Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Members 3 Presidents 4 Commissions of the Academy 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities 25 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu বাংলা Беларуская Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français Italiano Latina Latviešu مصرى Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 48°08′30″N 11°34′50″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.14167°N 11.58056°E ﻿ / 48.14167; 11.58056 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften ) Independent public institution in Germany Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Munich The Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities ( German : Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften ) is an independent public institution, located in Munich . It appoints scholars whose research has contributed considerably to the increase of knowledge within their subject. The general goal of the academy is the promotion of interdisciplinary encounters and contacts and the cooperation of representatives of different subjects.

History [ edit ] German State Kingdom of Bavaria Silver Prize Token 1807, obverse The reverse of this medal On 12 October 1758 the lawyer Johann Georg von Lori (1723–1787), Privy Counsellor at the College of Coinage and Mining in Munich, founded the Bayerische Gelehrte Gesellschaft (Learned Society of Bavaria).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] This led to the foundation by Maximilian III Joseph, Elector of Bavaria , of the Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities on 28 March 1759.

[ 3 ] Count Sigmund von Haimhausen was the first president.
The Academy's foundation charter specifically mentions the Parnassus Boicus , an earlier learned society.

[ 1 ] Originally, the Academy consisted of two divisions, the Class for History ( Historische Klasse ) and the Class for Philosophy ( Philosophische Klasse ); natural sciences, including mathematics and physics , were thought of as part of the Class for Philosophy.  Today, the Academy is still divided into two classes, but the classes are now the Class for Philosophy and History (which also includes the humanities and social sciences) and the Class for Mathematics and the Natural Sciences.

Members [ edit ] In each class, the number of ordinary members is limited to 45, and the number of corresponding members is limited to 80.  However, ordinary members at or over the age of 70 are not counted towards this limit; the number of ordinary members is, therefore, usually around 120.

During the course of its history, the academy has had numerous famous members including Johann Wolfgang von Goethe , the Grimm brothers, Theodor Mommsen , Anthimos Gazis , Alexander and Wilhelm von Humboldt , Kurt Sethe , Max Planck , Otto Hahn , Albert Einstein , Max Weber , Werner Heisenberg and Adolf Butenandt .

The first women were admitted as full members of the academy in 1995, and including the geneticist Regine Kafmann and the Indo-European linguist Johanna Narten .

[ 4 ] Presidents [ edit ] First president was the chairman of the Mint and Mining Commission, Sigmund, Count of Haimhausen . Further presidents included Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi , Anton Clemens von Toerring-Seefeld , Friedrich Wilhelm von Schelling , Justus von Liebig , Ignaz von Döllinger , Max von Pettenkofer and Walther Meißner .

At present, the presidency is held by Thomas Höllmann [ de ] .

Commissions of the Academy [ edit ] For the pursuit of long-term projects, the Academy forms Commissions. At present, 37 Commissions employ more than 450 persons.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich Technical University of Munich List of universities in Germany Bavaria German Academy of Sciences Leopoldina References [ edit ] Citations ^ a b Geschichte: Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften .

^ Küpper, Hans-Josef.

"Einstein und die Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften" .

Albert Einstein in the World Wide Web (in German). Archived from the original on 28 March 2022 . Retrieved 8 July 2021 .

^ "Königreich – "Constitutionsurkunde" der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu München (1807)" .

Haus der Bayerischen Geschichte (in German).

Archived from the original on 28 March 2022 . Retrieved 8 July 2021 .

^ "Timeline: Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften" .

badw.de .

Archived from the original on 27 May 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

Further reading "Geschichte" . Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften.

Archived from the original on 11 October 2022 . Retrieved 17 December 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften .

Homepage of the Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities Sitzungsberichte der mathematisch-physikalischen Klasse (Proceedings of the Mathematical-Physical Class, in German) 1860–2004 at ZOBODAT "Union der deutschen Akademien der Wissenschaften" .

Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften (in German) . Retrieved 8 July 2021 .

"Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften" .

TUM (in German). Archived from the original on 29 May 2022 . Retrieved 8 July 2021 .

"Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften, München" .

Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (in German) . Retrieved 8 July 2021 .

48°08′30″N 11°34′50″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.14167°N 11.58056°E ﻿ / 48.14167; 11.58056 Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic 2 Spain Portugal Norway Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bavarian_Academy_of_Sciences_and_Humanities&oldid=1252387783 " Categories : 1759 establishments in the Holy Roman Empire 18th-century establishments in Bavaria Culture in Munich Union of German Academies of Sciences and Humanities Scientific organizations established in 1759 Munich Residenz Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2021 Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2018 Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 October 2024, at 03:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities 25 languages Add topic

