Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Limitations in the conversion of thermal energy 2 History of energy transformation Toggle History of energy transformation subsection 2.1 Release of energy from gravitational potential 2.2 Release of energy from radioactive potential 2.3 Release of energy from hydrogen fusion potential 3 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 3.1 Examples of sets of energy conversions in machines 3.2 Other energy conversions 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Energy transformation 20 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית Македонски नेपाली Norsk bokmål Polski Slovenčina Svenska Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process of changing energy Fire is an example of energy transformation Energy transformation using Energy Systems Language Energy transformation , also known as energy conversion , is the process of changing energy from one form to another.

[ 1 ] In physics , energy is a quantity that provides the capacity to perform work (e.g. lifting an object) or provides heat . In addition to being converted, according to the law of conservation of energy , energy is transferable to a different location or object or living being, but it cannot be created or destroyed.

[ 2 ] Limitations in the conversion of thermal energy [ edit ] Conversions to thermal energy from other forms of energy may occur with 100% efficiency.

[ 3 ] [ self-published source?

] Conversion among non-thermal forms of energy may occur with fairly high efficiency, though there is always some energy dissipated thermally due to friction and similar processes.

[ 4 ] Sometimes the efficiency is close to 100%, such as when potential energy is converted to kinetic energy as an object falls in a vacuum. This also applies to the opposite case; for example, an object in an elliptical orbit around another body converts its kinetic energy (speed) into gravitational potential energy (distance from the other object) as it moves away from its parent body. When it reaches the furthest point, it will reverse the process, accelerating and converting potential energy into kinetic. Since space is a near-vacuum, this process has close to 100% efficiency.

Because transformations between non-thermal forms of energy are constrained only by the conservation of energy, they have a theoretical maximum efficiency of 100%.

[ 5 ] By contrast, transformations from thermal energy to other forms of energy are additionally constrained by the second law of thermodynamics and have a theoretical maximum efficiency strictly less than 100% (see Carnot cycle ), and typically much lower. In addition, only a difference in the density of thermal/heat energy (temperature) can be used to perform work.  This is because thermal energy represents a particularly disordered form of energy; it is spread out randomly among many available states of a collection of microscopic particles constituting the system (these combinations of position and momentum for each of the particles are said to form a phase space ). The measure of this disorder or randomness is entropy , and its defining feature is that the entropy of an isolated system never decreases. One cannot take a high-entropy system (like a hot substance, with a certain amount of thermal energy) and convert it into a low entropy state (like a low-temperature substance, with correspondingly lower energy), without that entropy going somewhere else (like the surrounding air). In other words, there is no way to concentrate energy without spreading out energy somewhere else.

Thermal energy in equilibrium at a given temperature already represents the maximal evening-out of energy between all possible states [ 6 ] because it is not entirely convertible to a "useful" form, i.e. one that can do more than just affect temperature. The second law of thermodynamics states that the entropy of a closed system can never decrease. For this reason, thermal energy in a system may be converted to other kinds of energy with efficiencies approaching 100% only if the entropie of the universe is increased by other means, to compensate for the decrease in entropy associated with the disappearance of the thermal energy and its entropy content. Otherwise, only a part of that thermal energy may be converted to other kinds of energy (and thus useful work). This is because the remainder of the heat must be reserved to be transferred to a thermal reservoir at a lower temperature. The increase in entropy for this process is greater than the decrease in entropy associated with the transformation of the rest of the heat into other types of energy.

In order to make energy transformation more efficient, it is desirable to avoid thermal conversion. For example, the efficiency of nuclear reactors, where the kinetic energy of the nuclei is first converted to thermal energy and then to electrical energy, lies at around 35%.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] By direct conversion of kinetic energy to electric energy, effected by eliminating the intermediate thermal energy transformation, the efficiency of the energy transformation process can be dramatically improved.

[ 9 ] History of energy transformation [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( May 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Energy transformations in the universe over time are usually characterized by various kinds of energy, which have been available since the Big Bang , later being "released" (that is, transformed to more active types of energy such as kinetic or radiant energy) by a triggering mechanism.

Release of energy from gravitational potential [ edit ] A direct transformation of energy occurs when hydrogen produced in the Big Bang collects into structures such as planets, in a process during which part of the gravitational potential is to be converted directly into heat. In Jupiter , Saturn , and Neptune , for example, such heat from the continued collapse of the planets' large gas atmospheres continue to drive most of the planets' weather systems. These systems, consisting of atmospheric bands, winds, and powerful storms, are only partly powered by sunlight. However, on Uranus , little of this process occurs.

[ why?

] [ citation needed ] On Earth , a significant portion of the heat output from the interior of the planet, estimated at a third to half of the total, is caused by the slow collapse of planetary materials to a smaller size, generating heat.

[ citation needed ] Release of energy from radioactive potential [ edit ] Familiar examples of other such processes transforming energy from the Big Bang include nuclear decay, which releases energy that was originally "stored" in heavy isotopes , such as uranium and thorium . This energy was stored at the time of the nucleosynthesis of these elements. This process uses the gravitational potential energy released from the collapse of Type II supernovae to create these heavy elements before they are incorporated into star systems such as the Solar System and the Earth. The energy locked into uranium is released spontaneously during most types of radioactive decay , and can be suddenly released in nuclear fission bombs. In both cases, a portion of the energy binding the atomic nuclei together is released as heat.

Release of energy from hydrogen fusion potential [ edit ] In a similar chain of transformations beginning at the dawn of the universe, nuclear fusion of hydrogen in the Sun releases another store of potential energy which was created at the time of the Big Bang. At that time, according to one theory [ which?

] , space expanded and the universe cooled too rapidly for hydrogen to completely fuse into heavier elements. This resulted in hydrogen representing a store of potential energy which can be released by nuclear fusion . Such a fusion process is triggered by heat and pressure generated from the gravitational collapse of hydrogen clouds when they produce stars, and some of the fusion energy is then transformed into starlight. Considering the solar system, starlight, overwhelmingly from the Sun, may again be stored as gravitational potential energy after it strikes the Earth. This occurs in the case of avalanches , or when water evaporates from oceans and is deposited as precipitation high above sea level (where, after being released at a hydroelectric dam , it can be used to drive turbine/generators to produce electricity).

Sunlight also drives many weather phenomena on Earth. One example is a hurricane , which occurs when large unstable areas of warm ocean, heated over months, give up some of their thermal energy suddenly to power a few days of violent air movement. Sunlight is also captured by plants as a chemical potential energy via photosynthesis , when carbon dioxide and water are converted into a combustible combination of carbohydrates, lipids, and oxygen. The release of this energy as heat and light may be triggered suddenly by a spark, in a forest fire; or it may be available more slowly for animal or human metabolism when these molecules are ingested, and catabolism is triggered by enzyme action.

Through all of these transformation chains, the potential energy stored at the time of the Big Bang is later released by intermediate events, sometimes being stored in several different ways for long periods between releases, as more active energy. All of these events involve the conversion of one kind of energy into others, including heat.

Examples [ edit ] Examples of sets of energy conversions in machines [ edit ] A coal -fired power plant involves these energy transformations: Chemical energy in the coal is converted into thermal energy in the exhaust gases of combustion Thermal energy of the exhaust gases converted into thermal energy of steam through heat exchange Kinetic energy of steam converted to mechanical energy in the turbine Mechanical energy of the turbine is converted to electrical energy by the generator, which is the ultimate output In such a system, the first and fourth steps are highly efficient, but the second and third steps are less efficient. The most efficient gas-fired electrical power stations can achieve 50% conversion efficiency.

[ citation needed ] Oil- and coal-fired stations are less efficient.

In a conventional automobile , the following energy transformations occur: Chemical energy in the fuel is converted into kinetic energy of expanding gas via combustion Kinetic energy of expanding gas converted to the linear piston movement Linear piston movement converted to rotary crankshaft movement Rotary crankshaft movement passed into transmission assembly Rotary movement passed out of transmission assembly Rotary movement passed through a differential Rotary movement passed out of differential to drive wheels Rotary movement of drive wheels converted to linear motion of the vehicle Other energy conversions [ edit ] Lamatalaventosa Wind Farm There are many different machines and transducers that convert one energy form into another. A short list of examples follows: ATP hydrolysis (chemical energy in adenosine triphosphate → mechanical energy) Battery (electricity) (chemical energy → electrical energy) Electric generator ( kinetic energy or mechanical work → electrical energy) Electric heater (electric energy → heat) Fire (chemical energy → heat and light) Friction (kinetic energy → heat) Fuel cell ( chemical energy → electrical energy) Geothermal power (heat→ electrical energy) Heat engines , such as the internal combustion engine used in cars, or the steam engine (heat → mechanical energy) Hydroelectric dam ( gravitational potential energy → electrical energy) Electric lamp (electrical energy → heat and light) Microphone (sound → electrical energy) Ocean thermal power (heat → electrical energy) Photosynthesis (electromagnetic radiation → chemical energy) Piezoelectrics (strain → electrical energy) Thermoelectric ( heat → electrical energy ) Wave power (mechanical energy → electrical energy) Windmill ( wind energy → electrical energy or mechanical energy) See also [ edit ] Chaos theory Conservation law Conservation of energy Conservation of mass Energy accounting Energy quality Groundwater energy balance Laws of thermodynamics Noether's theorem Ocean thermal energy conversion Thermodynamic equilibrium Thermoeconomics Uncertainty principle References [ edit ] ^ "Energy Transfers and Transformations | National Geographic Society" .

education.nationalgeographic.org . Retrieved 2022-05-29 .

^ "Energy Transfers and Transformations" .

Education . 2023-10-19 . Retrieved 2025-06-30 .

^ Pandey, Er. Akanksha (9 February 2010).

"Advantages and Limitations of Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion" .

India Study Channel .

^ Struchtrup, Henning (2014-07-02).

Thermodynamics and Energy Conversion . Springer. pp.

2– 3.

ISBN 978-3-662-43715-5 .

^ Tesfai, A.; Irvine, J.T.S. (2012). "Solid Oxide Fuel Cells:Theory and Materials".

Comprehensive Renewable Energy . Elsevier. p. 274–289.

doi : 10.1016/b978-0-12-819727-1.00195-3 .

ISBN 978-0-12-819734-9 .

^ Katinas, Vladislovas; Marčiukaitis, Mantas; Perednis, Eugenijus; Dzenajavičienė, Eugenija Farida (1 March 2019). "Analysis of biodegradable waste use for energy generation in Lithuania".

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews .

101 : 559– 567.

Bibcode : 2019RSERv.101..559K .

doi : 10.1016/j.rser.2018.11.022 .

S2CID 117316732 .

^ Dunbar, William R.; Moody, Scott D.; Lior, Noam (March 1995).

"Exergy analysis of an operating boiling-water-reactor nuclear power station" .

Energy Conversion and Management .

36 (3): 149– 159.

Bibcode : 1995ECM....36..149D .

doi : 10.1016/0196-8904(94)00054-4 .

^ Wilson, P.D. (1996).

The Nuclear Fuel Cycle: From Ore to Waste . New York: Oxford University Press .

[ page needed ] ^ Shinn, Eric; Hübler, Alfred; Lyon, Dave; Perdekamp, Matthias Grosse; Bezryadin, Alexey; Belkin, Andrey (January 2013). "Nuclear energy conversion with stacks of graphene nanocapacitors".

Complexity .

18 (3): 24– 27.

Bibcode : 2013Cmplx..18c..24S .

doi : 10.1002/cplx.21427 .

Further reading [ edit ] "Energy—Volume 3: Nuclear energy and energy policies".

Applied Energy .

5 (4): 321. October 1979.

doi : 10.1016/0306-2619(79)90027-8 .

Energy Transfer and Transformation | Core knowledge science v t e Energy History Index Outline Fundamental concepts Conservation of energy Energetics Energy Units Energy condition Energy level Energy system Energy transformation Energy transition Mass Negative mass Mass–energy equivalence Power Thermodynamics Enthalpy Entropic force Entropy Exergy Free entropy Heat capacity Heat transfer Irreversible process Isolated system Laws of thermodynamics Negentropy Quantum thermodynamics Thermal equilibrium Thermal reservoir Thermodynamic equilibrium Thermodynamic free energy Thermodynamic potential Thermodynamic state Thermodynamic system Thermodynamic temperature Volume (thermodynamics) Work Types Binding Nuclear Chemical Dark Elastic Electric potential energy Electrical Gravitational Binding Interatomic potential Internal Ionization Kinetic Magnetic Mechanical Negative Phantom Potential Quantum chromodynamics binding energy Quantum fluctuation Quantum potential Quintessence Radiant Rest Sound Surface Thermal Vacuum Zero-point Energy carriers Battery Capacitor Electricity Enthalpy Fuel Fossil Oil Heat Latent heat Hydrogen Hydrogen fuel Mechanical wave Radiation Sound wave Work Primary energy Bioenergy Fossil fuel Coal Natural gas Petroleum Geothermal Gravitational Hydropower Marine Nuclear fuel Natural uranium Radiant Solar Wind Energy system components Biomass Electric power Electricity delivery Energy engineering Fossil fuel power station Cogeneration Integrated gasification combined cycle Geothermal power Hydropower Hydroelectricity Tidal power Wave farm Nuclear power Nuclear power plant Radioisotope thermoelectric generator Oil refinery Solar power Concentrated solar power Photovoltaic system Solar thermal energy Solar furnace Solar power tower Wind power Airborne wind energy Wind farm Use and supply Efficient energy use Agriculture Computing Transport Energy conservation Energy consumption Energy policy Energy development Energy security Energy storage Renewable energy Sustainable energy World energy supply and consumption Africa Asia Australia Canada Europe Mexico South America United States Misc.

Energy in work Carbon footprint Energy democracy Energy recovery Energy recycling Jevons paradox Waste-to-energy Waste-to-energy plant Category Commons Portal WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Energy_transformation&oldid=1298113852 " Categories : Energy conversion Energy (physics) Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2020 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from January 2020 Articles needing additional references from May 2019 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2019 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2019 This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 15:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Energy transformation 20 languages Add topic

