Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation 2 Importance in navigation 3 List of capes Toggle List of capes subsection 3.1 Antarctica 3.2 Australia 3.3 Canada 3.4 Chile 3.5 India 3.6 Malaysia 3.7 Portugal 3.8 United States 3.9 South Africa 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Cape (geography) 78 languages Адыгэбзэ Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy მარგალური Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Jaku Iban Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Large headland extending into a body of water, usually the sea For other uses, see Cape (disambiguation) .

Cape of Good Hope (left) and Cape Hangklip (right) in South Africa, from space Cape Tisan in Mersin Province , Turkey Cape Tindari and Marinello lagoons, Sicily In geography , a cape is a headland , peninsula or promontory extending into a body of water , usually a sea .

[ 1 ] A cape usually represents a marked change in trend of the coastline , [ 2 ] often making them important landmarks in sea navigation. This also makes them prone to natural forms of erosion , mainly tidal actions, resulting in a relatively short geological lifespan.

Formation [ edit ] Capes can be formed by glaciers , volcanoes , and changes in sea level .

[ 2 ] Erosion plays a large role in each of these methods of formation.

[ 3 ] Coastal erosion by waves and currents can create capes by wearing away softer rock and leaving behind harder rock formations. Movements of the Earth's crust can uplift land, forming capes. For example, the Cape of Good Hope was formed by tectonic forces. Volcanic eruptions can create capes by depositing lava that solidifies into new landforms.

Cape Verde , (also known as Cabo Verde ) is an example of a volcanic cape.

[ 4 ] Glaciers can carve out capes by eroding the landscape as they advance and retreat.

Cape Cod in the United States was formed by glacial activity during the last Ice Age.

[ 3 ] Importance in navigation [ edit ] Capes (and other headlands) are conspicuous visual landmarks along a coast, and sailors have relied on them for navigation since antiquity.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The Greeks and Romans considered some to be sacred capes and erected temples to the sea god nearby.

Greek peripli describe capes and other headlands a sailor will encounter along a route. The Periplus of Pseudo-Scylax , for instance, illustrates a clockwise journey around Sicily using three capes that define its triangular shape: Cape Peloro in the northeast, Cape Pachynus in the southeast, and Cape Lilybaeum in the west.

[ 5 ] Sicily itself was referred to as Trinacria (or Three Capes) in antiquity.

[ 7 ] Homer 's works reference a number of capes to describe journeys around the Mediterranean Sea .

Menelaus , Agamemnon , and Odysseus each faced peril at the notoriously dangerous Cape Malea at the southeastern tip of the Peloponnese . Menelaus navigated via Cape Sounion on his way home from Troy, and Nestor stopped at Cape Geraestus (now Cape Mandelo ) on Euboea to give offerings at the altar to Poseidon there.

[ 6 ] Cape Gelidonya (then known as Chelidonia) on the coast of Turkey served as a bearing aid for ships heading to the Egyptian port of Canopus , directly to the south.

Cape Sidero on the eastern tip of Crete was a waypoint for Jason and the Argonauts returning from Libya as well as for Paul the Apostle as he traveled from Caesarea to Rome .

[ 8 ] The three great capes ( Africa 's Cape of Good Hope , Australia 's Cape Leeuwin , and South America 's Cape Horn ) defined the traditional clipper route between Europe and the Far East , Australia and New Zealand .

[ 9 ] They continue to be important landmarks in ocean yacht racing .

List of capes [ edit ] This list is incomplete ; you can help by adding missing items .

( September 2024 ) Antarctica [ edit ] Cape Ann Cape May (Antarctica) , McMurdo Sound Australia [ edit ] Cape Flattery (Queensland) Cape Howe Cape Leeuwin Cape York (Queensland) Canada [ edit ] Anse du Cap des Rosiers Cape Blomidon Cape Kildare Cape North Cape Race Cape Sable Cape Spear Cape St Mary Cape St Mary's Cape Traverse Crown Point North Cape Cape Breton Chile [ edit ] Cape Horn India [ edit ] Cape Comorin Malaysia [ edit ] Tanjung Datu Tanjung Piai Tanjung Tuan Portugal [ edit ] Cabo da Roca United States [ edit ] Cape Ann , Massachusetts Cape Cod , Massachusetts Cape May , New Jersey Cape Charles, Virginia Cape Henry , Virginia Cape Hatteras , North Carolina Cape Lookout , North Carolina Cape Fear , North Carolina Cape Canaveral , Florida Cape Canaveral Space Force Station , a launch station of the US Space Force Cape Coral , Florida Cape Rosier , Maine South Africa [ edit ] Cape of Good Hope , a headland on the southwest coast of South Africa, when referred to as the Cape , a metonym for: Dutch Cape Colony , a colony of the Dutch East India company Cape Colony , a British colony in South Africa that replaced the Dutch Cape Colony Cape Province , a former province of South Africa formed from the Cape Colony Cape Town , a city in South Africa, and surrounding areas Gallery [ edit ] Cape Cornwall , England Satellite image of Cape Fear, North Carolina Cape MacLear , Malawi Map depicting Cape Horn at the southernmost portion of South America Photograph of Cabo Mayor in Santander, Spain Photograph of Cape Campbell , New Zealand, at sunrise The North Cape , Finnmark, Norway Aerial view of Cape Lindesnes , Mandal, Norway Tipping lantern at Cape Verdens Ende , Tønsberg, Norway See also [ edit ] Extreme points of Africa Extreme points of Antarctica Extreme points of Asia Extreme points of Australia Extreme points of Europe Extreme points of North America Extreme points of South America Notes [ edit ] ^ Whittow 1984 , p. 80.

^ a b Wright & Nichols 2018 , p. 360.

^ a b "Cape" .

education.nationalgeographic.org . Retrieved 24 August 2024 .

^ "Cabo Verde - Trade, Fisheries, Tourism | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 14 August 2024 . Retrieved 24 August 2024 .

^ a b Kowalski, Claramunt & Zucker 2007 , p. 52.

^ a b Davis 2001 , pp. 117–120.

^ Davis 2001 , p. 203.

^ Davis 2001 , pp. 122–123.

^ Holm 1974 .

References [ edit ] Davis, Danny Lee (May 2001).

Navigation in the Ancient Eastern Mediterranean (PDF) (MA thesis).

Texas A&M University . Retrieved 28 July 2024 .

Holm, Don (1974).

The Circumnavigators: Small Boat Voyagers of Modern Times . Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice Hall.

ISBN 0-13-134452-8 .

Kowalski, Jean-Marie; Claramunt, Christophe; Zucker, Arnaud (September 2007). "Thalassographeïn: Representing Maritime Spaces in Ancient Greece". In Winter, Stephan; Duckham, Matt; Kulik, Lars; Kuipers, Ben (eds.).

Spatial Information Theory . 8th International Conference, COSIT 2007. Melbourne: Springer.

ISBN 978-3-540-74788-8 .

Whittow, J. B. (1984).

The Penguin Dictionary of Physical Geography . London New York Victoria: Puffin.

ISBN 0-14-051094-X .

Wright, Lynn Donelson; Nichols, C. Reid (15 June 2018).

Tomorrow's Coasts: Complex and Impermanent . Cham: Springer.

ISBN 978-3-319-75453-6 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Capes (geography) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Coastal geography Landforms Anchialine pool Archipelago Atoll Avulsion Ayre Barrier island Bay Bight Bodden Brackish marsh Cape Channel Cliff Coast Coastal plain Coastal waterfall Continental margin Continental shelf Coral reef Cove Dune cliff-top Estuary Firth Fjard Fjord Freshwater marsh Fundus Gat Geo Gulf Gut Hapua Headland Inlet Intertidal wetland Island Islet Isthmus Liman Lagoon Machair Mudflat Natural arch Peninsula Reef Ria Salt marsh Shoal Skerry Sound Spit Stack Strait Strand plain Submarine canyon Tidal island Tidal marsh Tide pool Tied island Tombolo Waituna Windwatt Beaches Beach cusps Beach evolution Beach ridge Beach wrack Beaches in estuaries and bays Beachrock Coastal morphodynamics Pocket beach Raised beach Recession Shell beach Shingle beach Storm beach Wash margin River mouths Debouch Mouth bar River delta mega regressive Processes Blowhole Cliffed coast Coastal biogeomorphology Coastal erosion Concordant coastline Current Cuspate foreland Discordant coastline Emergent coastline Feeder bluff Flat coast Graded shoreline Ingression coast Large-scale coastal behaviour Longshore drift Marine regression Marine transgression Raised shoreline Rip current Rocky shore Sea cave Sea foam Shoal peresyp Steep coast Submergent coastline Surf break Surf zone Surge channel Swash Undertow Volcanic arc Wave-cut platform Wave shoaling Wind fetch Wind wave Management Accretion Coastal management Integrated coastal zone management Submersion Related Bulkhead line Coastal engineering Grain size boulder clay cobble granule gravel pebble sand shingle silt Intertidal zone Littoral zone Physical oceanography Region of freshwater influence River plume Category Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Japan Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cape_(geography)&oldid=1297284650 " Categories : Headlands Coastal and oceanic landforms Oceanographical terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2024 Incomplete lists from September 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 June 2025, at 06:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cape (geography) 78 languages Add topic

