Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Techniques 3 Debate over pain in released fish 4 Injury and mortality in released fish 5 Similar hunting practices 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Catch and release 12 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Simple English Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Method of Fishing used for environmental or conservation reasons For other uses, see Catch and release (disambiguation) .

Two anglers releasing the common carp they caught A rod-caught Atlantic salmon being released on the Little Gruinard in Wester Ross , Scotland "No Barbs" sign on Ribnik River in Bosnia and Herzegovina Catch and release is a practice within recreational fishing where after capture the fish is unhooked and returned live to the water. Originally adopted in the United Kingdom by coarse fishermen to preserve fish populations , it has since become a widely used technique to permit people to fish recreationally while ensuring sustainability in the face of growing human populations, mounting ecological pressure, increasingly effective fishing tackle and techniques, inadequate fishing regulations and enforcement, and habitat degradation.

Between 18 and 20% of fish released die from injuries and stress, although the rate varies by species. Among those that survive, their injuries may significantly reduce their ability to feed and grow. During tournaments, inadequate holding and weighing procedures may further increase mortality. With deep sea fishing in particular, fish are typically unable to adjust their physiology to the sudden pressure change . Scientific and philosophical debates over whether fish feel pain in a way similar to humans are unresolved. In the 21st century, there is a greater emphasis on developing techniques which increase the likelihood that released fish will survive, such as using barbless hooks . Catch and release is banned in Switzerland and Germany, while Canada requires barbless hooks in some cases.

History [ edit ] Multilingual catch and release sign in Ireland In the United Kingdom, catch and release has been performed for more than a century by coarse fishermen in order to prevent target species from disappearing in heavily fished waters. Since the latter part of the 20th century, many salmon and sea trout rivers have been converted to complete or partial catch and release. In Scotland, the River Dee operates a full catch and release policy for salmon, grilse and sea trout.

[ 1 ] In the United States, catch and release was first introduced as a management tool in the state of Michigan in 1952 as an effort to reduce the cost of stocking hatchery -raised trout.

Anglers fishing for fun rather than for food accepted the idea of releasing the fish while fishing in "no-kill" zones.

Conservationists have advocated catch and release as a way to ensure sustainability and to avoid overfishing of fish stocks .

Lee Wulff , a New York-based fly angler, author and film maker, promoted catch and release as early as 1936 with the phrase "Game fish are too valuable to be caught only once." [ 2 ] Don Martinez a West Yellowstone, Montana , fly shop owner, promoted catch and release in his 1930–40s newsletters sent to Eastern anglers.

[ 3 ] In Australia, catch and release caught on slowly, with some pioneers practicing it in the 1960s, and the practice slowly became more widespread in the 1970s and 1980s. Catch and release is now widely used to conserve—and indeed is critical in conserving—vulnerable fish species like the large, long lived native freshwater Murray Cod and the prized, slowly growing, heavily fished Australian bass , heavily fished coastal species like Dusky Flathead and prized gamefish like striped marlin .

[ citation needed ] In Ireland, catch and release has been used as a conservation tool for Atlantic salmon and sea trout fisheries since 2003. A number of fisheries now have mandatory catch and release regulations.

[ 4 ] Catch and release for coarse fish has been used by sport anglers for as long as these species have been fished for on this island. However catch and release for Atlantic salmon has required a huge turn about in how many anglers viewed the salmon angling resource. To encourage anglers to practice catch and release in all fisheries a number of government led incentives have been implemented.

[ 5 ] In Canada, catch and release is mandatory for some species. Canada also requires in some cases the use of barbless hooks to facilitate release and minimize injury.

[ citation needed ] In Switzerland and Germany, catch and release fishing is considered inhumane and is now banned.

[ 6 ] In Germany, the Animal Welfare Act states that "no-one may cause an animal pain, suffering or harm without good reason" .

[ 7 ] This leaves no legal basis for catch and release due to its argued inherent lack of "good reason", and thus personal fishing is solely allowed for immediate food consumption. Additionally, it is against the law to release fish back into the water if they are above minimum size requirements and are not a protected species or in closed season .

In 2011, the National Park Service in Yellowstone National Park began reversing decades of regulation that promoted catch and release and other techniques that protected fish populations. In the name of native fish conservation, they began mandatory kill regulations on rainbow and brook trout in the Lamar River drainage and encouraged unlimited taking and disposal of non-native species, including brown trout in some park waters.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Techniques [ edit ] Fish hook Professor with pinched barb Into the 21st century, there has been an emphasis on the development and refinement of science-based practices to increase the likelihood that released fish will survive (e.g., see research by Steven J. Cooke ). That work led to the development of the UN FAO Technical Guidelines for Recreational Fisheries.

[ 10 ] Effective catch and release fishing techniques avoid excessive fish fighting and handling times by using sufficiently strong tackle and barbless hooks, avoid damage to fish skin, scale and slime layers from nets, dry hands and dry, hot or rough surfaces (that leave fish vulnerable to oomycete skin infections), and avoid damage to jaw ligaments and vertebrae by suspending fish from jaws or gills for weighing or handling. If a net must be used it is important that it is pre-wetted and is not abrasive to the fish (such as a rubber coated net or very dense lightweight mesh), because fish can easily damage themselves in a normal net while thrashing.

[ citation needed ] The use of barbless hooks is an important aspect of catch and release; barbless hooks reduce injury and handling time, increasing survival. Frequently, fish caught on barbless hooks can be released without being removed from the water, and the hook(s) effortlessly slipped out with a single flick of the pliers or leader. Barbless hooks can be purchased from several major manufacturers or can be created from a standard hook by crushing the barb(s) flat with needle-nosed pliers. Some anglers avoid barbless hooks because of the belief that too many fish will escape. Concentrating on keeping the line tight at all times while fighting fish, equipping lures that do not have them with split rings, and using recurved point or "Triple Grip" style hooks on lures, will keep catch rates with barbless hooks as high as those achieved with barbed hooks.

[ citation needed ] One study looking at brook trout found that barbless hooks had no statistically significant effect on mortality rates when fish were hooked in the mouth, but observed that they did reduce mortalities compared to barbed hooks if fish were hooked deeper.

[ 11 ] The study also suggested bait fishing does not have a significantly higher mortality when utilized in an active style, rather than a passive manner that allows the fish to swallow the bait.

[ 11 ] The effects of catch and release vary from species to species. A study of fish caught in shallow water on the Great Barrier Reef showed high survival rates (97%+), [ 12 ] for released fish if handled correctly and particularly if caught on artificial baits such as lures. Fish caught on lures are usually hooked cleanly in the mouth, minimizing injury and aiding release. Other studies have shown somewhat lower survival rates for fish gut-hooked on bait if the line is cut and the fish is released without trying to remove the hook.

[ citation needed ] Debate over pain in released fish [ edit ] See also: Pain in fish Catch and release angling area on the Stura di Lanzo in Italy Opponents of catch and release argue that fish are highly evolved vertebrates that share many of the same neurological structures that in humans are associated with pain perception . They cite studies showing that, neurologically, fish are quite similar to higher vertebrates and that blood chemistry reveals that hormones and blood metabolites associated with stress are quite high in fish struggling against hook and line. The idea that fish do not feel pain in their mouths has been studied at the University of Edinburgh and the Roslin Institute by injecting bee venom and acetic acid into the lips of rainbow trout; the fish responded by rubbing their lips along the sides and floors of their tanks in an effort to relieve themselves of the sensation.

[ 13 ] Lead researcher Lynne Sneddon wrote, "Our research demonstrates nociception and suggests that noxious stimulation in the rainbow trout has adverse behavioral and physiological effects. This fulfills the criteria for animal pain." A 2014 paper provides a critique of existing studies that purport to demonstrate that fish feel pain.

[ 14 ] James D. Rose of the University of Wyoming argues this may demonstrate a chemical sensitivity rather than pain and that the evidence for pain sensation in fish is ambiguous.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Injury and mortality in released fish [ edit ] A metastudy in 2005 found that the average catch and release mortality rate was 18%, but varied greatly by species.

[ 17 ] During an Oklahoma Department of Wildlife Conservation study, total mortality averaged 2.9% percent of fish after a six-day holding period in a livewell during spring, but in summer this increased up to 43% as a result of inadequate holding conditions and weigh in procedures during tournaments.

[ 18 ] More recent studies reported in Montana estimate that approximately 20% of released trout die from injuries or stress and for those that do not die, their injuries may significantly reduce their ability to feed and grow.

[ 19 ] Emerging research suggests catch and release does not work very well with fish caught when deep sea fishing. Most deep sea fish species suffer from the sudden pressure change when wound to the surface from great depths; these species cannot adjust their body's physiology quickly enough to follow the pressure change. The result is called " barotrauma ". Fish with barotrauma will have their enormously swollen swim-bladder protruding from their mouth, bulging eyeballs, and often sustain other, more subtle but still very serious injuries. Upon release, fish with barotrauma will be unable to swim or dive due to the swollen swim-bladder. The common practice has been to deflate the swim bladder by pricking it with a thin sharp object before attempting to release the fish. Emerging research also indicates both barotrauma and the practice of deflating the swimbladder are both highly damaging to fish, and that survival rates of caught-and-released deep-sea fish are extremely low.

[ 20 ] Barotrauma requires that fish be caught at least 10–15 m (30–50 ft) below the surface. Many surface caught fish, such as billfish, and all fish caught from shore do not meet this criterion and thus do not suffer barotrauma.

[ citation needed ] Similar hunting practices [ edit ] A similar practice, called "tree and free", uses hunting dogs to chase a bear or mountain lion up a tree, and then letting the predator escape.

[ 21 ] Treeing large predators in such a manner can encourage them to stay away from humans through fear.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] See also [ edit ] Fishing tournament References [ edit ] ^ Dee Conservation Code 2022 (riverdee.org.uk) ^ Giudice, Gary.

"A Hero of Mine: Remembering Lee Wulff" . Outdoor Writers Association of America . Retrieved 2014-11-15 .

^ Grant, George (Spring 1982).

"Don Martinez-Western Dry Fly Master" (PDF) .

American Fly Fisher .

9 (2): 9– 14. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-11-29 . Retrieved 2014-11-15 .

^ Catch and Release for Atlantic Salmon Central Fisheries Board Website ^ Catch and Release Incentive Scheme Central Fisheries Board Website ^ Animal Rights Law Passed in Switzerland – Catch and Release Fishing Banned ^ German Animal Welfare Act ^ "Reluctant anglers drafted in war on fish" .

Fox News . 2015-03-25 . Retrieved January 26, 2016 .

^ "2015 Yellowstone National Park Fishing Regulations" (PDF) .

National Park Service . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 15, 2015 . Retrieved 2014-04-13 .

^ "FAO Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries" (PDF) .

fao.org . Retrieved 5 October 2023 .

^ a b Dubois, R. B.; Kuklinski, K. E. (2004). "Effect of Hook Type on Mortality, Trauma, and Capture Efficiency of Wild, Stream-Resident Trout Caught by Active Baitfishing".

North American Journal of Fisheries Management .

24 (2): 617.

Bibcode : 2004NAJFM..24..617D .

doi : 10.1577/M02-172.1 .

^ Australian shallow reef fish study ^ Vantressa Brown, "Fish Feel Pain, British Researchers Say," Agence France-Presse, 1 May 2003 Archived 14 October 2009 at the Portuguese Web Archive ^ Rose, J. D.; Arlinghaus, R.; Cooke, S. J.; Diggles, B. K.; Sawynok, W.; Stevens, E. D.; Wynne, C D L.

(2014). "Can fish really feel pain?".

Fish and Fisheries .

15 (1): 97– 133.

Bibcode : 2014AqFF...15...97R .

doi : 10.1111/faf.12010 .

^ "Anglers carp at 'fish pain' theory,", CNN, April 30, 2003 ^ Rose, J.D. (2003) A Critique of the paper: "Do fish have nociceptors: Evidence for the evolution of a vertebrate sensory system" Archived 2008-11-19 at the Wayback Machine In: Information Resources on Fish Welfare 1970-2003, Animal Welfare
Information Resources No. 20. H. E. Erickson, Ed., U. S. Department of Agriculture, Beltsville, MD. pp. 49–51 ^ Bartholomew, Aaron; Bohnsack, James A. (2005-02-01). "A Review of Catch-and-Release Angling Mortality with Implications for No-take Reserves".

Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries .

15 (1): 129– 154.

Bibcode : 2005RFBF...15..129B .

doi : 10.1007/s11160-005-2175-1 .

ISSN 1573-5184 .

S2CID 2323279 .

^ Oklahoma Department of Wildlife Conservation. " Evaluation of Procedures to Reduce Delayed Mortality of Black Bass Following Summer Tournaments Archived 2020-11-11 at the Wayback Machine ." Federal Aid Grant No. F-50-R, Fish Research for Oklahoma Waters, Project No. 8, March 1, 1996 through February 28, 1997 ^ Drews, Debby (Spring 2016).

"Like a Fish Out of Water" .

17 (1). Outside Bozeman: 70– 74 . Retrieved April 17, 2016 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ 100% of Jew fish landed from water 15 to 20 meters deep have life-threatening injuries. Official Barotrauma results.

^ Brooks, Malcolm (31 December 2024).

"A Mountain Lion Attacked My Nephews. What Could Have Stopped It?" .

The New York Times .

^ "Scaring cougars for science: Research in northeast Washington looks at effectiveness, long term impacts of hazing | The Spokesman-Review" .

www.spokesman.com . 5 March 2020 . Retrieved 2024-12-31 .

^ Flatt, Courtney (11 March 2021).

"WA effort on training hounds to haze cougars worries conservationists | Cascade PBS" .

www.cascadepbs.org . Retrieved 2024-12-31 .

External links [ edit ] brown trout catch and release tips Archived 2013-08-06 at the Wayback Machine -link from browntrout.info Only Some Catch And Release Methods Let The Fish Live ScienceDaily , 4 June 2007.

v t e Angling topics General Angling Boat fishing Big-game fishing Flats fishing Flosser Float tube Trolling Casting Surf fishing Rock fishing Bank fishing Jet ski fishing Kayak fishing Centerpin fishing Coarse fishing Bottom fishing Urban fishing Tackle Techniques Land-based game fishing Ice fishing Indoor fishing Snagging Spin fishing Skishing Tailrace fishing Tenkara fishing Fish Bass Bait fish Carp Game fish Mahi-mahi Marlin Panfish Porgie (bream) Rough fish Shad Smelt whiting Striped bass Walleye Regulation and sustainability Fishing license Fisheries management Fisheries law Bag limits Catch and release Conservation officer Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing Minimum landing size Tag and release Poaching Catch records Europe UK Wisconsin West Virginia Organisations Bass Anglers Sportsman Society Confédération Internationale de la Pêche Sportive International Game Fish Association Nippon Bass Club Prince Albert Angling Society Sport Fishing Association Literature Angler's Mail Angling Times Field & Stream Gray's Sporting Journal List of pseudonyms of angling authors Marlin Outdoor Life Rod and Line Book of the Black Bass Salt Water Sportsman Sports Afield The Secrets of Angling Other Angling at the 1900 Summer Olympics Ikejime Pain in fish Priest (tool) Tournaments Television series World Fishing Network v t e Articles about fly fishing and fly tying Fly fishing Bamboo fly rod Float tube Fly fishing tackle Fly line Fly rod building Furled leader Dry fly fishing Fly casting Fly Casting Analyzer Reach cast Spey casting Manufacturers of fly tying materials and tools Tenkara fishing Trout bum Waders Fly waters: Blue Ribbon fishery Class A Wild Trout Waters North America Europe Artificial flies Adams Alexandra BWO Bonefish flies Brown Bi-visible Bunyan Bug Clouser Deep Minnow Copper John Crazy Charlie Dave's Hopper Diawl bach Egg sucking leech Elk Hair Caddis Flesh Fly Fully dressed flies Grey Ghost Streamer Hare's Ear Humpy Jock Scott Klinkhammer Lefty's Deceiver Mallard and Claret Mickey Finn Muddler Minnow Parks' Salmonfly Partridge and Orange Pheasant Tail Nymph Prince Nymph Popper Red Tag Royal Coachman Royal Wulff Sakasa Kebari Salmon fly patterns Stimulator Surf Candy Terrestrials Tube fly Woolly Bugger Woolly Worm Wulff flies Organizations American Museum of Fly Fishing Anglers' Club of New York Catskill Fly Fishing Center and Museum Flyfishers' Club Fly Fishers International Fly Fishing Team USA Orvis Parks' Fly Shop Scientific Anglers Trout Unlimited World Fly Fishing Championships Literature Bibliography of fly fishing (species related) Bibliography of fly fishing Bibliography of fly fishing (fly tying, stories, fiction) Pseudonyms of notable angling authors The American Angler's Book Blacker's Art of Fly Making Dry-Fly Fishing in Theory and Practice Favorite Flies and Their Histories Floating Flies and How to Dress Them Fly Fishing (Grey book) Fly Fishing: Memories of Angling Days The Fly-fisher's Entomology Minor Tactics of the Chalk Stream The Salmon Fly The Way of a Trout with the Fly People Dan Bailey A.K. Best Megan Boyd Drew Chicone James Deren Edward Fitzgibbon Jack Gartside George F. Grant Frederic M. Halford J. Richard Harris Lefty Kreh George Selwyn Marryat Don Martinez Louis Rhead Edwin Rist Alfred Ronalds Frank Sawyer Carrie G. Stevens Lee Wulff v t e Fisheries and fishing topic areas Fisheries Aquaculture Diversity of fish Fish diseases and parasites Fish farming Fisheries management Fisheries science Individual fishing quota Sustainable fishery Overfishing Wild fisheries Fishing Artisanal fishing Fisherman Fishing vessel History of fishing Industry List of harvested aquatic animals by weight By country Commercial fishing Marketing Markets Processing Products Seafood Recreation Angling Big-game fishing Catch and release Fishing tournaments Fly fishing Techniques Destructive fishing practices Fish trap Fishfinder Fishing net Gathering seafood by hand Handline fishing Spearfishing Trawling Trolling Tackle Artificial flies Bait Bite indicators Hook Line Lures Rod Sinker Locations Fish ponds Fishing banks Fishing villages Marine habitats Crime Bering Sea Anti-Poaching Operations Coral poaching Freshwater eel poaching and smuggling Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing Arctic Glossary Index Outline Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐jg8ss
Cached time: 20250812000317
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.493 seconds
Real time usage: 0.612 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2479/1000000
Revision size: 19581/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 110550/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4156/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 75957/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.303/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7938023/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  478.282      1 -total
 38.00%  181.769      1 Template:Reflist
 23.61%  112.911      6 Template:Cite_web
 20.82%   99.559      1 Template:Angling_topics
 20.42%   97.649      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 15.27%   73.011      3 Template:Navbox
 14.36%   68.675      6 Template:Citation_needed
 12.23%   58.499      1 Template:Fly_fishing
 11.90%   56.919      1 Template:Short_description
 11.83%   56.559      6 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:490901:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000317 and revision id 1304376541. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Catch_and_release&oldid=1304376541 " Categories : Recreational fishing Fishing techniques and methods Hidden categories: Webarchive template other archives Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 17:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Catch and release 12 languages Add topic

