Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 1.1 Imaging 1.2 Gemology 2 Equipment 3 Astronomical polarimetry 4 Measuring optical rotation 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Polarimetry 23 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Gaeilge Italiano Қазақша Кыргызча Magyar မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands پښتو Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Measurement and interpretation of the polarization of transverse waves Synthetic aperture radar image of Death Valley colored using polarimetry.

Polarimetry is the measurement and interpretation of the polarization of transverse waves , most notably electromagnetic waves , such as radio or light waves . Typically polarimetry is done on electromagnetic waves that have traveled through or have been reflected , refracted or diffracted by some material in order to characterize that object.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Plane polarized light: According to the wave theory of light , an ordinary ray of light is considered to be vibrating in all planes of right angles to the direction of its propagation . If this ordinary ray of light is passed through a nicol prism , the emergent ray has its vibration only in one plane.

Applications [ edit ] Polarimetry of thin films and surfaces is commonly known as ellipsometry .

Polarimetry is used in remote sensing applications, such as planetary science , astronomy , and weather radar .

Polarimetry can also be included in computational analysis of waves. For example, radars often consider wave polarization in post-processing to improve the characterization of the targets. In this case, polarimetry can be used to estimate the fine texture of a material, help resolve the orientation of small structures in the target, and, when circularly-polarized antennas are used, resolve the number of bounces of the received signal (the chirality of circularly polarized waves alternates with each reflection).

Imaging [ edit ] In 2003, a visible-near IR (VNIR) Spectropolarimetric Imager with an acousto-optic tunable filter (AOTF) was reported.

[ 3 ] These hyperspectral and spectropolarimetric imager functioned in radiation regions spanning from ultraviolet (UV) to long-wave infrared (LWIR). In AOTFs a piezoelectric transducer converts a radio frequency (RF) signal into an ultrasonic wave. This wave then travels through a crystal attached to the transducer and upon entering an acoustic absorber is diffracted. The wavelength of the resulting light beams can be modified by altering the initial RF signal.

[ 3 ] VNIR and LWIR hyperspectral imaging consistently perform better as hyperspectral imagers.

[ 4 ] This technology was developed at the U.S. Army Research Laboratory.

[ 3 ] The researchers reported visible near infrared system (VISNIR) data (.4-.9 micrometers) which required an RF signal below 1 W power.  The reported experimental data indicates that polarimetric signatures are unique to manmade items and are not found in natural objects. The researchers state that a dual system, collecting both hyperspectral and spectropolarimetric information, is an advantage in image production for target tracking.

[ 3 ] Polarimetric infrared imaging and detection can also highlight and distinguish different features in a scene and give unique signatures of different objects. A nano-plasmonic chirped metal structure for polarimetric detection in the mid-wave and long-wave infrared dual bands can give unique characteristics about the different detected materials, objects, and surfaces.

[ 5 ] Gemology [ edit ] Gemologists use polariscopes to identify various properties of gems under examination. Proper examination may require the gem to be inspected in various positions and angles.

[ 6 ] A gemologist's polariscope is a vertically oriented device, usually with two polarizing lenses with one over the other with some space in between. A light source is built into the polariscope underneath the bottom polarizing lens and pointing upwards. A gemstone will be placed on top of the lower lens and may be properly examined by looking down at it through the top lens. To operate the polariscope, a gemologist may turn the polarizing lenses by hand to observe various characteristics about a gemstone. Polariscopes make use of their polarizing filters to reveal properties of a gem about how it affects light waves passing through it.

A polariscope may be first used to determine the optic character of a gem and whether it is singly refracting (isotropic), anomalously doubly refracting (isotropic), doubly refracting (anisotropic), or aggregate. If the stone is doubly refracting and is not an aggregate, the polariscope may be used to further determine the optic figure of the gemstone, or whether it is uniaxial or biaxial. This step may require use of a loupe , also known as a conoscope.

[ 7 ] Finally, a polariscope can be used to detect the pleochroism of a gemstone, although a dichroscope may be preferred for this purpose as it may show pleochroic colors side by side for easier identification.

Equipment [ edit ] A polarimeter is the basic scientific instrument used to make these measurements, although this term is rarely used to describe a polarimetry process performed by a computer, such as is done in polarimetric synthetic aperture radar .

Polarimetry can be used to measure various optical properties of a material, including linear birefringence , circular birefringence (also known as optical rotation or optical rotary dispersion), linear dichroism , circular dichroism and scattering .

[ 8 ] To measure these various properties, there have been many designs of polarimeters, some archaic and some in current use. The most sensitive are based on interferometers , while more conventional polarimeters are based on arrangements of polarising filters , wave plates or other devices.

Astronomical polarimetry [ edit ] See also: Methods of detecting exoplanets § Polarimetry Polarimetry is used in many areas of astronomy to study physical characteristics of sources including active galactic nuclei and blazars , exoplanets , gas and dust in the interstellar medium , supernovae , gamma-ray bursts , stellar rotation , [ 9 ] stellar magnetic fields, debris disks , reflection in binary stars [ 10 ] and the cosmic microwave background radiation. Astronomical polarimetry observations are carried out either as imaging polarimetry, where polarization is measured as a function of position in imaging data, or spectropolarimetry, where polarization is measured as a function of wavelength of light, or broad-band aperture polarimetry.

Measuring optical rotation [ edit ] Optically active samples, such as solutions of chiral molecules, often exhibit circular birefringence . Circular birefringence causes rotation of the polarization of plane polarized light as it passes through the sample.

In ordinary light, the vibrations occur in all planes perpendicular to the direction of propagation. When light passes through a Nicol prism its vibrations in all directions except the direction of axis of the prism are cut off. The light emerging from the prism is said to be plane polarised because its vibration is in one direction. If two Nicol prisms are placed with their polarization planes parallel to each other, then the light rays emerging out of the first prism will enter the second prism. As a result, no loss of light is observed. However, if the second prism is rotated by an angle of 90°, the light emerging from the first prism is stopped by the second prism and no light emerges. The first prism is usually called the polarizer and the second prism is called the analyser .

A simple polarimeter to measure this rotation consists of a long tube with flat glass ends, into which the sample is placed. At each end of the tube is a Nicol prism or other polarizer.

Light is shone through the tube, and the prism at the other end, attached to an eye-piece, is rotated to arrive at the region of complete brightness or that of half-dark, half-bright or that of complete darkness. The angle of rotation is then read from a scale. The same phenomenon is observed after an angle of 180°. The specific rotation of the sample may then be calculated. Temperature can affect the rotation of light, which should be accounted for in the calculations.

[ α α ] λ λ T = 100 α α / l ρ ρ {\displaystyle [\alpha ]_{\lambda }^{T}=100\alpha /l\rho \,\!} where: [α] λ T is the specific rotation.

T is the temperature.

λ is the wavelength of light.

α is the angle of rotation.

l is the distance the light travels through the sample, the path length.

ρ ρ {\displaystyle \rho } is the mass concentration of solution.

See also [ edit ] Ellipsometry References [ edit ] ^ Mishchenko, M.I.; Yatskiv, Y.S.; Rosenbush, V.K.; Videen, G., eds. (2011).

Polarimetric Detection, Characterization and Remote Sensing, Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Study Institute on Special Detection Technique (Polarimetry) and Remote Sensing Yalta, Ukraine 20 September – 1 October 2010, Series: NATO Science for Peace and Security Series C: Environmental Security (1st ed.). Springer.

ISBN 9789400716353 .

^ Tinbergen, Jaap (2007).

Astronomical Polarimetry .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-01858-6 .

^ a b c d Goldberg, A.; Stann, B.; Gupta, N. (July 2003).

"Multispectral, Hyperspectral, and Three-Dimensional Imaging Research at the U.S. Army Research Laboratory" (PDF) .

Proceedings of the International Conference on International Fusion [6th] .

1 : 499– 506.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 May 2017.

^ Makki, Ihab; Younes, Rafic; Francis, Clovis; Bianchi, Tiziano; Zucchetti, Massimo (1 February 2017).

"A survey of landmine detection using hyperspectral imaging" (PDF) .

ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing .

124 : 40– 53.

Bibcode : 2017JPRS..124...40M .

doi : 10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2016.12.009 .

ISSN 0924-2716 .

^ Awad, Ehab; et., al. (January 2017).

"Nano-plasmonic chirped metal-stripes polarimeter for dual-band infrared detection" .

Electronics Letters .

53 (2): 95.

Bibcode : 2017ElL....53...95A .

doi : 10.1049/el.2016.3778 .

^ "Polariscope" .

Gemstone Buzz . Retrieved 4 January 2022 .

^ "Polariscope - The Gemology Project" .

gemologyproject.com . Retrieved 4 January 2022 .

^ V. Tuchin (2000).

Tissue Optics Light Scattering Methods and Instruments for Medical Diagnosis . Society of Photo Optical.

ISBN 978-0-8194-3459-3 .

^ Cotton, Daniel V; Bailey, Jeremy; Howarth, Ian D; Bott, Kimberly; Kedziora-Chudczer, Lucyna; Lucas, P. W; Hough, J. H (2017). "Polarization due to rotational distortion in the bright star Regulus".

Nature Astronomy .

1 (10): 690– 696.

arXiv : 1804.06576 .

Bibcode : 2017NatAs...1..690C .

doi : 10.1038/s41550-017-0238-6 .

S2CID 53560815 .

^ Bailey, Jeremy; Cotton, Daniel V.; Kedziora-Chudczer, Lucyna; De Horta, Ain; Maybour, Darren (1 April 2019). "Polarized reflected light from the Spica binary system".

Nature Astronomy .

3 (7): 636– 641.

arXiv : 1904.01195 .

Bibcode : 2019NatAs...3..636B .

doi : 10.1038/s41550-019-0738-7 .

S2CID 131977662 .

External links [ edit ] Polariscope – Gemstone Buzz instrument to measure optical properties.

EU Project NanoCharM nanocharm.org v t e Exoplanets Planet Definition IAU Planetary science Main topics Exoplanet Exoplanet orbital and physical parameters Methods of detecting exoplanets Planetary system Planet-hosting stars Sizes and types Terrestrial Carbon planet Catastrophically evaporating planet Coreless planet Desert planet Dwarf planet Hycean planet Ice planet Iron planet (Super-Mercury) Lava planet Ocean world Mega-Earth Steam world Sub-Earth Super-Earth Gaseous Cold Jupiter Eccentric Jupiter Mini-Neptune (Gas dwarf) Helium planet Hot Jupiter Hot Neptune Gas giant Ice giant Neptunian Jupiter analogue Super-Jupiter Super-Neptune Super-puff Ultra-hot Jupiter Ultra-hot Neptune Warm Jupiter Other types Blanet Brown dwarf Chthonian planet Circumbinary planet Circumtriple planet Disrupted planet Double planet Ecumenopolis Eyeball planet Giant planet Mesoplanet Planemo Planet/Brown dwarf boundary Planetesimal Protoplanet Pulsar planet Sub-brown dwarf Sub-Neptune Toroidal planet Ultra-cool dwarf Ultra-short period planet (USP) Formation and evolution Accretion Accretion disk Asteroid belt Circumplanetary disk Circumstellar disc Circumstellar envelope Cosmic dust Debris disk Detached object Disrupted planet Excretion disk Exozodiacal dust Extraterrestrial materials Extraterrestrial sample curation Giant-impact hypothesis Gravitational collapse Hills cloud Internal structure Interplanetary dust cloud Interplanetary medium Interplanetary space Interstellar cloud Interstellar dust Interstellar medium Interstellar space Kuiper belt List of interstellar and circumstellar molecules Merging stars Molecular cloud Nebular hypothesis Oort cloud Outer space Planetary migration Planetary system Planetesimal Planet formation Protoplanetary disk Radial drift Ring system Rubble pile Sample-return mission Scattered disc Star formation Systems Exocomet Interstellar Exomoon Tidally detached Rogue planet Jupiter-mass binary objects Orbits Retrograde Trojan Mean-motion resonances Titius–Bode law Host stars A B Binary star Brown dwarfs F/Yellow-white dwarfs G/Yellow dwarfs Herbig Ae/Be K/Orange dwarfs M/Red dwarfs Pulsar Red giant Subdwarf B Subgiant T Tauri White dwarfs Yellow giants Detection Astrometry Direct imaging list Microlensing list Polarimetry Timing list Radial velocity list Transit method list Transit-timing variation Habitability Astrobiology Astrooceanography Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Catalogues Nearby Habitable Systems Exoplanet Data Explorer Extrasolar Planets Encyclopaedia NASA Exoplanet Archive NASA Star and Exoplanet Database Open Exoplanet Catalogue Lists Exoplanetary systems Host stars Multiplanetary systems Stars with proto-planetary discs Exoplanets Discoveries Extremes Firsts Nearest Largest Heaviest Terrestrial candidates Kepler 1–500 501–1000 1001–1500 1501–2000 K2 Potentially habitable Proper names Discovered exoplanets by year before 2000 2000–2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Other Carl Sagan Institute Exoplanet naming convention Exoplanet phase curves Exoplanetary Circumstellar Environments and Disk Explorer Extragalactic planet Extrasolar planets in fiction Geodynamics of terrestrial exoplanets Neptunian desert Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Planets in globular clusters Small planet radius gap Sudarsky's gas giant classification Discoveries of exoplanets Search projects Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Polarimetry&oldid=1292134517 " Categories : Polarization (waves) Optical metrology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2019 This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 11:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Polarimetry 23 languages Add topic

