Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Elements of a fire safety policy 2 Common fire hazards 3 Fire code Toggle Fire code subsection 3.1 List of some typical fire and explosion issues in a fire code 4 Public fire safety education Toggle Public fire safety education subsection 4.1 Fire educator qualifications 4.2 Target audiences 5 Global perspectives 6 Fire safety plan Toggle Fire safety plan subsection 6.1 Fire safety plan structure 6.2 Use of fire safety plans 6.3 Fire safety plans in the fire code 6.4 Advances in fire safety planning 7 Insurance companies 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Fire safety 20 languages العربية বাংলা Čeština Eesti فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Lietuvių Македонски Nederlands Norsk bokmål Română Русский தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Practices to reduce the results of fire This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Fire safety" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( March 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .

See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.

( August 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Fire safety equipment at a construction site in China Fire safety is the set of practices intended to reduce destruction caused by fire . Fire safety measures include those that are intended to prevent the ignition of an uncontrolled fire and those that are used to limit the spread and impact of a fire.

Fire safety measures include those that are planned during the construction of a building or implemented in structures that are already standing and those that are taught or provided to occupants of the building.

[ citation needed ] Threats to fire safety are commonly referred to as fire hazards . A fire hazard may include a situation that increases the likelihood of a fire or may impede escape in the event a fire occurs.

[ citation needed ] Fire safety is often a component of building safety . Those who inspect buildings for violations of the Fire Code and go into schools to educate children on fire safety topics are Fire Department members known as Fire Prevention Officers . The Chief Fire Prevention Officer or Chief of Fire Prevention will normally train newcomers to the Fire Prevention Division and may also conduct inspections or make presentations.

[ 1 ] Elements of a fire safety policy [ edit ] External fire escape stairs in a public building in Netherlands .

Fire safety policies apply at the construction of a building and throughout its operating life.

Building codes are enacted by local, sub-national, or national governments to ensure such features as adequate fire exits , signage, and construction details such as fire stops and fire rated doors, windows, and walls. Fire safety is also an objective of electrical codes to prevent overheating of wiring or equipment, and to protect from ignition by electrical faults.

[ 2 ] Fire codes regulate such requirements as the maximum occupancy for buildings such as theatres or restaurants, for example. Fire codes may require portable fire extinguishers within a building, or may require permanently installed fire detection and suppression equipment such as a fire sprinkler system and a fire alarm system .

Local authorities charged with fire safety may conduct regular inspections for such items as usable fire exit and proper exit signage, functional fire extinguishers of the correct type in accessible places, and proper storage and handling of flammable materials. Depending on local regulations, a fire inspection may result in a notice of required action, or closing of a building until it can be put into compliance with fire code requirements.

[ citation needed ] Owners and managers of a building may implement additional fire policies.  For example, an industrial site may designate and train particular employees as a fire fighting force. Managers must ensure buildings comply with fire evacuation regulations , and that building features such as spray fireproofing remains undamaged. Fire policies may be in place to dictate training and awareness of occupants and users of the building to avoid obvious mistakes, such as the propping open of fire doors . Buildings, especially institutions such as schools, may conduct fire drills at regular intervals throughout the year.

[ citation needed ] Beyond individual buildings, other elements of fire safety policies may include technologies such as wood coatings, [ 3 ] [ 4 ] education and prevention, preparedness measures, wildfire detection and suppression , and ensuring geographic coverage of local and sufficient fire extinguishing capacities.

Common fire hazards [ edit ] Improper use and poor maintenance of gas stoves often create fire hazards.

Some common fire hazards are: [ 5 ] Kitchen fires from unattended cooking, grease fires/chip pan fires Electrical systems that are overloaded, poorly maintained or defective Combustible storage areas with insufficient protection Combustibles near equipment that generates heat, flame, or sparks Candles and other open flames Smoking (Cigarettes, cigars, pipes, lighters, etc.) Equipment that generates heat and utilizes combustible materials Flammable liquids and aerosols Flammable solvents (and rags soaked with solvent) placed in enclosed trash cans Fireplace chimneys not properly or regularly cleaned Cooking appliances - stoves, ovens Heating appliances - fireplaces, wood-burning stoves, furnaces, boilers, portable heaters, solid fuels Household appliances - clothes dryers, curling irons, hair dryers, refrigerators, freezers, boilers Chimneys that concentrate creosote Electrical wiring in poor condition Leaking/defective batteries Personal ignition sources - matches, lighters Electronic and electrical equipment Exterior cooking equipment - barbecue Fire code [ edit ] An example of a fire code violation in the United States Fire extinguisher in a public school In the United States, the fire code (also fire prevention code or fire safety code) is a model code adopted by the state or local jurisdiction and enforced by fire prevention officers within municipal fire departments . It is a set of rules prescribing minimum requirements to prevent fire and explosion hazards arising from storage, handling, or use of dangerous materials, or from other specific hazardous conditions.

[ 6 ] It complements the building code . The fire code is aimed primarily at preventing fires, ensuring that necessary training and equipment will be on hand, and that the original design basis of the building, including the basic plan set out by the architect , is not compromised. The fire code also addresses inspection and maintenance requirements of various fire protection equipment in order to maintain optimal active fire protection and passive fire protection measures.

A typical fire safety code includes administrative sections about the rule-making and enforcement process, and substantive sections dealing with fire suppression equipment, particular hazards such as containers and transportation for combustible materials, and specific rules for hazardous occupancies, industrial processes, and exhibitions.

[ citation needed ] Sections may establish the requirements for obtaining permits and specific precautions required to remain in compliance with a permit. For example, a fireworks exhibition may require an application to be filed by a licensed pyrotechnician, providing the information necessary for the issuing authority to determine whether safety requirements can be met. Once a permit is issued, the same authority (or another delegated authority) may inspect the site and monitor safety during the exhibition, with the power to halt operations, when unapproved practices are seen or when unforeseen hazards arise.

[ citation needed ] List of some typical fire and explosion issues in a fire code [ edit ] Fireworks , explosives , mortars and cannons, model rockets (licenses for manufacture, storage, transportation, sale, use) Certification for servicing, placement, and inspecting fire extinguishing equipment General storage and handling of flammable liquids, solids, gases (tanks, personnel training, markings, equipment) Limitations on locations and quantities of flammables (e.g., 10 liters of gasoline inside a residential dwelling) Specific uses and specific flammables (e.g., dry cleaning, gasoline distribution, explosive dusts, pesticides, space heaters, plastics manufacturing) Permits and limitations in various building occupancies (assembly hall, hospital, school, theater, elderly care , child care centers) that require a smoke detector , sprinkler system , fire extinguisher , or other specific equipment or procedures Removal of interior and exterior obstructions to emergency exits or firefighters and removal of hazardous materials Permits and limitations in special outdoor applications (tents, asphalt kettles, bonfires, etc.) Other hazards (flammable decorations, welding, smoking, bulk matches, tire yards ) Electrical safety codes such as the National Electrical Code (by the National Fire Protection Association ) for the U.S. and some other places in the Americas Fuel gas code Car fire Public fire safety education [ edit ] Children evacuating a smoky building as a way to learn fire safety Members of the United States Forest Service Fire Department teaching children fire safety Most U.S. fire departments have fire safety education programs .

Fire prevention programs may include distribution of smoke detectors , visiting schools to review key topics with the students and implementing nationally recognized programs such as NFPA S "Risk Watch" and "Learn not to burn".

[ 7 ] Other programs or props can be purchased by fire departments or community organizations. These are usually entertaining and designed to capture children's attention and relay important messages. Props include those that are mostly auditory, such as puppets and robots. The prop is visually stimulating but the safety message is only transmitted orally. Other props are more elaborate, access more senses and increase the learning factor. They mix audio messages and visual cues with hands-on interaction. Examples of these include mobile trailer safety houses and tabletop hazard house simulators. Some fire prevention software is also being developed to identify hazards in a home.

[ 8 ] All programs tend to mix messages of general injury prevention, safety, fire prevention, and escape in case of fire. In most cases the fire department representative is regarded as the expert and is expected to present information in a manner that is appropriate for each age group.

Fire educator qualifications [ edit ] The US industry standard that outlines the recommended qualifications for fire safety educators is NFPA 1035: Standard for Professional Qualifications for Public Fire and Life Safety Educator, which includes the requirements for Fire and Life Safety Educator Levels I, II, and III; Public Information Officer; and Juvenile Firesetter Intervention Specialist Levels I and II.

[ 9 ] Target audiences [ edit ] According to the United States Fire Administration , the very young and the elderly are considered to be "at risk" populations. These groups represent approximately 33% of the population.

Global perspectives [ edit ] Fire safety has been highlighted in relation to global supply chain management . Sedex, the Supplier Ethical Data Exchange, a collaborative platform for sharing ethical supply chain data, [ 10 ] and Verité, Inc., a Massachusetts -based supply chain investigatory NGO , issued a briefing in August 2013 which highlighted the significance of this issue.

[ 11 ] The briefing referred to several major factory fires, including the 2012 Dhaka garment factory fire in the Tazreen Fashion factory and other examples of fires in Bangladesh, Pakistan [ 12 ] and elsewhere, compared the incidence of fire safety issues in a manufacturing context, and highlighted the need for buyers , suppliers and local fire safety enforcement agencies all to take action to improve fire safety within the supply chains for ready-made garments and other products. The briefing recommended that buyers seek greater visibility of fire safety and other risks across the supply chain and identify opportunities to improve standards: "buyers can encourage change through more responsible and consistent practices".

[ 11 ] Fire safety plan [ edit ] Fire escape plan of a hotel in Taiwan .

A fire safety plan is required by all North American national, state and provincial fire codes based on building use or occupancy types. Generally, the owner of the building is responsible for the preparation of a fire safety plan. Buildings with elaborate emergency systems may require the assistance of a fire protection consultant. After the plan has been prepared, it must be submitted to the Chief Fire Official or authority having jurisdiction for approval. Once approved, the owner is responsible for implementing the fire safety plan and training all staff in their duties. It is also the owner's responsibility to ensure that all visitors and staff are informed of what to do in case of fire. During a fire emergency, a copy of the approved fire safety plan must be available for the responding fire department's use.

In the United Kingdom, a fire safety plan is called a fire risk assessment.

[ 13 ] Fire safety plan structure [ edit ] Key contact information Utility services (Including shut-off valves for water, gas and electric) Access issues Dangerous stored materials Location of people with special needs Connections to sprinkler system Layout, drawing, and site plan of building Maintenance schedules for life safety systems Personnel training and fire drill procedure Create assemble point/safe zone Use of fire safety plans [ edit ] Fire safety plans are a useful tool for fire fighters to have because they allow them to know critical information about a building that they may have to go into. Using this, fire fighters can locate and avoid potential dangers such as hazardous material (hazmat) storage areas and flammable chemicals . In addition to this, fire safety plans can also provide specialized information that, in the case of a hospital fire, can provide information about the location of things like the nuclear medicine ward.

[ 14 ] In addition to this, fire safety plans also greatly improve the safety of fire fighters. According to FEMA, 16 percent of all fire fighter deaths in 2002 occurred due to a structural collapse or because the fire fighter got lost.

[ 15 ] Fire safety plans can outline any possible structural hazards, as well as give the fire fighter knowledge of where he is in the building.

Fire safety plans in the fire code [ edit ] In North America alone, there are around 8 million buildings that legally require a fire safety plan, be it due to provincial or state law.

[ 16 ] Not having a fire safety plan for buildings which fit the fire code occupancy type can result in a fine, and they are required for all buildings, such as commercial, industrial, assembly, etc.

Advances in fire safety planning [ edit ] As previously stated, a copy of the approved fire safety plan shall be available for the responding fire department. This, however, is not always the case. Up until now, all fire plans were stored in paper form in the fire department. The problem with this is that sorting and storing these plans is a challenge, and it is difficult for people to update their fire plans. As a result, only half of the required buildings have fire plans, and of those, only around 10 percent are up-to-date.

[ 16 ] This problem has been solved through the introduction of digital fire plans. These fire plans are stored in a database and can be accessed wirelessly on site by firefighters and are much simpler for building owners to update.

Insurance companies [ edit ] Fire is one of the biggest threats to property with losses adding up to billions of dollars in damages every year. In 2019 alone, the total amount of property damage resulting from fire was $14.8 billion in the United States.

[ 17 ] Insurance companies in the United States are not only responsible for financially covering fire loss but are also responsible for managing risk associated with it. Most commercial insurance companies hire a risk control specialist whose primary job is to survey property to ensure compliance with NFPA standards, assess the current risk level of the property, and make recommendations to reduce the probability of fire loss. Careers in property risk management continue to grow and have been projected to grow 4 to 8% from 2018 to 2028 in the United States.

[ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Ablation – Removal of material from an object's surface Building information modeling – Process for digital management of built assets Emergency evacuation – Urgent removal of people from an area of imminent or ongoing threat Endothermic process – Thermodynamic process that absorbs energy from its surroundings Fire drill – Method of practicing orderly evacuation in case of a fire Fire sprinkler – Component that discharges water to protect buildings Fire-adapted communities Firestop pillow Intumescent – Substance that swells as a result of heat exposure List of fires Industrial fire Listing and approval use and compliance – Document used for installations Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Product certification – Performance and quality assurance Safety Centre References [ edit ] ^ "Fire Extinguisher Use" .

Life Safety Systems . Retrieved 2020-11-12 .

^ "Planning , Drawing & Designing" .

matrixfireengineers.com . Retrieved 2020-11-12 .

^ Paleja, Ameya (22 August 2022).

"A fireproof wood achieves the highest class in burning test thanks to an invisible coating" .

interestingengineering.com . Retrieved 18 September 2022 .

^ "An invisible coating to make wood 'fireproof' " .

Nanyang Technological University via techxplore.com . Retrieved 18 September 2022 .

^ "Fire Safety" . Fire Protection Specialists. Archived from the original on 19 January 2014 . Retrieved 17 January 2014 .

^ "Articles - Fire Code | Safety Media Inc" .

safetymedia.com . Retrieved 2020-11-12 .

^ "NFPA eLearning On-line catalog" . Archived from the original on 2009-01-16 . Retrieved 2008-05-10 .

^ "September 2011" .

Magazine . Archived from the original on July 8, 2018 . Retrieved 2020-11-06 .

^ "Buy NFPA 1035: Standard on Fire and Life Safety Educator, Public Information Officer..." catalog.nfpa.org . Retrieved 2020-11-12 .

^ "Lithium-Ion Battery Safety" .

www.nfpa.org . Retrieved 2024-04-11 .

^ a b https://www.nyc.gov/assets/fdny/downloads/pdf/codes/dangers-of-lithium-ion-batteries.pdf www.nyc.org . Retrieved 2024-05-01.

^ Zia ur-Rehman, Declan Walsh and Salman Masood, More Than 300 Killed in Pakistani Factory Fires , New York Times, published 12 September 2012, accessed 28 May 2022 ^ "Fire safety in the workplace" .

GOV.UK . Retrieved 21 August 2021 .

^ "Fire Safety in Buildings" .

www.researchgate.net .

^ https://www.usfa.fema.gov/statistics/reports/firefighters-departments/firefighter-fatalities.html www.usfa.fema.gov . Retrieved 2024-05-01.

^ a b "10 participating in or in a victim of horseplay" .

www.coursehero.com . Retrieved 2024-04-11 .

^ "NFPA report - Fire loss in the United States" .

www.nfpa.org . Retrieved 2020-10-21 .

^ "Changing clocks and smoke alarm batteries | NFPA" .

www.nfpa.org . Retrieved 2024-04-29 .

External links [ edit ] Sample Fire Code Table of Contents from International Code Council Archived 2012-04-05 at the Wayback Machine v t e Occupational safety and health Occupational diseases and injuries Acrodynia Asbestosis Asthma Barotrauma Berylliosis Brucellosis Burnout Byssinosis ("brown lung") Cardiovascular Chalicosis Chronic solvent-induced encephalopathy Chronic stress Chimney sweeps' carcinoma Coalworker's pneumoconiosis ("black lung") Concussions in sport Decompression sickness De Quervain syndrome Erethism Exposure to human nail dust Farmer's lung Fiddler's neck Flock worker's lung Glassblower's cataract Golfer's elbow Hearing loss Hospital-acquired infection Indium lung Laboratory animal allergy Lead poisoning Low back pain Mesothelioma Metal fume fever Mule spinners' cancer Noise-induced hearing loss Phossy jaw Pneumoconiosis Radium jaw Repetitive strain injury Silicosis Silo-filler's disease Sports injury Surfer's ear Tennis elbow Tinnitus Writer's cramp Occupational hygiene Occupational hazard Biological hazard Chemical hazard Physical hazard Psychosocial hazard Occupational stress Hierarchy of hazard controls Prevention through design Exposure assessment Occupational exposure limit Occupational epidemiology Workplace health surveillance Professions Environmental health Industrial engineering Occupational health nursing Occupational health psychology Occupational medicine Occupational therapist Safety engineering Agencies and organizations International European Agency for Safety and Health at Work International Labour Organization World Health Organization National Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety (Canada) Federal Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (Germany) Istituto nazionale per l'assicurazione contro gli infortuni sul lavoro (Italy) National Institute for Safety and Health at Work (Spain) Health and Safety Executive (UK) Occupational Safety and Health Administration National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (US) Safe Work Australia (Australia) Standards Bangladesh Accord OHSAS 18001 ISO 45001 Occupational Safety and Health Convention, 1981 Worker Protection Standard (US) Working Environment Convention, 1977 Safety Checklist Code of practice Contingency plan Diving safety Emergency procedure Emergency evacuation Hazard Hierarchy of hazard controls Hazard elimination Administrative controls Engineering controls Hazard substitution Personal protective equipment Job safety analysis Lockout-tagout Permit To Work Operations manual Redundancy (engineering) Risk assessment Safety culture Standard operating procedure Immediately dangerous to life or health Legislation Diving regulations Occupational Safety and Health Act (United States) Potty parity ( United States ) Right to sit ( United States ) Workers' right to access the toilet See also Aerosol Break Break room Drug policy Effects of overtime Environment, health and safety Environmental toxicology Ergonomics Fire Fighter Fatality Investigation and Prevention Program Hawks Nest Tunnel disaster Health physics Hostile work environment Indoor air quality International Chemical Safety Card Job strain National Day of Mourning (Canada) NIOSH air filtration rating Overwork Process safety Public health Quality of working life Risk management Safety data sheet Source control Toxic tort Toxic workplace Workers' compensation Workplace hazard controls for COVID-19 Workplace health promotion Category Occupational diseases Journals Organizations Commons v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline v t e Fire protection Fundamental concepts Backdraft Boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE) Boilover Combustibility and flammability Conflagration Dangerous goods (HAZMAT) Deflagration Detonation Dust explosion Enthalpy of vaporization Explosive Fire classification Fire control Fire loading Fire point Fire triangle Flammability diagram Flammability limit Flammable liquid Flashover Flash point Friction loss Gas leak Heat transfer Jet fire K-factor (fire protection) Pool fire Pyrolysis Spontaneous combustion Structure fire Thermal radiation Water pressure Technology Active fire protection Automatic fire suppression Condensed aerosol fire suppression Detonation flame arrester External water spray system Fire bucket Fire prevention Fire protection Fire retardant Fire-retardant fabric Fire retardant gel Fire-safe polymers Fire safety Fire sprinkler system Fire suppression system Firefighting foam Flame arrester Flame retardant Flashback arrestor Fusible link Gaseous fire suppression Hypoxic air technology for fire prevention Inerting system Intumescent Passive fire protection Personal protective equipment (PPE) Relief valve Spark arrestor Tank blanketing Vehicle fire suppression system Building design Annulus (firestop) Area of refuge Booster pump Compartmentation Crash bar Electromagnetic door holder Electromagnetic lock Emergency exit Emergency light Exit sign Fire curtain Fire cut Fire damper Fire door Fire escape Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire pump Fire sprinkler Firestop Firestop pillow Firewall (construction) Grease duct Heat and smoke vent Packing (firestopping) Penetrant (mechanical, electrical, or structural) Penetration (firestop) Pressurisation ductwork Safety glass Smoke control Smoke damper Smoke exhaust ductwork Smokeproof enclosure Standpipe (firefighting) Fire alarm systems Aspirating smoke detector Carbon monoxide detector Circuit integrity Explosive gas leak detector Fire alarm call box Fire alarm control panel Fire alarm notification appliance Fire drill Flame detector Heat detector Manual fire alarm activation Smoke detector Professions, trades, and services Duct cleaning Fire insurance Fire protection engineering Fireproofing Fire-resistance rating Fire Safety Evaluation System (FSES) Fire test Kitchen exhaust cleaning Listing and approval use and compliance Sprinkler fitting Industry organizations Institution of Fire Engineers (IFE) National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Society of Fire Protection Engineers (SFPE) Underwriters Laboratories (UL) Standards CE marking EN 3 EN 54 EN 16034 Flame spread GHS hazard statements GHS precautionary statements Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) List of R-phrases List of S-phrases Safety data sheet UL 94 Awards Arthur B. Guise Medal Harry C. Bigglestone Award See also Template:Fire Template:Firefighting Template:HVAC Category Commons Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fire_safety&oldid=1304175646 " Categories : Fire prevention Fire protection Legal codes Safety practices Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles with limited geographic scope from March 2015 United States-centric Wikipedia articles with style issues from August 2014 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 12:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fire safety 20 languages Add topic

