Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and development of sports 2 Game equipment Toggle Game equipment subsection 2.1 Projectiles 2.2 Goal 2.3 Nets 2.4 Paddles 2.5 Rackets 2.6 Rods and tackle 2.7 Sticks, bats, and clubs 2.8 Wickets and bases 3 Player equipment Toggle Player equipment subsection 3.1 Footwear 3.2 Protective equipment 3.3 Clothing 3.4 Training equipment 3.5 Special sports equipment 4 Vehicles 5 Various sports 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Works cited 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Sports equipment 26 languages العربية Català Dansk Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių 日本語 Norsk bokmål Русский සිංහල Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Object used for sport or exercise Some sports equipment, from left to right, up to down: American football helmet and ball, field hockey stick and ball, association football goalkeeper gloves and golf clubs Sports equipment , also called sporting goods , are the tools, materials, apparel, and gear, which varies in shapes, size, and usage in a particular sport. It includes balls, nets , rackets , protective gears like helmets , goggles , etc. Since the performer must use a sport equipment, [ 1 ] it can also be serve for protection.

[ 2 ] [ a ] History and development of sports [ edit ] Historically, many sports players have developed their own sporting equipment over time. For instance, the use of a football dates back to ancient China , between the Warring States period (476–221 BC) and the Han Dynasty (220 AD).

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] As football remains the most popular sport in the 21st century, the material of the ball has completely changed over the centuries; from being made out of animal skin, to being lined with multiple layers of polyester or cotton.

[ 6 ] [ citation needed ] As the sporting equipment industry improves, so do the athletes' performance. This is due to the fact that the equipment is more efficient, lighter and stronger, thus forming a biomechanical system that is interacting with the athlete.

[ 7 ] Since the massive adoption of wearable, new sport equipment tend to be electronics and connected to deliver data performances.

Standards and monitoring processes apply in certain industries aimed at the elimination of child labour in the manufacturing of sports goods. One example would be the Atlanta Agreement of 1997 in relation to child labour in the football-making industry in Pakistan.

[ 8 ] There are well-developed international trade markets for sports equipment: for example, a steady increase in sports equipment trade within the European Union and between EU member states and the rest of the world was reported during the period from 2017 to 2020.

[ 9 ] Game equipment [ edit ] Projectiles [ edit ] In ball sports , balls are a key element—usually as part of the scoring mechanism. Sports balls are usually in the shape of a sphere , though they may also be spheroid or ellipsoid . Spherical balls include the baseball , basketball , Gaelic ball , cricket ball , golf ball , lacrosse ball , tennis ball , and the ball used in association football . Spheroid and ellipsoid balls include the gridiron football and rugby ball .

In flying disc sports , frisbees are used for various games such as freestyle , disc golf and ultimate .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] In ice hockey and floor hockey , a puck is used.

Goal [ edit ] Main article: Goal (sports) In many games, goal posts are at each end of the playing field. In some games, such as association football , hockey and water polo , the object is to pass the ball or puck between the posts below the crossbar. In basketball, the object is to pass the ball through the basket . In these sports, the goal usually has a net . In other sports, such as those based on rugby , the ball must pass over the crossbar.

Nets [ edit ] Main article: Net and wall games In tennis , badminton , and volleyball , players launch the projectile over a net which is supported by two posts.

Paddles [ edit ] In canoeing and kayaking , a handheld tool used to propel a human-powered watercraft; Paddle In racket sports , such as padel , pickleball , and table tennis , a flat-faced non-netted tool used for striking balls; Pickleball paddle Table tennis racket Rackets [ edit ] Rackets , a netted tool used for striking balls or shuttlecocks in sports such as tennis , squash and badminton .

[ 12 ] Rods and tackle [ edit ] Fishing rods and fishing tackle are primarily used for fishing and sport fishing .

Sticks, bats, and clubs [ edit ] Sticks are used for sports such as hockey and lacrosse . Bats are used for sports such as baseball , cricket , and rounders . Clubs are used mainly for golf .

Wickets and bases [ edit ] Wickets , creases and balls are used in cricket , and bases are used in baseball.

[ 13 ] Player equipment [ edit ] Footwear [ edit ] Air Jordan shoe by Nike (left); football boots with metal cleats by Adidas (right) In many sports, athletes wear cleats . These include cricket spikes, football boots , golf shoes , and track spikes .

Cyclists wear cycling shoes , which may be designed for special interaction with pedals .

Wheeled shoes include roller skates and inline skates .

Skiers wear ski boots , which attach to skis via bindings . Similarly, snowboarders have snowboard boots and bindings .

Athletes wear ice skates in most ice-based sports, although there are exceptions such as broomball and curling .

Athletes with limb differences (such as those in the Paralympics ) may use extremity prostheses , such as the Flex-Foot Cheetah running blade.

Protective equipment [ edit ] Shoulder pads used in gridiron football and ice hockey Protective equipment is often worn for sports including motor sport and contact sports , where there is a danger of injury through collision of players or other objects.

In many sports, athletes wear helmets. These include: Bicycle helmet Football helmet Hockey helmet Motorcycle helmet Padding is used to protect various body parts, most often as elbow pads , shin pads , and shoulder pads . Specialized equipment, such as the jockstrap and mouthguard , is used to protect certain body parts. Ice hockey players may wear neck guards . Some athletes wear sports gloves to protect their hands.

Clothing [ edit ] Main article: Sportswear Many sports have a common set of clothing, usually called a uniform or kit, including the association football kit , baseball uniform , basketball uniform , cricket whites , and cycling kit . As part of the uniform, athletes may wear jerseys ; they may also be called shirts, sweaters in ice hockey or guernseys in Australian rules football. These jerseys may change color when the team is on the road .

Training equipment [ edit ] Examples of training equipment include swiss balls , resistance bands , tennis balls, balance discs, cones, weights , chin-up bars , weight machines, and gym equipment. Also, protective equipment such as weight lifting belts and bench shirts are used for weight training and powerlifting .

[ citation needed ] Special sports equipment [ edit ] Special sports equipment, is the equipment usually worn by the athletes according to their needs or desires.

Special equipment in sports branches: Cycling : Cycling jersey : a sleeved jersey covering the upper torso.

Bib shorts : the shorts worn by cyclists which come with pads for added comfort.

Socks : typically mid-length socks.

Cycling shoes : specialised shoes with stiff soles for more efficient energy transfer and cleats cliping into clipless pedals .

Football : Football leggings : Football leggings, mostly used in winter. It is used to prevent the body from getting cold and injury due to the cold weather after warm-up training in winter.

Football captain's tape: Football captain's tape, is a compulsory (required) piece of equipment. Football captains are chosen by the coach, the accessory provided must be worn by the captain.

Football shinguard: Football shinguard, is a special piece of equipment, that football players wear according to their specific wishes.

Football bracelet: Football bracelet, is a special need equipment and players write the name of a family member or loved one according to their wishes.

Football footband: Football footband, is worn by footballers in the ankle area between the crampons and the toe and is need or for pleasure.

Football Visor : Football visor, is a piece of plastic attached to the facemask of the football helmet. It helps prevent damage to the eyes and face.

Volleyball : Volleyball wristband: Volleyball wristband, is mostly used by volleyball players. Volleyball players use it for better grip of their hands.

Volleyball knee pads: Volleyball knee pads, is the equipment used by volleyball players to protect their knees, when they jump high, jump sideways and fall to the ground.

Volleyball leg pads: Volleyball leg pads, allows volleyball players to play safely.

Basketball : Basketball sleeve : Basketball sleeve, is a piece of equipment that basketball players wear according to their wishes and tastes and is not mandatory.

Basketball armband: Basketball armband, is a piece of equipment that basketball players use according to their tastes or needs.

Basketball headband: Basketball headband, is a piece of equipment that basketball players wear according to their wishes and tastes and is not mandatory.

Basketball handband: Basketball handband, is like a need for basketball players to protect their hands and grip the ball more comfortably, but it is not mandatory.

Basketball bracelet: Basketball bracelet, is a piece of equipment, that is generally used only as an accessory by basketball players.

Tennis : Tennis armband: It is a non-mandatory accessory worn by tennis players.

Tennis hairband: Tennis headband, is an accessory especially used by athletes according to their own color and taste.

Tennis hat: The tennis hat is often used by tennis athletes. Used as an accessory.

Vehicles [ edit ] Vehicles (sometimes specialized) are used as equipment for some sports, including motor sport , cycling, aeronautics , sailing and hot air ballooning .

Small vehicles with flatbeds are often used to carry injured athletes off the field, most commonly in American football .

Various sports [ edit ] Budget Sport, a sports equipment store in Tampere , Finland Category:Sports equipment (various sports) Association football clothing and equipment Baseball clothing and equipment Climbing equipment Cricket clothing and equipment Cycling kit Golf equipment Gridiron football equipment Ice hockey equipment Rugby shirt Snowboarding equipment Triathlon equipment See also [ edit ] Equipment Equipment manager Outdoor gym Protective equipment Chin-up bar Athletic Equipment Managers Association Protective gear in sports Ice sock Notes [ edit ] ^ Over time, sporting equipment has evolved because sports have started to require more protective gear to prevent injuries.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ Qiu 2020 , p. 1.

^ Shan 2008 , pp. 5.

^ Harvard Medical School (October 1, 2013), 10 tips to prevent injuries when you exercise , Harvard Health Publishing, archived from the original on December 25, 2022 , retrieved March 3, 2020 ^ Cuju , an ancient Chinese ball game dating back to the Han dynasty (206 BC – AD 220), is the earliest known recorded game similar to soccer, described as a competitive exercise involving kicking a ball through a net without using hands.

^ "Ancient Chinese Football" .

en.chinaculture.org .

Archived from the original on May 17, 2023 . Retrieved May 24, 2024 .

^ "Football Size, Shape and Design | The History Of The Football | Football-Stadiums.co.uk" .

www.football-stadiums.co.uk . October 13, 2017.

Archived from the original on June 22, 2023 . Retrieved June 22, 2023 .

^ Stefanyshyn, Darren J.; Wannop, John W. (2015). "Biomechanics research and sport equipment development".

Sports Engineering .

18 (4): 191– 202.

doi : 10.1007/s12283-015-0183-5 .

S2CID 109120639 .

^ Independent Monitoring Association for Child Labor, Atlanta Agreement (a retyped copy) Archived June 18, 2009, at the Wayback Machine , accessed October 29, 2022 ^ Eurostat , EU International trade in sporting goods between 2017 and 2022 , Statistics Explained , published with June 2023 data, accessed on 16 August ^ "The History and Evolution of Frisbee Games" .

Frizbowl . June 18, 2023.

Archived from the original on December 30, 2023 . Retrieved December 30, 2023 .

^ "The History of Frisbee and Flying Disc Freestyle" .

Freestyle Players Association . May 11, 2017.

Archived from the original on December 11, 2023 . Retrieved December 30, 2023 .

^ "Sports Rackets Dimensions & Drawings | Dimensions.com" .

www.dimensions.com .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2023 . Retrieved December 30, 2023 .

^ "Cricket for Baseball Fans | Cheryl's Mewsings" .

www.cheryl-morgan.com . September 11, 2006.

Archived from the original on December 30, 2023 . Retrieved December 30, 2023 .

Works cited [ edit ] Shan, G. B. (May 19, 2008).

"Sport Equipment Evaluation and Optimization — A Review of the Relationship between Sport Science Research and Engineering" .

The Open Sports Sciences Journal .

1 (1): 5– 11.

doi : 10.2174/1875399X00801010005 .

Qiu, Zhenyu (June 1, 2020).

"The Influence of the Design and Manufacture of Sports Equipment on Sports" .

Journal of Physics: Conference Series .

1549 (3): 032039.

doi : 10.1088/1742-6596/1549/3/032039 .

ISSN 1742-6588 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sports equipment .

v t e Sports equipment brands This list includes companies that produce sports equipment. List by sport include only current products manufactured Multi-sports Acerbis Adidas Admiral AFA Alpine Pro Anta Arc'teryx Asics Atletica BLK Burley-Sekem Castore Champion Charly Classic Descente Diadora Erke (brand) Erreà EvoShield FBT Fila Fischer 4F Garcis Givova Grand Sport Grays Head Hummel ISC Jako Joma Kappa Kelme Kookaburra Le Coq Sportif Legea Li-Ning Lotto Luanvi Lululemon Macron Majestic Mikasa Mills Mitchell & Ness Mitre Mizuno Molten NAAI New Balance New Era Nike Nivia O'Neills Oakley On Peak Penalty Poker Pirma Pro-Specs Puma Reebok Reusch Russell Schutt Scott Signia Skins Slazenger Sportika Starter Topper Uhlsport Umbro Under Armour Voit XBlades Xtep Warrior Warrix Sports Wilson World Balance Yonex 2XU Association football Athleta Bukta Capelli Finta Marathon Nanque Patrick Select Sport-Saller St Margaret's Australian football Cotton On Sherrin Baseball / softball DeMarini Louisville Slugger Marucci Nokona Rawlings Basketball AND1 First Ever Spalding Boxing Boxa Everlast Fairtex Lonsdale Sting Twins Special Cricket CA County Dukes Duncan Fearnley Gray-Nicolls Gunn & Moore Sanspareils Greenlands Sareen Stuart Surridge Cue sports Alcocks Brunswick Parris Cues Riley Cycling Bell Sports Castelli Giro Northwave Rapha Santini SMS SIDI Troy Lee Darts Winmau Golf Adams Ashworth Bettinardi Bridgestone Callaway Cleveland Cobra FootJoy Forgan John Letters MacGregor Maxfli OnCore PXG Penfold Ping Polara Srixon TaylorMade Titleist Top-Flite Wilson Staff Scotty Cameron Yamaha Golf Gridiron football Riddell Handball Select Ice hockey Bauer Canadien CCM Hespeler Itech Jofa Koho Mission Sher-Wood Titan Vaughn Martial arts Fairtex Tapout Twins Special Venum Motorsport AGV Alpinestars Arai Bell Sports Dainese Momo Nolan OMP Schuberth Shark Shoei SIDI Simpson Sparco Troy Lee Rugby Canterbury FI-TA Gilbert LE St Margaret's Steeden Webb Ellis Running / Hiking Altra Brooks Hoka (brand) Karhu Karrimor LA Gear Merrell Olympikus Saucony Skiing 4FRNT Alpina Armada Atomic Black Crows Black Diamond Blizzard Elan Faction K2 Kneissl Liberty Skis Line Skis Look Bindings Madshus Marker Moment Skis Nordica Peltonen Rossignol Rottefella Salomon Skigo Spyder Swix Völkl Surf Billabong Haydenshapes Hurley Mambo Ocean Pacific O'Neill Oxbow Rip Curl Quiksilver Swimming Arena Speedo TYR Zoggs Table tennis Butterfly Kettler Killerspin Stiga Sports Tennis / racket sports Babolat Carlton Donnay Dunlop Ellesse Lacoste Prince ProKennex Sergio Tacchini Snauwaert Tecnifibre Victor Volley Water polo Delfina Sport KAP7 Category Commons v t e Sport Types Individual Team Military sports Parasports Women Professional Semi-professional Amateur Science Exercise Biomechanics Practice Periodization Physiology Strength training Doping Medicine Athletic training Chriopractic Injury Physicians Psychology Nutrition Bodybuilding supplements Sports drink Pedagogy Physical education Physical activity Rating system Sociology Organizations Clubs Governing bodies Leagues Season Postseason School Teams International Business Agents Broadcasting Economics Industry Marketing Sponsorship Trade Communication General managers Journalism Magazines Podcasts Radio Promoters Culture Betting Cheerleaders Entertainment Fan History Memorabilia Naming Nicknames Numbering Olympic culture Philosophy Rivalries Sports mascots Sportsmanship Violence Equipment Artificial turf Balls Caving Exercise Flying disc Sportswear Politics Sports law Ministries National sport Regulation Sport by region Africa Australia Asia South Asia Europe North America Oceania South America Other regions Western world Latin America Sports portal Category Outline Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic 2 3 Latvia Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐6vnjn
Cached time: 20250818015159
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.590 seconds
Real time usage: 0.774 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3105/1000000
Revision size: 17118/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 105724/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3937/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 66635/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.343/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7678364/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  591.388      1 -total
 22.75%  134.559      2 Template:Reflist
 18.26%  108.002      3 Template:Navbox
 15.50%   91.646      1 Template:Sports_equipment_brands
 11.82%   69.878      1 Template:Citation
 11.24%   66.446      1 Template:Short_description
  8.71%   51.497      1 Template:Commons
  8.40%   49.692      1 Template:Sister_project
  8.10%   47.890      1 Template:Side_box
  8.04%   47.519      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1802372:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818015159 and revision id 1296486624. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sports_equipment&oldid=1296486624 " Category : Sports equipment Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2022 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 08:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sports equipment 26 languages Add topic

