Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Environmental soil chemistry 3 Key concepts Toggle Key concepts subsection 3.1 Soil structure 3.1.1 Formation of aggregates 3.1.2 Types of soil structure 3.1.3 Minerals 3.1.4 Soil pores 3.1.5 Soil water 3.1.6 Air/Atmosphere 3.2 Soil texture 3.2.1 Sand 3.2.2 Silt 3.2.3 Clay 3.2.4 Loam 3.3 Biota 3.3.1 Soil organisms 3.3.2 Soil organic matter 3.4 Soil cycle 3.4.1 Elemental cycles 4 Methods of investigation 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Soil chemistry 21 languages Afrikaans বাংলা Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Italiano Lietuvių മലയാളം Монгол Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi தமிழ் Українська 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of chemical characteristics of soil Soil chemistry is the study of the chemical characteristics of soil . Soil chemistry is affected by mineral composition, organic matter and environmental factors. In the early 1870s a consulting chemist to the Royal Agricultural Society in England, named J. Thomas Way, performed many experiments on how soils exchange ions , and is considered the father of soil chemistry.

[ 1 ] Other scientists who contributed to this branch of ecology include Edmund Ruffin , and Linus Pauling .

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Until the late 1960s, soil chemistry focused primarily on chemical reactions in the soil that contribute to pedogenesis or that affect plant growth . Since then, concerns have grown about environmental pollution , organic and inorganic soil contamination and potential ecological health and environmental health risks . Consequently, the emphasis in soil chemistry has shifted from pedology and agricultural soil science to an emphasis on environmental soil science .

Environmental soil chemistry [ edit ] A knowledge of environmental soil chemistry is paramount to predicting the fate of contaminants , as well as the processes by which they are initially released into the soil. Once a chemical is exposed to the soil environment, myriad chemical reactions can occur that may increase or decrease contaminant toxicity. These reactions include adsorption / desorption , precipitation , polymerization , dissolution , hydrolysis , hydration , complexation and oxidation/reduction . These reactions are often disregarded by scientists and engineers involved with environmental remediation . Understanding these processes enable us to better predict the fate and toxicity of contaminants and provide the knowledge to develop scientifically correct, and cost-effective remediation strategies.

Key concepts [ edit ] Soil structure [ edit ] Soil structure refers to the manner in which these individual soil particles are grouped together to form clusters of particles called aggregates. This is determined by the types of soil formation , parent material , and texture . Soil structure can be influenced by a wide variety of biota as well as management methods by humans.

Formation of aggregates [ edit ] Aggregates form under varying soil forming conditions and differ in structure as a result Natural aggregation results in soil peds.

Compaction produces hard dirt clods rather than soft soil peds. Clods result from tillage, excavation, and using heavy field equipment under poor (wet) soil conditions.

Microbial activity also influences the formation of aggregates.

[ 2 ] Types of soil structure [ edit ] The classification of soil structural forms is based largely on shape.

Soil particle shapes Spheroidal structure : sphere-like or rounded in shape. All the axes are approximately of the same dimensions, with curved and irregular faces. These are found commonly in cultivated fields .

Crumb structure : small and are like crumbs of bread due to them being porous Granular structure : less porous than crumb structure aggregates  and are more durable than crumb structure aggregates Plate-like structure : mainly horizontally aligned along plant based areas, with thin units being laminar and the thick units of the aggregates are classified as platy. Platy structures are usually found in the surface and sometimes in the lower sub-soils .

Block-like structure : particles that are arranged around a central point are enclosed by surfaces that may be either flat or somewhat rounded. These types are generally found in subsoil.

Sub angular blocky : corners are more rounded than the angular blocky aggregates Prism -like structure : particles that are longer than they are wide, with the vertical axis being greater than the horizontal axis. They are commonly found in subsoil horizon of arid and semi-arid region soils.

Prismatic : more angular and hexagonal at the top of the aggregate Columnar : particles that are rounded at the top of the aggregate Minerals [ edit ] The mineral components of the soil are derived from the parental rocks or regolith . The minerals present about 90% of the total weight of the soil. Some important elements, which are found in compound state, are oxygen , iron , silicon , aluminium , nitrogen , phosphorus , potassium , calcium , magnesium , carbon , hydrogen , etc.

The formation of primary and secondary minerals can better define what minerals are in the rock composition Soil pores [ edit ] The interactions of the soil's micropores and macropores are important to soil chemistry, as they allow for the provision of water and gaseous elements to the soil and the surrounding atmosphere.

Macropores [ 3 ] help transport molecules and substances in and out of the micropores.

Micropores are comprised within the aggregates themselves.

Soil water [ edit ] Water is essential for organisms within the soil profile , and it partially fills up the macropores in an ideal soil.

Leaching of the soil occurs as water carries along with it ions deeper into the lower soil horizons, causing the soil to become more oxidized in other soil horizons.

Water also will go from a higher water potential to a lower water potential, this can result in capillarity activity and gravitational force occurring with the water due to adhesion of the water to the soil surface and cohesion amongst the water molecules.

Air/Atmosphere [ edit ] The atmosphere contains three main gases, namely oxygen, carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) and nitrogen. In the atmosphere, oxygen is 20%, nitrogen is 79% and CO 2 is 0.15% to 0.65% by volume. CO 2 increases with the increase in the depth of soil because of decomposition of accumulated organic matter and abundance of plant roots . The presence of oxygen in the soil is important because it helps in breaking down insoluble rocky mass into soluble minerals and organic humification .  Air in the soil is composed of gases that are present in the atmosphere, but not in the same proportions. These gases facilitate chemical reactions in microorganisms .  Accumulation of soluble nutrients in the soil makes it more productive. If the soil is deficient in oxygen, microbial activity is slowed down or eliminated.  Important factors controlling the soil atmosphere are temperature , atmospheric pressure , wind / aeration and rainfall .

Soil texture [ edit ] Soil texture triangle Soil texture influences the soil chemistry pertaining to the soil's ability to maintain its structure, the restriction of water flow and the contents of the particles in the soil. Soil texture considers all particle types and a soil texture triangle is a chart that can be used to calculate the percentages of each particle type adding up to total 100% for the soil profile. These soil separates differ not only in their sizes but also in their bearing on some of the important factors affecting plant growth such as soil aeration , work ability, movement and availability of water and nutrients.

Sand [ edit ] Sand particles range in size (about 0.05–2 mm).

[ 4 ] Sand is the most coarse of the particle groups. Sand has the largest pores and soil particles of the particle groups. It also drains the most easily. These particles become more involved in chemical reactions when coated with clay.

Silt [ edit ] Silt particles range in size (about 0.002–0.5 mm). Silt pores are considered a medium in size compared with the other particle groups. Silt has a texture consistency of flour. Silt particles allow water and air to pass readily, yet retain moisture for crop growth. Silty soil contains sufficient quantities of nutrients, both organic and inorganic.

Clay [ edit ] Clay has particles smallest in size (about <0.002 mm) of the particle groups. Clay also has the smallest pores which give it a greater porosity, and it does not drain well. Clay has a sticky texture when wet. Some kinds can grow and dissipate, or in other words shrink and swell.

Loam [ edit ] Loam is a combination of sand, silt and clay that encompasses soils. It can be named based on the primary particles in the soil composition, ex. sandy loam, clay loam, silt loam, etc.

Biota [ edit ] Biota are organisms that, along with organic matter, help comprise the biological system of the soil. The vast majority of biological activity takes place near the soil surface, usually in the A horizon of a soil profile . Biota rely on inputs of organic matter in order to sustain themselves and increase population sizes. In return, they contribute nutrients to the soil, typically after it has been cycled in the soil trophic food web .

With the many different interactions that take place, biota can largely impact their environment physically, chemically, and biologically (Pavao-Zuckerman, 2008). A prominent factor that helps to provide some degree of stability with these interactions is biodiversity , a key component of all ecological communities. Biodiversity allows for a consistent flow of energy through trophic levels and strongly influences the structure of ecological communities in the soil.

Soil organisms [ edit ] Types of living soil biota can be divided into categories of plants (flora), animals (fauna), and microorganisms. Plants play a role in soil chemistry by exchanging nutrients with microorganisms and absorbing nutrients, creating concentration gradients of cations and anions. In addition to this, the differences in water potential created by plants influence water movement in soil, which affects the form and transportation of various particles. Vegetative cover on the soil surface greatly reduces erosion , which in turn prevents compaction and helps to maintain aeration in the soil pore space , providing oxygen and carbon to the biota and cation exchange sites that depend on it. Animals are essential to soil chemistry, as they regulate the cycling of nutrients and energy into different forms. This is primarily done through food webs. Some types of soil animals can be found below.

Detritivores Examples include millipedes, woodlice, and dung beetles Decomposers Examples include fungi, earthworms, and bacteria Protozoans Examples include amoeba, euglena, and paramecium Soil microbes play a major role in a multitude of biological and chemical activities that take place in soil. These microorganisms are said to make up around 1,000–10,000 kg of biomass per hectare in some soils (García-Sánchez, 2016). They are mostly recognized for their association with plants. The most well-known example of this is mycorrhizae , which exchange carbon for nitrogen with plant roots in a symbiotic relationship. Additionally, microbes are responsible for the majority of respiration that takes place in the soil, which has implications for the release of gases like methane and nitrous oxide from soil (giving it significance in discussion of climate change ) (Frouz et al., 2020). Given the significance of the effects of microbes on their environment, the conservation and promotion of microbial life is often desired by many plant growers, conservationists, and ecologists.

Soil organic matter [ edit ] Soil organic matter is the largest source of nutrients and energy in a soil. Its inputs strongly influence key soil factors such as types of biota, pH , and even soil order. Soil organic matter is often strategically applied by plant growers because of its ability to improve soil structure, supply nutrients, manage pH, increase water retention, and regulate soil temperature (which directly affects water dynamics and biota).

The chief elements found in humus , the product of organic matter decomposition in soil, are carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, sulphur and nitrogen. The important compound found in humus are carbohydrates , phosphoric acid , some organic acids , resins , urea etc. Humus is a dynamic product and is constantly changing because of its oxidation, reduction and hydrolysis ; hence, it has much carbon content and less nitrogen. This material can come from a variety of sources, but often derives from livestock manure and plant residues.

Though there are many other variables, such as texture, soils that lack sufficient organic matter content are susceptible to soil degradation and drying, as there is nothing supporting the soil structure. This often leads to a decline in soil fertility and an increase in erodibility.

Other associated concepts: Anion and cation exchange capacity [ 5 ] Soil pH Mineral formation and transformation processes and pedogenesis Clay mineralogy Sorption and precipitation reactions in soil Chemistry of problem soils C/N ratio Erosion and soil degradation [ 6 ] Soil cycle [ edit ] Many plant nutrients in soil undergo biogeochemical cycles throughout their environment. These cycles are influenced by water, gas exchange, biological activity, immobilization , and mineralization dynamics, but each element has its own course of flow (Deemy et al., 2022). For example, nitrogen moves from an isolated gaseous form to the compounds nitrate and nitrite as it moves through soil and becomes available to plants. In comparison, an element like phosphorus transfers in mineral form, as it is contained in rock material. These cycles also greatly vary in mobility, solubility , and the rate at which they move through their natural cycles. Together, they drive all of the processes of soil chemistry.

Elemental cycles [ edit ] Carbon Hydrogen Oxygen Nitrogen Phosphorus Potassium Sulfur Calcium Magnesium Iron Boron Manganese Copper Zinc Nickel Chlorine Methods of investigation [ edit ] New knowledge about the chemistry of soils often comes from studies in the laboratory, in which soil samples taken from undisturbed soil horizons in the field are used in experiments that include replicated treatments and controls.  In many cases, the soil samples are air dried at ambient temperatures (e.g., 25 °C (77 °F)) and sieved to a 2 mm size prior to storage for further study.  Such drying and sieving soil samples markedly disrupts soil structure, microbial population diversity, and chemical properties related to pH , oxidation-reduction status, manganese oxidation state, and dissolved organic matter; among other properties.

[ 7 ] Renewed interest in recent decades has led many soil chemists to maintain soil samples in a field-moist condition and stored at 4 °C (39 °F) under aerobic conditions before and during investigations.

[ 8 ] Two approaches are frequently used in laboratory investigations in soil chemistry.  The first is known as batch equilibration.  The chemist adds a given volume of water or salt solution of known concentration of dissolved ions to a mass of soil (e.g., 25–mL of solution to 5–g of soil in a centrifuge tube or flask).  The soil slurry then is shaken or swirled for a given amount of time (e.g., 15 minutes to many hours) to establish a steady state or equilibrium condition prior to filtering or centrifuging at high speed to separate sand grains, silt particles, and clay colloids from the equilibrated solution.

[ 9 ] The filtrate or centrifugate then is analyzed using one of several methods, including ion specific electrodes, atomic absorption spectrophotometry , inductively coupled plasma spectrometry, ion chromatography , and colorimetric methods.  In each case, the analysis quantifies the concentration or activity of an ion or molecule in the solution phase, and by multiplying the measured concentration or activity (e.g., in mg ion/mL) by the solution-to-soil ratio (mL of extraction solution/g soil), the chemist obtains the result in mg ion/g soil. This result based on the mass of soil allows comparisons between different soils and treatments.  A related approach uses a known volume to solution to leach (infiltrate) the extracting solution through a quantity of soil in small columns at a controlled rate to simulate how rain, snow meltwater, and irrigation water pass through soils in the field.  The filtrate then is analyzed using the same methods as used in batch equilibrations.

[ 10 ] Another approach to quantifying soil processes and phenomena uses in situ methods that do not disrupt the soil. as occurs when the soil is shaken or leached with an extracting soil solution.  These methods usually use surface spectroscopic techniques, such as Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy , nuclear magnetic resonance , Mössbauer spectroscopy , and X-ray spectroscopy . These approaches aim to obtain information on the chemical nature of the mineralogy and chemistry of particle and colloid surfaces, and how ions and molecules are associated with such surfaces by adsorption, complexation, and precipitation.

[ 11 ] These laboratory experiments and analyses have an advantage over field studies in that chemical mechanisms on how ions and molecules react in soils can be inferred from the data. One can draw conclusions or frame new hypotheses on similar reactions in different soils with diverse textures, organic matter contents, types of clay minerals and oxides, pH, and drainage condition.  Laboratory studies have the disadvantage that they lose some of  the realism and heterogeneity of undisturbed soil in the field, while gaining control and the power of extrapolation to unstudied soil. Mechanistic laboratory studies combined with more realistic, less controlled, observational field studies often yield accurate approximations of the behavior and chemistry of the soils that may be spatially heterogeneous and temporally variable.  Another challenge faced by soil chemists is how microbial populations and enzyme activity in field soils may be changed when the soil is disturbed, both in the field and laboratory, particularly when soils samples are dried prior to laboratory studies and analysis.

[ 12 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Sparks, Donald. "Environmental Soil Chemistry: An Overview".

Environmental Soil Chemistry (Second Edition) .

^ Dong, Menghui (February 2, 2021).

"Microbial community assembly in soil aggregates: A dynamic interplay of stochastic and deterministic processes" .

Applied Soil Ecology .

163 : 103911.

Bibcode : 2021AppSE.16303911D .

doi : 10.1016/j.apsoil.2021.103911 .

hdl : 1874/414089 .

S2CID 233564862 – via Elsevier Science Direct .

^ Moore, Brian (February 1, 2003).

"GAC Pore Structure in Cincinnati during Full-Scale Treatment/Reactivation" .

American Water Works Association .

95 (2): 103– 112.

Bibcode : 2003JAWWA..95b.103M .

doi : 10.1002/j.1551-8833.2003.tb10296.x .

JSTOR 41310983 .

S2CID 103472342 .

^ Weil, Ray (2019).

Elements of the Nature and Properties of Soils .

Pearson . pp.

120– 123.

ISBN 978-0-13-325459-4 .

^ Norman, A. G. (1 January 1957).

"Soil-Plant Relationships and Plant Nutrition" .

American Journal of Botany .

44 (1): 67– 73.

doi : 10.2307/2438347 .

hdl : 2027.42/142079 .

JSTOR 2438347 .

^ Guo, Mingming (June 10, 2021).

"Revegetation induced change in soil erodibility as influenced by slope situation on the Loess Plateau" .

Science of the Total Environment .

772 : 145540.

Bibcode : 2021ScTEn.77245540G .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.145540 .

PMID 33770870 .

S2CID 232376861 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Bartlett, Richmond; James, Bruce (1980). "Studying dried, stored soil samples -- some pitfalls".

Soil Science Society of America Journal .

44 (4): 721– 724.

Bibcode : 1980SSASJ..44..721B .

doi : 10.2136/sssaj1980.03615995004400040011x .

^ Mimmo, T; Marzadori, C; Gessa, C.E. (2008). "Organic acid extraction from rhizosphere soil: effect of field-moist, dried and frozen samples".

Plant and Soil .

312 ( 1– 2): 175– 184.

Bibcode : 2008PlSoi.312..175M .

doi : 10.1007/s11104-008-9574-8 .

S2CID 22059913 .

^ Blaylock, Michael J.; James, Bruce R. (1993). "Selenite and selenate quantification by hydride generation-atomic absorption spectrometry, ion chromatography, and colorimetry".

Journal of Environmental Quality .

22 (4): 851– 857.

Bibcode : 1993JEnvQ..22..851B .

doi : 10.2134/jeq1993.00472425002200040031x .

^ Langlois, Christina L.; James, Bruce R. (2014). "Chromium oxidation-reduction chemistry at soil horizon interfaces defined by iron and manganese oxides".

Soil Science Society of America Journal .

79 (5): 1329– 139.

doi : 10.2136/sssaj2014.12.0476 .

^ Chabrillat, Sabine; Ben-Dor, Eyal; Viscarra Rossel, Raphael A.; Dematte, Jose A.M. (2013).

"Quantitative soil spectroscopy" .

Applied and Environmental Soil Science .

2013 (1): 3.

Bibcode : 2013ApESS201316578C .

doi : 10.1155/2013/616578 .

^ Fisher, Kristin A.; Meisinger, John J.; James, Bruce R. (2016). "Urea hydrolysis rate in soil toposequences as influenced by pH, carbon, nitrogen, and soluble metals".

Journal of Environmental Quality .

45 (1): 349– 359.

Bibcode : 2016JEnvQ..45..349F .

doi : 10.2134/jeq2015.05.0228 .

PMID 26828191 .

Sonon, L.S., M.A. Chappell and V.P. Evangelou (2000) The History of Soil Chemistry . Url accessed on 2006-04-11.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Soil chemistry at Wikimedia Commons v t e Soil science History Index Main fields Pedology Edaphology Soil biology Soil microbiology Soil zoology Soil ecology Soil physics Soil mechanics Soil chemistry Environmental soil science Agricultural soil science Soil topics Soil Pedosphere Soil morphology Pedodiversity Soil formation Soil erosion Soil contamination Soil retrogression and degradation Soil compaction Soil compaction (agriculture) Soil sealing Soil salinity Alkali soil Soil pH Soil acidification Soil health Soil life Soil biodiversity Soil quality Soil value Soil fertility Soil resilience Soil color Soil texture Soil structure Pore space in soil Pore water pressure Soil crust Soil horizon Soil biomantle Soil carbon Soil gas Soil respiration Soil organic matter Soil moisture Soil water (retention) Soil type v t e Soil classification World Reference Base for Soil Resources (1998–) Acrisols Alisols Andosols Anthrosols Arenosols Calcisols Cambisols Chernozem Cryosols Durisols Ferralsols Fluvisols Gleysols Gypsisols Histosol Kastanozems Leptosols Lixisols Luvisols Nitisols Phaeozems Planosols Plinthosols Podzols Regosols Retisols Solonchaks Solonetz Stagnosol Technosols Umbrisols Vertisols USDA soil taxonomy Alfisols Andisols Aridisols Entisols Gelisols Histosols Inceptisols Mollisols Oxisols Spodosols Ultisols Vertisols Other systems FAO soil classification (1974–1998) Unified Soil Classification System AASHTO Soil Classification System Référentiel pédologique (French classification system) Canadian system of soil classification Australian Soil Classification Polish Soil Classification 1938 USDA soil taxonomy List of U.S. state soils List of vineyard soil types PG-3 (Spanish classification system) Non-systematic soil types Sand Silt Clay Loam Topsoil Subsoil Soil crust Claypan Hardpan Gypcrust Caliche Parent material Pedosphere Laimosphere Rhizosphere Bulk soil Alkali soil Bay mud Blue goo Brickearth Brown earth Calcareous grassland Dark earth Dry quicksand Duplex soil Eluvium Expansive clay Fill dirt Fuller's earth Hydrophobic soil Loess Lunar soil Martian soil Mud Muskeg Paleosol Peat Prime farmland Quicksand Serpentine soil Spodic soil Stagnogley Subaqueous soil Takir Terra preta Terra rossa Tropical peat Yedoma Types of soil Applications Soil conservation Soil management Soil guideline value Soil survey Soil test Soil governance Soil value Soil salinity control Erosion control Agroecology Liming (soil) Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Geomorphology Geotechnical engineering Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Societies, Initiatives Australian Society of Soil Science Incorporated Canadian Society of Soil Science Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (India) German Soil Science Society Indian Institute of Soil Science International Union of Soil Sciences International Year of Soil National Society of Consulting Soil Scientists (US) OPAL Soil Centre (UK) Soil Science Society of Poland Soil and Water Conservation Society (US) Soil Science Society of America World Congress of Soil Science Scientific journals Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica B Journal of Soil and Water Conservation Plant and Soil Pochvovedenie Soil Research Soil Science Society of America Journal See also Land use Land conversion Land management Vegetation Infiltration (hydrology) Groundwater Crust (geology) Impervious surface / Surface runoff Petrichor Wikipedia:WikiProject Soil Category soil Category soil science List of soil scientists v t e Branches of chemistry Glossary of chemical formulae List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Analytical Calorimetry Characterization Chromatography GC HPLC Crystallography Electroanalytical methods Elemental analysis Instrumental chemistry Mass spectrometry EI ICP MALDI Separation process Spectroscopy IR Raman UV-Vis NMR Titration Wet chemistry Theoretical Computational chemistry Mathematical chemistry Molecular modelling Molecular mechanics Molecular dynamics Molecular geometry VSEPR theory Quantum chemistry Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Molecular physics Chemical thermodynamics Cryochemistry Electrochemistry Spectroelectrochemistry Photoelectrochemistry Equilibrium chemistry Femtochemistry Interface and colloid science Micromeritics Mechanochemistry Microwave chemistry Photochemistry Sonochemistry Spectroscopy Spin chemistry Structural chemistry Surface science Thermochemistry Inorganic Ceramic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Magnetochemistry Organometallic chemistry Organolanthanide chemistry Solid-state chemistry Organic Dynamic covalent chemistry Enantioselective synthesis Fullerene chemistry Organic reactions Organic synthesis Petrochemistry Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Retrosynthetic analysis Stereochemistry Alkane stereochemistry Total synthesis / Semisynthesis Biological Biochemistry Molecular biology Cell biology Bioinorganic chemistry Bioorganic chemistry Bioorganometallic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Bioorthogonal chemistry Clinical chemistry Medicinal chemistry Pharmacology Neurochemistry Interdisciplinarity Nuclear chemistry Radiochemistry Radiation chemistry Actinide chemistry Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry Geochemistry Biogeochemistry Photogeochemistry Environmental chemistry Atmospheric chemistry Ocean chemistry Clay chemistry Carbochemistry Food chemistry Carbohydrate chemistry Food physical chemistry Agricultural chemistry Soil chemistry Chemistry education Amateur chemistry General chemistry Clandestine chemistry Forensic chemistry Forensic toxicology Post-mortem chemistry Nanochemistry Supramolecular chemistry Chemical synthesis Green chemistry Click chemistry Combinatorial chemistry Biosynthesis Chemical engineering Stoichiometry Materials science Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science See also History of chemistry Nobel Prize in Chemistry Timeline of chemistry of element discoveries " The central science " Chemical reaction Catalysis Chemical element Chemical compound Atom Molecule Ion Chemical substance Chemical bond Alchemy Quantum mechanics Category Commons Portal WikiProject Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Soil_chemistry&oldid=1296417853 " Category : Soil chemistry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 22:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Soil chemistry 21 languages Add topic

