Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Examples and counter examples Toggle Examples and counter examples subsection 2.1 Spaces that are not T 0 2.2 Spaces that are T 0 but not T 1 3 Operating with T 0 spaces 4 The Kolmogorov quotient 5 Removing T 0 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Kolmogorov space 16 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in topology This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Kolmogorov space" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Separation axioms in topological spaces Kolmogorov classification T 0 (Kolmogorov) T 1 (Fréchet) T 2 (Hausdorff) T 2 ½ (Urysohn) completely T 2 (completely Hausdorff) T 3 (regular Hausdorff) T 3½ (Tychonoff) T 4 (normal Hausdorff) T 5 (completely normal Hausdorff) T 6 (perfectly normal Hausdorff) History In topology and related branches of mathematics , a topological space X is a T 0 space or Kolmogorov space (named after Andrey Kolmogorov ) if for every pair of distinct points of X , at least one of them has a neighborhood not containing the other.

[ 1 ] In a T 0 space, all points are topologically distinguishable .

This condition, called the T 0 condition , is the weakest of the separation axioms . Nearly all topological spaces normally studied in mathematics are T 0 spaces. In particular, all T 1 spaces , i.e., all spaces in which for every pair of distinct points, each has a neighborhood not containing the other, are T 0 spaces. This includes all T 2 (or Hausdorff) spaces , i.e., all topological spaces in which distinct points have disjoint neighbourhoods. In another direction, every sober space (which may not be T 1 ) is T 0 ; this includes the underlying topological space of any scheme . Given any topological space one can construct a T 0 space by identifying topologically indistinguishable points.

T 0 spaces that are not T 1 spaces are exactly those spaces for which the specialization preorder is a nontrivial partial order . Such spaces naturally occur in computer science , specifically in denotational semantics .

Definition [ edit ] A T 0 space is a topological space in which every pair of distinct points is topologically distinguishable . That is, for any two different points x and y there is an open set that contains one of these points and not the other. More precisely the topological space X is Kolmogorov or T 0 {\displaystyle \mathbf {T} _{0}} if and only if: [ 1 ] If a , b ∈ ∈ X {\displaystyle a,b\in X} and a ≠ ≠ b {\displaystyle a\neq b} , there exists an open set O such that either ( a ∈ ∈ O ) ∧ ∧ ( b ∉ ∉ O ) {\displaystyle (a\in O)\wedge (b\notin O)} or ( a ∉ ∉ O ) ∧ ∧ ( b ∈ ∈ O ) {\displaystyle (a\notin O)\wedge (b\in O)} .

Note that topologically distinguishable points are automatically distinct. On the other hand, if the singleton sets { x } and { y } are separated then the points x and y must be topologically distinguishable. That is, separated ⇒ topologically distinguishable ⇒ distinct The property of being topologically distinguishable is, in general, stronger than being distinct but weaker than being separated. In a T 0 space, the second arrow above also reverses; points are distinct if and only if they are distinguishable. This is how the T 0 axiom fits in with the rest of the separation axioms .

Examples and counter examples [ edit ] Nearly all topological spaces normally studied in mathematics are T 0 . In particular, all Hausdorff (T 2 ) spaces , T 1 spaces and sober spaces are T 0 .

Spaces that are not T 0 [ edit ] A set with more than one element, with the trivial topology . No points are distinguishable.

The set R 2 where the open sets are the Cartesian product of an open set in R and R itself, i.e., the product topology of R with the usual topology and R with the trivial topology; points ( a , b ) and ( a , c ) are not distinguishable.

The space of all measurable functions f from the real line R to the complex plane C such that the Lebesgue integral ( ∫ ∫ R | f ( x ) | 2 d x ) 1 2 < ∞ ∞ {\displaystyle \left(\int _{\mathbb {R} }|f(x)|^{2}\,dx\right)^{\frac {1}{2}}<\infty } . Two functions which are equal almost everywhere are indistinguishable. See also below.

Spaces that are T 0 but not T 1 [ edit ] The Zariski topology on Spec( R ), the prime spectrum of a commutative ring R , is always T 0 but generally not T 1 . The non-closed points correspond to prime ideals which are not maximal . They are important to the understanding of schemes .

The particular point topology on any set with at least two elements is T 0 but not T 1 since the particular point is not closed (its closure is the whole space). An important special case is the Sierpiński space which is the particular point topology on the set {0,1}.

The excluded point topology on any set with at least two elements is T 0 but not T 1 . The only closed point is the excluded point.

The Alexandrov topology on a partially ordered set is T 0 but will not be T 1 unless the order is discrete (agrees with equality). Every finite T 0 space is of this type. This also includes the particular point and excluded point topologies as special cases.

The right order topology on a totally ordered set is a related example.

The overlapping interval topology is similar to the particular point topology since every non-empty open set includes 0.

Quite generally, a topological space X will be T 0 if and only if the specialization preorder on X is a partial order . However, X will be T 1 if and only if the order is discrete (i.e. agrees with equality). So a space will be T 0 but not T 1 if and only if the specialization preorder on X is a non-discrete partial order.

Operating with T 0 spaces [ edit ] Commonly studied topological spaces are all T 0 .
Indeed, when mathematicians in many fields, notably analysis , naturally run across non-T 0 spaces, they usually replace them with T 0 spaces, in a manner to be described below. To motivate the ideas involved, consider a well-known example. The space L 2 ( R ) is meant to be the space of all measurable functions f from the real line R to the complex plane C such that the Lebesgue integral of | f ( x )| 2 over the entire real line is finite .
This space should become a normed vector space by defining the norm || f || to be the square root of that integral. The problem is that this is not really a norm, only a seminorm , because there are functions other than the zero function whose (semi)norms are zero .
The standard solution is to define L 2 ( R ) to be a set of equivalence classes of functions instead of a set of functions directly.
This constructs a quotient space of the original seminormed vector space, and this quotient is a normed vector space. It inherits several convenient properties from the seminormed space; see below.

In general, when dealing with a fixed topology T on a set X , it is helpful if that topology is T 0 . On the other hand, when X is fixed but T is allowed to vary within certain boundaries, to force T to be T 0 may be inconvenient, since non-T 0 topologies are often important special cases. Thus, it can be important to understand both T 0 and non-T 0 versions of the various conditions that can be placed on a topological space.

The Kolmogorov quotient [ edit ] Topological indistinguishability of points is an equivalence relation . No matter what topological space X might be to begin with, the quotient space under this equivalence relation is always T 0 . This quotient space is called the Kolmogorov quotient of X , which we will denote KQ( X ). Of course, if X was T 0 to begin with, then KQ( X ) and X are naturally homeomorphic .
Categorically, Kolmogorov spaces are a reflective subcategory of topological spaces, and the Kolmogorov quotient is the reflector.

Topological spaces X and Y are Kolmogorov equivalent when their Kolmogorov quotients are homeomorphic. Many properties of topological spaces are preserved by this equivalence; that is, if X and Y are Kolmogorov equivalent, then X has such a property if and only if Y does.
On the other hand, most of the other properties of topological spaces imply T 0 -ness; that is, if X has such a property, then X must be T 0 .
Only a few properties, such as being an indiscrete space , are exceptions to this rule of thumb.
Even better, many structures defined on topological spaces can be transferred between X and KQ( X ).
The result is that, if you have a non-T 0 topological space with a certain structure or property, then you can usually form a T 0 space with the same structures and properties by taking the Kolmogorov quotient.

The example of L 2 ( R ) displays these features.
From the point of view of topology, the seminormed vector space that we started with has a lot of extra structure; for example, it is a vector space , and it has a seminorm, and these define a pseudometric and a uniform structure that are compatible with the topology.
Also, there are several properties of these structures; for example, the seminorm satisfies the parallelogram identity and the uniform structure is complete .  The space is not T 0 since any two functions in L 2 ( R ) that are equal almost everywhere are indistinguishable with this topology.
When we form the Kolmogorov quotient, the actual L 2 ( R ), these structures and properties are preserved.
Thus, L 2 ( R ) is also a complete seminormed vector space satisfying the parallelogram identity.
But we actually get a bit more, since the space is now T 0 .
A seminorm is a norm if and only if the underlying topology is T 0 , so L 2 ( R ) is actually a complete normed vector space satisfying the parallelogram identity—otherwise known as a Hilbert space .
And it is a Hilbert space that mathematicians (and physicists , in quantum mechanics ) generally want to study.  Note that the notation L 2 ( R ) usually denotes the Kolmogorov quotient, the set of equivalence classes of square integrable functions that differ on sets of measure zero, rather than simply the vector space of square integrable functions that the notation suggests.

Removing T 0 [ edit ] Although norms were historically defined first, people came up with the definition of seminorm as well, which is a sort of non-T 0 version of a norm. In general, it is possible to define non-T 0 versions of both properties and structures of topological spaces. First, consider a property of topological spaces, such as being Hausdorff . One can then define another property of topological spaces by defining the space X to satisfy the property if and only if the Kolmogorov quotient KQ( X ) is Hausdorff. This is a sensible, albeit less famous, property; in this case, such a space X is called preregular . (There even turns out to be a more direct definition of preregularity). Now consider a structure that can be placed on topological spaces, such as a metric . We can define a new structure on topological spaces by letting an example of the structure on X be simply a metric on KQ( X ). This is a sensible structure on X ; it is a pseudometric . (Again, there is a more direct definition of pseudometric.) In this way, there is a natural way to remove T 0 -ness from the requirements for a property or structure. It is generally easier to study spaces that are T 0 , but it may also be easier to allow structures that aren't T 0 to get a fuller picture. The T 0 requirement can be added or removed arbitrarily using the concept of Kolmogorov quotient.

See also [ edit ] Sober space References [ edit ] ^ a b Karno, Zbigniew (1994).

"On Kolmogorov Topological Spaces" (PDF) .

Journal of Formalized Mathematics .

6 (published 2003).

Lynn Arthur Steen and J. Arthur Seebach, Jr., Counterexamples in Topology . Springer-Verlag, New York, 1978. Reprinted by Dover Publications, New York, 1995.

ISBN 0-486-68735-X (Dover edition).

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kolmogorov_space&oldid=1239230997 " Categories : Separation axioms Properties of topological spaces Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2022 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 8 August 2024, at 02:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kolmogorov space 16 languages Add topic

