Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The Consumer groups 2 Basis Toggle Basis subsection 2.1 Global morality 2.2 Spending as morality 3 Standards and labels 4 Research 5 Related concepts Toggle Related concepts subsection 5.1 Conscientious consumption 5.2 Alternative giving 6 Criticism 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Ethical consumerism 18 languages العربية Català Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Lietuvių 日本語 Português Русский Simple English Suomi ไทย Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of consumer activism Part of a series on Anti-consumerism Theories and ideas Asceticism Affluenza Alternative culture Anti-capitalism Autonomous building Billboard hacking Buyer's remorse Bioeconomics Buddhist economics Buy Nothing Day Collaborative consumption Collapsology Commodification Commodity fetishism Commune Compulsive buying disorder Conspicuous consumption Consumer capitalism Consumerism Conviviality Criticism of advertising Culture jamming Degrowth Do it yourself Downshifting Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological economics Ecovillage Ethical consumerism Feminist political ecology Food loss and waste Freeganism Gift economy Green consumption Hyperconsumerism Laconophilia Local food Microgeneration Non-possession Overconsumption Planned obsolescence Right to repair Political ecology Post-consumerism Simple living Slow Food Steady-state economy Subvertising Sustainable consumer behaviour Sustainable consumption Notable works Walden The Theory of the Leisure Class Brave New World The Affluent Society One-Dimensional Man The Society of the Spectacle ( book , film ) The Consumer Society: Myths and Structures [ fr ] Steal This Book Small Is Beautiful To Have or to Be?

Future Primitive and Other Essays Fight Club ( novel , film ) Escape from Affluenza No Logo Profit over People: Neoliberalism and Global Order The Cultural Creatives Affluenza: The All-Consuming Epidemic Evasion The Corporation Surplus: Terrorized into Being Consumers So, What's Your Price?

What Would Jesus Buy?

Organizations and groups Adbusters Crass CrimethInc.

Deep Green Resistance Democracy Now!

Earth Liberation Front Fifth Estate Freecycle Green Anarchy Institute for Social Ecology Monthly Review Rage Against the Machine Reverend Billy The Venus Project The Yes Men 350.org People Mauro Bonaiuti Noam Chomsky Erich Fromm Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen Edward Goldsmith Paul Goodman André Gorz Ivan Illich Serge Latouche Donella Meadows Pierre Rabhi John Ruskin E. F. Schumacher Bernard Stiegler Henry David Thoreau Related social movements Alter-globalization Amateurism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-punk Anti-capitalism Anti-corporate activism Anti-globalization movement Communism Diggers (theater) Ecofeminism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Food Not Bombs Fossil fuel phase-out Green anarchism Green left Green politics Hippie Libertarian socialism Neo-Luddism New Left Occupy Wall Street Postmodernism Punk Situationists Slow movement Social anarchism Social ecology See also Advanced capitalism Advertising Barter Consumer behaviour Consumption (economics) Consumption (sociology) Cooperative Counterculture Disneyfication Ecological economics Economic materialism Economic problems Frugality Green economy Gross National Happiness Heterodox economics HospEx Illth Influence of mass media Informal sector Intentional community Left-wing politics McDonaldization Mutual aid Natural resource economics Non-monetary economy Permaculture Post-materialism Productivism Shopping Subsistence economy Sustainability Sweatshops Veblen good Workaholic v t e Ethical consumerism (alternatively called ethical consumption , ethical purchasing , moral purchasing , ethical sourcing , or ethical shopping and also associated with sustainable and green consumerism ) is a type of consumer activism based on the concept of dollar voting .

[ 1 ] People practice it by buying ethically made products that support small-scale manufacturers or local artisans and protect animals and the environment, while boycotting products that exploit children as workers , are tested on animals, or damage the environment.

The term "ethical consumer", now used generically, was first popularised by the UK magazine Ethical Consumer , first published in 1989.

[ 2 ] Ethical Consumer magazine's key innovation was to produce "ratings tables", inspired by the criteria-based approach of the then-emerging ethical investment movement.

Ethical Consumer ' s ratings tables awarded companies negative marks (and overall scores, starting in 2005) across a range of ethical and environmental categories such as "animal rights", "human rights", and "pollution and toxics", empowering consumers to make ethically informed consumption choices and providing campaigners with reliable information on corporate behaviour. Such criteria-based ethical and environmental ratings have subsequently become commonplace both in providing consumer information and in business-to-business corporate social responsibility and sustainability ratings such as those provided by Innovest, Calvert Foundation , Domini, IRRC, TIAA–CREF , and KLD Analytics. Today, Bloomberg and Reuters provide "environmental, social, and governance" ratings directly to the financial data screens of hundreds of thousands of stock market traders.

[ 3 ] The nonprofit Ethical Consumer Research Association continues to publish Ethical Consumer and its associated website, which provides free access to ethical rating tables.

Although single-source ethical consumerism guides such as Ethical Consumer , Shop Ethical, [ 4 ] and the Good Shopping Guide [ 5 ] are popular, they suffer from incomplete coverage.

User-generated ethical reviews are more likely, long-term, to provide democratic, in-depth coverage of a wider range of products and businesses.

[ 6 ] The Green Stars Project [ 7 ] promotes the idea of including ethical ratings (on a scale of one to five green stars) alongside conventional ratings on retail sites such as Amazon or review sites such as Yelp .

The term "political consumerism" , first used in a study titled "The Gender Gap Reversed: Political Consumerism as a Women-Friendly Form of Civic and Political Engagement" from authors Dietlind Stolle and Michele Micheletti (2003), is identical to the idea of ethical consumerism. However, in this study, the authors found that political consumerism as a form of social participation often went overlooked at the time of writing and needed to be accounted for in future studies of social participation.

[ 8 ] However, in "From Ethical Consumerism to Political Consumption", author Nick Clarke argues that political consumerism allows for marginalized groups, such as women, to participate in political advocacy in non-bureaucratic ways that draw attention to governmental weaknesses.

[ 9 ] Political consumerism has also been criticised on the basis that "it cannot work", or that it displays class bias.

[ 10 ] The widespread development of political consumerism is hampered by substantial mundane consumption, which does not afford reflective choice, along with complexities of everyday life, which demand negotiations between conflicting moral and ethical considerations.

[ 11 ] The Consumer groups [ edit ] In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, people in industrialized countries began formal consumer movements to ensure that they would get value for their money in terms of the things they purchased. These movements focused on the unfair labor practices of the companies, and on labelling requirements of food, cosmetics, drugs, etc. Examples of the consumer movements were the Consumer League which was established in New York, US in 1891, National Consumers League created in US in 1898, and Consumers Council which was established during World War I in Great Britain. During this time [ clarification needed ] workers were neither well-paid nor did they have secure employment with benefit of social [ clarification needed ] protection; similarly, working conditions were decent [ clarification needed ] and the Irish Trade Union movement focused the ILO [ clarification needed ] policy of campaigning for decent work wherever there was an opportunity for job improvement or job creation.

[ 12 ] Basis [ edit ] Global morality [ edit ] An electric wire reel reused as a center table in a Rio de Janeiro decoration fair . When consumers choose and reuse environmentally friendly material like this, they are practicing ethical consumerism.

In Unequal Freedoms: The Global Market As An Ethical System (1998), John McMurtry argues that all purchasing decisions imply some moral choice, and that there is no purchasing that is not ultimately moral in nature. This mirrors older arguments, especially by the Anabaptists (e.g.

Mennonites , Amish ), that one must accept all personal moral and spiritual liability for all harms done at any distance in space or time to anyone by one's own choices. Some interpretations of the book of Genesis from the Judeo-Christian scriptures appears to direct followers towards practising good stewardship of the Earth, under an obligation to a God who is believed to have created the planet for people to share with other creatures. A similar argument presented [ who?

] from a secular humanist point of view is that it is simply better for human beings to acknowledge that the planet supports life only because of a delicate balance of many different factors.

Spending as morality [ edit ] Some trust criteria, e.g.

creditworthiness or implied warranty , are considered to be part of any purchasing or sourcing decision. However, these terms refer to broader systems of guidance that would, ideally, cause any purchasing decision to disqualify offered products or services based on non-price criteria that affect the moral rather than the functional liabilities of the entire production process.

[ clarification needed ] Paul Hawken , a proponent of natural capitalism , refers to "comprehensive outcomes" of production services as opposed to the "culminative outcomes" of using the product of such services.

[ citation needed ] Often, moral criteria are part of a shift away from commodity markets towards a service economy where all activities, from growing to harvesting to processing to delivery, are considered part of the value chain for which consumers are "responsible".

Andrew Wilson, Director of the UK's Ashridge Centre for Business and Society, argues that "Shopping is more important than voting", and that the disposition of money is the most basic role we play in any system of economics .

[ 13 ] Some theorists [ who?

] believe that it is the clearest way that we express our actual moral choices: if we say we care about something but continue to buy in a way that has a high probability of risk of harm or destruction to that thing, we don't really care about it; we are practising a form of simple hypocrisy . Ethical consumerism is widely explained by psychologists using the theory of planned behavior , which attributes a consumer's choices to their perceived sense of control, social norms, and evaluation of the consequences.

[ 14 ] However, recent research suggests that a consumer's ethical obligation, self-identity, and virtues may also influence their buying decisions.

[ 15 ] In an effort by churches to advocate moral and ethical consumerism, many have become involved in the Fair Trade movement: Ten Thousand Villages is affiliated with the Mennonite Central Committee [ 16 ] SERRV International [ 17 ] is partnered with Catholic Relief Services [ 18 ] and Lutheran World Relief [ 19 ] Village Markets of Africa sells Fair Trade gifts from the Lutheran Church in Kenya [ 20 ] Catholic Relief Services has their own Fair Trade mission in CRS Fair Trade [ 21 ] Standards and labels [ edit ] A number of standards, labels and marks have been introduced for ethical consumers, such as: B corporation Co-op Marque Dolphin safe EKOenergy for electricity agreements Equal Exchange Ethical Consumer Best Buy label Fairtrade Free-range poultry FSC-certified sustainably sourced wood Grass fed beef Green America Seal of Approval Halal (religious standard) Kosher (religious standard) Local food MSC-certified sustainably sourced seafood No Pork No Lard (semi-religious standard) Organic food Organic Trade Association Product Red Rainforest Alliance certified Recycled/recyclable Respects Your Freedom Shade-grown coffee Social Accountability 8000 Union-made Vegan Along with disclosure of ingredients, some mandatory labelling of the origins of clothing or food is required in all developed nations . This practice has been extended in some developing nations so that, for example, every item carries the name, phone number and fax number of the factory where it was made so a buyer can inspect its conditions. This can also be used to show that the item was not made by child labour or " prison labor ", the use of which to produce export goods is banned in most developed nations. Such labels have also been used for boycotts, as when the merchandise mark Made in Germany was introduced in 1887.

These labels serve as tokens of some reliable validation process, some instructional capital, [ 22 ] much as does a brand name or a nation's flag. They also signal some social capital , or trust, in some community of auditors that must follow those instructions to validate those labels.

A sign proclaiming carbon neutrality in the Virginia-Highland neighborhood of Atlanta Some companies in the United States, though currently not required to reduce their carbon footprint , are doing so voluntarily by changing their energy use practices, as well as by directly funding (through carbon offsets ), businesses that are already sustainable—or that are developing or improving green technologies for the future.

In 2009, Atlanta 's Virginia-Highland neighborhood became the first Carbon-Neutral Zone in the United States. Seventeen merchants in Virginia-Highland allowed their carbon footprint to be audited. Now, they are partnered with the Valley Wood Carbon Sequestration Project—thousands of acres of forest in rural Georgia—through the Chicago Climate Exchange (CCX).

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] The businesses involved in the partnership display the Verus Carbon Neutral seal in each store front and posted a sign prominently declaring the area's Carbon Neutral status. (CCX ceased trading carbon credits at the end of 2010 due to inactivity in the U.S. carbon markets, [ 25 ] although carbon exchanges were intended [ who?

] to still be facilitated [ who?

] .) [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Some theorists [ who?

] suggest the amount of social capital or trust invested in nation-states (or "flags") will continue to decrease, and that placed in corporations (or "brands") will increase. This can only be offset by retrenched national sovereignty to reinforce shared national standards in tax, trade, and tariff laws, and by placing the trust in civil society in such "moral labels".

[ clarification needed ] These arguments have been a major focus of the anti-globalization movement , which includes many broader arguments against the amoral nature of markets. However, the economic school of Public Choice Theory pioneered by James M. Buchanan has offered counter-arguments based on an economic demonstration of this theory of "amoral markets", which lack ethics or morals, versus "moral governments", which are tied to ideas of justice.

[ 28 ] Research [ edit ] GfK NOP , the market research group, made a five-country study of consumer beliefs about the ethics of large companies. The countries surveyed were Germany, the United States, Britain , France, and Spain. More than half of respondents in Germany and the US believed there is a serious deterioration in standards of corporate practice. Almost half of those surveyed in Britain, France, and Spain held similar beliefs.

[ 29 ] About a third of respondents told researchers they would pay higher prices for ethical brands, though the perception of various companies' ethical or unethical status varied considerably from country to country.

The most ethically perceived brands were The Co-op (in the UK), Coca-Cola (in the US), Danone (in France), Adidas (in Germany), and Nestlé (in Spain). Coca-Cola, Danone, Adidas, and Nestlé did not appear anywhere in the UK's list of 15 most ethical companies.

Nike appeared in the lists of the other four countries but not in the UK's list. Additionally, a study conducted in 2024 stated that ethnical consumer behavior can vary between emerging and developing countries.

[ 30 ] In the UK, The Co-operative Bank has produced an Ethical Consumerism Report [ 31 ] (formerly the Ethical Purchasing Index) since 2001. The report measures the market size and growth of a basket of 'ethical' products and services, and valued UK ethical consumerism at GBP 36.0 billion (~ USD 54.4 billion) in 2008, and GBP47.2 billion (USD72.5 billion) in 2012.

A number of organizations provide research-based evaluations of the behavior of companies around the world, assessing them along ethical dimensions such as human rights , the environment , animal welfare , and politics .

Green America is a not-for-profit membership organization founded in 1982 that provides the Green American Seal of Approval and produces a "Responsible Shopper" guide to "alert consumers and investors to problems with companies that they may shop with or invest in." [ 32 ] The Ethical Consumer Research Association is a not-for-profit workers' co-operative founded in the UK in 1988 to "provide information on the companies behind the brand names and to promote the ethical use of consumer power." [ 33 ] They provide an online searchable database under the name Corporate Critic [ 34 ] or Ethiscore.

[ 35 ] The Ethiscore is a weightable numerical rating designed as a quick guide to the ethical status of companies, or brands in a particular area, and is linked to a more detailed ethical assessment. "Alonovo" is an online shopping portal that provides similar weightable ethical ratings termed the "Corporate Social Behavior Index".

[ 36 ] Related concepts [ edit ] Conscientious consumption [ edit ] Conscientious consumerism is when people make a habit of buying goods from ethical companies and avoid impulsive buying from unethical ones, in order to contribute positively in political, social, and environmental ways. Such a consumer rationalizes unnecessary and even unwanted consumption by saying that "it's for a good cause." [ 37 ] As a result, the consumer buys pink ribbons during National Breast Cancer Awareness Month , green products to support the environment, candy and popcorn from school children, greeting cards and gift wrap from charities, and other such often-unwanted objects. The consumer avoids considering whether the price offered is fair, whether a small cash donation would be more effective with far less work, or even whether selling the item is consistent with the ostensible mission, such as when sports teams sell candy.

Some of these efforts are based on concept brands : the consumer is buying an association with women's health or environmental concerns as much as they are buying a tangible product.

[ 37 ] Conscientious consumption involves people who are "more focused on real needs than artificially created craves," such as not continually following trend cycles in consumer industries.

[ 38 ] Conscientious consumerism has become more popular in recent years, with consumers becoming more aware of the impact of their purchases on society and the environment. This trend has led to the growth of companies that prioritize corporate social responsibility and ethical practices in their operations to reinforce customer loyalty.

[ 39 ] However, some companies have taken note of this shift towards conscientious consumerism and started deceptive marketing to convey a false impression that their product is environmentally friendly. This green marketing tactic is called greenwashing, which is  prevalent in the cosmetic industry. Greenwashing has a negative impact on consumer trust with brands and cosmetic products that are marketed as green.

[ citation needed ] Alternative giving [ edit ] Main article: Alternative giving In response to an increasing demand for ethical consumerism surrounding gift-giving occasions, charities have promoted an alternative gift market, in which charitable contributions are made on behalf of the gift "recipient". The "recipient" receives a card explaining the selected gift, while the actual gift item (frequently agricultural supplies or domestic animals) is sent to a family in a poor community.

[ 40 ] Criticism [ edit ] Critics argue [ who?

] that ethical consumerism has limited ability to affect structural change. Berkey (2021) [ 41 ] has argued that ethical consumerism focuses on individual consumer behavior rather than systemic change can create a false sense of efficacy and distract from more effective methods of creating change, such as collective action and policy reform. Some [ who?

] say the actual effect of ethical consumerism is the preponderance of niche markets , [ 42 ] while others [ who?

] argue that because it is difficult for consumers to obtain enough information about the outcomes of a given purchase, this prevents them from making informed ethical choices.

[ 43 ] Critics [ who?

] have also argued that the uneven distribution of wealth prevents consumerism, ethical or otherwise, from fulfilling its democratic potential.

[ 44 ] One study suggests that "Buying Green" serves as a license for unethical behavior. In their 2009 paper, "Do Green Products Make Us Better People?", [ 45 ] Nina Mazar and Chen-Bo Zhong write: In line with the halo associated with green consumerism, people act more altruistically after mere exposure to green than conventional products. However, people act less altruistically and are more likely to cheat and steal after purchasing green products as opposed to conventional products. Together, the studies show that consumption is more tightly connected to our social and ethical behaviors in directions and domains other than previously thought.

In a 2010 The Guardian article, British environmental writer and activist George Monbiot argued that green consumers who do not articulate their values are part of "a catastrophic mistake," on the grounds that such consumerism "strengthens extrinsic values" (those that "concern status and self-advancement"), thereby "making future campaigns less likely to succeed".

[ 46 ] James G Carrier, Associate at the Max Planck Institute for Social Anthropology , draws on Karl Marx's concept of commodity fetishism to argue that ethical consumption does not help consumers lead a more moral life, nor does it influence businesses as intended.

[ 47 ] The goal of ethical consumption at a personal level is to lead a more moral life, and that capitalism causes commodities to be presented in such a way that they are perceived without regard for the labor that is represented by the product, the labor that was involved in allowing that commodity to exist.

[ clarification needed ] The goal at a public level is for consumers to use their purchasing power to put pressure on companies to change the way they conduct business. Marx argued that under capitalism, the presentation of goods obscures the people and processes behind their production.

Carrier begins by giving examples of products that have been presented in a way that misrepresents their context. He first points to the images of growers commonly found on fair trade coffee packaging. The image suggests self-reliance and ignores the dependence upon immigrant wage workers who harvest the coffee. Fairtrade coffee is viewed [ who?

] as a direct link to the grower without a middle man. However, there are many parties involved such as the roasters, shippers, wholesalers, and retailers of the product. Carrier also discusses fictitious commodities, which are things that are not produced in the conventional sense, material or not, and can be appropriated for commercial gain.

[ clarification needed ] The conceptual categories of ethicality need to be legible to consumers in order for a consumer to be able to participate in ethical consumption.

[ clarification needed ] Sellers use imagery to satisfy that need, and the images they use become emblematic and representational of the values of ethical consumers, and in some ways the presentation of these images fetishize the product, and the pervasiveness of such images begins to shape ethicality, as the absence of these images also signifies the absence of those same values. In short: it is difficult to buy ethical products because there are many aspects to commodities that consumers are unable to be fully aware of; fully informed decisions are almost impossible to make. Consumers see the images that sellers use as a means of virtue signaling, and purchase those products with the intent of ethical consumption because they believe that those images have been produced conscientiously to represent conceptual categories of "ethical." [ 47 ] Carrier extends commodity fetishism to include nature reserves because they are advertised and because people are urged to visit the landscapes and animals for a fee. For example, parks in Jamaica show colorful fish and coral growth on pamphlets to attract tourists. These photos fetishize coastal waters by ignoring the other important ecological aspects of the water. In Montego Bay, Jamaica , environmentalists [ who?

] argue that tourism has damaged the park. Run-off feeds into the waterways and sea-grass beds integral to local nutrient cycles are removed.

[ 47 ] The strategic direction of the consumer's attention further mystifies and fetishizes the object of consumption.

[ clarification needed ] Carrier points out that the moment of consumer choice is emphasized rather than the context that leads people to seek ethicality.

[ 47 ] He believes that more attention should be paid to how the consumer acquired their moral leanings.

See also [ edit ] Anti-consumerism Carrying capacity Cause marketing Circular economy Circular fashion Consumerism Critical consumerism Cultured meat Degrowth Double-duty dollar Ecologism Ethical banking Ethical eating Ethical investing FIRE movement Fair trade Frugality Green brands Intentional living Leon Sullivan § Selective Patronage Movement Organic food culture Socially responsible investing Sustainable fashion Sustainable living Textile recycling Veganism Vegetarianism Zero-waste fashion References [ edit ] ^ Giesler, Markus ; Veresiu, Ela (2014). "Creating the Responsible Consumer: Moralistic Governance Regimes and Consumer Subjectivity".

Journal of Consumer Research .

41 (October): 849– 867.

doi : 10.1086/677842 .

S2CID 145622639 .

^ "20th Birthday!" . Ethicalconsumer.org . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

^ Lubber, Mindy S. (6 May 2009).

"Is ESG Data Going Mainstream?" .

Harvard Business Review . Blogs.hbr.org . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

^ "Shop Ethical" . Retrieved 2019-05-11 .

^ "The Good Shopping Guide" . Retrieved 2019-05-11 .

^ "Ethical Consumerism, Part 5: Why we need User-Generated Ratings" . greenstarsproject.org. 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 2019-05-11 .

^ "The Green Stars Project" . Retrieved 2019-05-11 .

^ Stolle, Dietlind; Micheletti, Michele (2003).

"The Gender Gap Reversed: Political Consumerism as a Women-Friendly Form of Civic and Political Engagement: An Exploratory Study in Canada, Belgium and Sweden. Work in Progress" (PDF) .

umanitoba.ca . Retrieved 2018-12-14 .

^ Clarke, Nick (November 2008).

"From Ethical Consumerism to Political Consumption: From ethical consumerism to political consumption" .

Geography Compass .

2 (6): 1870– 1884.

doi : 10.1111/j.1749-8198.2008.00170.x . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

^ Haydu, Jeffrey (2014). "Consumer Citizenship and Cross-Class Activism: The Case of the National Consumers' League, 1899-1918".

Sociological Forum .

29 (3): 628– 649.

doi : 10.1111/socf.12107 .

JSTOR 43653954 .

^ Jacobsen, Eivind; Dulsrud, Arne (2007).

"Will Consumers Save The World? The Framing of Political Consumerism" .

Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics .

20 (5): 469– 482.

Bibcode : 2007JAEE...20..469J .

doi : 10.1007/s10806-007-9043-z .

S2CID 154330638 . Retrieved 2023-04-25 .

^ Irish Congress of Trade Unions.

"Ethical Consumerism: A Guide for Trade Unions" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-11-22 . Retrieved 2018-12-06 .

^ "Ethics is in the eye of the spender" .

Sustainability at LSE . Archived from the original on 2016-04-18 . Retrieved 2019-08-29 .

^ Ajzen, Icek (1991-12-01).

"The theory of planned behavior" .

Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes . Theories of Cognitive Self-Regulation.

50 (2): 179– 211.

doi : 10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-T .

hdl : 11323/1038 .

ISSN 0749-5978 .

^ Sun, William (2020-12-01).

"Toward a theory of ethical consumer intention formation: re-extending the theory of planned behavior" .

AMS Review .

10 (3): 260– 278.

doi : 10.1007/s13162-019-00156-6 .

ISSN 1869-8182 .

S2CID 203466215 .

^ "Our History" .

Ten Thousand Villages . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

^ "Our Story" . SERRV . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

^ "Catholic Relief Services" . Crs.org . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

^ "Home - Lutheran World Relief | Working to end poverty, injustice and human suffering" . Lwr.org . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

^ "About Village Markets and Fair Trade" . Villagemarkets.org . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

" 'God's love is what they pass on' : Fair trade is a mission for a Wittenberg University grad, students and faculty" . The Lutheran. 2012-03-29. Archived from the original on 2013-01-16 . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

^ [1] Archived July 11, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Coop Marque" .

Coop . International Cooperative Alliance.

^ Jay, Kate (November 14, 2008).

"First Carbon Neutral Zone Created in the United States" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on September 7, 2009.

^ Auchmutey, Jim (January 26, 2009).

"Trying on carbon-neutral trend" .

Atlanta Journal-Constitution .

The Atlanta Journal-Constitution . Archived from the original on 2009-04-13 . Retrieved 2019-08-29 .

^ "ICE cuts staff at Chicago Climate Exchange-sources" .

Reuters . 12 August 2010 . Retrieved 3 February 2016 .

^ Weitzman, Hal (November 2010).

"End of US carbon trading looms" .

Financial Times . Archived from the original on 2022-12-10 . Retrieved 3 February 2016 .

^ Lavelle, Marianne (November 3, 2010).

"A U.S. Cap-And-Trade Experiment to End" .

National Geographic . Archived from the original on November 5, 2010 . Retrieved 3 February 2016 .

^ Mercuro, Nicholas; Medema, Steven G. (2020-07-21), Chapter 3. Public Choice Theory , Princeton University Press, pp.

156– 207, doi : 10.1515/9780691216010-004 , ISBN 978-0-691-21601-0 , retrieved 2023-04-29 ^ Staff Writer.

"Consumers Changing the Ethical Business Agenda" . Market Research World . Retrieved 7 March 2007 .

^ Gómez-Suárez, M., & Veloutsou, C. (2024). Ethical consumer behavior in emerging markets: The role of socio-cultural capital. Journal of Business Ethics.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-024-05657-4 ^ "Ethical Consumerism Report" . Co-operative Bank . Retrieved 2010-09-03 .

^ "Coop American: Responsible Shopping: About" . Coopamerica.org. Archived from the original on 2012-07-23 . Retrieved 2011-12-18 .

^ "Ethical Consumer Research Association: About" . Corporatecritic.org . Retrieved 2011-12-18 .

^ "Research & Ratings: About the Ethiscore" . Corporate Critic . Retrieved 2011-12-18 .

^ "Research and ratings" . Ethiscore . Retrieved 2011-12-18 .

^ Alonovo Corporate Social Behavior Index Archived June 24, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Gayle A. Sulik (2010).

Pink Ribbon Blues: How Breast Cancer Culture Undermines Women's Health . USA: Oxford University Press. pp.

111–132 .

ISBN 978-0-19-974045-1 .

OCLC 535493589 .

^ Puaschunder, Julia M. (February 2022).

"Defashionization for Sustainability: from Conspicuous to Conscientious Consumption Breaking Business Cycles for Environmentalism" (PDF) .

Advances in Socially Responsible Investment in Resilience Finance . Proceedings of the 26th Research Association for Interdisciplinary Studies (RAIS) Conference. pp.

146– 155.

doi : 10.5281/zenodo.6414896 .

S2CID 252650068 .

SSRN 4226243 .

^ Islam, Tahir; Islam, Rauf; Pitafi, Abdul Hameed; Xiaobei, Liang; Rehmani, Mahmood; Irfan, Muhammad; Mubarak, Muhammad Shujaat (2021). "The impact of corporate social responsibility on customer loyalty: The mediating role of corporate reputation, customer satisfaction, and trust".

Sustainable Production and Consumption .

25 : 123– 135.

Bibcode : 2021SusPC..25..123I .

doi : 10.1016/j.spc.2020.07.019 .

S2CID 225020032 .

^ "Giving well is hard to do: so here's my seasonal guide" .

The Guardian . London. 2005-12-22 . Retrieved 2007-05-03 .

^ Berkey, Brian (2001). "Ethical Consumerism, Democratic Values, and Justice".

Philosophy & Public Affairs .

49 (3): 237– 274.

doi : 10.1111/papa.12191 .

^ Devinney, Timothy.

"Value vs. Values: The Myth of the Ethical Consumer" .

Policy Innovations . Archived from the original on 27 February 2017 . Retrieved 11 June 2015 .

^ Irwin, Julie (2015-01-12).

"Ethical Consumerism Isn't Dead, It Just Needs Better Marketing" .

Harvard Business Review .

ISSN 0017-8012 . Retrieved 2022-07-14 .

^ Gee, Tim (March 26, 2014).

"When did fair trade become a consumerist concept?" .

New Statesman . New Statesman . Retrieved 11 June 2015 .

^ Do Green Products Make Us Better People? ( Psychological Science , April, 2010) Nina Mazar, Chen-Bo Zhong ^ Monbiot, George (12 October 2010).

"It goes against our nature; but the left has to start asserting its own values" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 29 December 2010 .

^ a b c d Carrier, James G. (2010). "Protecting the Environment the Natural Way: Ethical Consumption and Commodity Fetishism".

Antipode .

42 (3): 672– 689.

Bibcode : 2010Antip..42..672C .

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00768.x .

Further reading [ edit ] Speth, James Gustave (2008).

The Bridge at the End of the World: Capitalism, the Environment, and Crossing from Crisis to Sustainability . Caravan Books.

Bartley, Tim and colleagues (2015).

Looking Behind the Label: Global Industries and the Conscientious Consumer .

Indiana University Press .

v t e Consumerism the philosophy of and activism for consumer protection Concepts Consumerism Consumer Anti-consumerism Consumer capitalism Consumer privacy Consumer protection Consumer revolution Consumer welfare standard Ethical consumerism Informed consumer Activism Consumer activism Consumer Bill of Rights Consumer complaint Consumer education Consumer movement Collaborative consumption United Nations Guidelines for Consumer Protection Fields of study Consumer math Euthenics Home economics Key players Consumer organizations list Consumers' Association Ellen Swallow Richards Ralph Nader Esther Peterson v t e Sustainability Outline Index Principles Anthropocene Environmentalism Global governance Human impact on the environment Planetary boundaries Development Consumption Anthropization Anti-consumerism Circular economy Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological footprint Ethical Green consumption Micro-sustainability Over-consumption Product stewardship Simple living Social return on investment Steady-state economy Sustainability Advertising Brand Marketing myopia Sustainable Consumer behaviour Market Systemic change resistance Tragedy of the commons World population Control Demographic transition Dependency ratio List Family planning Intergenerational equity Population ageing Sustainable population Technology Appropriate Environmental technology Natural building Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable industries Sustainable packaging Biodiversity Biosecurity Biosphere Conservation biology Endangered species Holocene extinction Invasive species Energy Carbon footprint Renewable energy Sustainable energy Food Civic agriculture Climate-smart agriculture Community-supported agriculture Cultured meat Sustainable agriculture Sustainable diet Sustainable fishery Water Air well (condenser) Bioretention Bioswale Blue roof Catchwater Constructed wetland Detention basin Dew pond Footprint Hydroelectricity Hydropower Infiltration basin Irrigation tank Marine energy Micro hydro Ocean thermal energy conversion Pico hydro Rain garden Rainwater harvesting Rainwater tank Reclaimed water Retention basin Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity Scarcity Security Small hydro Sustainable drainage system Tidal power Tidal stream generator Tree box filter Water conservation Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Water-sensitive urban design Accountability Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate social responsibility Environmental accounting Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental planning Generational accounting Sustainability Accounting Measurement Metrics and indices Reporting Standards and certification Sustainable yield Economic Debt Sustainability Analysis Fiscal sustainability Applications Advertising Art Business City Cultural sustainability Climate finance Community Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco-cities Eco-investing Eco-socialism Ecovillage Environmental finance Green economy Construction Fashion Finance Gardening Geopark Green Development Infrastructure Marketing Green roof Greening Impact investing Landscape Livelihood Living Market Organic movement Organizations Procurement Refurbishment Socially responsible business Socially responsible marketing Sanitation Sourcing Space Sustainability organization Tourism Transport Urban drainage systems Urban infrastructure Sustainable management Environmental Fisheries Forest Humanistic capitalism Landscape Materials Natural resource Planetary Recycling Waste Agreements and conferences UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972) Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983) Our Common Future (1987) Earth Summit (1992) Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992) Agenda 21 (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) Lisbon Principles (1997) Earth Charter (2000) UN Millennium Declaration (2000) Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg) UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012) Sustainable Development Goals (2015) UNESCO MONDIACULT conferences Category Lists Science Studies Degrees v t e Recycling Materials Aluminium Asphalt Concrete Copper Cotton Energy Glass Gypsum Paper Plastic Refrigerant Scrap Timber Cooking oil Water Products Appliances Automotive oil Batteries Bottles PET bottles Computers Drugs Fluorescent lamps Lumber Mobile phones Paint Ships Textiles Tires Vehicles Apparatus Bins Blue bags Blue boxes Codes Collection Materials recovery facility Waste sorting Countries Rate by country Australia Brazil Canada Ireland Israel Japan Malaysia Mongolia The Netherlands Switzerland Taiwan United Kingdom Northern Ireland United States Concepts Circular economy Dematerialization Downcycling Durable good Eco-industrial park Ecological design Extended producer responsibility Green economy Industrial ecology Industrial metabolism Interchangeable parts Land recycling Material flow analysis Precycling Product stewardship Recycling (ecological) Refill (campaign) Repairability Resource recovery Reusable packaging Reuse of bottles Reuse of human excreta Repurposing Reuse Right to repair Symbol ( Green Dot ) Upcycling Urban lumberjacking Waste hierarchy Waste minimisation Waste picking Wishcycling Zero waste See also Bottle cutting Cogeneration Composting Container-deposit legislation Dumpster diving Ethical consumerism Freeganism Pallet crafts Reverse vending machine Simple living Waste Waste-to-energy Waste collection Waste management law Waste management Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Environment portal Category by country by material by product organizations Index Commons v t e Social and environmental accountability Ethics and principles Aarhus Convention Climate justice Corporate accountability / behaviour / environmental responsibility / responsibility / social responsibility Dirty hands Environmental racism / in Russia / in the United States / in Western Europe / inequality in the UK / injustice in Europe Ethical banking Ethical code Extended producer responsibility Externality Harm Little Eichmanns Loss and damage Organizational ethics Organizational justice Pollution Principles for Responsible Investment Racism Social impact assessment Social justice Social responsibility Stakeholder theory Sullivan principles Transparency (behavioral social) UN Global Compact Social accounting Corporate crime Double bottom line Ethical positioning index Higg Index Impact assessment ( environmental equality social ) ISO 26000 ISO 45001 Genuine progress indicator Performance indicator SA 8000 OHSAS 18001 Social return on investment Whole-life cost Environmental accounting Carbon accounting Eco-Management and Audit Scheme Emission inventory Environmental full-cost accounting / Environmental conflict / impact assessment / management system / profit-and-loss account ISO 14000 ISO 14031 Life-cycle assessment Pollutant release and transfer register Sustainability accounting / measurement / metrics and indices / standards and certification / supply chain Toxics Release Inventory Triple bottom line Reporting Global Reporting Initiative GxP guidelines Sustainability reporting Auditing Community-based monitoring Environmental ( certification ) Fair trade ( certification ) ISO 19011 Related Bangladesh Accord Benefit corporation Child labour Community interest company Conflict of interest Disasters Disinvestment Eco-labeling Environmental degradation Environmental pricing reform Environmental, social, and corporate governance Ethical consumerism Euthenics Global justice movement Health impact assessment Market governance mechanism Product certification Public participation SDG Publishers Compact Social enterprise Socially responsible business Socially responsible investing Socially responsible marketing Stakeholder ( engagement ) Supply chain management Environment portal Category Commons Organizations Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ethical_consumerism&oldid=1305270179 " Categories : Ethical consumerism Consumer boycotts Protectionism Sustainability Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2022 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2016 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 02:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ethical consumerism 18 languages Add topic

