Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Relation to Marxist feminism 3 Theory 4 Criticism 5 Leading figures 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Materialist feminism 17 languages العربية Català Čeština Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Português Română سرائیکی کوردی தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of feminism Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Materialist feminism is a theoretical current of radical feminism that was formed around the French magazine Questions féministes . It is characterized by the use of conceptual tools from Marxism —notably historical materialism —to theorize patriarchy and its abolition.

[ 1 ] Materialist feminism understands sex and gender as social constructs that are produced through reproductive exploitation and domestic subordination.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Its body of literature includes an analysis of women's work within marriage and in the formal economy, criticism of other streams of feminism, deconstruction of sexuality and advocacy for an autonomous women's movement.

Jennifer Wicke defines materialist feminism as "a feminism that insists on examining the material conditions under which social arrangements, including those of gender hierarchy, develop... materialist feminism avoids seeing this gender hierarchy as the effect of a singular... patriarchy and instead gauges the web of social and psychic relations that make up a material, historical moment".

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] See also: Mouvement de libération des femmes The term materialist feminism emerged in the late 1970s and is associated with key thinkers such as Christine Delphy , Colette Guillaumin , Nicole-Claude Mathieu , and Monique Wittig .

[ 1 ] Rosemary Hennessy traces the history of materialist feminism in the work of British and French feminists who preferred the term materialist feminism to Marxist feminism . In their view, Marxism had to be altered to be able to explain the sexual division of labor. Marxism was inadequate to the task because of its class bias and focus on production.

Feminism was also problematic due to its essentialist concept of woman. Material feminism then emerged as a positive substitute to both Marxism and feminism and pointed out the unequal distribution of social resources.

The Grand Domestic Revolution by Dolores Hayden is a reference. Hayden describes material feminism at that time as reconceptualizing the relationship between the private household space and public space by presenting collective options to take the "burden" off women in regard to housework , cooking , and other traditional female domestic jobs.

[ 5 ] Margaret Benston presents a similar sentiment in her 1969 article, “The Political Economy of Women’s Liberation,” stating that the material basis for discrimination against women will be gone when household work is moved from the private to the public sector. However, Benston argues that without actual freedom from housework, it is likely impossible for true equality to exist in job opportunity. A change to communal eating places, she argues, may simply mean that women are moved from a home kitchen to a communal one, not truly freeing them from the burden of domestic labor.

[ 6 ] As feminism became postfeminism , the notion of femininity was "problematized, rather than taken as a given", says Stevi Jackson .

[ 1 ] The cultural turn of the 1990s aimed to push the boundaries of what the category of "woman" was. Feminists then began to focus on the language of oppression, and materialist feminism lost its prominence.

[ 1 ] Relation to Marxist feminism [ edit ] Marxist feminism is focused on investigating and explaining the ways in which women are oppressed through systems of capitalism and private property . As stated previously, materialist feminism was developed as an improvement upon Marxism, as it was felt that Marxist feminism failed to address division of labor, especially in the household. The current concept has its roots in socialist and Marxist feminism; Rosemary Hennessy and Chrys Ingraham, who are editors of Materialist Feminism: A Reader in Class, Difference, and Women's Lives , describe material feminism as the "conjuncture of several discourses—historical materialism, Marxist and radical feminism , as well as postmodernist and psychoanalytic theories of meaning and subjectivity".

[ 7 ] Theory [ edit ] Christine Delphy affirms that materialism is the only theory of history that views oppression as a basic reality of women's lives, which is why women (and other oppressed groups) need materialism to investigate their situation.

[ 8 ] For her, "to start from oppression defines a materialist approach, oppression is a materialist concept".

[ 8 ] However, the Marxist distinction between production and reproduction is harshly criticized. For materialist feminists, constructing a theory of patriarchy that reduces women's work to reproduction ends up reaffirming the patriarchal ideology.

[ 9 ] Delphy theorizes two modes of production in our society: industrial and domestic. The first mode allows for capitalist exploitation, while the second allows for familial and patriarchal exploitation.

[ 10 ] She argues that the domestic mode of production is the material basis of gender oppression, and that marriage is a labor contract that gives men the right to exploit women.

[ 8 ] Materialist feminists reject that women's oppression has any natural basis. Instead, it is conceived as strictly cultural, and sex assignment would be a means to realize it.

[ 11 ] They are therefore opposed to any discourse that attempts to explain the situation of women by some internal characteristic of this group, in particular those of an anatomical nature, such as the capacity to give birth or a physical weakness of women relative to men, as well as those of a psychological or psychoanalytic nature, which presuppose a different psyche for men and women.

[ 11 ] A common target of their criticism is what they call néo-féminité : the celebration of femininity proposed by difference feminism .

[ 12 ] Criticism [ edit ] The relationship between materialism and feminism has been described as "problematic" and regarded as an "unhappy couple".

[ 13 ] There has also been a concern for the general ambiguity of materialist feminism. It has been called to question whether the differentiation between materialist feminism and Marxist feminism is great enough to be a worthwhile contribution to feminist theory.

[ 14 ] Christine Delphy's contributions to materialist feminism have also been the subject of criticism, for example by Michèle Barrett and Mary McIntosh . They suggest that the definition of materialism feminism has a very loose interpretation of patriarchy and that Delphy's article "Towards a Materialist Feminism" has a focus limited to the oppression of wives and fails to connect this to the global oppression of women in general.

[ 15 ] However, the main criticism for materialist feminism involves the lack of intersectionality within the theory. By focusing on capitalist relations combined with patriarchy, materialist feminism fails to include women of different classes , sexualities , and ethnicities .

Hazel Carby challenged the materialist feminist analyses of the family as universally oppressive to all women. She instead noted the ways that values of the family are different for black women and men, just as the division of labor is also racialized.

[ 16 ] Rosemary Hennessy comments on how there has recently been pressure to recognize the differences within the definition of "woman" and how this intersects with not only class, but race, sexualities, and genders.

[ 17 ] Stevi Jackson calls concern towards the recent resurgence of materialist interest, stating that many of the new ideas were reducing the material to capitalist ideas, and that "this might bring us full circle back to the least productive forms of 1970s Marxism".

[ 1 ] In recent years, materialist feminist thoughts have attempted to focus on transnational issues. Scholars consider a global economic change in relation to the feminization of poverty . Feminist scholars are also working to create a transnational feminist agenda. For example, Hennessy analyzes grassroots organizations in four maquiladora communities along Mexico's northern border. The research claims that the global nature of patriarchy and capitalism sustains a "political economy of sex".

[ 18 ] Leading figures [ edit ] Christine Delphy Colette Guillaumin Rosemary Hennessy Stevi Jackson Diana Leonard Nicole-Claude Mathieu Monique Plaza Paola Tabet Monique Wittig See also [ edit ] Antinaturalism Criticism of marriage Double burden Feminist economics Feminist metaphysics Feminist urbanism Social construction of gender References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Jackson, Stevi (May 2001).

"Why a materialist feminism is (Still) Possible—and necessary" .

Women's Studies International Forum .

24 ( 3– 4): 283– 293.

doi : 10.1016/S0277-5395(01)00187-X .

^ Delphy, Christine (1993).

"Rethinking sex and gender" .

Women's Studies International Forum .

16 (1): 1– 9.

doi : 10.1016/0277-5395(93)90076-L .

^ Adkins, Lisa; Leonard, Diana (1996). "Reconstructing French Feminism: Commodification, Materialism and Sex". In Leonard, Diana; Adkins, Lisa (eds.).

Sex in question: French materialist feminism . London: Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-7484-0294-6 .

^ Wicke, Jennifer (1994-10-01).

"Celebrity Material: Materialist Feminism and the Culture of Celebrity" .

South Atlantic Quarterly .

93 (4): 751– 778.

doi : 10.1215/00382876-93-4-751 .

ISSN 0038-2876 .

^ Kramarae, Cheris; Spender, Dale, eds. (2000).

Routledge international encyclopedia of women: global women's issues and knowledge . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-92088-9 .

^ Benston, Margaret (September 2019).

"The Political Economy of Women's Liberation" .

Monthly Review: An Independent Socialist Magazine .

^ Hennessy, Rosemary; Ingraham, Chrys (1997). "Introduction: Reclaiming Anticapitalist Feminism". In Hennessy, Rosemary; Ingraham, Chrys (eds.).

Materialist feminism: a reader in class, difference, and women's lives . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-91633-2 .

^ a b c Delphy, Christine; Leonard, Diana (March 1980).

"A Materialist Feminism is Possible" .

Feminist Review .

4 (1): 79– 105.

doi : 10.1057/fr.1980.8 .

ISSN 0141-7789 .

^ Delphy, Christine; Leonard, Diana; Boisset, Annick (2019).

L'exploitation domestique . Nouvelles questions féministes. Paris: Éditions Syllepse.

ISBN 978-2-84950-738-4 .

^ Barrett, Michèle; McIntosh, Mary (1979). "Christine Delphy: Towards a Materialist Feminism?".

Feminist Review (1): 95– 106.

doi : 10.2307/1394753 .

JSTOR 1394753 .

^ a b Guillaumin, Colette (1996). "The Practice of Power and Belief in Nature". In Leonard, Diana; Adkins, Lisa (eds.).

Sex in question: French materialist feminism . London: Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-7484-0294-6 .

^ Jones, Ann Rosalind (1981).

"Writing the Body: Toward an Understanding of "L'Ecriture Feminine" " .

Feminist Studies .

7 (2): 247– 263.

doi : 10.2307/3177523 .

hdl : 2027/spo.0499697.0007.206 .

JSTOR 3177523 .

^ Rooney, Ellen (1996). "What Can the Matter Be?".

American Literary History .

8 (4): 745– 758.

doi : 10.1093/alh/8.4.745 .

JSTOR 490122 .

^ Martha E. Gimenez (2000).

"What's material about materialist feminism?" .

Radical Philosophy . Retrieved 2017-10-10 .

^ Barrett, Michèle; McIntosh, Mary (1979). "Christine Delphy: Towards a Materialist Feminism?".

Feminist Review (1): 95– 106.

doi : 10.2307/1394753 .

JSTOR 1394753 .

^ Carby, Hazel (1982). "White woman listen! Black feminism and the boundaries of sisterhood". In Gilroy, Paul (ed.).

The Empire Strikes Back: Race and Racism in 70s Britain . London New York: Routledge in association with the Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies , University of Birmingham . pp.

211– 234.

ISBN 9780415079099 .

^ Hennessy, Rosemary; Mohan, Rajeswari (1989-12-01). "The construction of woman in three popular texts of empire: Towards a critique of materialist feminism".

Textual Practice .

3 (3): 323– 359.

doi : 10.1080/09502368908582066 .

ISSN 0950-236X .

^ Hennessy, Rosemary (December 2009).

"Open secrets: The affective cultures of organizing on Mexico's northern border" .

Feminist Theory .

10 (3): 309– 322.

doi : 10.1177/1464700109343254 .

ISSN 1464-7001 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Materialist_feminism&oldid=1304005869 " Categories : Feminism and social class Feminism and the family Marxist feminism Cultural materialism Radical feminism Second-wave feminism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 10:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Materialist feminism 17 languages Add topic

