Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Style and symbolism 3 Representative Korean gardens 4 Korean gardens abroad 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Korean garden 7 languages Беларуская 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Magyar Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of Asian garden This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Korean garden" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on the Culture of Korea Society History People Diaspora Language Names of Korea Religion Arts and literature Architecture Art Pottery Painting Dance Film North South Literature North South Poetry Manhwa Webtoon Media Television K-drama Music Traditional North South K-pop Theater Other Cuisine Kimchi Banchan Mythology Folklore Holidays Clothing Hanbok Tal Sports Martial arts Taekwondo Ssireum Video games Symbols " Arirang " Mugunghwa Paektu Mountain " Aegukka " North Korea " Aegukga " South Korea Flags Taegeuk Emblem of North Korea Emblem of South Korea World Heritage Sites 100 Cultural Symbols of Korea v t e Changdeok palace Gyeonghoeru Pavilion of Gyeongbokgung Palace Korean gardens are a type of garden described as being natural, informal, simple and unforced, seeking to merge with the natural world.

[ 1 ] They have a history that goes back more than two thousand years, [ 2 ] but are little known in the west. The oldest records date to the Three Kingdoms period (57 BC – 668 AD) when architecture and palace gardens showed a development noted in the Korean History of the Three Kingdoms .

History [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( December 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Donggung Palace and Wolji Pond Korean garden culture can be traced back more than 2,000 years. In recent years, 300 documents have been found, written during the Koryo (918–1392) and Choson (1392–1910) dynasties, that contain detailed records about traditional Korean gardens, many of which survive and can be visited today.

In prehistoric times, Koreans worshipped nature, the sun, stars, water, rocks, stones, and trees. They especially believed that rocks had more power than water and other things in nature. Also, they have believed that rocks engendered God's good-will. Therefore, the arrangement of rocks is considered one of the "essential" elements in designing the traditional Korean garden. Koreans have recently rediscovered their stone garden tradition in the stacked stone altars that express the ancient concept of a round heaven and square earth. Also Susok or "rock arrangement," gardens are commonly found. In recent years, in fact, there has been a revival of interest in rock arrangements in gardens. In general, Korean Susok (rock arrangement) garden culture can be described according to its stages of development. Even during the primitive agricultural period, stones were an essential element in building gardens. Then, rock arrangements for shamanic rituals were built in the shape of shrines or heavenly altars.

During the Three Kingdoms period (57 BC – 668 AD), palace gardens were erected on a grand scale with stones. And in the 4th-century temple gardens were introduced along with Buddhism. Since the early Koryo dynasty , when Buddhism was established as the national religion, gardens evolved into the style of Hwagye (terraced rock garden), which represented Son (Zen) Buddhist rock arrangements. In the middle of the Koryo period, a new style of stone garden, called Imchon , which contained a pavilion and a stone pond in beautiful forest surroundings, became popular. During the Joseon dynasty , the Hwagye garden style was popular in the yards of many homes, and mansion gardens were usually built in Imchon style.

Style and symbolism [ edit ] Korean gardens are structured to live in harmony with pre-existing landscapes. Sites are chosen in favor of the energy flow called pungsu 풍수, geomancy which affects all aspects of life including health, wealth, and happiness. Unlike gardening styles of the west, the construction of a Korean garden must be done with as little disruption to the pre-existing site as possible, and can even lend from the surrounding view, such as mountains on the horizon, into its own appearance. The gardens can be found enclosed within walls of stone or brick or can blend seamlessly into its surroundings without a barrier.

[ 3 ] Buildings and pavilions in the gardens are minimal in number and unobtrusive to the thriving natural landscape. Stylized flowers and blossoms that hold great symbolism, such as the Sacred Lotus and plum blossoms, are painted onto Buddhist temples, royal tombs, and palace pavilions in bright yet harmonious colors; a style called dancheong 단청, or “red and blue/green.” [ 3 ] Traditional spiritual and philosophical symbolism can be found throughout Korean gardens; Shamanistic, Animist, Buddhist, Daoist, and Confucian influences along with homage to the Dangun Creation story are often simultaneously represented. From the clear symbols such as stylized decorations painted on pavilions and buildings, to the use of colors and the number and types of trees, rocks, ponds, and plants, all Korean gardens hold a significance of beauty aesthetically, culturally, and spiritually.

[ 3 ] Examples of Tree Types and their Meanings: Persimmon: The Persimmon tree symbolizes transformation. Jill Mathews, author of Korean Gardens , writes, “… their fruit starts off hard, green, and extremely bitter but ripens to a bright orange and becomes very soft and sweet…” [ 3 ] Korean Red Pine: Symbolizes loyalty, constancy, and righteousness. The bark resembles the shell of the tortoise, which symbolizes longevity. Often used near Confucian scholarly buildings and pavilions. Called sonamu 소나무 meaning supreme tree.

[ 3 ] Bamboo: Simplicity, integrity, flexibility. Its uprightness symbolizes strength while its hollow stem equates to open-mindedness.

[ 3 ] Crepe Myrtle: Baerong Namu 배롱나무, meaning “Tree with flowers lasting more than 100 days”, symbolize integrity and loyalty of Confucian scholars and can be found in Confucian academy gardens.

[ 3 ] Flowers: Peonies: Known as the Queen of Flowers, both the tree peony and the herbaceous peony symbolize royalty, riches, honor, female beauty, and love.

[ 3 ] Lotus: The lotus is recognizable as a sacred symbol in Buddhism and can be found in ponds of both Buddhist temples and Confucian academies, symbolizing purity, transformation, and enlightenment.

[ 3 ] Rocks: The symbolism of rocks can be found in their number and structure, for instance, three rocks in an arrangement can represent the three mountain gods in the Dangun creation story. Matthews notes that, “… rocks appear in two’s, three’s, nine’s, or twelves, although there are occasional extravagant arrangements of sixty.” [ 3 ] Rocks can be selected and assigned special names either based upon their appearance, or some unconnected meaning, however, no stones are taken from far distances and added to the garden.

[ 3 ] Ponds: Ponds symbolize tranquility and stillness; inviting deep contemplation from visitors. Their bridges can symbolize moving from lower thought processes to more sacred thoughts, or the movement from life on Earth into the tranquil afterlife. The Daoist and Confucian belief that heaven is round and the Earth is square is often reflected in the appearance of ponds and their island; the pond being square in shape and the island being round. "Few Korean gardens are considered complete without at least one pond." [ 3 ] Representative Korean gardens [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( December 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The most central and representative and relatively undisturbed classical Korean gardens are in three complexes.

Changdeokgung Nakseonjae The Iseong mountain fortress of Baekje near Seoul , where one finds numerous rockeries depicting turtles , dragons or phoenixes The Anak Palace Garden of Goguryeo near Pyongyang , where one finds the remains of three rock Garden complexes.

The Anapji Garden of Silla in Gyeongju is perhaps the best known, with three islands in the pond, man-made waterfalls in two tiers, granite basins of round and square design as well as hundreds of rock arrangement along its curbed shore.

Further important gardens, often historical recreations, are found at these sites: The rear garden of Changdeok Palace in Seoul, especially the Buyong pond with the pavilion of cosmic union.

The Chongpyeong-sa temple near Chuncheon .

Korean gardens abroad [ edit ] A traditional Korean garden was inaugurated in Nantes , France in 2006.

[ 4 ] "Colline de Suncheon" (" Suncheon Hill"), a 5000 square metre site, is enclosed within Blottereau Park and celebrates the 120th anniversary of diplomatic ties between South Korea and France. There are traditional Korean gardens in the Chapultepec Zoo in Mexico City ; Gençlik Park in Ankara , Turkey ; in Cairo , Egypt ; le Jardin d'Acclimatation de Paris ; Erholungspark Marzahn in Berlin ; [ 5 ] Grüneburgpark in Frankfurt ; and at the VanDusen Botanical Garden in Vancouver , Canada. The Korean Ambassador's Residence Garden in Washington, D.C. is a typical example of a well-maintained Korean garden.

See also [ edit ] Culture of Korea East Asian gardens History of Korea References [ edit ] ^ Hoare, James (January 1988).

Korea: An Introduction - Google Book Search . Kegan Paul International.

ISBN 9780710302991 . Retrieved 2009-01-12 .

^ "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on 2011-09-28 . Retrieved 2011-05-18 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Matthews, Jill, 1949- (2018).

Korean gardens : tradition, symbolism and resilience . Carlsbad, CA.

ISBN 978-1-56591-490-2 .

OCLC 1046110821 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Le plus grand jardin coréen d'Europe se cache à Nantes" .

Le Bonbon (in French) . Retrieved 2023-10-18 .

^ "Der Koreanische Garten in den Gärten der Welt" .

www.gaertenderwelt.de (in German) . Retrieved 2023-10-18 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Korean gardens .

Examples and simple outline of Korean gardens The Herbert Offen Research Collection of the Phillips Library at the Peabody Essex Museum Matthews, J 'Traditional Korean Gardens' Landscape Outlook pp 12-16, Winter, 2010 (on SSRN) Kim, Dong-uk Palaces of Korea Hollym, Seoul, 2006 Kyun, Heo (trans. Baker, DL) Gardens of Korea: Harmony with Intellect and Nature Saffron Book, London, 2005 Min, Kyung-Hyun Korean Gardens Borim Editions, Seoul, 1992 v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e East Asian traditional gardens and landscape design Styles Chinese garden Japanese garden Korean garden Jiangnan style Classical Gardens of Suzhou Yu Garden Gardens around the West Lake Zhan Garden Mochou Lake Royal style Huaqing Pool Beihai Park Zhongnanhai Summer Palace Old Summer Palace Fragrant Hills Chengde Mountain Resort Rear Garden of Changdeokgung Katsura Imperial Villa Shugakuin Imperial Villa Hayama Imperial Villa Suzaki Imperial Villa North China style Garden of the Prince Gong Mansion Gardens in Peking University Lingnan style Ke Yuan Qing Hui Yuan Yu Yin Shan Fang Sichuanese style Du Fu Thatched Cottage Authority control databases National United States Korea Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐847s2
Cached time: 20250817051940
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.468 seconds
Real time usage: 0.604 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1299/1000000
Revision size: 11275/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 84712/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 892/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 58229/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.285/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6639638/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  470.678      1 -total
 23.44%  110.330      1 Template:Reflist
 17.36%   81.688      2 Template:Cite_book
 17.18%   80.885      1 Template:Culture_of_Korea
 16.78%   78.996      1 Template:Sidebar
 14.34%   67.486      1 Template:Short_description
 13.71%   64.531      2 Template:Navbox
 13.47%   63.416      1 Template:Horticulture_and_gardening
 11.78%   55.468      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 11.70%   55.053      3 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1618132:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817051940 and revision id 1236689122. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Korean_garden&oldid=1236689122 " Category : Korean gardens Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2013 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 July 2024, at 02:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Korean garden 7 languages Add topic

