Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 As rhetorical criticism 2 Distinctions within primary frameworks 3 For social movements 4 For political thought 5 Content analysis in framing 6 Common frames in the news 7 Automated frame analysis 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Frame analysis 8 languages Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Multi-disciplinary social science research method For frame analysis in digital videos, see video content analysis .

Frame analysis (also called framing analysis ) is a multi-disciplinary social science research method used to analyze how people understand situations and activities. Frame analysis looks at images, stereotypes, metaphors, actors, messages, and more. It examines how important these factors are and how and why they are chosen.

[ 1 ] The concept is generally attributed to the work of Erving Goffman and his 1974 book Frame analysis: An essay on the organization of experience and has been developed in social movement theory, policy studies and elsewhere.

[ 2 ] Framing theory and frame analysis is a broad theoretical approach that has been used in communication studies , news (Johnson-Cartee, 1995), politics, and social movements among other applications. "Framing is the process by which a communication source, such as a news organization, defines and constructs a political issue or public controversy" (Nelson, Oxley, & Clawson, 1997, p. 221).

[ 3 ] It is related to the concept of agenda-setting . Framing influences how people interpret or process information.

[ 4 ] This can set an agenda. However, frame analysis goes beyond agenda-setting by examining the issues rather than the topics.

[ 4 ] Frame analysis is usually done in regard to news media. However, framing is inevitable, as everyone does it.

[ 4 ] It can speed up the process of interpretation as well as writing and presenting the news.

[ 5 ] People just may not realize they are using frames.

[ 4 ] When people are aware that they are using framing, there are several techniques that can be used. These may include: metaphor, stories, tradition, slogan, jargon, catchphrase, artifact, contrast or spin.

[ 1 ] As rhetorical criticism [ edit ] Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Frame analysis had been proposed as a type of rhetorical analysis for political actors in the 1980s.  Political communication researcher Jim A. Kuypers first published his work advancing framing analysis as a rhetorical perspective in 1997. His approach begins inductively by looking for themes that persist across time in a text (for Kuypers, primarily news narratives on an issue or event), and then determining how those themes are framed. Kuypers' work begins with the assumption that frames are powerful rhetorical entities that "induce us to filter our perceptions of the world in particular ways, essentially making some aspects of our multi-dimensional reality more noticeable than other aspects. They operate by making some information more salient than other information. ..." [ 6 ] In "Framing Analysis From a Rhetorical Perspective" Kuypers details the differences between framing analysis as rhetorical criticism and as a social scientific endeavor, in particular arguing that framing criticism offers insights unavailable to social scientists.

[ 7 ] In his 2009 work, Rhetorical Criticism: Perspectives in Action [ 8 ] Kuypers offers a detailed template for doing framing analysis from a rhetorical perspective. According to Kuypers, "Framing is a process whereby communicators, consciously or unconsciously, act to construct a point of view that encourages the facts of a given situation to be interpreted by others in a particular manner. Frames operate in four key ways: they define problems, diagnose causes, make moral judgments, and suggest remedies. Frames are often found within a narrative account of an issue or event, and are generally the central organizing idea." [ 9 ] Kuypers' work is based on the premise that framing is a rhetorical process and as such it is best examined from a rhetorical point of view.

Distinctions within primary frameworks [ edit ] In his book, Goffman said that people use their primary framework to examine their world.

[ 4 ] There are also distinctions within primary frameworks. There are natural and social frameworks.

[ 4 ] Natural frameworks don't apply social forces to situations.

[ 4 ] They just exist naturally. However, social frameworks do apply social forces to situations.

[ 4 ] The two are connected because social frameworks stem from natural frameworks.

[ 4 ] For social movements [ edit ] Framing has been utilized to explain the process of social movements (Snow & Benford, 1988).

[ 10 ] Movements are carriers of beliefs and ideologies. In addition, they are part of the process of constructing meaning for participants and opposers (Snow & Benford, 1988). Mass movements are said to be successful when the frames projected align with the frames of participants to produce resonance between the two parties. This is a process known as frame alignment .

Snow and Benford (1988) say that frame alignment is an important element in social mobilization or movement. They argue that when individual frames become linked in congruency and complementariness, that "frame alignment" occurs (p. 198; Snow et al. 1986, p. 464 [ 11 ] ), producing "frame resonance", which is key to the process of a group transitioning from one frame to another (although not all framing efforts are successful).

For political thought [ edit ] Frame analysis for political thought has been dominated by two popular cognitive scientists: George Lakoff , nurturant parent governance; and Frank Luntz , strict father governance.

[ 12 ] Content analysis in framing [ edit ] The deductive frame analysis pre-defines frames and then looks for them in the news to see which stories fit into the definitions.

[ 13 ] The inductive frame analysis requires that a story is analyzed first.

[ 13 ] The researcher looks for possible frames that have been loosely defined.

[ 13 ] Common frames in the news [ edit ] Conflict: conflicts between individual people, groups, institutions, etc.

[ 13 ] Economic consequences: looks at the economic consequences of a situation in the news and how it may affect people, groups, institutions, etc. economically [ 13 ] Human interest: adds emotion or a human side to an issue, event, etc.

[ 13 ] Morality: applies religious or moral beliefs to a situation [ 13 ] Responsibility: makes someone (individual, group, institution, etc.) responsible for a situation [ 13 ] Other examples of frames may include: health severity, thematic and episodic, medical, uncertainty, alarmist.

[ 5 ] What frames are used depends on the event at hand.

Automated frame analysis [ edit ] Since frame analyses are conducted manually, they require significant effort and time. Recently, some researchers have proposed to automate parts of frame analysis. For example, one approach aims to find instances of biased news coverage in news articles.

[ 14 ] The automated approach imitates frame analysis by using natural language processing and media bias models.

See also [ edit ] Alternative facts – Expression associated with political misinformation established in 2017 Argumentation theory – Academic field of logic and rhetoric Code word (figure of speech) – Word or phrase that has a special meaning Concept-driven strategy Communication theory – Proposed description of communication phenomena Discourse analysis – Generic term for the analysis of social, language policy or historiographical discourse phenomena Figure of speech – Non-literal word or phrase used for effect Framing – Effect of how information is presented on perception Language and thought – Study of how language influences thought Idea networking Meme – Cultural idea which spreads through imitation Metaphorical framing – Type of framing Narrative inquiry – Discipline within qualitative research Newspeak – Fictional language in the novel "Nineteen Eighty-Four" Personal construct theory – Theory of personality and cognition Political frame – Effect of how information is presented on perception Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Loaded language , also known as Power word – Rhetoric used to influence an audience Rhetorical device – Literary technique used to persuade Semantics – Study of meaning in language Spin – Form of propaganda in public relations and politics Stovepiping – Metaphorical term referring to information presented without proper context Thought Reform (book) – American psychiatrist and author (born 1926) Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Trope – Use of figurative language for artistic effect Unspeak (book) – British writer Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets References [ edit ] ^ a b Matthes, Jörg (2009). "What's in a Frame? A Content Analysis of Media Framing Studies in the World's Leading Communication Journals, 1990-2005".

Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly .

86 (2): 349– 367.

doi : 10.1177/107769900908600206 .

S2CID 144431380 .

ProQuest 216941182 .

^ Goffman, Erving (1974).

Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experience . Boston: Northeastern University Press.

ISBN 0-930350-91-X .

^ Nelsen, T. E.; Oxley, Z. M.; Clawson, R. A. (1997). "Toward a Psychology of Framing Effects".

Political Behavior .

19 (3): 221– 246.

doi : 10.1023/A:1024834831093 .

S2CID 15874936 .

^ a b c d e f g h i "Framing Theory" .

Mass Communication Theory . 2011-03-17 . Retrieved 2020-02-29 .

^ a b Dan, Viorela; Raupp, Juliana (2018-08-18). "A systematic review of frames in news reporting of health risks: Characteristics, construct consistency vs. name diversity, and the relationship of frames to framing functions".

Health, Risk & Society .

20 ( 5– 6): 203– 226.

doi : 10.1080/13698575.2018.1522422 .

ISSN 1369-8575 .

S2CID 81633513 .

^ Jim A. Kuypers, Rhetorical Criticism: Perspectives in Action , Lexington Press, 2009 ^ Jim A. Kuypers, "Framing Analysis From a Rhetorical Perspective", P. D'Angelo and J. A. Kuypers, eds., Doing News Framing Analysis, Routledge, 2010.

^ Rhetorical Criticism: Perspectives in Action ^ Jim A. Kuypers, Bush's War: Media Bias and Justifications for War in a Terrorist Age , Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 2006.

^ Snow, David A. and Robert D. Benford (1988). "Ideology, Frame Resonance, and Participant Mobilization". Pp. 197-217 in Bert Klandermans, Hanspeter Kriesi, and Sidney Tarrow (eds.), From Structure to Action: Social Movement Participation Across Cultures. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press.

^ Snow, David A., R. Burke Rochford, Jr., Steven K. Worden, and Robert D. Benford. 1986. "Frame Alignment Processes, Micromobilization, and Movement Participation." American Sociological Review 51: 464-481.

^ Chuck Watts, co-founder, Empathy Surplus Project, http://empathysurplus.com/?recruiter_id=2 ^ a b c d e f g h Semetko, Holli A.; Valkenburg, Patti M. Valkenburg (2000-06-01).

"Framing European politics: A Content Analysis of Press and Television News" .

Journal of Communication .

50 (2): 93– 109.

doi : 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2000.tb02843.x .

ISSN 0021-9916 .

^ Felix Hamborg, Anastasia Zhukova and Bela Gipp, Illegal Aliens or Undocumented Immigrants? Towards the Automated Identification of Bias by Word Choice and Labeling in Proceedings of the iConference 2019, 2019.

External links [ edit ] Rockridge Institute articles on frame analysis , archived by Cognitive Policy Works whom provides commercial frame analysis.

Frameworks Institute provides frame analysis, based on scholarly research, for non-profits.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Frame_analysis&oldid=1292270732 " Categories : Communication studies Social science methodology Erving Goffman Framing (social sciences) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 03:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Frame analysis 8 languages Add topic

