Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Programs Toggle Programs subsection 2.1 Nieman Fellows 2.2 Nieman Reports 2.2.1 Nieman Watchdog 2.3 Nieman Journalism Lab 2.4 Narrative journalism 3 Awards based at Nieman Foundation 4 Curators 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Nieman Foundation for Journalism 2 languages 한국어 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Journalism institution at Harvard University Logo of the Nieman Foundation The Nieman Foundation for Journalism is the primary journalism institution at Harvard University .

History [ edit ] It was founded in February 1938 as the result of a $1.4 million bequest by Agnes Wahl Nieman, the widow of Lucius W. Nieman , founder of The Milwaukee Journal . Scholarships were established for journalists with at least three years' experience to go back to college to advance their work.

[ 1 ] She stated the goal was "to promote and elevate the standards of journalism in the United States and educate persons deemed specially qualified for journalism." [ 2 ] Programs [ edit ] Nieman Fellows [ edit ] Main article: Nieman Fellowship The Nieman Foundation is best known as home to the Nieman Fellows, a group of journalists from around the world who come to Harvard for a year of study. Many noted journalists, and from 1959, also photojournalists, have been Nieman Fellows, including John Carroll , Dexter Filkins , Susan Orlean , Robert Caro , Hodding Carter , Michael Kirk , Alex Jones , Anthony Lewis , Robert Maynard , Allister Sparks , Stanley Forman , Hedrick Smith , Lucia Annunziata , Jonathan Yardley , Philip Meyer , Howard Sochurek and Huy Duc . It is considered the most prestigious fellowship program for journalists; Nieman Fellows have collectively won 101 Pulitzer Prizes .

[ citation needed ] Nieman Reports [ edit ] The foundation is also the home of Nieman Reports , a website and quarterly print publication on journalism issues. The journal was founded in 1947.

[ 3 ] Nieman Watchdog [ edit ] In 2004, the Foundation launched Nieman Watchdog, a website intended to encourage more aggressive questioning of the powerful by news organizations. In 2012 it became a project of Nieman Reports .

[ 4 ] Nieman Journalism Lab [ edit ] In 2008, the foundation created the Nieman Journalism Lab , an effort to investigate future models that could support quality journalism.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Narrative journalism [ edit ] For several years, ending in 2009, the foundation sponsored the annual Nieman Conference on Narrative Journalism, [ 9 ] the largest conference of its kind, which attracted hundreds of writers, filmmakers, and broadcasters to Boston. The narrative program now consists of a writing seminar for Fellows, and a public website, Nieman Storyboard, [ 10 ] which covers storytelling across media.

Awards based at Nieman Foundation [ edit ] Several prestigious literary or journalism awards are based at the Nieman Foundation. They include three given in connection with the Columbia University School of Journalism : The J. Anthony Lukas Book Prize ($10,000, "recognizes superb examples of nonfiction writing that exemplify literary grace, a commitment to serious research and social concern") The Mark Lynton History Prize ($10,000, awarded to the "book-length work of history, on any subject, that best combines intellectual or scholarly distinction with felicity of expression") The J. Anthony Lukas Work-in-Progress Award ($30,000, "given annually to aid in the completion of a significant work of nonfiction") Other awards based at Nieman include: The Worth Bingham Prize for Investigative Reporting ($20,000, "honors investigative reporting of stories of national significance where the public interest is being ill-served") The I.F. Stone Medal for Journalistic Independence ("to a journalist whose work captures the spirit of independence, integrity, courage, and indefatigability that characterized I. F. Stone's Weekly ") The Louis Lyons Award for Conscience and Integrity in Journalism ("recognizes displays of conscience and integrity by individuals, groups or institutions in communications") The Taylor Family Award for Fairness in Newspapers ($10,000, "recognizes fairness in newspaper reporting") Curators [ edit ] The leader of the Nieman Foundation is known as its "curator" — a holdover from a brief moment after Agnes Wahl Nieman's death when her gift was to be used to build a microfilm library of quality journalism. The foundation has appointed eight curators: Archibald MacLeish , 1938–1939 Louis M. Lyons ( Nieman Fellow class of 1939), 1939–1964 Dwight E. Sargent ( Nieman Fellow class of 1951), 1964–1972 James C. Thomson Jr.

, 1972–1984 Howard Simons ( Nieman Fellow class of 1959), 1984–1989 Bill Kovach ( Nieman Fellow class of 1989), 1989–2000 Robert H. Giles ( Nieman Fellow class of 1966), 2000 – June 2011 Ann Marie Lipinski ( Nieman Fellow class of 1990), 2011 – References [ edit ] ^ "School for Reporters" .

Green Bay Press-Gazette . February 16, 1938. p. 6.

Archived from the original on September 22, 2024 . Retrieved October 16, 2022 .

^ "Authority to Sell Paper's Stock Asked" .

St. Louis Globe-Democrat . March 29, 1936. pp. 2A.

Archived from the original on October 16, 2022 . Retrieved October 16, 2022 .

^ "About Nieman Reports" .

Nieman Reports . Retrieved 2023-07-26 .

^ "Nieman Watchdog" .

niemanwatchdog.org .

Archived from the original on 2023-07-26 . Retrieved 2023-07-26 .

^ Lambert, Craig (19 April 2012).

"Meta-journalism" .

Harvard Magazine .

Archived from the original on 24 December 2022 . Retrieved 24 December 2022 .

^ Grueskin, Bill (July 19, 2021).

"How a Twitter thread sparked a lawsuit against Nieman Lab's founder" .

Columbia Journalism Review .

Archived from the original on 3 January 2023 . Retrieved 24 December 2022 .

In the thirteen years since it was founded, Harvard University's Nieman Lab has developed a reputation for thoughtful explorations of digital trends in journalism and incisive critiques of how reporters and editors go about their business.

^ Forman, Craig I.

(12 October 2021).

"Solutions to America's Local Journalism Crisis: Consolidated Literature Review" .

Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy .

Archived from the original on 21 December 2022 . Retrieved 24 December 2022 .

At Harvard, in the gray area between academic research and journalism, both Ken Doctor and Joshua Benton have made consistent contributions to the understanding of the changing business of local journalism in the contributions to the Nieman Journalism Lab.

^ Gerova, Veselina (8 March 2017).

"Follow these newsletters by journalists and never miss a thing" .

TNW .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2022 . Retrieved 24 December 2022 .

^ "Nieman Foundation" .

nieman.harvard.edu .

Archived from the original on 2009-03-12 . Retrieved 2009-03-15 .

^ "Nieman Storyboard" .

niemanstoryboard.org .

Archived from the original on 2022-06-14 . Retrieved 2025-03-12 .

External links [ edit ] Nieman Foundation Nieman Journalism Lab Nieman Reports Nieman Watchdog v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Academics CiNii Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nieman_Foundation_for_Journalism&oldid=1289804572 " Categories : Harvard University research institutes 1938 establishments in Massachusetts Educational foundations based in the United States American journalism organizations Organizations established in 1938 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 This page was last edited on 10 May 2025, at 23:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nieman Foundation for Journalism 2 languages Add topic

