Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Presidents 2 Campuses Toggle Campuses subsection 2.1 Athletic facilities 2.2 Housing 2.3 St. John Academic Center 2.4 Technology and research facilities 3 Academics Toggle Academics subsection 3.1 The Caribbean Writer 3.2 Marine biology program 3.3 National Student Exchange (NSE) 3.4 Online programs 4 Student life Toggle Student life subsection 4.1 Clubs and organizations 5 Athletics Toggle Athletics subsection 5.1 Coaches 5.2 Tournaments 6 Notable alumni 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents University of the Virgin Islands 7 languages Беларуская Esperanto فارسی Français Galego Norsk bokmål Tagalog Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Public university in the United States Virgin Islands University of the Virgin Islands University of the Virgin Islands seal Former names College of the Virgin Islands (1962–1986) Motto Historically American. Uniquely Caribbean. Globally Interactive.

Type Public historically black land-grant university Established March 16, 1962 ; 63 years ago ( March 16, 1962 ) [ 1 ] : 310 Endowment $66.9 million (2020) [ 2 ] President Safiya George Provost Camille McKayle Academic staff 107 Administrative staff 450 Students 2,138 [ 3 ] Location St. Croix 17°43′03″N 64°47′51″W ﻿ / ﻿ 17.7176°N 64.7975°W ﻿ / 17.7176; -64.7975 St. Thomas 18°20′37″N 64°58′21″W ﻿ / ﻿ 18.3435°N 64.9725°W ﻿ / 18.3435; -64.9725 St.

John 18°19′40″N 64°47′35″W ﻿ / ﻿ 18.3276696°N 64.7930529°W ﻿ / 18.3276696; -64.7930529 Colors Reflex Blue & White [ 4 ] : 3 Nickname Buccaneers and Lady Buccaneers Sporting affiliations NAIA – HBCUAC Website uvi .edu The University of the Virgin Islands (or UVI ) is a public historically black land-grant university in the United States Virgin Islands .

History [ edit ] UVI was founded as the College of the Virgin Islands on March 16, 1962.

[ 1 ] : 310 In 1986, it officially became one of the historically black colleges and universities .

[ 1 ] : 310 The institution also changed its name in 1986 to the University of the Virgin Islands to reflect the growth and diversification of its academic curriculum, research programs, and regional community services.

[ 5 ] : 319 On August 18, 2010, the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit decided that the university's regulations prohibiting signs and conduct that could cause emotional distress were unconstitutional.

[ 6 ] On January 5, 2021, Governor Albert Bryan signed into law Act 8404, which honors former UVI President Orville Edward Kean for his contributions to the University of the Virgin Islands and renamed the St. Thomas campus after him.

[ 7 ] Presidents [ edit ] Lawrence C. Wanlass 1962–1980 Arthur A. Richards 1980-1990 Orville Edward Kean 1990-2002 LaVerne E. Ragster 2002-2009 David Hall 2009-2024 Safiya George 2024- Campuses [ edit ] St. Thomas Campus St. Croix Campus St. John Academic Center The university has two campuses and two extension facilities. The 388-acre (1.57 km 2 ) campus opened in 1963 on St. Thomas , at the time named College of the Virgin Islands.

[ 8 ] The Albert A. Sheen campus is on St. Croix .

[ 9 ] The extensions include an academic center and an environmental research facility, both on St. John .

[ 9 ] The St. Croix campus is located on Estate Golden Grove in mid-island.  The St. Thomas campus is three miles (5 km) from Charlotte Amalie , the capital of the territory. The St. Thomas campus is situated on two hills and it has its own beach (John Brewer's Bay beach) which can be directly accessed off the main road which cuts through the campus.

[ 10 ] : 107 The majority of the buildings on the St. Thomas campus are made of volcanic rock and cement. This makes the campus not only aesthetically pleasing but it also improves the structural integrity of the structures as the U.S. Virgin Islands are known for experiencing very active hurricane seasons.

Athletic facilities [ edit ] Sports and Fitness Center The campus on St. Thomas boasts the 64,000-square-foot (5,900 m 2 ) Sports and Fitness Center with an adjacent weightlifting and aerobic exercise gym, as well as a golf course, tennis courts, outdoor basketball and volleyball courts, and baseball and soccer fields. The Sports and Fitness Center can seat up to 3,500 people and annually hosts the Paradise Jam tournament for mainland NCAA basketball teams .

[ 11 ] : 111 On St. Croix, there is an outdoor sports facility equipped with basketball, volleyball, and tennis courts. Also, there is a small exercise gym inside the Student Activities center. St. Croix has large fields in front, and they are usually acceptable for athletic use, but they tend to flood during heavy rain.

[ 12 ] Housing [ edit ] In 2012 the university added a 37,000 square foot residential hall.

[ 13 ] The university has six different sets of dorms on the St. Thomas campus which include: Eastern Dorms, Western Dorms, Northern Dorms, Southern Dorms, and Middle Dorms. The Eastern and Western Dorms are both unisex dorms whereas the South and Middle are all-female dorms. The Northern Dorms are all male dorms.

[ 14 ] Albert A. Sheen Campus on St. Croix has two residence halls, which together are known as the Delta M. Jackson Dorsch Complex. Its doors opened to students in 1999.

[ 15 ] Housing consists of 45 rooms with two beds per room, allowing accommodation for 90 students. The halls are sectioned into blocks: Knight's Block, Pirate's Block, Spartan's Block, and Titan's Block. Each block is designated by gender.

St. John Academic Center [ edit ] St. John , the northernmost island of the US Virgin Islands currently has no college campus on the island. Residents of St. John wishing to attend the UVI are required to travel by ferry to the island of St. Thomas to attend classes. The journey can take a few minutes each way. UVI President, David Hall, made it a priority to provide easier access to students living in St. John.

[ 16 ] After speaking with residents of St. John, Dr. Hall (President) discovered many obstacles hindering student education, including lack of access to a library and study spaces. Through the HBCU Library Alliance , funds were raised for the construction of a learning center in St. John. UVI chief information officer, Tina Koopmans, and library and IT staff developed a plan and located the resource center in an old gymnasium in St. John's MarketPlace.

[ 16 ] The St. John Academic Center (STJAC) contains four classrooms, a library, and a computer lab. Additionally, students can attend class via video conferencing technology so that they do not need to travel off the island as frequently. There are also individual and group study spaces available.

[ 17 ] According to Koopmans UVI has "seen an increase in our St. John student population from 37 to 47, and we are only at the beginning of the process." [ 16 ] In addition to being used by students, the STJAC provides the entire St. John community with access to the Small Business Development Center, access to the general library and Wi-Fi networks, and conference rooms for meetings.

[ 17 ] Currently, the STJAC is undergoing a relocation from the MarketPlace to the Department of Planning and Natural Resources in Cruz Bay.

[ 17 ] Technology and research facilities [ edit ] The legislature of the Virgin Islands chartered the University of the Virgin Islands Research and Technology Park to help expand the technology segment of the islands' economy, encourage more businesses to operate on the islands, and foster technology research and activities at the university. The university is filled with knowledgeable staff to help guide and support students in reaching their goals.  The United States Department of Agriculture operates a large agricultural experiment station on the St. Croix campus working on agroforestry , aquaponics , biotechnology , forage agronomy, and tilapia farming. The University also own and run the Etelman Observatory .

[ 18 ] Academics [ edit ] Entrance sign The university has five academic divisions: Business, Education, Humanities and Social Sciences, Nursing, and Science and Mathematics. UVI offers various graduate degree and undergraduate degree programs. The graduate programs consist of a Specialist Degree in Education Specialist in School Psychology and the following Master's degrees :  Master of Arts in Education, Master of Arts in Mathematics for Secondary Teachers, Master of Business Administration, Master of Marine and Environmental Science, Master of Psychology and Master of Public Administration. The Undergraduate Degree Programs are divided into several categories: Bachelor of Arts, Bachelor of Science, Associate of Arts, Associate of Science, and Associate of Applied Science.

Its liberal arts curriculum is accredited by the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools . In addition, the university works to recruit local, national and international students to broaden and create a diversified student population, as 95% of its current students are natives of the US Virgin Islands.

The university also has several academic programs under its College of Science and Mathematics. One of these is an engineering program, where students attend UVI for three years and then transfer to either Columbia University , the University of Florida , Washington University in St. Louis , or the University of South Carolina (Columbia) to complete the last two years of their engineering studies. After completing the program, students will acquire a Bachelor of Science in Applied Mathematics from UVI and a Bachelor of Science in their specialization of engineering from the partner university. The Bachelor of Science in Computer Science with concentration in computational biology is offered on both St. Thomas and St. Croix. Students will be able to focus in fields related to parallel computing , data mining, bioinformatics, computational science or cyber-security.

The university also has an early medical school selection program with Boston University which affords selected students to study for three years at UVI and then transfer to Boston University Medical School in their senior year. They are then granted the opportunity to take medical school courses early. The university also holds several National Science Foundation -funded research grants and programs including MBRS-RISE, SEAGEP, HBCU-UP, and MARC under its Emerging Caribbean Scientist (ECS) program. The mission of the ECS programs is to increase research training and promote excellence for science, technology, engineering, mathematics and psychology students at the University of the Virgin Islands. The university fosters research by hosting research symposiums every semester where students are given the opportunity to present research projects conducted both locally and abroad, to the UVI faculty and the Virgin Islands community.

[ 9 ] The Caribbean Writer [ edit ] The Caribbean Writer – subtitled "Where the Caribbean Imagination Embraces the World" – is an international, refereed, literary journal, founded in 1986 and published annually by UVI. The stated mission of the journal is to "publish quality writing by established and emerging writers that reflects the culture of the Caribbean; promote and foster a strong literary tradition; serve as an institute for the development of emerging writers throughout the Caribbean". The current editor of the journal is Alscess Lewis-Brown. The journal's founding editor was Erika J. Waters , now Professor Emeritus of English at UVI.

[ 19 ] Subsequent editors have included Marvin Williams, Opal Palmer Adisa , and Tregenza Roach .

[ 20 ] The Caribbean Writer announced the past issues online in the Digital Library of the Caribbean (dLOC) as Open Access in 2016.

[ 21 ] Marine biology program [ edit ] The marine biology program attracts students from all parts of the world. The University is next to John Brewers Bay , which hosts a variety of marine life and is studied by both undergrad and masters students.

[ 22 ] : 145 National Student Exchange (NSE) [ edit ] At UVI, students from around the nation are allowed to participate in a semester or year-long exchange to UVI through the National Student Exchange . Tuition is paid toward either the student's home or host school. Students who attend UVI are also able to participate in the NSE program as long as they have completed their freshman year.

[ 23 ] : 1135 Online programs [ edit ] In 2018, the UVI started offering undergraduate and graduate degree programs online in science, arts & business administration. Courses start at the second Wednesday of each month and run for eight weeks. In addition to new programs, the UVI online students will also have the option to complete a mini-residency program on the island of St. Thomas while earning academic credit.

[ 24 ] Student life [ edit ] View from campus The university offers counselling and career services including interpersonal, personal, social and cognitive development education.

Clubs and organizations [ edit ] At the University of the Virgin Islands St. Thomas campus there are various clubs and Greek Life organizations such as Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity, Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority, Delta Sigma Theta sorority, Anguilla Student Association, Chess Club, Criminal Justice Club, Foods Committee, Golden Key Int'l Honour Society, Japanese Club, Psychology Student Association, Queen's Committee, Social & Cultural Committee, Sports Committee, Student Nursing Association, UVI ACS Student Chemistry Club, UVI French Club, UVI St. Kitts/Nevis Association, Dominican Association, BVI Association, Interact (in conjunction with the local Rotary International Club ), Queens Court Club, R.E.A.C.H, Carnival Committee, Cheerleading Squad and Dance Team. UVI's Student Government Association is active on both campuses, particularly the St. Croix campus where (as of the school year 2012–2013) Kevin Dixon serves as president, Estica Caesar, Vice President, Jacqueline Romer, Treasurer, and Amiquah Freeman is secretary.

[ 25 ] : 203 Athletics [ edit ] The University of the Virgin Islands (UVI) athletic teams are called the Buccaneers. The school colors are blue, white and gold. The university is a member of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA), [ 26 ] primarily competing in the HBCU Athletic Conference (HBCUAC), formerly the Gulf Coast Athletic Conference (GCAC), since the 2023–24 academic year. The Buccaneers previously competed from 2016–17 until 2022–23 as an NAIA Independent within the Continental Athletic Conference [ 27 ] and in the Inter-university Athletic League of Puerto Rico (LAI; Liga Atlética Interuniversitaria de Puerto Rico in Spanish).

UVI competes in five intercollegiate varsity sports: Men's sports includes basketball and track & field; while women's sports compete in basketball and track & field; and co-ed sports include eSports. Former sports included soccer, tennis, volleyball, cross country, swimming and table tennis.

Coaches [ edit ] Currently, the head coach of UVI's men's basketball team is Jeffery Jones. The head coach of the women's basketball team is Reggie Carrick.

Tournaments [ edit ] The University of the Virgin Islands hosts the Paradise Jam tournament in November of every year.

NCAA Division I and II basketball teams from across the U.S. mainland compete in a men's and women's basketball tournament. The tournament has national coverage and is a major event in the Virgin Islands.

[ 28 ] Notable alumni [ edit ] Name Class year Notability Reference(s) Shawn Richards Member of the National Assembly of Saint Kitts and Nevis [ 29 ] Ricky Skerritt 1980 UVI's first-ever Rhodes scholar , businessman, Saint Kitts and Nevis cabinet minister and manager of the West Indies cricket team.

[ 1 ] [ self-published source ] : 311 Silveria Jacobs 1992 Prime Minister of Sint Maarten [ 30 ] Kenneth Gittens Majority Leader of the Legislature of the Virgin Islands [ 31 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Knight Sr., Alphonso W. (July 15, 2014).

Historically Black Colleges and Universities . Xlibris.

^ As of June 30, 2020.

U.S. and Canadian Institutions Listed by Fiscal Year 2020 Endowment Market Value and Change in Endowment Market Value from FY19 to FY20 (Report). National Association of College and University Business Officers and TIAA . February 19, 2021 . Retrieved February 21, 2021 .

^ "University of the Virgin Islands" .

U.S. News & World Report . Retrieved 26 April 2017 .

^ Brand Identity Style Guide (PDF) . University of the Virgin Islands. Dec 14, 2014.

^ Virgin Islands Code . Lexis Law. 1993.

^ Opinion in McCauley v. University of the Virgin Islands , 618 F 3d, 232 (3d Cir August 18, 2010).

^ "UVI St. Thomas Campus Renamed As The Orville E. Kean Campus" .

Virgin Islands Free Press . January 5, 2021 . Retrieved June 3, 2021 .

^ 1963, College of the Virgin Islands: U.S. Virgin Islands: A Guide to National Parklands in the United States Virgin Islands . Government Printing Office. February 12, 2002. p. 127.

: 27 Acreage: Harty, Cheyenne (January 10, 2017).

VI Settler's Handbook: Your Complete Moving Guide to the US Virgin Islands . eBookIt.com. p. 206.

^ a b c Harty, Cheyenne (Jan 10, 2017).

VI Settler's Handbook: Your Complete Moving Guide to the US Virgin Islands . eBookIt.com. p. 206.

^ van Beverhoudt, Jr., Arnold E. (Nov 20, 2014).

Island Boy Photobook: The U.S. Virgin Islands . Lulu. p. 166.

^ Peffer, Randall (2001).

Virgin Islands . Lonely Planet. pp.

256 .

ISBN 9780864427359 .

^ de Jongh, John P. (December 15, 2013).

Territorial Comprehensive Outdoor Recreation Plan . Governor. p. 57.

^ Bourne-Vanneck, Allison.

"New Residential Hall" .

News 2 .

Archived from the original on 2021-12-21 . Retrieved April 15, 2017 .

^ Dorms: van Beverhoudt, Jr., Arnold E. (November 20, 2014).

Island Boy Photobook: The U.S. Virgin Islands . Lulu. p. 166.

: 107 The College Board College Handbook .

College Board . 2009.

: 1338 ^ "Albert A. Sheen Campus" .

www.uvi.edu . Retrieved September 1, 2017 .

^ a b c Brooks-Tatum, Shanesha R. F. (6 February 2012).

"Preserving Black Academic Library History" .

American Libraries .

^ a b c Henderson, Marilyn.

"St. John Academic Center" . University of the Virgin Islands Libraries.

^ Palmer, David (Jan 27, 2016).

"GCN Circular" . No. 18938.

NASA . Retrieved 30 April 2017 .

^ The Caribbean Writer home page.

^ "Marvin E. Williams, R.I.P." , Geoffrey Philp, April 11, 2010.

^ "Global Open Access Portal" .

UNESCO .

United Nations . Retrieved 26 April 2017 .

^ University Curricula in the Marine Sciences and Related Fields . Interagency Committee on Marine Science and Engineering, Federal Council for Science and Technology. 1988.

^ Thomson Gale (2007).

The College Blue Book, Volume 1 . Macmillan.

^ "UVI Board of Trustees Approve University Online Degrees" .

www.uvi.edu .

^ Morris, Philip (1995).

A Guide to Black Organizations .

^ "Silver Lake College joins NAIA" . Herald Times Reporter. April 22, 2016 . Retrieved April 15, 2017 .

^ "UVI History" .

www.uviathle2016-17 after being a member of the Inter-university Athletic League" . University of the Virgin Islands . Retrieved July 19, 2022 .

"UVI joined the NAIA in story ^ Kramer, Lindsay (April 18, 2017).

"Syracuse women's basketball gets pairings for 2017 Paradise Jam tournament" . The Post-Standard . Retrieved 30 April 2017 .

^ "Hon. Shawn Richards" . People's Action Movement . Retrieved December 21, 2013 .

^ "St. Maarten has new government" .

The Daily Herald . November 19, 2019. Archived from the original on December 14, 2019 . Retrieved November 19, 2019 .

^ "Senator Kenneth L. Gittens" .

Legislature of the United States Virgin Islands . Retrieved 2024-09-04 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Official athletics website v t e HBCU Athletic Conference Full members Dillard Bleu Devils and Lady Devils Fisk Bulldogs Huston–Tillotson Rams Oakwood Ambassadors Paul Quinn Tigers Philander Smith Panthers Rust Bearcats SUNO Knights and Lady Knights Stillman Tigers Talladega Tornadoes Tougaloo Bulldogs Virgin Islands Buccaneers Voorhees Tigers Wilberforce Bulldogs Wiley Wildcats v t e Liga Atlética Interuniversitaria de Puerto Rico UPR Rio Pedras UPR Mayagüez Interamerican University Pontifical Catholic University UPR Cayey Ana G. Méndez University UPR Humacao Universidad del Sagrado Corazón UPR Bayamón UPR Arecibo American University Bayamón Central University UPR Ponce UPR Aguadilla UPR Carolina UPR Utuado Polytechnic University of Puerto Rico Caribbean University v t e Universities and colleges in insular areas of the United States American Samoa Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico U.S. Virgin Islands v t e Historically black colleges and universities ( List ) Public institutions Alabama A&M Alabama State Albany State Alcorn State Arkansas–Pine Bluff Bishop State CC Bluefield State Bowie State Central State Cheyney Coahoma CC Coppin State Delaware State Elizabeth City State Fayetteville State Florida A&M Fort Valley State Gadsden State CC Grambling State Harris–Stowe Hinds CC Jackson State Kentucky State Langston Lincoln, Missouri Lincoln, Pennsylvania Maryland, Eastern Shore Mississippi Valley State Morgan State Norfolk State North Carolina A&T North Carolina Central Prairie View A&M Savannah State Shelton State CC South Carolina State Southern Southern–New Orleans Southern–Shreveport Tennessee State Texas Southern UDC / UDC-CC UVI Virginia State West Virginia State Winston-Salem State Private institutions Allen Arkansas Baptist Barber–Scotia Benedict Bennett Bethune–Cookman Claflin Clark Atlanta Dillard Edward Waters Fisk Florida Memorial University Hampton Howard Huston–Tillotson Interdenominational Theological Center Jarvis Christian Johnson C. Smith Knoxville Lane LeMoyne–Owen Livingstone Meharry Miles Morehouse Morehouse School of Medicine Morris Brown Morris Oakwood Paine Paul Quinn Pensole Lewis Philander Smith Rust Selma Shaw Simmons College (Ky.) Southwestern Christian Spelman Stillman St. Augustine's Talladega Texas College Tougaloo Tuskegee Virginia Union Virginia University Voorhees Wilberforce Wiley Xavier (Louisiana) Defunct institutions Bishop Bishop Ward Booker T. Washington Carver (Florida) Carver (Maryland) Central Mississippi College Collier-Blocker Concordia Alabama Daniel Payne Frelinghuysen Georgia Baptist Gibbs Guadalupe Hampton Haygood Seminary Immanuel Lutheran Jackson Johnson Kittrell Lincoln Junior College Louisville Municipal Luther Miner Teachers College Mississippi Industrial College Morristown Mount Hermon Female Seminary New Orleans University Roosevelt Rosenwald Saint Paul's SCSU Law School Storer Straight Suwannee River Terrell Law School Turner Volusia County Western Law Schools David A. Clarke School of Law (UDC) Florida A&M University College of Law Howard University School of Law North Carolina Central University School of Law Southern University Law Center Thurgood Marshall School of Law (Texas Southern) Consortia Atlanta University Center Florida's Black Junior Colleges Mid-Eastern Athletic Conference Southwestern Athletic Conference Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Conference HBCU Athletic Conference v t e Thurgood Marshall College Fund Alabama A&M University Alabama State University Albany State University Alcorn State University Bluefield State University Bowie State University Central State University Charles R. Drew University of Medicine and Science Cheyney University of Pennsylvania Chicago State University Coppin State University Delaware State University Elizabeth City State University Fayetteville State University Florida A&M University Florida A&M University Law School Fort Valley State University Grambling State University Harris–Stowe State University Howard University Howard University School of Law Jackson State University Kentucky State University Langston University Lincoln University (Missouri) Lincoln University (Pennsylvania) Medgar Evers College Mississippi Valley State University Morgan State University Norfolk State University North Carolina A&T State University North Carolina Central University North Carolina Central University School of Law Prairie View A&M University Savannah State University South Carolina State University Southern University and A&M College Southern University at New Orleans Southern University at Shreveport-Bossier City Southern University Law Center Tennessee State University Texas Southern University Thurgood Marshall School of Law Tuskegee University University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff University of the District of Columbia University of the District of Columbia Law University of Maryland Eastern Shore University of the Virgin Islands Virginia State University West Virginia State University Winston-Salem State University York College Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=University_of_the_Virgin_Islands&oldid=1306065080 " Categories : University of the Virgin Islands Liga Atletica Interuniversitaria de Puerto Rico Universities and colleges established in 1962 Historically black universities and colleges in the United States Universities and colleges in the United States Virgin Islands 1962 establishments in the United States Virgin Islands Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using infobox university with the image name parameter All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from January 2018 Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 18:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents University of the Virgin Islands 7 languages Add topic

