Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types 2 Preservation 3 Notable Lagerstätten Toggle Notable Lagerstätten subsection 3.1 Precambrian 3.2 Cambrian 3.3 Ordovician 3.4 Silurian 3.5 Devonian 3.6 Carboniferous 3.7 Permian 3.8 Triassic 3.9 Jurassic 3.10 Cretaceous 3.11 Paleogene 3.12 Neogene 3.13 Quaternary 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Lagerstätte 22 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Svenska Українська West-Vlams Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sedimentary deposit with well-preserved extraordinary fossils Well-preserved basal arthropod Opabinia from Burgess Shale Lagerstätte (Middle Cambrian ) Part of a series on Paleontology Fossils Fossil Fossil preparation Fossil collecting Index fossil Microfossil Trace fossil Transitional fossil Geology Geology Absolute dating Relative dating Biochronology Geochronology Geologic formation Geologic record Geologic time scale Geological map Lagerstätte Stratigraphy Extinction Extinction Extinction event Lazarus taxon Living fossil Pseudoextinction Mass extinction Evolution Evolution Cladistics Convergent evolution Natural selection Phyletic gradualism Punctuated equilibrium Phylogenetic tree Speciation History History of paleontology List of years in paleontology Applications Age of Earth Origin of life History of life Cambrian explosion Ediacaran biota Biogeography Biochronology Biostratigraphy Ecological succession Anagenesis Evolutionary taxonomy Macroevolution Microevolution Cultural impact Cultural depictions of dinosaurs List of films featuring dinosaurs Dinosaur renaissance Paleoart Paleontology portal Category v t e A Fossil-Lagerstätte ( German pronunciation: [ˈlaːɡɐˌʃtɛtə] – from Lager 'storage, lair' and Stätte 'place'; pl.

Lagerstätten ) is a sedimentary deposit that preserves an exceptionally high amount of palaeontological information.

[ 1 ] Konzentrat-Lagerstätten preserve a high concentration of fossils , while Konservat-Lagerstätten offer exceptional fossil preservation, sometimes including preserved soft tissues.

Konservat-Lagerstätten may have resulted from carcass burial in an anoxic environment with minimal bacteria, thus delaying the decomposition of both gross and fine biological features until long after a durable impression was created in the surrounding matrix.

Fossil-Lagerstätten spans geological time from the Neoproterozoic era to the present .

Worldwide, some of the best examples of near-perfect fossilization are the Cambrian Maotianshan shales and Burgess Shale , the Ordovician Soom Shale , the Silurian Waukesha Biota , the Devonian Hunsrück Slates and Gogo Formation , the Carboniferous Mazon Creek , the Triassic Madygen Formation , the Jurassic Posidonia Shale and Solnhofen Limestone , the Cretaceous Yixian , Santana , & Agua Nueva formations and the Tanis Fossil Site , the Eocene Fur Formation , Green River Formation , Messel Formation & Monte Bolca , the Miocene Foulden Maar and Ashfall Fossil Beds , the Pliocene Gray Fossil Site , and the Pleistocene Naracoorte Caves & La Brea Tar Pits .

Types [ edit ] Palaeontologists distinguish two kinds: [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Konzentrat-Lagerstätten (concentration Lagerstätten ) are deposits with a particular "concentration" of disarticulated organic hard parts, such as a bone bed. These Lagerstätten are less spectacular than the more famous Konservat-Lagerstätten . Their contents invariably display a large degree of time averaging, as the accumulation of bones in the absence of other sediment takes some time. Deposits with a high concentration of fossils that represent an in situ community, such as reefs or oyster beds, are not considered Lagerstätten .

Konservat-Lagerstätten (conservation Lagerstätten ) are deposits known for the exceptional preservation of fossilized organisms or traces. The individual taphonomy of the fossils varies with the sites. Conservation Lagerstätten are crucial in elucidating important moments in the history and evolution of life. For example, the Burgess Shale of British Columbia is associated with the Cambrian explosion , and the Solnhofen limestone with the earliest known bird , Archaeopteryx .

Archaeopteryx specimen from Solnhofen Lagerstätte (Upper Jurassic ) Fossil specimen of Echinochimaera from the Bear Gulch Limestone (Middle Carboniferous ) Preservation [ edit ] Konservat-Lagerstätten preserve lightly sclerotized and soft-bodied organisms or traces of organisms that are not otherwise preserved in the usual shelly and bony fossil record; thus, they offer more complete records of ancient biodiversity and behavior and enable some reconstruction of the palaeoecology of ancient aquatic communities. In 1986, Simon Conway Morris calculated only about 14% of genera in the Burgess Shale had possessed biomineralized tissues in life. The affinities of the shelly elements of conodonts were mysterious until the associated soft tissues were discovered near Edinburgh, Scotland, in the Granton Lower Oil Shale of the Carboniferous .

[ 4 ] Information from the broader range of organisms found in Lagerstätten have contributed to recent phylogenetic reconstructions of some major metazoan groups.

Lagerstätten seem to be temporally autocorrelated, perhaps because global environmental factors such as climate might affect their deposition.

[ 5 ] A number of taphonomic pathways may produce Konservat-Lagerstätten : [ 6 ] Phosphatization (replacing soft tissues with phosphate , such as Orsten-type and Doushantuo-type preservations ).

Silicification (replacing or entombing soft tissues with silica, such as petrified wood or Bitter Springs-type preservation ).

Kerogenization (soft tissues converted into inert carbonaceous films , as found in Burgess Shale-type preservation ).

Aluminosilification (replacing or coating soft tissues with films of aluminosilicate minerals).

Pyritization (replacing soft tissues with pyrite , such as the exquisite detail found in Beecher's trilobite-type preservation ).

Calcification (replacing or soft tissues with calcite minerals).

Siderite or calcite nodules (chemicals released by decaying soft tissue modify the surrounding sediment into a siderite concretion or coal ball encasing the fossil, as found in the Mazon Creek fossil beds ).

Rapid sediment cementation (impressions of soft tissue preserved through casts and molds in the surrounding sediment, such as Ediacaran-type preservation facilitated by microbial mats ).

Amber (soft tissues encased in hardened tree resin).

The identification of a fossil site as a Konservat-Lagerstätte may be based on a number of different factors which constitute "exceptional preservation". These may include the completeness of specimens, soft tissue preservation, fine-scale detail, taxonomic richness, distinctive taphonomic pathways (often multiple at the same site), the extent of the fossil layer in time and space, and particular sediment facies encouraging preservation.

[ 6 ] Notable Lagerstätten [ edit ] This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources .

See also: List of fossil sites The world's major Lagerstätten include: Precambrian [ edit ] Site(s) Age Location Significance Notable fossils/organisms Francevillian B Formation 2140-2080 Ma Franceville , Gabon Possibly preserves the earliest macroscopic eukaryotes, [ 7 ] [ 8 ] however these may instead be pseudofossils.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Example of macroscopic structure referred to the Francevillian biota Chuanlinggou Formation 1630 Ma [ 11 ] Yan Mountains , North China Preserves the first definitive multicellular eukaryotes in the form of Qingshania , [ 11 ] Tawuia and Changchengia .

[ 12 ] Changchengia sp.

Chitrakoot Formation 1600 Ma Vindhya Range , India Preserves earliest red algae, Rafatazmia and Ramathallus [ 13 ] Ramathallus lobatus Gaoyuzhuang Formation 1588.8±6.5 Ma [ 14 ] Yan Mountains , North China Preserves some of the first algae such as Tuanshanzia and Grandilingulata , [ 15 ] alongside a diverse microbiota including possible fungi.

[ 16 ] Grandilingulata , a possible alga fossil from the Gaoyuzhuang Formation Volyn biota 1500 Ma Zhytomyr Oblast , Ukraine Possibly one of the first fossil sites of the deep biosphere .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] A sample of the Volyn biota with multiple filaments with claw-like ends growing from a common center Hunting Formation 1200 Ma Somerset Island , Canada Shallow-water Mesoproterozoic deposits, containing multiple genera of algae [ 19 ] [ 20 ] including Bangiomorpha .

Bangiomorpha pubescens , the earliest definite red algae Nonesuch Formation 1083-1070 Ma Michigan, USA An oxygenated Mesoproterozoic lake [ 21 ] containing exceptionally preserved limnic microbes.

[ 22 ] Lakhanda Group 1030-1000 Ma Uchur-Maya Depression, Russia A site preserving a Mesoproterozoic community dominated by anaerobic bacteria.

[ 23 ] The lagerstätte contains evidence of trophic interactions from the Boring Billion .

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Bitter Springs 1000–850 Ma South Australia Preserved fossils include cyanobacteria microfossils .

An early Stromatolite Diabaig Formation 994 ± 48 Ma [ 26 ] Scotland A freshwater environment preserving phosphatic microfossils, [ 27 ] which represent some of the oldest known non-marine eukaryotes.

[ 28 ] Dolores Creek Formation 950 Ma Yukon, Canada An Early Tonian site containing pyritised macroalgal fossils.

[ 29 ] Svanbergfjellet Formation 791.1±4.9 Ma [ 30 ] Svalbard A site preserving some of the earliest green algae, such as Proterocladus , alongside various enigmatic eukaryotes like Pseudotawuia .

[ 31 ] Chichkan Lagerstätte 775 Ma Kazakhstan A site from the transition between the prokaryote-dominated biota of the Early Neoproterozoic and the eukaryote-dominated biota of the Late Neoproterozoic and Phanerozoic.

[ 32 ] Doushantuo Formation 600–555 Ma Guizhou Province, China Spans the poorly understood interval between the end of the Cryogenian period and the late Ediacaran Avalon explosion .

An Ediacaran embryo -like fossil Portfjeld Formation 570 Ma North Greenland A Middle Ediacaran biota from the continent of Laurentia exhibiting Doushantuo-type preservation.

[ 33 ] Mistaken Point 565 Ma Newfoundland, Canada This site contains one of the most diverse and well-preserved collections of Precambrian fossils .

Frondose ediacaran organisms Itajai Biota 563 Ma Brazil An Ediacaran lagerstatte preserved by volcanism.

[ 34 ] Ediacara Hills 555 Ma South Australia The type location the Ediacaran period, and has preserved a significant amount of fossils from that time.

Spriggina floundersi , a worm-like organism Shibantan Lagerstätte 551-543 Ma Hubei , China A terminal Ediacaran fossil assemblage preserving life forms living just before the Proterozoic-Phanerozoic transition.

[ 35 ] Gaojiashan Lagerstätte 551-541 Ma Shaanxi , China A lagerstätte documenting tube growth patterns of Cloudina .

[ 36 ] Jiucheng Member 551-543 Ma Yunnan, China A latest Ediacaran macrofossil biota dominated by giant, unbranching thallophytes.

[ 37 ] Khatyspyt Lagerstätte 544 Ma Yakutia , Russia A Late Ediacaran lagerstätte preserving an Avalon-type biota.

[ 38 ] Bernashivka open pit ? (Upper Vendian ) Vinnytsia Oblast , Ukraine A Late Ediacaran lagerstätte with numerous soft-bodied animals, algae, microfossils, bacteria, and fungi, comprising a number of different geological formations.

[ 39 ] Cambrian [ edit ] Site(s) Age Location Significance Notable fossils/organisms Zhangjiagou Fortunian Shaanxi, China A lagerstätte from the earliest Cambrian notable for its fossils of cnidarians, [ 40 ] cycloneuralians, [ 41 ] [ 42 ] and the basal ecdysozoan Saccorhytus coronarius .

[ 43 ] Life restoration of Saccorhytus as it may have been seen through the lens of a microscope, living among grains of sand.

Maotianshan Shales (Chengjiang) 518 Ma Yunnan , China The preservation of an extremely diverse faunal assemblage renders the Maotianshan Shales the world's most important formation for understanding the evolution of early multi-cellular life. Microscopic animals like Yicaris are preserved here, showing the presence of an Orsten-type deposit within the formation.

[ 44 ] Haikouichthys , a primitive craniate Qingjiang biota 518 Ma Hubei , China This site is particularly notable due to both the large proportion of new taxa represented (approximately 53% of the specimens), and the notable volume of soft-body tissue preservation.

Duplapex , a hymenocarine arthropod Sirius Passet 523-518 Ma Greenland A site known for its fauna, and that they were most likely preserved by a death mask . It is a part of the larger Buen Formation , and has a fauna similar to the Maotianshan shales.

Kerygmachela , a dinocaridid -like lobopodian Xiaoshiba Lagerstätte Cambrian Stage 3 Yunnan, China A site known for its detailed preservation of Early Cambrian macroalgae, [ 45 ] alongside fossils of Omnidens .

[ 46 ] A fossil of the partial mouth apparatus of Omnidens qiongqii from the Xiaoshiba Lagerstätte, in association with a small trilobite.

Poleta Formation 519-518 Ma Nevada , USA The middle member of the formation preserves the Indian Springs Lagerstätte, one of the oldest such sites from former Laurentia . This site preserves a diversity of mineralized organisms such as trilobites and brachiopods, but also non-mineralized remains such as sponges, algae, and soft-bodied arthropods.

[ 47 ] The trilobite Nevadia Sinsk Algal Lens 518 Ma Yakutia , Russia One of the oldest known Cambrian lagerstätten . The fauna of this site is unique, as it seems that they were adapted to living in dysaerobic conditions.

[ 48 ] A reconstruction of the large Lobopodian Siberion Guanshan Biota Cambrian Stage 4 Eastern Yunnan , China A relatively diverse lagerstätte within the Wulongqing Formation , between the more famous Maotianshan Shales and Burgess Shale in age, alongside having both taxa from the previous two formations and completely new genera/species preserved here. It is also unusual for being quite shallow and having a brachiopod-dominated fauna.

[ 49 ] Neobolus wulongqingensis , the most abundant taxon in the Guanshan Biota Cranbrook Lagerstätte Cambrian Stage 4 British Columbia One of the oldest Burgess Shale-type biotas of North America.

[ 50 ] Tatelt Formation 515 Ma High Atlas , Morocco A layer in this formation has produced some of the most well-preserved trilobites ever discovered, with preserved internal organs, feeding structures, and articulated appendages. The trilobites were likely rapidly buried and preserved by a volcanic eruption.

[ 51 ] The trilobite Gigoutella mauretanica Emu Bay Shale 513 Ma South Australia Noted soft tissue mineralization, most often of blocky apatite or fibrous calcium carbonate , including the oldest phosphatized muscle tissue.

Oestokerkus , a megacheiran arthropod Parker Slate 513-511 Ma Vermont , US A Burgess Shale-type biota with rare but exceptionally preserved soft-bodied animals. The earliest Burgess Shale-type biota to be described, being documented 25 years before the Burgess Shale itself.

[ 52 ] Kaili Formation 513–501 Ma Guizhou , China The middle part of the Kaili Formation, the Oryctocephalus indicus Zone, contains a Burgess Shale-type lagerstätte with many well-preserved fossils known collectively as the Kaili Biota.

Pararotadiscus a cambroernid animal Murero Lagerstätte 511-503 Ma Spain Thanks to the paleontological content, mainly trilobites, fourteen biozones have been established, the most precise biozonation for this time interval in the world. It also records in detail the so-called Valdemiedes event, the mass extinction episode at the end of the Lower Cambrian.

[ 53 ] Eccaparadoxides trilobites showing sexual dimorphism Blackberry Hill ~510–500 Ma Central Wisconsin , US This site preserves some of the oldest evidence of multicellular life walking out of the ocean, and onto dry land (in the form of large mollusks and euthycarcinoid arthropods). Other notable fossils include stranded scyphozoans , and some of the oldest true crustaceans (in the form of phyllocarids ).

Mosineia , a euthycarcinoid arthropod Henson Gletscher Formation Wuliuan North Greenland A phosphatised lagerstätte preserving hatching priapulid larvae, pentastomids [ 54 ] and abundant bradoriid and phosphatocopid arthropods.

[ 55 ] Burgess Shale 508 Ma British Columbia, Canada One of the most famous fossil localities in the world. It is famous for the exceptional preservation of the soft parts of its fossils. At 508 million years old ( middle Cambrian ), it is one of the earliest fossil beds containing soft-part imprints.

Anomalocaris , a predatory radiodont Duchesnay Formation ~505 Ma?

Southeastern British Columbia Similar to the Burgess Shale above (both formations even have similar depositional environments next to escarpments), but seemingly lower-diversity and slightly younger. Several organisms are shared between both formations, although the Duchesnay Formation preserves several new genera. Brine pools are also preserved.

[ 56 ] Spence Shale 507 Ma Northeastern Utah , Southeastern Idaho , US A site known for its abundant Cambrian trilobites and the preservation of Burgess Shale-type fossils. The type locality for this site is Spence Gulch in southeastern Idaho.

Hyoliths , most likely lophophorates Linyi Lagerstätte 504 Ma Shandong , China A lagerstätte recognised for its exceptional preservation of arthropod limbs, intestines, and eyes.

[ 57 ] Restoration of the Linyi Lagerstätte Ravens Throat River Lagerstätte Drumian Northwest Territories A Burgess Shale-type biota coeval in age with the more famous Wheeler Shale and Marjum Formation.

[ 58 ] Wheeler Shale ( House Range ) 504 Ma Western Utah , US A world-famous locality known for its prolific agnostid and Elrathia kingii trilobite remains. Varied soft bodied organisms are also locally preserved, including Naraoia , Wiwaxia and Hallucigenia .

Elrathia sp. trilobites Marjum Formation 502 Ma Western Utah , US A site known for its occasional preservation of soft-bodied tissue, and diverse assemblage.

Branchiocaris a pelagic hymenocarine Weeks Formation 500 Ma Western Utah , US A site that is dominated by trilobites and brachiopods , but also comprising various soft-bodied organisms, such as Falcatamacaris .

Beckwithia , an aglaspidid trilobite relative Kinnekulle Orsten and Alum Shale 500 Ma Sweden The Orsten sites reveals the oldest well-documented benthic meiofauna in the fossil record. Fossils such as microfossils of arthropods like free-living pentastomids are known. Multiple "Orsten-type" lagerstätten are also known from other countries.

Cambropachycope , a stem-group mandibulate arthropod Ordovician [ edit ] Site(s) Age Location Significance Notable fossils/organisms Fezouata Formation about 485 Ma Draa Valley, Morocco It was deposited in a marine environment, and is known for its exceptionally preserved fossils, filling an important preservational window beyond the earlier and more common Cambrian Burgess shale-type deposits .

Aegirocassis , a giant hurdiid radiodont Cabrieres biota Floian Montagne Noire, France A polar marine ecosystem from the Early Ordovician that likely served as a refuge from the high temperatures of the epoch.

[ 59 ] Liexi fauna About 470 Ma (early-middle Floian ) Hunan Province , China Preserves Early Ordovician fauna with soft tissue, includes not only Cambrian relics but also taxa originated during Ordovician.

[ 60 ] Castle Bank About 461 Ma Llandrindod Wells, Wales A unique environment deposited during the middle Ordovician that possibly shows iconic groups from Cambrian lagerstättes, like Opabiniids and Megacheirans, survived for longer than what was thought.

Diagram of Mieridduryn , an opabiniid-like panarthropod Douglas Dam Member [ 61 ] 460 Ma Tennessee , US Low-diversity assemblage of arthropod fossils, which are preserved well because of volcanic ash.

Chasmataspis , a horseshoe crab -like chasmataspid arthropod Winneshiek Shale 460 Ma Decorah , Iowa A Middle Ordovician site confined to a large impact Crater that is known for exceptionally exquisite preservation of conodonts, bivalved arthropods, and the earliest eurypterids in the fossil record.

[ 62 ] Pentecopterus , the oldest known eurypterid Beecher's Trilobite Bed 460? Ma New York, US Noted exceptionally preserved trilobites with soft tissue preserved by pyrite replacement.

Pyritisation allows the use of X-rays to study fine detail of preserved soft body parts.

A pair of Triarthrus trilobites with pyritized soft-tissue Letná Formation 460-450 Ma Czech Republic A site known for its fossil echinoderms , brachiopods , conulariids , and trilobites .

[ 63 ] Harding Sandstone [ 61 ] ? ( Sandbian ) Colorado , US Although preservation is not excellent, this lagoonal site provides early vertebrate fossils such as Astraspis and Eriptychius .

Eriptychius , an early agnathan Walcott-Rust Quarry about 455? Ma New York, US This site is an excellent example of an obrution (rapid burial or "smothered") Lagerstätte .

Unique preservation of trilobite appendages resulted from early cementation of the surrounding rock and spar filling of the interior cavity of the appendages.

Isotelus gigas , a large asaphid trilobite Big hill Lagerstätte about 450? Mya Michigan, US A site known for its preservation of soft-bodied medusae (jellyfish), as well as linguloid brachiopods, algae, and arthropods (namely chasmataspidids, leperditid ostracods, and eurypterids).

Hoplitaspis , chasmataspid arthropod Brechin Lagerstätte 450 Ma Ontario, Canada Known for preserving one of the most diverse crinoid fauna of the Katian .

[ 64 ] Tomlinsonus , a marrellomorph Soom Shale 450? Ma South Africa Known for its remarkable preservation of soft-tissue in fossil material. Deposited in still waters, the unit lacks bioturbation , perhaps indicating anoxic conditions.

Promissum , a conodont known from rare soft-tissues Tafilalt Biota ? ( Sandbian -middle Katian ) Tafilalt , Morocco Known from range of non-biomineralised and soft-bodied organisms in polar environment.

[ 65 ] " Eldonia " barvera , an eldoniid Cat Head Member [ 61 ] ? (middle Katian ) Manitoba , Canada Fossils like algae, conulariids and trilobites are known from this site.

Vauréal Formation [ 66 ] Katian Anticosti Island , Quebec Preserves earliest known acoelomorphs, nemerteans, nematodes and flatworms in the fossil record Georgian Bay Formation [ 61 ] 449-445.6 Ma Manitoulin District , Canada Low-diversity assemblage of arthropod fossils.

Orcanopterus , a middle-sized waeringopterid eurypterid William Lake ( Stony Mountain Formation ) [ 61 ] 445 Ma Manitoba, Canada Well-preserved fossils like jellyfish , xiphosurans , sea spiders are known from this site, it is important since many of the fossils are unknown in other Ordovician sites.

Lunataspis aurora , an early xiphosuran known in two sites Airport Cove [ 61 ] 445 Ma Manitoba, Canada Fossils like eurypterids, algae and xiphosurans are preserved in this site.

Silurian [ edit ] Site(s) Age Location Significance Notable fossils/organisms Kalana Lagerstätte ~440 Ma Aeronian Estonia Known for well preserved fossils of algae and crinoids, [ 67 ] along with an osteostracan fossilised via an extremely unusual carbonaceous mode of preservation that was previously unknown among vertebrates.

[ 68 ] Kalanaspis , the earliest known osteostracan Chongqing Lagerstätte ( Huixingshao Formation ) [ 69 ] 436 Ma Chongqing , China This site preserved complete fossils of earliest jawed vertebrates , as well as some galeaspids and eurypterids .

Xiushanosteus , the earliest placoderm Waukesha Biota ( Brandon Bridge Formation ) ~435 Ma Early Silurian Wisconsin , US Well-studied site known for the exceptional preservation of its diverse, soft-bodied and lightly skeletonized fauna, includes many major taxa found nowhere else in strata of similar age. It was one of the first fossil sites with soft bodied preservation known to science.

Parioscorpio , an enigmatic arthropod Herefordshire Lagerstätte ( Coalbrookdale Formation ) ~430 Ma Herefordshire , UK Known for the well-preserved fossils of various invertebrate animals many of which are in their three-dimensional structures. Fossils are preserved within volcanic ash, because of that sometimes this site has been compared to Pompeii .

[ 70 ] Some of the fossils are regarded as earliest evidences and evolutionary origin of some of the major groups of modern animals.

Offacolus , a euchelicerate Eramosa Lagerstätte ~425 Ma Ontario & New York (state) Known for preservation of both hard and soft bodied organisms in great detail, including early scorpions, eurypterids, agnathan vertebrates, and several other species.

Eramoscorpius , an early scorpion Bertie Group 422.9-416 Ma Ontario &  New York State This limestone have produced thousands of fossil eurypterids , such as giant Acutiramus and well-known Eurypterus , as well as other fauna like scorpions and fish.

Nerepisacanthus , an acanthodian Tonoloway Formation [ 71 ] ~420 Ma Pennsylvania , US Known from exceptionally preserved mass assemblage of Eurypterus , the most abundant eurypterid in the fossil record.

Reconstruction of Eurypterus Rochester Shale 415 Ma [ 72 ] New York, US and Ontario , Canada Echinoderms (such as crinoids) and trilobites are known from Lewiston Member in this shale.

Arctinurus , one of the trilobites from this site Devonian [ edit ] Site(s) Age Location Significance Notable fossils/organisms Ditton Group Lochkovian Wales, UK A wildfire-derived lagerstätte containing pyrolysis products of ancient wildfires.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] Rhynie chert 400 Ma Scotland , UK The Rhynie chert contains exceptionally preserved plant, fungus, lichen and animal material (euthycarcinoids, branchiopods, arachnids, hexapods, etc) preserved in place by an overlying volcanic deposit and hot springs. As well as one of the first known fully terrestrial ecosystems.

Asteroxylon , an early vascular plant related to lycopods Waxweiler Lagerstätte ( Klerf Formation ) 409-392 Ma Eifel , Germany Waxweiler Lagerstätte is known from well-preserved fossils of chelicerates , giant claw of Jaekelopterus rhenaniae shows the largest arthropod ever known.

Jaekelopterus , around 2.5 m-long eurypterid Heckelmann Mill 395 Ma Rhineland-Palatinate , Germany Heckelmann Mill preserves well preserved rhinocaridid archaeostracan phyllocarids, [ 75 ] along with exceptionally abundant crinoid holdfasts from the late Emsian .

[ 76 ] Hunsrück Slates (Bundenbach) 390 Ma Rheinland-Pfalz, Germany The Hunsrück slates are one of the few marine Devonian lagerstätte having soft tissue preservation, and in many cases fossils are coated by a pyritic surface layer.

Schinderhannes bartelsi , the youngest known radiodont Gogo Formation 380 Ma (Frasnian) Western Australia The fossils of the Gogo Formation display three-dimensional soft-tissue preservation of tissues as fragile as nerves and embryos with umbilical cords. Over fifty species of fish have been described from the formation, and arthropods.

Materpiscis , a ptyctodontid placoderm fish that is the oldest vertebrate known to give live birth Miguasha National Park ( Escuminac Formation ) 370 Ma Québec, Canada Some of the fish, fauna, and spore fossils found at Miguasha are rare and ancient species. For example, Eusthenopteron is sarcopterygian that shares characters with early tetrapods .

Fossil of lungfish Scaumenacia and antiarch placoderm Bothriolepis Kowala Lagerstätte ~368 Ma Świętokrzyskie Voivodeship , Poland A Late Devonian site known for its fossils of non-biomineralised algae and arthropods.

[ 77 ] Maïder Basin 368 Ma (for Thylacocephalan Layer) Anti-Atlas , Morocco Thylacocephalan Layer and Hangenberg Black Shale in this basin provides well-preserved fossils of Famennian fauna, including chondrichthyans and placoderms that preserved soft tissues.

[ 78 ] Amazichthys , pelagic placoderm with preserved soft tissue Strud [ 79 ] ? (Late Famennian ) Namur Province , Belgium Mainly juvenile placoderms are known, suggesting this site would be nursery site of placoderms.

[ 80 ] Various biota like tetrapods, arthropods and plants are also known, Strudiella from this site may be the earliest insect, but its affinity is disputed.

Strudops , the earliest known notostracan .

Canowindra , New South Wales ( Mandagery Sandstone ) 360 Ma Australia An accidentally discovered lagerstätte known for its exceptional preservation of Sarcopterygian and Placoderm fish.

Mandageria , a lobe-finned fish that is the NSW State Fossil Emblem in Australia Waterloo Farm Lagerstätte (Witpoort Formation) 360 Ma South Africa Important site that providing the only record of a high latitude (near polar ) coastal ecosystem, overturning numerous assumptions about high latitude conditions during the latest Devonian.

Priscomyzon , the oldest known genus of lamprey Carboniferous [ edit ] Site(s) Age Location Significance Notable fossils/organisms Granton Shrimp Bed ? ( Dinantian ) Firth of Forth , Scotland Dominated by well-preserved crustacean fossils, this site provided first body fossil of Clydagnathus which solved long-lasted mystery of conodont fossils.

East Kirkton Quarry [ 81 ] 335 Ma West Lothian , Scotland This site has produced numerous well-preserved fossils of early tetrapods like temnospondyls or reptiliomorphs , and large arthropods like scorpions or eurypterids.

Silvanerpeton , a possible reptiliomorph Bear Gulch Limestone 324 Ma Montana , US A limestone -rich geological lens in central Montana . It is renowned for its unusual and ecologically diverse fossil composition of chondrichthyans , the group of cartilaginous fish containing modern sharks , rays , and chimaeras . Other animals like brachiopods, ray finned fish , arthropods, and the possible mollusk Typhloesus are also known from the site.

Falcatus , a holocephalian which males had large fin spine Wamsutta Formation ~320-318 Ma Massachusetts A subhumid alluvial fan deposit that preserves ichnofossils, plants, invertebrates, and vertebrates.

[ 82 ] Bickershaw [ 83 ] ? ( Langsettian ) Lancashire , England This locality contains exceptionally preserved fossils within nodules . Arthropods have greater diversity, many of which are aquatic ones that lived in brackish environment.

Valloisella , a xiphosuran Joggins Fossil Cliffs ( Joggins Formation ) 315 Ma Nova Scotia , Canada A fossil site that preserves a diverse terrestrial ecosystem consisting of plants like lycopsids, giant arthropods, fish, and the oldest known sauropsid , Hylonomus .

Hylonomus , the oldest known sauropsid in the fossil record Castlecomer fauna 315-307 Kilkenny , Ireland A konservat-lagerstätte with a high number of well-preserved spinicaudatan clam shrimp .

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] Linton Diamond Coal Mine [ 86 ] [ 87 ] 310 Ma Ohio , US A site known for its number of prehistoric tetrapods , like the lepospondyl Diceratosaurus .

[ 88 ] The lepospondyl tetrapod Diceratosaurus Mazon Creek 310 Ma Illinois , US A conservation lagerstätte found near Morris , in Grundy County, Illinois . The fossils from this site are preserved in ironstone concretions with exceptional detail. The fossils were preserved in a large delta system that covered much of the area. The state fossil of Illinois, the enigmatic animal Tullimonstrum , is only known from these deposits.

Tullimonstrum , an enigmatic animal Buckhorn Asphalt Quarry ~310 Ma Oklahoma, USA A quarry of the Boggy Formation known for its exceptionally rich orthocerid assemblage.

[ 89 ] Kinney Brick Quarry ( Atrasado Formation ) around 307 Ma New Mexico , US This site is known from rich fish fossils with preserved soft tissues, that lived in lagoonal environment. Dozens of fish genera are known, ranging from chondrichthyans like ctenacanths and hybodonts , to actinopterygians and sarcopterygians .

[ 90 ] Dracopristis , a ctenacanth Lontras Shale (Campáleo Outcrop) [ 91 ] Gzhelian Santa Catarina, Brazil A fungal and palynological lagerstätte from Gondwana during Late Palaeozoic Ice Age .

[ 92 ] Montceau-les-Mines 300 Ma France Exceptional preservation of Late Carboniferous fossil biota are known, including various vertebrates and arthropods, as well as plants.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] Idmonarachne , an arachnid that is related to spiders Hamilton Quarry 300 Ma Kansas , US This site is known for its diverse assemblage of unusually well-preserved marine, euryhaline , freshwater, flying, and terrestrial fossils (invertebrates, vertebrates, and plants). This extraordinary mix of fossils suggests it was once an estuary.

Spinoaequalis , a semi-aquatic diapsid Carrizo Arroyo ? (Latest Gzhelian to earliest Asselian ) New Mexico , US This site is known from exceptional preservation of arthropod fossils, mainly insects.

[ 95 ] Remigiusberg Formation 300.0 Ma ± 2.4 Ma Saarland and Rhineland-Palatinate , Germany A Permian-Carboniferous site known for its excellent preservation of fossil plants, invertebrates, and vertebrates in fluvial to marginal lacustrine deposits.

[ 96 ] Trypanognathus , a temnospondyl amphibian from the site.

Permian [ edit ] Site(s) Age Location Significance Notable fossils/organisms Taiyuan Formation 298 Ma Inner Mongolia , China Known from exceptionally well-preserved plant fossils in volcanic ash.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] Meisenheim Formation [ 99 ] ?( Asselian to early Sakmarian ) [ 100 ] Lebach , Germany This site is well-known for the rich occurrence of fauna lived in large freshwater lakes, including fish, temnospondyls , insects and others.

Lebachacanthus , a large-sized xenacanth Franchesse 292 Ma Massif Central , France A Sakmarian seymouriamorph lagerstätte from the Bourbon l'Archambault Basin in the French Massif Central containing hundreds of complete seymouriamorph specimens.

[ 101 ] Chemnitz petrified forest 291 Ma Saxony , Germany A petrified forest in Germany that is composed of Arthropitys bistriata , a type of Calamites , giant horsetails that are ancestors of modern horsetails , found on this location with never seen multiple branches. Many more plants and animals from this excavation are still in an ongoing research.

[ 102 ] Large trunks of Arthropitys at Chemnitz Mangrullo Formation about 285–275 Ma (Artinskian) Uruguay This site is known for its abundant mesosaur fossils. It also contains the oldest known konservat-lagerstätte in South America , as well as the oldest known fossils of amniote embryos .

[ 103 ] Stereosternum , an aquatic mesosaurid reptile Chekarda (Koshelevka Formation) about 283–273 Ma Perm , Russia Over 260 species of insect species are described from this site as well as diverse taxa of plants, making it one of the most important Permian konservat-lagerstätten.

[ 104 ] Tshekardocoleidae beetle larva Toploje Member 273-264 Ma Prince Charles Mountains , Antarctica This site preserves a high-latitude fauna in exceptional position before the large extinctions that happened later in the Permian.

[ 105 ] Onder Karoo 266.9–264.28 Ma Karoo Basin, South Africa A high latitude, cool-temperate lacustrine ecosystem preserving detailed plant and insect fossils.

[ 106 ] Sakamena Group [ 107 ] 260–247 Ma Madagascar Lower Sakamena Formation (Permian) and Middle Sakamena Formation (Triassic) contain fossils of animals lived around wetland environment, such as semi-aquatic and gliding neodiapsids .

Claudiosaurus , aquatic neodiapsid reptile Kupferschiefer 259–255 Ma Central Europe This site deposited in an open marine and shallow marine environment provides fossils of reptiles as well as many fish.

Weigeltisaurus , gliding weigeltisaurid reptile Huopu Lagerstätte ~255 Ma Guizhou, China A plant fossil site documenting floral dynamics between the end-Guadalupian and end-Permian extinction events .

[ 108 ] Triassic [ edit ] Site(s) Age Location Significance Notable fossils/organisms Guiyang biota [ 109 ] 250.8 Ma Guizhou Province , China The oldest known Mesozoic lagerstätte ( Dienerian ). It preserves taxa belonging to 12 classes and 19 orders , including several species of fish.

Teffichthys elegans , a perleidiform ray-finned fish Paris biota [ 110 ] ~249 Ma Idaho , Nevada , USA This earliest Spathian aged assemblage preserves fossils belonging to 7 phyla and 20 orders , combining Paleozoic groups (e.g. leptomitid protomonaxonid sponges otherwise known from the early Paleozoic) with members of the Modern evolutionary fauna (e.g. gladius-bearing coleoids ).

Ankitokazocaris triassica is a thylacocephalan from the Paris biota Jialingjiang Formation [ 111 ] 249.2–247.2 Ma Hubei Province , China This site preserved aquatic reptiles soon after Permian extinction.

Hupehsuchians are exclusively known from here, and already got unique ecology like filter feeding .

Eretmorhipis , a hupehsuchian that potentially had platypus -like ecology Nanlinghu Formation [ 111 ] 248 Ma Anhui Province , China This site provides important fossils to show early evolution of ichthyosauriforms .

Cartorhynchus , a primitive ichthyosauriform Petropavlovka Formation 248 Ma Orenburg Oblast , Russia A site known for preserving oligochaetes , whose fossil record is extremely sparse.

[ 112 ] Zarzaïtine Formation Olenekian - Anisian In Amenas , Algeria A site with a high number of exceptionally well-preserved temnospondyl specimens, indicating of a seasonal climate with sudden droughts, with a freshwater ecosystem that could rapidly turn into a sebkha .

[ 113 ] Luoping Biota ( Guanling Formation ) [ 114 ] ~247-245 Ma Yunnan , China Various marine animals are preserved in this site, showing how marine ecosystem recovered after Permian extinction.

[ 115 ] Barracudasauroides , an ichthyosaur preserved in articulation from the Guanling Formation Hawkesbury Sandstone [ 116 ] Anisian Sydney , Australia This sandstone produced many of freshwater fish fossils, as well as arthropods.

Austrolimulus , a xiphosuran .

Grès à Voltzia 245 Ma France A fossil site remarkable for its detailed myriapod specimens.

[ 117 ] It also contains the earliest known aphid fossils.

[ 118 ] Fossil Hill Member ? ( Anisian ) Nevada, US One of many Anisian marine lagerstatte, the Fossil Hill Member represents an open-ocean environment with a well-preserved fauna largely dominated almost entirely by ichthyosaurs .

[ 115 ] The large ichthyosaur Thalattoarchon Vossenveld Formation ? ( Anisian ) Winterswijk , Netherlands An exposure of this Muschelkalk formation in the Winterswijk quarry has a diverse assemblage of well-preserved marine reptiles, amphibians, fishes, and plants. It is the only marginal marine assemblage recorded from the earlier Triassic.

[ 115 ] Strelovec Formation ? ( Anisian ) Slovenia A formation with well-preserved Triassic horseshoe crabs .

[ 119 ] Saharonim Formation Late Anisian/Lower Ladinian Southern District , Israel One brachiopod -dominated horizon of this formation documents the rapid burial of a community of exclusively juvenile Coenothyris brachiopods and ten different bivalve genera.

[ 120 ] Besano Formation [ 111 ] 242 Ma Alps , Italy and Switzerland This formation is designated as a World Heritage Site , as it is famous for its preservation of Middle Triassic marine life including fish and aquatic reptiles.

[ 115 ] [ 121 ] Cymbospondylus , one of the many marine reptile specimens preserved in articulation from the Besano Formation Pelsa-Vazzoler Lagerstätte Late Ladinian Northeastern Italy A site preserving a megadiverse mollusc fauna during the recovery from the Permian-Triassic extinction event.

[ 122 ] Xingyi biota ( Zhuganpo Formation ) [ 111 ] ? (Upper Ladinian - Lower Carnian ) Guizhou and Yunnan , China Previously considered as part of Falang Formation, this site yields many articulated skeletons of marine reptiles, as well as fish and invertebrates.

Keichousaurus , common sauropterygian from this site Guanling biota ( Xiaowa Formation ) [ 111 ] ? ( Carnian ) Guizhou, China Like Xingi Biota, this site also yields well-preserved marine fauna, especially many species of thalattosaurs are known.

Odontochelys , an early pantestudine (relative of turtles ) Polzberg 233 Ma Austria A site from the Reingrabener Schiefer known for exceptional preservation of bromalites [ 123 ] and of cartilage, [ 124 ] deposited during the Carnian Pluvial Event .

[ 125 ] Fossil invertebrates from Polzberg Madygen Formation 230 Ma Kyrgyzstan The Madygen Formation is renowned for the preservation of more than 20,000 fossil insects, making it one of the richest Triassic lagerstätten in the world. Other vertebrate fossils as fish, amphibians , reptiles and synapsids have been recovered from the formation too, as well as minor fossil flora.

A cast of the holotype of Sharovipteryx , a well-preserved gliding reptile Cow Branch Formation 230 Ma Virginia , US This site preserves a wide variety of organisms (including Fish, reptiles, arachnids , and insects ).

Mecistotrachelos , a gliding reptile distantly related to archosauromorphs , like crocodylians and dinosaurs Alakir Çay ? ( Norian ) southwest Turkey A konservat-lagerstätte with exceptionally well-preserved Triassic corals, retaining much of their original aragonite skeletons.

[ 126 ] Jurassic [ edit ] Site(s) Age Location Significance Notable fossils/organisms Yuzhou Biota ( Ziliujing Formation ) ~199 Ma Chongqing , China A fossil biota representing an extremely well-preserved lake ecosystem with freshwater mollusks, ray-finned fishes, lungfishes, sharks, and even pliosauroids , documenting one of the earliest well-preserved terrestrial ecosystems from Asia following the Triassic-Jurassic extinction event .

[ 127 ] Bishanopliosaurus , a freshwater pliosaur Osteno ( Moltrasio Formation ) [ 128 ] ~196-188 Ma Italy Several kinds of marine biota such as fish, crustaceans, cephalopods, polychaetes, and nematodes have been recovered. This site is the only fossil deposit in Italy in which soft tissues are preserved other than Monte Bolca .

Ecological reconstruction in the site, showing thylacocephalan Ostenocaris and cephalopod Ostenoteuthis Charmouth Mudstone Formation ~196-188 Ma Lyme Regis and Charmouth (UK) Known for its amniote remains, specially complete specimens of the armoured dinosaur Scelidosaurus , but also plesiosaurs & ichthyosaurs .

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] [ 131 ] Large quantities of exceptional fish specimens and a diverse entomofauna are also known.

[ 132 ] Excepcionally preserved Scelidosaurus Rotzo Formation ~192-184 Ma Italy Diverse fossils from a Carbonate archipelago, specially within plicatostylid reefs. It is mostly known for the exceptional preservation of organisms like Testate amoebae , and specially due to its amber -bearing layers and associated macroflora.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] Calcaires du Bou Dahar 196-183 Ma Morocco It records the evolution of a carbonate platform.

[ 135 ] It is known mostly for its rich coral bioherms and associated invertebrates.

[ 136 ] [ 137 ] Sedan 185 Ma Ardennes France Notorious for extraordinarily good preservation of highly abundant echinoderm specimens.

[ 138 ] Korsaröd ( Djupadal Formation ) 183 Ma Skane , Sweden Know for it´s excepcionally preserved plant remains, specially Osmundastrum pulchellum , preserving intact calcified tissue with DNA and cells.

[ 139 ] It has also preserved its biotic interactions and even ongoing mitosis.

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] Ya Ha Tinda 183 Ma Alberta , Canada A fossil site notable for containing abundant and extremely well-preserved vampire squid, being the largest concentration of vampire squid fossils outside the Tethys Ocean, [ 142 ] and for being deposited during the Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event (TOAE).

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] [ 145 ] Strawberry Bank 183 Ma Somerset , England A site from the TOAE documenting marine life during the recovery from the Triassic-Jurassic extinction event as well as the turmoil of the TOAE.

[ 146 ] The oldest pseudoplanktonic barnacles in the fossil record, [ 147 ] near-complete ichthyosaur skeletons, [ 148 ] and evidence of ichthyosaur niche partitioning are preserved at this site.

[ 149 ] Grimmen Formation 183 Ma Grimmen , Germany A coastal marine sequence, know specially for its fish fauna.

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] The formation is also known for its rich entomofauna, including collections of up to 3000 specimens.

[ 152 ] Reinberg Member biota Holzmaden / Posidonia Shale 183 Ma Württemberg , Germany The Sachrang member is among the most important formations of the Toarcian boundary, due to the concentrations of exceptionally well-preserved complete skeletons of fossil marine fish and reptiles. It was also deposited during the TOAE.

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] A specimen of the ichthyosaur Stenopterygius crassicostatus with preserved young Cabeço da Ladeira ( Chão das Pias Formation ) Late Bajocian Portugal A site known for exquisite preservation of microbial mats in a tidal flat.

[ 155 ] Example of the exceptional preservation of echinoderms at the Cabeço da Ladeira site Monte Fallano ? ( Bajocian - Bathonian ) Campania , Italy This Plattenkalk preserves fossils of terrestrial plants, crustaceans and fish.

[ 156 ] Christian Malford Callovian Wiltshire, England A site in the Oxford Clay Formation which preserves exceptionally detailed coleoid fossils.

[ 157 ] Mesa Chelonia [ 158 ] 164.6 Ma Shanshan County , China This site is notable because it contains a large turtle bonebed , containing specimens of the genus Annemys . This bonebed contains up to an estimated 36 turtles per square meter.

La Voulte-sur-Rhône 160 Mya Ardèche , France La Voulte-sur-Rhône, in the Ardèche region of southwestern France , offers paleontologists an outstanding view of an undisturbed paleoecosystem that was preserved in fine detail. Notable finds include retinal structures in the eyes of thylacocephalan arthropods, and fossilized relatives of the modern day vampire squid , like Vampyronassa rhodanica .

A rare well-preserved cephalopod, Rhomboteuthis Shar Teeg Beds 160-145 Mya Govi-Altay , Mongolia Many insect remains and some vertebrates like relatives of crocodilians are known from this site.

[ 159 ] Karabastau Formation 155.7 Ma Kazakhstan This site is an important locality for insect fossils that has been studied since the early 20th century, alongside the rarer remains of vertebrates, including pterosaurs , salamanders , lizards and crocodiles .

Sordes , small pterosaur with visible soft-tissues preserved Tiaojishan Formation 165-153 Ma Liaoning Province , China It is known for its exceptionally preserved fossils, including those of plants, insects and vertebrates. It is made up mainly of pyroclastic rock interspersed with basic volcanic and sedimentary rocks .

Anchiornis , small feathered anchiornithid dinosaur La Casita Formation Kimmeridgian Coahuila, Mexico A marine konzentrat-lagerstätte deposited in a hemipelagic mud bottom during dysoxic conditions.

[ 160 ] Talbragar fossil site [ 161 ] 151 Ma New South Wales , Australia This bed is part of Purlawaugh Formation , and provided fauna like fish and insects that lived around the lake.

Cavenderichthys , a teleost known from this site Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry 150 Ma Utah, US Jurassic National Monument , at the site of the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry, well known for containing the densest concentration of Jurassic dinosaur fossils ever found, is a paleontological site located near Cleveland, Utah , in the San Rafael Swell , a part of the geological layers known as the Morrison Formation . Up to 15,000 have been excavated from this site alone.

Allosaurus , the largest predator of the quarry Canjuers Lagerstätte 150 Ma France This site shows a high amount of biodiversity, including reptiles, invertebrates, fish, and other organisms.

Pleurosaurus , an aquatic rhynchocephalian Agardhfjellet Formation 150-140 Ma Spitsbergen, Norway The formation contains the Slottsmøya Member, a highly fossiliferous unit where many ichthyosaur and plesiosaur fossils have been found, as well as abundant and well preserved fossils of invertebrates.

Pliosaurus funkei , a large thalassophonean pliosaurid which was informally known as "Predator X" Solnhofen Limestone (including the Altmühltal , Painten , Torleite , and Mörnsheim Formations) 149-148 Ma Bavaria, Germany This site is unique as it preserves a rare assemblage of fossilized organisms, including highly detailed imprints of soft bodied organisms such as sea jellies . The most familiar fossils of the Solnhofen Plattenkalk include the early feathered theropod dinosaur Archaeopteryx preserved in such detail that they are among the most famous and most beautiful fossils in the world.

The Berlin Specimen of Archaeopteryx lithographica Owadów–Brzezinki site ~148 Ma Łódź Voivodeship , Poland A marine deposit of the Kcynia Formation similar to the Solnhofen Formation, with large numbers of preserved insect remains, numerous marine invertebrates, and vertebrates including fishes, marine reptiles, and pterosaurs.

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] [ 164 ] Fossil of the horseshoe crab Crenatolimulus darwini Cretaceous [ edit ] Site(s) Age Location Significance Notable fossils/organisms Muzinho Shale latest Jurassic/earliest Cretaceous Parnaíba Basin , Brazil A black shale deposit containing articulated, three-dimensionally preserved fish skeletons.

[ 165 ] Angeac-Charente bonebed ~141 Ma Charente , France A lagerstätte preserving both vertebrate and invertebrate fossils from the poorly represented Berriasian stage known for its taphonomic and sedimentological ‘frozen scenes’.

[ 166 ] El Montsec ( La Pedrera de Rúbies Formation ) ~140-125 Ma Catalonia , Spain Known from exceptional preservation of biota such as plants, fish, insects, crustaceans and even some tetrapods.

[ 167 ] Montsecosuchus , atoposaurid crocodylomorph Lebanese amber ~130-125 Ma (Barremian) Lebanon Preserves a high diversity of insects from the Early Cretaceous , and is among the oldest known fossilized amber to contain a significant number of preserved organisms.

[ 168 ] Includes many of the oldest known members of modern insect groups, and many of the youngest known members for extinct insect groups.

[ 169 ] Preserved larval lacewings ( Tragichrysa ovoruptora ) Grès du Liban Alloformation ~125 Ma (early Barremian) Lebanon A deposit of dysodiles (sedimentary rocks with high organic matter content) representing a well-preserved freshwater ecosystem, including plants, pollen grains, invertebrates (including insects), turtles, and a diverse fish fauna.

[ 170 ] [ 171 ] Las Hoyas about 125 Ma (Barremian) Cuenca , Spain The site is mostly known for its exquisitely preserved dinosaurs, especially enantiornithines . The lithology of the formation mostly consists of lacustarine limestone deposited in a freshwater wetland environment.

Concornis , an early enantiornithean Yixian Formation about 125–121 Ma (Barremian- Aptian ) Liaoning, China The Yixian Formation is well known for its great diversity of well-preserved specimens and its feathered dinosaurs, such as the large tyrannosauroid Yutyrannus , the therizinosaur Beipiaosaurus , and various small birds, along with a selection of other dinosaurs, such as the iguanodontian Bolong , the sauropod Dongbeititan and the ceratopsian Psittacosaurus . Other biota included the troodontid Mei , the dromaeosaurid Tianyuraptor , and the compsognathid Sinosauropteryx .

Sinosauropteryx , the first non-avain dinosaur with evidence of feathers to have been recognized Jiufotang Formation about 122-119 Ma (Aptian) Liaoning, China This formation overlies the slightly older Yixian Formation and preserved very similar species, including a wide variety of dinosaurs such as the ceratopsian Psittacosaurus and the early bird Confuciusornis , both of which are also found in the Yixian Formation.  Also notable are the very abundant specimens of the dromaeosaurid Microraptor , which is known from up to 300 specimens and is among the most common animals found here.

Microraptor had four wings and is believed to have evolved powered flight independently of true birds .

Khasurty Fossil Site ? ( Aptian ) Buryatia , Russia One of the largest fossil insect sites in northern Asia, with over 6000 fossilized insect specimens preserved in mudstones, representing over 16 orders and 130 families. Taxa have both Jurassic & Cretaceous affinities. Fossils of other invertebrates such as arachnids & crustaceans are also known, in addition to small plants and fragmentary vertebrate remains such as fish scales and bird feathers.

[ 172 ] Shengjinkou Formation about 120 Ma Xinjiang , China Part of the finds from this site consisted of dense concentrations of pterosaur bones, associated with soft tissues and eggs. The site represented a nesting colony that storm floods had covered with mud. Dozens of individuals could be secured from a total that in 2014 was estimated to run into the many hundreds.

Hamititan , a large titanosaurian sauropod Xiagou Formation about 120–115? Ma Gansu , China This site is known outside the specialized world of Chinese geology as the site of a lagerstätte in which the fossils were preserved of Gansus yumenensis , the earliest true modern bird.

Gansus is among the earliest known modern birds Paja Formation 130-113 Ma Colombia This site is famous for its vertebrate fossils and is the richest Mesozoic fossiliferous formation of Colombia. Several marine reptile fossils of plesiosaurs, pliosaurs , ichthyosauras and turtles have been described from the formation and it hosts the only dinosaur fossils described in the country to date; the titanosauriform sauropod Padillasaurus .

Desmatochelys , a protostegid and one of the oldest known turtle fossils Koonwarra Fossil Bed [ 173 ] around 118-115 Ma Victoria , Australia This site is composed of mudstone sediment thought to have been laid down in a freshwater lake. Arthropods, fish and plant fossils are known from this site.

Tarwinia , a large sized stem- flea Crato Formation 113 Ma northeast Brazil The Crato Formation earns the designation of lagerstätte due to an exceedingly well preserved and diverse fossil faunal assemblage. Some 25 species of fossil fishes are often found with stomach contents preserved, enabling paleontologists to study predator-prey relationships in this ecosystem. There are also fine examples of pterosaurs , reptiles and amphibians, invertebrates (particularly insects), and plants. Also known from this site is Ubirajara , the first non-avian dinosaur from the southern hemisphere with evidence of feathers. Additionally, the formation abounds with evidence of plant-insect interaction.

[ 174 ] Tupandactylus , a fossil pterosaur that was preserved with feathers and other soft tissues intact Amargosa Bed ( Marizal Formation ) ? (Aptian-Albian) northeast Brazil Fluvial site which preserved fish, crustacean and plant fossils.

[ 175 ] Pietraroja Plattenkalk 113-110 Ma Campania , Italy A konservat-lagerstätte famous for its diverse and well-preserved fish and plant fossils. Also known from this formation is Scipionyx , one of Europe's most well-preserved dinosaurs.

[ 176 ] [ 177 ] Scipionyx , a small dinosaur with preserved internal organs.

Jinju Formation 112.4–106.5 Ma South Korea The Jinju Formation is notable for the post-Jehol Group insect assemblage, [ 178 ] as well as other fauna such as isopods and fish.

[ 179 ] [ 180 ] The site is also notable for its abundance and diversity of tetrapod trackways.

[ 181 ] Coptoclavidae beetle larva preserved at this locality Tlayúa Formation 110 Ma Puebla , Mexico A marine lagerstätte preserving Albian actinopterygians and lepidosaurs.

[ 182 ] Cipactlichthys , example of fish from this site Romualdo Formation 108–92 Ma northeast Brazil The Romualdo Formation is a part of the Santana Group and has provided a rich assemblage of fossils; flora, fish, arthropods insects, turtles, snakes, dinosaurs, such as Irritator , and pterosaurs, including the genus Thalassodromeus . The stratigraphic units of the group contained several feathers of birds, among those the first record of Mesozoic birds in Brazil.

Tapejara , a common pterosaur in Brazil during the Early Cretaceous Muhi Quarry ( El Doctor Formation ) ? ( Albian to Cenomanian , probably Late Albian) [ 183 ] Hidalgo , Mexico While this site produced limestones for construction, rocks in that locality contain a diverse Cretaceous marine biota such as fish, ammonites and crustaceans.

Motlayoichthys , a member of Pachyrhizodontidae Puy-Puy Lagerstätte 100.5 Ma France A paralic site preserving a variety of ichnofossils, [ 184 ] along with some vertebrate remains.

[ 185 ] The site preserves evidence of plant-insect interaction.

[ 186 ] Burmese amber 101-99 Ma (latest Albian/earliest Cenomanian ) Myanmar More than 1,000 species of taxa have been described from ambers from Hukawng Valley . While it is important for understanding the evolution of biota, mainly insects, during the Cretaceous period, it is also extremely controversial by facing ethical issues due to its association with conflicts and labor conditions.

Oculudentavis , small-sized lizard El Chango Lagerstätte Earliest Cenomanian Chiapas A site from the beginning of the Angiosperm Terrestrial Revolution containing early evidence of insect predation on angiosperms.

[ 187 ] English Chalk 100-90 Ma (Cenomanian to Turonian ) England Two subsections of England's famous chalk formation, the Grey Chalk Subgroup and the lower sections of the White Chalk Subgroup, yield three-dimensionally preserved fossils of marine fishes. This exquisite level of preservation is unlike fish fossils from other deposits from around the same time, which are only preserved as two-dimensional compression fossils.

[ 188 ] Fossil of the fish Aulolepis typus Haqel/Hjoula/al-Nammoura 95-94 Ma Lebanon Famous Lebanese konservat-lagerstätten of the Late Cretaceous (middle to late Cenomanian ) age, which contain a well-preserved variety of different fossils. Small animals like shrimp, octopus, stingrays, and bony fishes are common finds at these sites. Some of the rarest fossils from this locality include those of octopuses .

[ 189 ] Ichthyoceros , a pycnodont actinopterygian Ein Yabrud ( Amminadav Formation or Bet-Meir Formation ) Cenomanian West Bank , Palestine The marine fossil site with well-preserved marine vertebrate fossils, especially fossils of early legged snakes like Haasiophis and Pachyrhachis has quality of preservation rivals that of other famous Lagerstatten.

[ 190 ] Scalacurvichthys , a pycnodont actinopterygian Komen Limestone 95-94 Ma Komen , Slovenia A Late Cenomanian locality in the Karst of Slovenia with a high diversity of articulated fossil fish, in addition to small reptiles and invertebrates.

[ 191 ] The marine lizard Carsosaurus Hesseltal Formation 94–93 Ma Saxony & North Rhine-Westphalia , Germany Deposited during the anoxic conditions of the Cenomanian-Turonian boundary event , this formation has a high number of well-preserved, articulated fish skeletons, in addition to exceptionally preserved ammonites with soft parts.

[ 192 ] [ 193 ] The billfish -like Rhamphoichthys Vallecillo ( Agua Nueva Formation ) 94–92 Ma Nuevo León , Mexico The site is noted for its qualities as a konservat-lagerstätte , with notable finds including the plesiosaur Mauriciosaurus and the possible shark Aquilolamna .

Mauriciosaurus , a short-necked plesiosaur Conulus Bed Turonian Poland A crinoid konzentrat-lagerstätte.

[ 194 ] Akrabou Formation (Gara Sbaa/Agoult & Goulmima) ? (Turonian) Asfla, Morocco Marine site known for exceptionally preserved, three-dimensional fish fossils.

[ 195 ] [ 196 ] Grandemarinus , an early gar Orapa diamond mine Turonian Botswana An insect lagerstätte known for being one of the few entomofaunas from southern Africa, containing a variety of insects, [ 197 ] particularly beetles.

[ 198 ] [ 199 ] New Jersey amber 91-89 Ma New Jersey , US Turonian -aged amber from the Raritan & Magothy Formations of New Jersey, with a high diversity of well-preserved insects, plants and fungi.

[ 200 ] Sphecomyrma , an early ant Lower Idzików beds 87-86 Ma ( Coniacian ) Lower Silesian Voivodeship , Poland An exposure of these beds near Stary Waliszów contains a konzentrat-lagerstätte of numerous Cretaceous marine invertebrates in concretions, including decapods, molluscs and echinoderms, as well as well-preserved plant fossils that indicate a nearshore environment. Very well-preserved phosphatized decapod remains are known.

[ 201 ] Smoky Hill Chalk 87–82 Ma Kansas and Nebraska , US A Cretaceous konservat-lagerstätte known primarily for its exceptionally well-preserved marine reptiles . Also known from this site are fossils of large bony fish such as Xiphactinus , mosasaurs , flying reptiles or pterosaurs (namely Pteranodon ), flightless marine birds such as Hesperornis , and turtles .

Xiphactinus is famous for being found with another fish ( Gillicus ) preserved in its stomach.

Ingersoll Shale 85 Ma Alabama , US A Late Cretaceous ( Santonian ) informal geological unit in eastern Alabama. Fourteen theropod feathers assigned to birds and possibly dromaeosaurids have been recovered from the unit.

Sahel Alma ~84 Ma Lebanon A Late Cretaceous (Santonian) konservat-lagerstätte with similar excellent preservation of marine organisms as the nearby, older Sannine Lagerstätte, but in a deep-water environment. Includes a high number of well-preserved shark body fossils, in addition to cephalopods and deepwater arthropods.

[ 189 ] Propristiophorus , an early sawshark Calcare di Aurisina ~80-70.6 Ma Italy & Slovenia A late cretaceous shallow marine series of carbonate platforms dominated by rudists , with fossils of invertebrates and vertebrates, specially fishes.

[ 202 ] Its best known outcrop is the Villaggio del Pescatore site, that yielded the holotype of Tethyshadros , as well other exceptionally preserved taxa like Acynodon adriaticus .

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] "Antonio" specimen of Tethyshadros Auca Mahuevo 80 Ma Patagonia , Argentina A Cretaceous lagerstätte in the eroded badlands of the Patagonian province of Neuquén, Argentina . The sedimentary layers of the Anacleto Formation at Auca Mahuevo were deposited between 83.5 and 79.5 million years before the present and offers a view of a fossilized titanosaurid nesting site.

An egg from a titanosaurian sauropod Ellisdale Fossil Site 79-76 Ma New Jersey, US A middle Campanian konzentrat-lagerstätte from the Marshalltown Formation with one of the most diverse Mesozoic vertebrate faunas of eastern North America, likely originating from a flood event. A high number of disarticulated bones of dinosaurs, fish, reptiles, amphibians, and small mammals is known, most of which are microfossils .

[ 205 ] Coon Creek Formation 76.8-76.0 Ma [ 206 ] Tennessee and Mississippi , US This late Campanian formation has some of the world's best-preserved remains of Cretaceous marine invertebrates (primarily mollusks and decapod crustaceans), with many retaining their original aragonitic shells and exoskeletons.

[ 206 ] [ 207 ] The fossil crab Avitelmessus grapsoides , which occurs in great numbers at Coon Creek Baumberge Formation ~75-72 Ma North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany A Late Campanian formation in the Baumberge of Germany with a high number of articulated fossil fish remains, in addition to shark body fossils.

[ 192 ] [ 208 ] The paracanthopterygian fish Sphenocephalus Nardò ( Calcari di Melissano ) [ 209 ] ~72-70 Ma (upper Campanian-lower Maastrichtian ) Apulia , Italy This site is especially famous for its limestones containing abundant fossil fish remains.

Nardovelifer , the earliest lampriform Harrana ( Muwaqqar Chalk Marl Formation ) 66.5-66.1 Ma (Late Maastrichtian ) [ 210 ] Jordan Phosphatic deposits formed in this site are known to preserve vertebrate fossils with soft tissue, such as mosasaurs , plesiosaurs, sharks, bony fish, turtles and crocodylians.

[ 211 ] Postredectes , an example of fish fossil from this site Tanis [ 212 ] 66.0 Ma North Dakota , US Tanis is part of the heavily studied Hell Creek Formation , a group of rocks spanning four states in North America renowned for many significant fossil discoveries from the Upper Cretaceous and lower Paleocene . Tanis is a significant site because it appears to record the events from the first minutes until a few hours after the impact of the giant Chicxulub asteroid in extreme detail. This impact, which struck the Gulf of Mexico 66.043 million years ago, wiped out all non-avian dinosaurs and many other species (the so-called "K-Pg" or "K-T" extinction ).

Fossil sturgeon from the Tanis site Paleogene [ edit ] Site(s) Age Location Significance Notable fossils/organisms Baunekule Facies 64-63 Ma  ( Danian ) eastern Denmark These facies of the Faxe Formation document an extremely well-preserved cold-water coral mound ecosystem dominated by Dendrophyllia corals, and also includes gastropods, tubeworms, bivalves, bryozoans and gastropods.

[ 213 ] Tenejapa-Lacandón Formation ~63 Ma Chiapas , Mexico A formation with a high number of well-preserved fish fossils indicative of mass mortality events.

[ 214 ] One of the most important formations for documenting the recovery of ocean ecosystems in the wake of the K-Pg extinction, due to being deposited just a few million years after and being located only 500 kilometres (310 mi) away from the Chixculub impact site.

[ 215 ] Eekaulostomus , Kelmejtubus , and Paleoserranus , three unique fish Menat Formation 60 Ma Auvergne , France A Palaeocene maar lake containing three-dimensional plant remains.

[ 216 ] It is particularly notable for preserving one of the oldest known bees.

[ 217 ] The fossil bee Palaeohabropoda .

Danata Formation 56-53 Ma western Turkmenistan Outcropping in the Kopet Dag range, this formation preserves numerous fossil fish from a northeastern arm of the Tethys Ocean during the Paleocene-Eocene thermal maximum . 38 taxa from 13 orders are known, the vast majority of which are acanthomorphs .

[ 218 ] [ 219 ] Eospinus , a bizarre tetraodontiform fish.

Fur Formation 55–53 Ma Fur & Mors , Denmark Preserves abundant fossil fish, insects, reptiles, birds and plants. The Fur Formation was deposited about 55 Ma, just after the Palaeocene - Eocene boundary, and its tropical or sub-tropical flora indicate that the climate after the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum was moderately warm (approximately 4-8 degrees warmer than today).

Tasbacka danica , immature sea turtle London Clay 54–48 Ma England, UK Collected for close to 300 years, Plant fossils, especially seeds and fruits, are found in abundance.

Some 350 named species of plant have been found, making the London Clay flora one of the world's most diverse for fossil seeds and fruits. The flora includes tropical taxa found in modern Asia, reflecting the much warmer climate of the early Eocene .

Brychaetus muelleri , fish skull Eocene Okanagan Highlands 52 - 48 Ma British Columbia , Canada & Washington , USA Includes McAbee Fossil Beds , Princeton chert & Klondike Mountain Formation ; Recognized as temperate/subtropical uplands right after the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum and spanning the Early Eocene Climatic Optimum, preserves highly detailed uplands lacustrine fauna and flora.

A Florissantia quilchenensis flower, an extinct malvaceous genus from western North America Monte Solane 51-49 MA Verona , Italy Slightly older than the nearby, more well-known Monte Bolca site, the Monte Solane site also preserves numerous marine fish and plants, but documents an entirely different ecosystem that appears to be of a bathypelagic habitat, forming one of the few known lagerstätte to preserve a deep-sea ecosystem.

[ 220 ] Green River Formation 50 Ma Colorado/Utah/Wyoming, US An Eocene aged site that is noted for the fish fauna preserved. Other fossils include the crocodilians , birds , and mammals .

Diplomystus and Knightia Monte Bolca 50-49 Ma Verona , Italy A fossil site with specimens of fish and other organisms that are so highly preserved that their organs are often completely intact in fossil form, and even the skin color can sometimes be determined. It is assumed that mud at the site was low in oxygen, preventing both decay and the mixing action of scavengers from harming the fossils.

[ 218 ] A complete Archaeophis proavus Messel Formation 47 Ma Hessen, Germany This site has significant geological and scientific importance. Over 1000 species of plants and animals have been found at the site. After almost becoming a landfill, strong local resistance eventually stopped these plans and the Messel Pit was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site on 9 December 1995. Significant scientific discoveries about the early evolution of mammals and birds are still being made at the Messel Pit, and the site has increasingly become a tourist site as well.

Masillamys sp., an ischyromyid rodent Baltic amber 47-35 Ma ( Lutetian to Priabonian ) Pomeranian Voivodeship , Poland & Kaliningrad Oblast , Russia The largest amber deposit on Earth, this amber is part of the Prussian Formation , and preserves a high diversity of exceptionally well-preserved fossil invertebrates, plants, and small vertebrates that inhabited eastern Europe during the warmer, subtropical conditions of the middle Eocene. It is the largest world's single largest repository of fossil insects.

[ 221 ] [ 222 ] [ 223 ] [ 224 ] Yantarogekko , a gecko Kishenehn Formation 46.2 Ma Montana, US A Middle Eocene site preserving exquisitely detailed insect specimens in oil shale.

[ 225 ] Mahenge Formation 46 Ma Tanzania A terrestrial Middle Eocene lagerstätte preserving fish, plant and arthropod fossils.

[ 226 ] [ 227 ] The frog Singidella Quercy Phosphorites Formation [ 228 ] 45-25 Ma Occitania , France This site qualifies as a lagerstätte because beside a large variety of mammals, birds, turtles, crocodiles, flora and insects, it also preserves the soft tissues of amphibians and squamates , in addition to their articulated skeleton in what has been called natural mummies .

Xenomorphia resurrecta parasitic wasps preserved in fly pupae Na Duong Priabonian Northern Vietnam A Late Eocene site notable for its highly detailed coprolite preservation.

[ 229 ] Bitterfeld amber 38-34 Ma Saxony , Germany One of three major Paleogene deposits of European amber, this deposit of the Cottbus Formation shares a similar biota to the Baltic Amber, indicating a concurrent formation, but appears to have a geologically distinct origin from Baltic amber.

[ 224 ] Pseudoscorpions from the Bitterfeld amber Rovno amber 38-34 Ma Rivne Oblast , Ukraine & Gomel , Belarus One of three major Paleogene deposits of European amber, this deposit of the Obukhov Formation preserves a high diversity of invertebrates, many of which are shared with the Baltic amber but others of which are unique. A drier habitat compared to the Baltic amber is suggested based on some of the insect taxa preserved.

[ 221 ] Eocenomyrma ukrainica , an ant Florissant Formation 34 Ma Colorado, US A late Eocene ( Priabonian ) aged site that is noted for the finely preserved plant and insect paleobiota. Fossils are preserved in diatom blooms of a lahar dammed lake system and the formation is noted for the petrified stumps of Sequoia affinis A Palaeovespa florissantia Babaheidar ( Pabdeh Formation ) late Eocene/early Oligocene Chaharmahal and Bakhtiari province , Iran A well-preserved marine fossil site in the Zagros Mountains with thousands of known fish fossils, as well as plants, crustaceans, insects, and birds.

[ 230 ] Iraniplectus , an unusual tetraodontiform Tremembé Formation 30-25 Ma São Paulo , Brazil A Late Oligocene-aged freshwater lake deposit, containing well-preserved fossil fishes.

[ 231 ] Fossil specimens of the characin Lignobrycon ligniticus Menilite Formation Early Oligocene Poland A deep-sea flysch deposit along the Carpathian Mountains , originally deposited in the Paratethys Sea with exceptionally preserved deepwater fish fossils and microbial mats.

[ 232 ] Fossil of the fish Oligoserranoides [ 233 ] Canyon Ferry Reservoir 32.0 ± 0.1 Ma Montana, US A diverse Early Oligocene plant and insect fossil site.

[ 234 ] Luberon ( Campagne-Calavon Formation ) ~30 Ma Cereste , France A group of early Oligocene localities deposited along a large freshwater lake, preserving the fossils of plants, insects, fish, and terrestrial vertebrates, often with articulated skeletons, skin outlines, feathers, and original pigmentation patterns.

[ 235 ] Dapalis macrurus , one of the most common fossils of the site Rauenberg/Frauenweiler Clay Pit 30 Ma Baden-Württemberg , Germany A marine fossil site with an Arctic-like invertebrate fauna and a Paratethyan vertebrate fauna displaying evidence of intermittent anoxia.

[ 236 ] Sangtang Lagerstätte ~28 – 23 Ma Guangxi , China A section of the Late Oligocene Yongning Formation with one of the very few known Cenozoic assemblages of mummified plant fossils, [ 237 ] including mummified fruits.

[ 238 ] [ 239 ] [ 240 ] Enspel Lagerstätte 24.79-24.56 Ma Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany A Chattian maar deposit famous for its insect fossils.

[ 241 ] Aix-en-Provence Formation ~24 Ma Provence , France A terminal Oligocene brackish palaeoenvironment.

[ 242 ] Neogene [ edit ] Site(s) Age Location Significance Notable fossils/organisms Dominican amber 30–10 Ma Dominican Republic Dominican amber differentiates itself from Baltic amber by being nearly always [ citation needed ] transparent, and it has a higher number of fossil inclusions. This has enabled the detailed reconstruction of the ecosystem of a long-vanished tropical forest .

[ 243 ] A larval Amblyomma tick preserved in amber.

Riversleigh 25–15 Ma Queensland , Australia This locality is recognised for the series of well preserved fossils deposited from the Late Oligocene to the Miocene . The fossiliferous limestone system is located near the Gregory River in the north-west of Queensland , an environment that was once a very wet rainforest that became more arid as the Gondwanan land masses separated and the Australian continent moved north.

Reconstruction of the diprotodont marsupial Nimbadon lavarackorum .

Foulden Maar 23 Ma Otago , New Zealand These layers of diatomite have preserved exceptional fossils of fish from the crater lake, and plants, spiders, and insects from the sub-tropical forest that developed around the crater, [ 244 ] along with in situ pollen.

[ 245 ] The teleost fish species Galaxias effusus .

Ebelsberg Formation 23-22 Ma Upper Austria , Austria This Aquitanian -aged konservat-lagerstätte records an exceptional fossil assemblage of an enormous number of plants, fish, marine mammals, and marine invertebrates from a section of the central Paratethys Sea .

[ 246 ] Austromola , a sunfish Chiapas amber 23-15 Ma Chiapas , Mexico [ 247 ] As with other ambers, a wide variety of taxa have been found as inclusions including insects and other arthropods, as well as plant fragments and epiphyllous fungi.

The holotype specimen of the millipede Anbarrhacus adamantis .

Clarkia fossil beds 20-17 Ma Idaho , US The Clarkia fossil beds site is best known for its fossil leaves. Their preservation is exquisite; fresh leaves are unfossilized, and sometimes retain their fall colors before rapidly oxidizing in air. It has been reported that scientists have managed to isolate small amounts of ancient DNA from fossil leaves from this site. However, other scientists are skeptical of the validity of this reported occurrence of Miocene DNA.

A leaf fossil from the beds after being exposed to oxygen.

Barstow Formation 19–13.4 Ma California , US The sediments are fluvial and lacustrine in origin except for nine layers of rhyolitic tuff . It is well known for its abundant vertebrate fossils including bones, teeth and footprints . The formation is also renowned for the fossiliferous concretions in its upper member, which contain three-dimensionally preserved arthropods.

A fossilized footprint made by a camel .

Shanwang Formation 18-17 Ma Shandong Province, China Fossils have been found at this site in dozens of categories, representing over 600 separate species. Animal fossils include insects, fish, spiders, amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals. Insect fossils have clear, intact veins. Some have retained beautiful colours.

Fossil of Lusorex Morozaki Group [ 248 ] 18-17 Ma Aichi Prefecture , Japan Known from well-preserved deep sea fauna including fish, starfish and arthropods like crabs , shrimps and giant amphiopods .

Sandelzhausen 16 Ma Bavaria , Germany A Middle Miocene vertebrate locality.

[ 249 ] McGraths Flat ~16-11 Ma NSW , Australia Deposited in unusual conditions that record microscopic details of soft tissues and delicate structures. Fossil evidence of animals with soft bodies, unlike the bones of mammals and reptiles, is rare in Australia, and discoveries at McGraths' Flat have revealed unknown species of invertebrates such as insects and spiders.

[ 250 ] The large spider Megamonodontium Dolnja Stara ~15 Ma Slovenia A barnacle fossil site preserving barnacles shortly after settlement attached to mangrove leaves.

[ 251 ] Pisco Formation 15-2 Ma Arequipa & Ica , Peru Several specialists consider the Pisco Formation one of the most important lagerstätten , based on the large amount of exceptionally preserved marine fossils, including sharks (most notably megalodon ), penguins , whales , dolphins , birds, marine crocodiles and aquatic giant sloths .

Reconstruction of the macroraptorial stem- physeteroid whale Acrophyseter .

Hindon Maar 14.6 Ma New Zealand A maar preserving a Southern Hemisphere lake-forest ecosystem, including body fossils of plants, insects, fish, and birds, [ 252 ] along with in situ pollen [ 245 ] and coprolites of both fish and birds.

[ 252 ] Ngorora Formation 13.3-9 Ma Tanzania The alkaline palaeolake deposits of the Ngorora Formation contains articulated fish fossils that died en masse from asphyxiation during episodic ash falls or from rapid acidification.

[ 253 ] Megistotherium was a large sized hyaenodont mammal Öhningen Maar 13 Ma Baden-Württemberg , Germany This unit of the Upper Freshwater-Molasse contains a former crater lake that has produced long-renowned fossils for centuries, including several foundational to the science of paleontology. About 1,500 species have been described from these deposits.

[ 254 ] The giant salamander Andrias scheuchzeri Pi Gros 13 Ma Catalonia , Spain An ichnofossil lagerstätte containing annelid, mollusc, and sponge trace fossils. The fossil site no longer exists due to having been quarried for the construction of an industrial park.

[ 255 ] Bullock Creek 12 Ma Northern Territory , Australia Among the fossils at the Bullock Creek site have been found complete marsupial crania with delicate structures intact. New significant taxa identified from the Bullock Creek mid Miocene include a new genus of crocodile, Baru ( Baru darrowi ), a primitive true kangaroo, Nambaroo , with high-crowned lophodont teeth; and a new species of giant horned tortoise, Meiolania . New marsupial lion , thylacine , and dasyurid material has also been recovered.

Tunjice ? (Middle Miocene) Slovenia This site is known worldwide for the earliest fossil records of seahorses .

[ 256 ] Two fossil seahorse species, Hippocampus sarmaticus and H. slovenicus from this site.

Ashfall Fossil Beds 11.83 Ma Nebraska , US The Ashfall Fossil Beds of Antelope County in northeastern Nebraska are rare fossil sites of the type called lagerstätten that, due to extraordinary local conditions, capture an ecological "snapshot" in time of a range of well-preserved fossilized organisms. Ash from a Yellowstone hotspot eruption 10-12 million years ago created these fossilized bone beds .

A bone-bed containing the fossils of the basal rhino Teleoceras and the three-toed horse Cormohipparion .

Alcoota Fossil Beds 8 Ma Northern Territory , Australia It is notable for the occurrence of well-preserved, rare, Miocene vertebrate fossils, which provide evidence of the evolution of the Northern Territory's fauna and climate. The Alcoota Fossil Beds are also significant as a research and teaching site for palaeontology students.

Miscellaneous fossils of several macropod marsupials Saint-Bauzile 7.6-7.2 Ma Ardèche , France A Late Miocene site preserving articulated mammal skeletons with skin and fur impressions.

[ 257 ] Capo San Marco Formation ~7 Ma Sardinia , Italy A microbialite containing exceptionally preserved Girvanella -type filaments.

[ 258 ] Tresjuncos 6 Ma Cuenca , Spain A Late Miocene lacustrine konservat-lagerstätte containing fossils of diatoms, plants, crustaceans, insects, and amphibians.

[ 259 ] Libros Late Miocene Teruel , Spain A Late Miocene lacustrine lagerstätte located inside a sulfur mine, including well-preserved remains of frogs, as well as beavers, birds, snake, insects, arachnids, and plant remains.

[ 260 ] Fossil specimen of the frog Pelophylax pueyoi Gray Fossil Site 4.9-4.5 Ma Tennessee , US As the first site of its age known from the Appalachian region, the Gray Fossil Site is a unique window into the past. Research at the site has yielded many surprising discoveries, including new species of red panda , rhinoceros , pond turtle , hickory tree , and more. The site also hosts the world's largest known assemblage of fossil tapirs .

Fossil skull of Pristinailurus , a North American relative of the modern Red Panda Willershausen Late Pliocene Lower Saxony , Germany A lacustrine fossil site containing well preserved beetles.

[ 261 ] Quaternary [ edit ] Site(s) Age Location Significance Notable fossils/organisms The Mammoth Site 26 Ka South Dakota , US The facility encloses a prehistoric sinkhole that formed and was slowly filled with sediments during the Pleistocene era. As of 2016, the remains of 61 mammoths , including 58 North American Columbian and 3 woolly mammoths had been recovered. Mammoth bones were found at the site in 1974, and a museum and building enclosing the site were established.

Fossil skeleton of Arctodus simus , a large species of "short-faced" bear that was one of North America's largest predators during the Pleistocene.

Rancho La Brea Tar Pits 40–12 Ka California, US A group of tar pits where natural asphalt (also called asphaltum, bitumen, or pitch; brea in Spanish) has seeped up from the ground for tens of thousands of years. Over many centuries, the bones of trapped animals have been preserved. Among the prehistoric species associated with the La Brea Tar Pits are Pleistocene mammoths, dire wolves , short-faced bears , American lions , ground sloths , and, the state fossil of California , the saber-toothed cat ( Smilodon fatalis ).

Fossil skeleton of Mammuthus columbi excavated from the tar pits Waco Mammoth National Monument 65–51 Ka Texas , US A paleontological site and museum in Waco, Texas , United States where fossils of 24 Columbian mammoths ( Mammuthus columbi ) and other mammals from the Pleistocene Epoch have been uncovered. The site is the largest known concentration of mammoths dying from a (possibly) reoccurring event, which is believed to have been a flash flood .

Fossil skeleton of a mammoth found at the Waco site El Breal de Orocual 2.5–1 Ma Monagas, Venezuela The largest asphalt well on the planet. Like the La Brea Tar Pits, this site preserves a number of megafauna like toxodonts , glyptodonts , camelids , and the felid Homotherium venezuelensis .

Restoration of the environment at El Breal de Orocual, showing Glyptodon , Coragyps , Dasypus and Myrmecophaga El Mene de Inciarte 28–25.5 Ka Zulia, Venezuela Another series of tar pits. These also preserve a similar assemblage of megafauna.

Naracoorte Caves 500-1 Ka South Australia , Australia A series of caves that preserve numerous pleistocene megafauna , like Thylacoleo , and is recognized as a World heritage site alongside the older, but geographically similar Riversleigh site.

Skeleton of Thylacoleo at the Naracoorte Caves Mare aux Songes 4 Ka Mauritius A marsh that preserves a diversity of subfossil animals and plants, many of which were driven to extinction without proper documentation following human arrival, most notably the famous dodo . The mortality assemblages may have formed from a freshwater lake that was occasionally impacted by catastrophic droughts.

[ 262 ] Dodo skeleton from Mare aux Songes Crawford Lake 800 Ya -present Ontario , Canada This lake is notable for its detailed preservation of rotifer and dinoflagellate fossils even after centuries, documenting the ecological shifts that occurred in and around the lake following the establishment of a Iroquoian village from 1268–1486 CE, and later following European colonization of the region in the early 19th century.

[ 263 ] See also [ edit ] List of fossil sites (with link directory) Hoard , a concentration of human artifacts useful for similar reasons in archaeology References [ edit ] ^ Shields, Graham (1998).

"What are Lagerstätten" .

Lethaia .

31 (2): 124.

doi : 10.1111/j.1502-3931.1998.tb00498.x .

^ The term was originally coined by Adolf Seilacher in: Seilacher, A. (1970). " Begriff und Bedeutung der Fossil-Lagerstätten: Neues Jahrbuch fur Geologie und Paläontologie ".

Monatshefte (in German).

1970 : 34– 39.

^ The term was redefined by Julien Kimmig and James D. Schiffbauer in: Kimmig, Julien; James D. Schiffbauer (25 April 2024).

"A modern definition of Fossil-Lagerstätten" .

Trends in Ecology and Evolution .

39 (6): 621– 624.

doi : 10.1016/j.tree.2024.04.004 .

PMID 38670863 .

^ Briggs et al. 1983; Aldridge et al. 1993.

[ full citation needed ] ^ Retallack, G. J. (2011). "Exceptional fossil preservation during CO 2 greenhouse crises?".

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

307 ( 1– 4): 59– 74.

Bibcode : 2011PPP...307...59R .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2011.04.023 .

^ a b Kimmig, Julien; Schiffbauer, James D. (2024).

"A modern definition of Fossil-Lagerstätten" .

Trends in Ecology & Evolution .

39 (7): 621– 624.

doi : 10.1016/j.tree.2024.04.004 .

PMID 38670863 .

^ Albani, Abderrazak El; Bengtson, Stefan; Canfield, Donald E.; Bekker, Andrey; Macchiarelli, Roberto; Mazurier, Arnaud; Hammarlund, Emma U.; Boulvais, Philippe; Dupuy, Jean-Jacques; Fontaine, Claude; Fürsich, Franz T.; Gauthier-Lafaye, François; Janvier, Philippe; Javaux, Emmanuelle; Ossa, Frantz Ossa; Pierson-Wickmann, Anne-Catherine; Riboulleau, Armelle; Sardini, Paul; Vachard, Daniel; Whitehouse, Martin; Meunier, Alain (July 2010). "Large colonial organisms with coordinated growth in oxygenated environments 2.1 Gyr ago".

Nature .

466 (7302): 100– 104.

doi : 10.1038/nature09166 .

PMID 20596019 .

^ El Albani, A.; Konhauser, K.O.; Somogyi, A.; Ngwalghoubou Ikouanga, J.; Lamboux, A.; Blichert-Toft, J.; Chi-Fru, E.; Fontaine, C.; Mazurier, A.; Riboulleau, A.; Pierson-Wickmann, A.-C.; Albarède, F. (June 2023). "A search for life in Palaeoproterozoic marine sediments using Zn isotopes and geochemistry".

Earth and Planetary Science Letters .

612 118169.

doi : 10.1016/j.epsl.2023.118169 .

^ Fakhraee, Mojtaba; Tarhan, Lidya G.; Reinhard, Christopher T.; Crowe, Sean A.; Lyons, Timothy W.; Planavsky, Noah J. (May 2023). "Earth's surface oxygenation and the rise of eukaryotic life: Relationships to the Lomagundi positive carbon isotope excursion revisited".

Earth-Science Reviews .

240 104398.

doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2023.104398 .

^ Javaux, Emmanuelle J.; Lepot, Kevin (January 2018).

"The Paleoproterozoic fossil record: Implications for the evolution of the biosphere during Earth's middle-age" .

Earth-Science Reviews .

176 : 68– 86.

Bibcode : 2018ESRv..176...68J .

doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2017.10.001 .

hdl : 20.500.12210/62416 .

S2CID 37069547 .

The identity of the [Francevillian biota] macrostructures remains unknown and their biogenicity is questionable ^ a b Miao, Lanyun; Yin, Zongjun; Knoll, Andrew H.; Qu, Yuangao; Zhu, Maoyan (26 January 2024).

"1.63-billion-year-old multicellular eukaryotes from the Chuanlinggou Formation in North China" .

Science Advances .

10 (4): eadk3208.

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adk3208 .

PMC 10807817 .

PMID 38266082 .

^ Liu, Jingqi; Zhang, Yang; Shi, Xiaoying; Chen, Anfeng; Tang, Dongjie; Yang, Tinglu (November 2023). "Macroscopic fossils from the Chuanlinggou Formation of North China: evidence for an earlier origin of multicellular algae in the late Palaeoproterozoic".

Palaeontology .

66 (6).

doi : 10.1111/pala.12685 .

^ Bengtson, Stefan; Sallstedt, Therese; Belivanova, Veneta; Whitehouse, Martin (14 March 2017).

"Three-dimensional preservation of cellular and subcellular structures suggests 1.6 billion-year-old crown-group red algae" .

PLOS Biology .

15 (3): e2000735.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.2000735 .

PMC 5349422 .

PMID 28291791 .

^ Chen, Kai; Yang, Chuan; Miao, Lanyun; Zhao, Fangchen; Zhu, Maoyan (2024). "New SIMS U–Pb zircon age on the macroscopic multicellular eukaryotes from the early Mesoproterozoic Gaoyuzhuang Formation, North China".

Geological Magazine .

161 e2.

doi : 10.1017/S0016756824000220 .

^ Chen, Kai; Miao, Lanyun; Zhao, Fangchen; Zhu, Maoyan (July 2023). "Carbonaceous macrofossils from the early Mesoproterozoic Gaoyuzhuang Formation in the Yanshan Range, North China".

Precambrian Research .

392 107074.

doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2023.107074 .

^ Shi, Min; Feng, Qinglai; Khan, Maliha Zareen; Zhu, Shixing (December 2017). "An eukaryote-bearing microbiota from the early mesoproterozoic Gaoyuzhuang Formation, Tianjin, China and its significance".

Precambrian Research .

303 : 709– 726.

doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2017.09.013 .

^ Franz, Gerhard; Lyckberg, Peter; Khomenko, Vladimir; Chournousenko, Vsevolod; Schulz, Hans-Martin; Mahlstedt, Nicolaj; Wirth, Richard; Glodny, Johannes; Gernert, Ulrich; Nissen, Jörg (31 March 2022).

"Fossilization of Precambrian microfossils in the Volyn pegmatite, Ukraine" .

Biogeosciences .

19 (6): 1795– 1811.

doi : 10.5194/bg-19-1795-2022 .

^ Franz, Gerhard; Khomenko, Vladimir; Lyckberg, Peter; Chournousenko, Vsevolod; Struck, Ulrich; Gernert, Ulrich; Nissen, Jörg (24 May 2023).

"The Volyn biota (Ukraine) – indications of 1.5 Gyr old eukaryotes in 3D preservation, a spotlight on the "boring billion" " .

Biogeosciences .

20 (10): 1901– 1924.

doi : 10.5194/bg-20-1901-2023 .

^ Butterfield, Nicholas J. (2000). "Bangiomorpha pubescens n. gen., n. sp.: implications for the evolution of sex, multicellularity, and the Mesoproterozoic/Neoproterozoic radiation of eukaryotes".

Paleobiology .

26 (3): 386– 404.

doi : 10.1666/0094-8373(2000)026<0386:BPNGNS>2.0.CO;2 .

^ Butterfield, Nicholas J (October 2001). "Paleobiology of the late Mesoproterozoic (ca. 1200 Ma) Hunting Formation, Somerset Island, arctic Canada".

Precambrian Research .

111 ( 1– 4): 235– 256.

doi : 10.1016/S0301-9268(01)00162-0 .

^ Slotznick, Sarah P.; Swanson-Hysell, Nicholas L.; Zhang, Yiming; Clayton, Katherine E.; Wellman, Charles H.; Tosca, Nicholas J.; Strother, Paul K. (22 August 2023).

"Reconstructing the paleoenvironment of an oxygenated Mesoproterozoic shoreline and its record of life" .

Geological Society of America Bulletin .

doi : 10.1130/B36634.1 .

ISSN 0016-7606 . Retrieved 21 May 2024 – via GeoScienceWorld.

^ Strother, Paul K.; Wellman, Charles H. (30 November 2020).

"The Nonesuch Formation Lagerstätte: a rare window into freshwater life one billion years ago" .

Journal of the Geological Society .

178 (2): 1– 12.

doi : 10.1144/jgs2020-133 .

S2CID 229003508 .

^ Duda, Jan-Peter; König, Hannah; Reinhardt, Manuel; Shuvalova, Julia; Parkhaev, Pavel (8 December 2021).

"Molecular fossils within bitumens and kerogens from the ~ 1 Ga Lakhanda Lagerstätte (Siberia, Russia) and their significance for understanding early eukaryote evolution" .

PalZ .

95 (4): 577– 592.

doi : 10.1007/s12542-021-00593-4 .

ISSN 0031-0220 .

^ Shuvalova, J. V.; Nagovitsin, K. E.; Parkhaev, P. Yu. (26 February 2021).

"Evidences of the Oldest Trophic Interactions in the Riphean Biota (Lakhanda Lagerstätte, Southeastern Siberia)" .

Doklady Biological Sciences .

496 (1): 34– 40.

doi : 10.1134/S0012496621010105 .

PMID 33635488 .

S2CID 254411264 . Retrieved 30 April 2023 .

^ Podkovyrov, Victor N. (September 2009).

"Mesoproterozoic Lakhanda Lagerstätte, Siberia: Paleoecology and taphonomy of the microbiota" .

Precambrian Research .

173 ( 1– 4): 146– 153.

Bibcode : 2009PreR..173..146P .

doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2009.04.006 . Retrieved 30 April 2023 .

^ Turnbull, Matthew J. M.; Whitehouse, Martin J.; Moorbath, Stephen (November 1996).

"New isotopic age determinations for the Torridonian, NW Scotland" .

Journal of the Geological Society .

153 (6): 955– 964.

doi : 10.1144/gsjgs.153.6.0955 .

ISSN 0016-7649 . Retrieved 21 May 2024 .

^ Battison, Leila; Brasier, Martin D. (February 2012).

"Remarkably preserved prokaryote and eukaryote microfossils within 1Ga-old lake phosphates of the Torridon Group, NW Scotland" .

Precambrian Research .

196– 197: 204– 217.

doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2011.12.012 . Retrieved 7 July 2024 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Nielson, Grace C.; Stüeken, Eva E.; Prave, Anthony R. (February 2024).

"Estuaries house Earth's oldest known non-marine eukaryotes" .

Precambrian Research .

401 107278.

doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2023.107278 .

hdl : 10023/28949 . Retrieved 21 May 2024 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Maloney, Katie M.; Schiffbauer, James D.; Halverson, Galen P.; Xiao, Shuhai; Laflamme, Marc (13 April 2022).

"Preservation of early Tonian macroalgal fossils from the Dolores Creek Formation, Yukon" .

Scientific Reports .

12 (1): 6222.

Bibcode : 2022NatSR..12.6222M .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-022-10223-x .

PMC 9007953 .

PMID 35418588 .

^ Mughal, Sanaa; Millikin, Alexie E. G.; Zhang, Tianran; Gibson, Timothy M.; Rooney, Alan D.; Tosca, Nicholas J.; Bergmann, Kristin D.; Strauss, Justin V.; Anderson, Ross P. (5 May 2025).

"The Svanbergfjellet Formation: eukaryotic life in a Tonian Sea" .

Journal of the Geological Society .

182 (3).

doi : 10.1144/jgs2024-083 .

^ Butterfield, Nicholas J.; Knoll, Andrew H.; Swett, Keene (15 July 1994).

Paleobiology of the Neoproterozoic Svanbergfjellet Formation, Spitsbergen . Fossils and Strata. Vol. 34. pp.

1– 84.

doi : 10.18261/8200376494-1994-01 .

ISBN 82-00-37649-4 .

^ Sergeev, Vladimir N.; Schopf, J. William (1 May 2010).

"Taxonomy, paleoecology and biostratigraphy of the late Neoproterozoic Chichkan microbiota of South Kazakhstan: The marine biosphere on the eve of metazoan radiation" .

Journal of Paleontology .

84 (3): 363– 401.

Bibcode : 2010JPal...84..363S .

doi : 10.1666/09-133.1 .

S2CID 140668863 . Retrieved 30 April 2023 .

^ Willman, Sebastian; Peel, John S.; Ineson, Jon R.; Schovsbo, Niels H.; Rugen, Elias J.; Frei, Robert (6 November 2020).

"Ediacaran Doushantuo-type biota discovered in Laurentia" .

Communications Biology .

3 (1): 647.

doi : 10.1038/s42003-020-01381-7 .

PMC 7648037 .

PMID 33159138 .

^ Becker-Kerber, Bruno; El Albani, Abderrazak; Konhauser, Kurt; Abd Elmola, Ahmed; Fontaine, Claude; Paim, Paulo S. G.; Mazurier, Arnaud; Prado, Gustavo M. E. M.; Galante, Douglas; Kerber, Pedro B.; da Rosa, Ana L. Z.; Fairchild, Thomas R.; Meunier, Alain; Pacheco, Mírian L. A. F. (3 March 2021).

"The role of volcanic-derived clays in the preservation of Ediacaran biota from the Itajaí Basin (ca. 563 Ma, Brazil)" .

Scientific Reports .

11 (1): 5013.

doi : 10.1038/s41598-021-84433-0 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 7930025 .

PMID 33658558 .

^ Xiao, Shuhai; Chen, Zhe; Pang, Ke; Zhou, Chuanming; Yuan, Xunlai (12 October 2020).

"The Shibantan Lagerstätte: insights into the Proterozoic–Phanerozoic transition" .

Journal of the Geological Society .

178 : 1– 11.

doi : 10.1144/jgs2020-135 .

S2CID 225242787 . Retrieved 30 April 2023 .

^ Cai, Yaoping; Hua, Hong; Schiffbauer, James D.; Sun, Bo; Yuan, Xunlai (April 2014).

"Tube growth patterns and microbial mat-related lifestyles in the Ediacaran fossil Cloudina, Gaojiashan Lagerstätte, South China" .

Gondwana Research .

25 (3): 1008– 1018.

Bibcode : 2014GondR..25.1008C .

doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2012.12.027 . Retrieved 18 June 2023 .

^ Feng, Tang; Chongyu, Yin; Pengju, Liu; Linzhi, Gao; Wenyan, Zhang (7 September 2010).

"A New Diverse Macrofossil Lagerstätte from the Uppermost Ediacaran of Southwestern China" .

Acta Geologica Sinica - English Edition .

82 (6): 1095– 1103.

doi : 10.1111/j.1755-6724.2008.tb00709.x .

ISSN 1000-9515 . Retrieved 21 May 2024 .

^ Duda, Jan-Peter; Love, Gordon D.; Rogov, Vladimir I.; Melnyk, Dmitry S.; Blumenberg, Martin; Grazhdankin, Dmitriy V. (3 September 2020).

"Understanding the geobiology of the terminal Ediacaran Khatyspyt Lagerstätte (Arctic Siberia, Russia)" .

Geobiology .

18 (6): 643– 662.

Bibcode : 2020Gbio...18..643D .

doi : 10.1111/gbi.12412 .

PMID 32881267 .

S2CID 221477265 .

^ National Museum of Natural History, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine (Kyiv, Ukraine); Grytsenko, Volodymyr (2 October 2020).

"Diversity of the Vendian fossils of Podillia (Western Ukraine)" .

Geo&Bio .

2020 (19): 3– 19.

doi : 10.15407/gb1903 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Shao, Tiequan; Tang, Hanhua; Liu, Yunhuan; Waloszek, Dieter; Maas, Andreas; Zhang, Huaqiao (March 2018).

"Diversity of cnidarians and cycloneuralians in the Fortunian (early Cambrian) Kuanchuanpu Formation at Zhangjiagou, South China" .

Journal of Paleontology .

92 (2): 115– 129.

doi : 10.1017/jpa.2017.94 .

ISSN 0022-3360 . Retrieved 14 May 2024 – via Cambridge Core.

^ Shao, T. Q.; Qin, J. C.; Shao, Y.; Liu, Y. H.; Waloszek, D.; Maas, A.; Duan, B. C.; Wang, Q.; Xu, Y.; Zhang, H. Q. (October 2020).

"New macrobenthic cycloneuralians from the Fortunian (lowermost Cambrian) of South China" .

Precambrian Research .

349 105413.

doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2019.105413 . Retrieved 14 May 2024 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Liu, Yunhuan; Qin, Jiachen; Wang, Qi; Maas, Andreas; Duan, Baichuan; Zhang, Yanan; Zhang, Hu; Shao, Tiequan; Zhang, Huaqiao (19 October 2018). Zhang, Xi-Guang (ed.).

"New armoured scalidophorans (Ecdysozoa, Cycloneuralia) from the Cambrian Fortunian Zhangjiagou Lagerstätte, South China" .

Papers in Palaeontology .

5 (2): 241– 260.

doi : 10.1002/spp2.1239 .

ISSN 2056-2799 . Retrieved 14 May 2024 – via Wiley Online Library.

^ Han, Jian; Morris, Simon Conway; Ou, Qiang; Shu, Degan; Huang, Hai (9 February 2017).

"Meiofaunal deuterostomes from the basal Cambrian of Shaanxi (China)" .

Nature .

542 (7640): 228– 231.

doi : 10.1038/nature21072 .

ISSN 0028-0836 .

PMID 28135722 . Retrieved 14 May 2024 .

^ Zhang, Xi-guang; Siveter, David J.; Waloszek, Dieter; Maas, Andreas (4 October 2007). "An epipodite-bearing crown-group crustacean from the Lower Cambrian".

Nature .

449 (7162): 595– 598.

doi : 10.1038/nature06138 .

PMID 17914395 .

^ Lan, Tian; Yang, Jie; Zhang, Xi-guang; Hou, Jin-bo (15 June 2018).

"A new macroalgal assemblage from the Xiaoshiba Biota (Cambrian Series 2, Stage 3) of southern China" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

499 : 35– 44.

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2018.02.029 .

ISSN 0031-0182 . Retrieved 13 September 2024 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Li, Wei; Yang, Jie; Yang, Xiaoyu; Dhungana, Alavya; Wang, Yu; Zhang, Xiguang; Smith, Martin R. (November 2024). "Omnidens appendages and the origin of radiodont mouthparts".

Papers in Palaeontology .

10 (6).

doi : 10.1002/spp2.1600 .

^ English, Adam M.; Babcock, Loren E. (1 September 2010).

"Census of the Indian Springs Lagerstätte, Poleta Formation (Cambrian), western Nevada, USA" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

295 (1): 236– 244.

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2010.05.041 .

ISSN 0031-0182 .

^ Ivantsov, Andrey Yu.; Zhuravlev, Andrey Yu.; Leguta, Anton V.; Krassilov, Valentin A.; Melnikova, Lyudmila M.; Ushatinskaya, Galina T. (2 May 2005).

"Palaeoecology of the Early Cambrian Sinsk biota from the Siberian Platform" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

220 ( 1– 2): 69– 88.

Bibcode : 2005PPP...220...69I .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2004.01.022 . Retrieved 12 November 2022 .

^ Chen, Feiyang; Brock, Glenn A.; Zhang, Zhiliang; Laing, Brittany; Ren, Xinyi; Zhang, Zhifei (January 2021).

"Brachiopod-dominated communities and depositional environment of the Guanshan Konservat-Lagerstätte, eastern Yunnan, China" .

Journal of the Geological Society .

178 (1).

doi : 10.1144/jgs2020-043 .

^ Caron, Jean-Bernard; Webster, Mark; Briggs, Derek E. G.; Pari, Giovanni; Santucci, Guy; Mángano, M. Gabriela; Izquierdo-López, Alejandro; Streng, Michael; Gaines, Robert R. (13 December 2023).

"The lower Cambrian Cranbrook Lagerstätte of British Columbia" .

Journal of the Geological Society .

181 (1).

doi : 10.1144/jgs2023-106 .

ISSN 0016-7649 . Retrieved 7 July 2024 – via Lyell Collection Geological Society Publications.

^ Weisberger, Mindy (9 July 2024).

" 'Prehistoric Pompeii' reveals 515 million-year-old sea bugs' anatomy in pristine 3D" .

CNN . Retrieved 13 July 2024 .

^ Pari, Giovanni; Briggs, Derek E.G.; Gaines, Robert R. (22 February 2021).

"The Parker Quarry Lagerstätte of Vermont—The first reported Burgess Shale–type fauna rediscovered" .

Geology .

49 (6): 693– 697.

doi : 10.1130/g48422.1 .

ISSN 0091-7613 .

^ Gámez Vintaned, J. A.; Liñán, E. y Gozalo, R. (2013) «Los trilobites cámbricos de la Biota de Murero (Zaragoza, España)».

Cuadernos de Paleontología Aragonesa , 7 : 5-27 ^ Peel, John S. (3 April 2022). "The oldest tongue worm: a stem-group pentastomid arthropod from the early middle Cambrian (Wuliuan Stage) of North Greenland (Laurentia)".

GFF .

144 (2): 97– 105.

doi : 10.1080/11035897.2022.2064543 .

^ Department of Earth Sciences (Palaeobiology), Uppsala University, Sweden.; Peel, John S. (7 June 2023).

"A phosphatised fossil Lagerstätte from the middle Cambrian (Wuliuan Stage) of North Greenland (Laurentia)" .

Bulletin of the Geological Society of Denmark .

72 : 101– 122.

doi : 10.37570/bgsd-2023-72-03 . Retrieved 7 July 2024 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Johnston, Kimberley J.; Johnston, Paul A.; Powell, Wayne G. (June 2009). "A new, Middle Cambrian, Burgess Shale-type biota, Bolaspidella Zone, Chancellor Basin, southeastern British Columbia".

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

277 ( 1– 2): 106– 126.

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2009.02.015 .

^ Sun, Z.; Zhao, F.; Zeng, H.; Luo, C.; Van Iten, H.; Zhu, M. (2022).

"The middle Cambrian Linyi Lagerstätte from the North China Craton: a new window on the Cambrian evolutionary fauna" .

National Science Review .

9 (7): nwac069.

doi : 10.1093/nsr/nwac069 .

PMC 9273334 .

PMID 35832778 . Retrieved 2 April 2023 .

^ Kimmig, Julien; Pratt, Brian R. (29 July 2015).

"Taphonomy of the middle Cambrian (Drumian) Ravens Throat River Lagerstätte, Rockslide Formation, Mackenzie Mountains, Northwest Territories, Canada" .

Lethaia .

49 (2): 150– 169.

doi : 10.1111/let.12135 .

ISSN 0024-1164 .

^ Saleh, Farid; Lustri, Lorenzo; Gueriau, Pierre; Potin, Gaëtan J.-M.; Pérez-Peris, Francesc; Laibl, Lukáš; Jamart, Valentin; Vite, Antoine; Antcliffe, Jonathan B.; Daley, Allison C.; Nohejlová, Martina; Dupichaud, Christophe; Schöder, Sebastian; Bérard, Emilie; Lynch, Sinéad; Drage, Harriet B.; Vauchier, Romain; Vidal, Muriel; Monceret, Eric; Monceret, Sylvie; Lefebvre, Bertrand (9 February 2024).

"The Cabrières Biota (France) provides insights into Ordovician polar ecosystems" .

Nature Ecology & Evolution .

8 (4): 651– 662.

doi : 10.1038/s41559-024-02331-w .

ISSN 2397-334X .

PMC 11009115 .

PMID 38337049 .

^ Fang, Xiang; Mao, Yingyan; Liu, Qi; Yuan, Wenwei; Chen, Zhongyang; Wu, Rongchang; Li, Lixia; Zhang, Yuchen; Ma, Junye; Wang, Wenhui; Zhan, Renbin; Peng, Shanchi; Zhang, Yuandong; Huang, Diying (13 July 2022).

"The Liexi fauna: a new Lagerstätte from the Lower Ordovician of South China" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

289 (1978).

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2022.1027 .

ISSN 0962-8452 .

PMC 9277276 .

PMID 35858062 .

^ a b c d e f Young, Graham; Rudkin, David; Dobrzanski, Edward; Robson, Sean; Cuggy, Michael; Demski, Matthew; Thompson, Deborah (2012).

"Great Canadian Lagerstätten 3. Late Ordovician Konservat-Lagerstätten in Manitoba" .

Geoscience Canada .

39 (4): 201– 213.

ISSN 0315-0941 .

^ Liu, Huaibao P.; Bergström, Stig M.; Witzke, Brian J.; Briggs, Derek E. G.; McKay, Robert M.; Ferretti, Annalisa (28 February 2017).

"Exceptionally preserved conodont apparatuses with giant elements from the Middle Ordovician Winneshiek Konservat-Lagerstätte, Iowa, USA" .

Journal of Paleontology .

91 (3): 493– 511.

Bibcode : 2017JPal...91..493L .

doi : 10.1017/jpa.2016.155 .

S2CID 132698401 .

^ Fatka, Oldřich; Nardin, Élise; Budil, Petr; Nohejlová, Martina; Zicha, Ondře J.; Pittet, Bernard; Mikuláš, Radek; Aubrechtová, Martina; Polechová, Marika; Vodičha, Jakub; Christophoul, Frèdèric; Saleh, Farid; Lefebvre, Bertrand (2025).

"A new Late Ordovician Echinoderm Lagerstätte in the Prague Basin (Barrandian area, Czech Republic)" .

Bulletin of Geosciences .

100 (2): 95– 133.

^ Selina R. Cole; David F. Wright; William I. Ausich (1 May 2019).

"Phylogenetic community paleoecology of one of the earliest complex crinoid faunas (Brechin Lagerstätte, Ordovician)" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

521 : 82– 98.

Bibcode : 2019PPP...521...82C .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2019.02.006 .

S2CID 135129430 .

^ García-Bellido, Diego C.; Gutiérrez-Marco, Juan Carlos (29 October 2022).

"Polar gigantism and remarkable taxonomic longevity in new palaeoscolecid worms from the Late Ordovician Tafilalt Lagerstätte of Morocco" .

Historical Biology .

35 (11): 2011– 2021.

doi : 10.1080/08912963.2022.2131404 .

ISSN 0891-2963 .

S2CID 253297071 .

^ Knaust, Dirk; Desrochers, André (July 2019). "Exceptionally preserved soft-bodied assemblage in Ordovician carbonates of Anticosti Island, eastern Canada".

Gondwana Research .

71 : 117– 128.

doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2019.01.016 .

^ Ausich, William I.; Wilson, Mark A.; Tinn, Oive (14 May 2019).

"Kalana Lagerstätte crinoids: Early Silurian (Llandovery) of central Estonia" .

Journal of Paleontology .

94 (1): 131– 144.

doi : 10.1017/jpa.2019.27 .

S2CID 181399467 . Retrieved 27 April 2023 .

^ Tinn, Oive; Lang, Liisa; Märss, Tiiu; Vahur, Signu; Kirsimäe, Kalle (6 May 2022).

"A demineralized osteostracan fossil from the Silurian Kalana Lagerstätte of Estonia: revealing its internal anatomy and uncovering a unique type of fossilization" .

Lethaia .

55 (1): 1– 13.

doi : 10.1111/let.12452 .

^ Zhu, You-an; Li, Qiang; Lu, Jing; Chen, Yang; Wang, Jianhua; Gai, Zhikun; Zhao, Wenjin; Wei, Guangbiao; Yu, Yilun; Ahlberg, Per E.; Zhu, Min (2022).

"The oldest complete jawed vertebrates from the early Silurian of China" .

Nature .

609 (7929): 954– 958.

Bibcode : 2022Natur.609..954Z .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-022-05136-8 .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

PMID 36171378 .

S2CID 252569910 .

^ BBC.

"Fossils found in 425 million year old 'Pompeii' " .

www.bbc.co.uk . Retrieved 7 October 2023 .

^ Vrazo, Matthew B.; Trop, Jeffrey M.; Brett, Carlton E. (2014).

"A New Eurypterid Lagerstätte from the Upper Silurian of Pennsylvania" .

PALAIOS .

29 (7/8): 431– 448.

Bibcode : 2014Palai..29..431V .

doi : 10.2110/palo.2014.003 .

ISSN 0883-1351 .

JSTOR 43683811 .

S2CID 30066085 .

^ Taylor, Wendy L. (28 October 1999), "Middle Silurian Rochester Shale of Western New York, USA, and Southern Ontario, Canada" , Fossil Crinoids , Cambridge University Press, pp.

87– 92, doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511626159.012 , ISBN 9780521450249 , retrieved 9 October 2023 ^ Glasspool, I.J.; Edwards, D.; Axe, L. (December 2006).

"Charcoal in the Early Devonian: A wildfire-derived Konservat–Lagerstätte" .

Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology .

142 ( 3– 4): 131– 136.

doi : 10.1016/j.revpalbo.2006.03.021 . Retrieved 8 April 2025 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Morris, Jennifer L.; Edwards, Dianne; Richardson, John B. (2018), "The Advantages and Frustrations of a Plant Lagerstätte as Illustrated by a New Taxon From the Lower Devonian of the Welsh Borderland, UK" , Transformative Paleobotany , Elsevier, pp.

49– 67, doi : 10.1016/b978-0-12-813012-4.00004-8 , ISBN 978-0-12-813012-4 , retrieved 13 April 2025 ^ Poschmann, Markus J. (3 February 2021).

"A new phyllocarid (Crustacea, Archaeostraca) from the Early Devonian (late Emsian) Heckelmann Mill Fossil-Lagerstätte (Lahn Syncline, Rhineland-Palatinate, SW-Germany)" .

PalZ .

95 : 27– 36.

doi : 10.1007/s12542-020-00535-6 .

S2CID 231793893 . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

^ Poschmann, Markus J. (15 July 2019).

"Pelmatozoan "rooting grounds" from the Early Devonian (late Emsian) Heckelmann Mill Fossil-Lagerstätte (Lahn Syncline, Rhineland-Palatinate, SW-Germany): morphological, palaeoenvironmental and taphonomic aspects" .

PalZ .

94 (2): 311– 325.

doi : 10.1007/s12542-019-00454-1 .

S2CID 198137119 . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

^ Zatoń, Michał; Filipiak, Paweł; Rakociński, Michał; Krawczyński, Wojciech (25 March 2014).

"Kowala Lagerstätte: Late Devonian arthropods and non-biomineralized algae from Poland" .

Lethaia .

47 (3): 352– 364.

doi : 10.1111/let.12062 . Retrieved 29 June 2023 .

^ Frey, Linda; Pohle, Alexander; Rücklin, Martin; Klug, Christian (2020).

"Fossil-Lagerstätten, palaeoecology and preservation of invertebrates and vertebrates from the Devonian in the eastern Anti-Atlas, Morocco" .

Lethaia .

53 (2): 242– 266.

doi : 10.1111/let.12354 .

ISSN 0024-1164 .

S2CID 210627752 .

^ Denayer, Julien; Prestianni, Cyrille; Gueriau, Pierre; Olive, Sébastien; Clément, Gaël (2016).

"Stratigraphy and depositional environments of the Late Famennian (Late Devonian) of Southern Belgium and characterization of the Strud locality" .

Geological Magazine .

153 (1): 112– 127.

Bibcode : 2016GeoM..153..112D .

doi : 10.1017/S001675681500031X .

ISSN 0016-7568 .

S2CID 129070535 .

^ Olive, Sébastien; Clément, Gaël; Daeschler, Edward B.; Dupret, Vincent (23 August 2016).

"Placoderm Assemblage from the Tetrapod-Bearing Locality of Strud (Belgium, Upper Famennian) Provides Evidence for a Fish Nursery" .

PLOS ONE .

11 (8): e0161540.

Bibcode : 2016PLoSO..1161540O .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0161540 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 4994939 .

PMID 27552196 .

^ Fraser, Nicholas C.; Sues, Hans-Dieter (2017).

Terrestrial Conservation Lagerstätten: Windows Into the Evolution of Life on Land . Dunedin Academic Press.

ISBN 978-1-78046-014-7 .

^ Knecht, Richard J.; Benner, Jacob S.; Swain, Anshuman; Azevedo-Schmidt, Lauren; Cleal, Christopher J.; Labandeira, Conrad C.; Engel, Michael S.; Dunlop, Jason A.; Selden, Paul A.; Eble, Cortland F.; Renczkowski, Mark D.; Wheeler, Dillon A.; Funderburk, Mataeus M.; Emma, Steve L.; Knoll, Andrew H.; Pierce, Naomi E. (9 September 2024).

"Early Pennsylvanian Lagerstätte reveals a diverse ecosystem on a subhumid, alluvial fan" .

Nature Communications .

15 (1): 7876.

doi : 10.1038/s41467-024-52181-0 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 11383953 .

PMID 39251605 .

^ Anderson, Lyall I.; Dunlop, Jason A.; Horrocks, Carl A.; Winkelmann, Heather M.; Eagar, R. M. C. (1997).

"Exceptionally preserved fossils from Bickershaw, Lancashire UK (Upper Carboniferous, Westphalian A (Langsettian))" .

Geological Journal .

32 (3): 197– 210.

doi : 10.1002/(SICI)1099-1034(199709)32:3<197::AID-GJ739>3.0.CO;2-6 .

^ Orr, Patrick J.; Briggs, Derek E. G.; Parkes, Matthew A. (1996).

"The 'Castlecomer Fauna': A New Konservat-Lagerstätte from the Upper Carboniferous of Ireland" .

Irish Journal of Earth Sciences .

15 : 93– 106.

ISSN 0790-1763 .

JSTOR 30002319 .

^ Orr, P. J.; Briggs, D. E.G.; Kearns, S. L. (1 May 2008).

"Taphonomy of Exceptionally Preserved Crustaceans from the Upper Carboniferous of Southeastern Ireland" .

PALAIOS .

23 (5): 298– 312.

doi : 10.2110/palo.2007.p07-015r .

ISSN 0883-1351 .

^ "Direct Evidence of Food Chains at the Linton Lagerstatte" .

gsa.confex.com . Archived from the original on 9 June 2011 . Retrieved 19 October 2018 .

^ Dunne, Emma M. (1 July 2020).

Patterns and drivers of tetrapod diversity and biogeography in the late Palaeozoic and early Mesozoic (d_ph thesis). University of Birmingham.

^ Hook, Robert W.; Baird, Donald (19 June 1986).

"The Diamond Coal Mine of Linton, Ohio, and its Pennsylvanian-age vertebrates" .

Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology .

6 (2): 174– 190.

Bibcode : 1986JVPal...6..174H .

doi : 10.1080/02724634.1986.10011609 .

ISSN 0272-4634 .

^ Niko, Shuji; Seuss, Barbara; Mapes, Royal H. (1 January 2018).

"Desmoinesian (Middle Pennsylvanian) Orthocerid Cephalopods from the Buckhorn Asphalt Lagerstätte in Oklahoma, Midcontinent North America" .

Paleontological Research .

22 (1): 20– 36.

doi : 10.2517/2017PR008 .

ISSN 1342-8144 . Retrieved 12 May 2024 – via BioOne Digital Library.

^ M. Hodnett, John-Paul; Lucas, Spencer G.

"Review Of The Late Pennsylvanian Fish Assemblage From The Kinney Brick Quarry, New Mexico" .

New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin .

84 : 359– 390.

^ Cardoso, Alexandre Ribeiro; Schmidt, Jaques Soares; Bernardes, Eduardo Müller; Maraschin, Anderson José; de Coelho Andrade, Débora; de Medeiros Albano, Filipe; Rübensam, Gabriel; Barp, Gustavo Bombardelli; Kich, Juliana Nichele; Rodrigues, Naira Poerner; de Oliveira, Yasmin Felix; Zielinski, João Pedro Tauscheck; Weinschütz, Luiz Carlos; Vazquez, Joselito Cabral; Vecchia, Felipe Dalla (1 February 2025).

"Organic matter sources, accumulation and diagenesis of the Lontras Shale Lagerstätte (Paraná Basin, southern Brazil)" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

659 112661.

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2024.112661 .

ISSN 0031-0182 .

^ Boardman, Daiana Rockenbach; Souza, Paulo A.; Scomazzon, Ana Karina; Félix, Cristina Moreira; Mori, Ana Luisa Outa; Weinschütz, Luiz Carlos (January 2024).

"Palynological analysis (biochronostratigraphy and paleoenvironments) from a fossil-Lagerstätte section within the Late Paleozoic Ice Age unit of the Paraná Basin (Itararé Group), Western Gondwana" .

Sedimentary Geology .

459 106543.

doi : 10.1016/j.sedgeo.2023.106543 . Retrieved 8 June 2024 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Perrier, V.; Charbonnier, S. (2014). "The Montceau-les-Mines Lagerstätte (Late Carboniferous, France)".

Comptes Rendus Palevol .

13 (5): 353– 67.

Bibcode : 2014CRPal..13..353P .

doi : 10.1016/j.crpv.2014.03.002 .

^ Heyler, Daniel; Poplin, Cecile M. (1988).

"The Fossils of Montceau-les-Mines" .

Scientific American .

259 (3): 104– 111.

Bibcode : 1988SciAm.259c.104H .

doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican0988-104 .

ISSN 0036-8733 .

JSTOR 24989233 .

^ "NMGS 2016 Guidebook Details" .

New Mexico Geological Society .

doi : 10.56577/ffc-67.377 . Retrieved 18 December 2023 .

^ Poschmann, Markus J.; Hegna, Thomas A.; Emrich, Ortwin; Fischer, Jan; Hoffmann, René; Schindler, Thomas; Voigt, Sebastian (2024).

"Putative branchiopod and vertebrate eggs from the Remigiusberg Lagerstätte (Pennsylvanian-Permian boundary) of the Saar-Nahe  Basin, SW Germany" .

Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie .

313 (2): 111– 130.

doi : 10.1127/njgpa/2024/1221 .

^ Schmitz, Mark D.; Pfefferkorn, Hermann W.; Shen, Shu-Zhong; Wang, Jun (1 November 2021).

"A volcanic tuff near the Carboniferous–Permian boundary, Taiyuan Formation, North China: Radioisotopic dating and global correlation" .

Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology . Wuda Tuff Flora: A Permian peat-forming T0 fossil plant assemblage from Wuda Coalfield, Inner Mongolia.

294 104244.

doi : 10.1016/j.revpalbo.2020.104244 .

ISSN 0034-6667 .

^ Wang, Jun; Hilton, Jason; Pfefferkorn, Hermann W.; Wang, Shijun; Zhang, Yi; Bek, Jiri; Pšenička, Josef; Seyfullah, Leyla J.; Dilcher, David (16 March 2021).

"Ancient noeggerathialean reveals the seed plant sister group diversified alongside the primary seed plant radiation" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

118 (11).

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2013442118 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 7980368 .

PMID 33836571 .

^ Schoch, Rainer R. (23 March 2021).

"Osteology of the Permian temnospondyl amphibian Glanochthon lellbachae and its relationships" .

Fossil Record .

24 (1): 49– 64.

doi : 10.5194/fr-24-49-2021 .

ISSN 2193-0066 .

^ Poschmann, Markus J.; Nel, André; Raisch, Manfred (1 March 2024).

"Diversity and variability of grylloblattidan insects (Grylloblattida) from the early Permian Meisenheim Formation of the Saar-Nahe Basin (SW-Germany)" .

PalZ .

98 (1): 67– 84.

doi : 10.1007/s12542-023-00672-8 .

ISSN 1867-6812 .

^ Steyer, J.-Sébastien; Sanchez, Sophie; Debriette, Pierre J.; Valli, Andrea M. F.; Escuille, François; Pohl, Burkhard; Dechambre, Roger-Paul; Vacant, Renaud; Spence, Christopher; De Ploëg, Gaël (1 December 2012).

"A new vertebrate Lagerstätte from the Lower Permian of France (Franchesse, Massif Central): palaeoenvironmental implications for the Bourbon-l'Archambault basin" .

Bulletin de la Société Géologique de France .

183 (6): 509– 515.

doi : 10.2113/gssgfbull.183.6.509 . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

^ Luthardt, Ludwig; Rößler, Ronny; Schneider, Joerg W. (1 January 2016).

"Palaeoclimatic and site-specific conditions in the early Permian fossil forest of Chemnitz—Sedimentological, geochemical and palaeobotanical evidence" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

441 : 627– 652.

Bibcode : 2016PPP...441..627L .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2015.10.015 . Retrieved 8 June 2022 .

^ Piñeiro, G.; Ramos, A.; Goso, C. S.; Scarabino, F.; Laurin, M. (2012).

"Unusual Environmental Conditions Preserve a Permian Mesosaur-Bearing Konservat-Lagerstätte from Uruguay" .

Acta Palaeontologica Polonica .

57 (2): 299– 318.

doi : 10.4202/app.2010.0113 .

^ Khramov, Alexander V.; Naugolnykh, Sergey V.; Węgierek, Piotr (12 September 2022).

"Possible long-proboscid insect pollinators from the Early Permian of Russia" .

Current Biology .

32 (17): 3815–3820.e2.

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2022.06.085 .

ISSN 0960-9822 .

PMID 35858616 .

^ Slater, Ben J.; McLoughlin, Stephen; Hilton, Jason (June 2015).

"A high-latitude Gondwanan lagerstätte: The Permian permineralised peat biota of the Prince Charles Mountains, Antarctica" .

Gondwana Research .

27 (4): 1446– 1473.

Bibcode : 2015GondR..27.1446S .

doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2014.01.004 .

^ Prevec, Rosemary; Nel, André; Day, Michael O.; Muir, Robert A.; Matiwane, Aviwe; Kirkaldy, Abigail P.; Moyo, Sydney; Staniczek, Arnold; Cariglino, Bárbara; Maseko, Zolile; Kom, Nokuthula; Rubidge, Bruce S.; Garrouste, Romain; Holland, Alexandra; Barber-James, Helen M. (30 October 2022).

"South African Lagerstätte reveals middle Permian Gondwanan lakeshore ecosystem in exquisite detail" .

Communications Biology .

5 (1): 1154.

doi : 10.1038/s42003-022-04132-y .

PMC 9618562 .

PMID 36310243 .

^ Benton, M. J. (6 November 1989).

"Mass extinctions among tetrapods and the quality of the fossil record" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. B, Biological Sciences .

325 (1228): 369– 386.

Bibcode : 1989RSPTB.325..369B .

doi : 10.1098/rstb.1989.0094 .

ISSN 0080-4622 .

PMID 2574883 .

^ Neregato, R.; D'Apolito, C.; Glasspool, I. J.; Wang, S.-J.; Liu, F.; Windslow, P.; Lu, J.; Shao, L.; Hilton, J. (15 May 2016).

"Palynological constraints on the provenance and stratigraphic range of a Lopingian (Late Permian) inter-extinction floral lagerstätte from the Xuanwei Formation, Guizhou Province, China" .

International Journal of Coal Geology .

162 : 139– 150.

Bibcode : 2016IJCG..162..139N .

doi : 10.1016/j.coal.2016.06.005 .

S2CID 132822933 . Retrieved 18 June 2023 .

^ Dai, Xu; Davies, Joshua H.F.L.; Yuan, Zhiwei; Brayard, Arnaud; Ovtcharova, Maria; Xu, Guanghui; Liu, Xiaokang; Smith, Christopher P.A.; Schweitzer, Carrie E.; Li, Mingtao; Perrot, Morgann G.; Jiang, Shouyi; Miao, Luyi; Cao, Yiran; Yan, Jia; Bai, Ruoyu; Wang, Fengyu; Guo, Wei; Song, Huyue; Tian, Li; Dal Corso, Jacopo; Liu, Yuting; Chu, Daoliang; Song, Haijun (2023).

"A Mesozoic fossil lagerstätte from 250.8 million years ago shows a modern-type marine ecosystem" (PDF) .

Science .

379 (6632): 567– 572.

Bibcode : 2023Sci...379..567D .

doi : 10.1126/science.adf1622 .

PMID 36758082 .

S2CID 256697946 .

^ Brayard, Arnaud; Krumenacker, L. J.; Botting, Joseph P.; Jenks, James F.; Bylund, Kevin G.; Fara, Emmanuel; Vennin, Emmanuelle; Olivier, Nicolas; Goudemand, Nicolas; Saucède, Thomas; Charbonnier, Sylvain; Romano, Carlo; Doguzhaeva, Larisa; Thuy, Ben; Hautmann, Michael; Stephen, Daniel A.; Thomazo, Christophe; Escarguel, Gilles (2017).

"Unexpected Early Triassic marine ecosystem and the rise of the Modern evolutionary fauna" .

Science Advances .

3 (2): e1602159.

Bibcode : 2017SciA....3E2159B .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.1602159 .

PMC 5310825 .

PMID 28246643 .

^ a b c d e Flannery Sutherland, Joseph T.; Moon, Benjamin C.; Stubbs, Thomas L.; Benton, Michael J. (27 February 2019).

"Does exceptional preservation distort our view of disparity in the fossil record?" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

286 (1897): 20190091.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2019.0091 .

ISSN 0962-8452 .

PMC 6408902 .

PMID 30963850 .

^ Shcherbakov, Dmitry; Tarmo, Timm; Tzetlin, Alexander B.; Vinn, Olev; Zhuravlev, Andrey (April 2020).

"A probable oligochaete from an Early Triassic Lagerstätte of the southern Cis-Urals and its evolutionary implications" .

Acta Palaeontologica Polonica .

65 (2): 219– 233.

doi : 10.4202/app.00704.2019 .

S2CID 219097612 . Retrieved 28 April 2023 .

^ Dahoumane, Anissa; Nedjari, Ahmed; Aït-Ouali, Rachid; Taquet, Philippe; Vacant, Renaud; Steyer, Jean-Sébastien (2016).

"A new Mastodonsauroid Temnospondyl from the Triassic of Algeria: Implications for the biostratigraphy and palaeoenvironments of the Zarzaïtine Series, northern Sahara" .

Comptes Rendus Palevol (in French).

15 (8): 918– 926.

doi : 10.1016/j.crpv.2015.09.005 .

^ Hu, Shi-xue; Zhang, Qi-yue; Chen, Zhong-Qiang; Zhou, Chang-yong; Lü, Tao; Xie, Tao; Wen, Wen; Huang, Jin-yuan; Benton, Michael J. (7 August 2011).

"The Luoping biota: exceptional preservation, and new evidence on the Triassic recovery from end-Permian mass extinction" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

278 (1716): 2274– 2282.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2010.2235 .

ISSN 0962-8452 .

PMC 3119007 .

PMID 21183583 .

^ a b c d Liu, Jun; Martin Sander, P. (1 January 2019).

"The Vossenveld Formation and biotic recovery from the Permo-Triassic extinction" .

Staringia .

16 (1): 147– 152.

ISSN 0165-2354 .

^ Bicknell, Russell D. C.; Smith, Patrick M. (2 October 2021).

"The first fossil scorpion from Australia" .

Alcheringa: An Australasian Journal of Palaeontology .

45 (4): 419– 422.

doi : 10.1080/03115518.2021.1983874 .

ISSN 0311-5518 .

^ Shear, W. A.; Selden, Paul A.; Gall, Jean-Claude (June 2009).

"Millipedes from the Grès à Voltzia, Triassic of France, with comments on Mesozoic millipedes (Diplopoda: Helminthomorpha: Eugnatha)" .

International Journal of Myriapodology .

2 (1): 1– 13.

doi : 10.1163/187525409X462395 (inactive 1 July 2025).

hdl : 1808/8337 . Retrieved 18 June 2023 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Szwedo, Jacek; Nel, André (1 December 2011).

"The Oldest Aphid Insect from the Middle Triassic of the Vosges, France" .

Acta Palaeontologica Polonica .

56 (4): 757– 766.

doi : 10.4202/app.2010.0034 .

ISSN 0567-7920 .

^ Bicknell, Russell D. C.; Zalohar, Jure; Miklavc, Primoz; Celarc, Bogomir; Kriznar, Matija; Hitij, Tomaz (2021).

"Revisiting horseshoe crab fossils from the Middle Triassic (Anisian) Strelovec Formation Konservat-Lagerstätte of Slovenia" .

Palaeontologia Electronica .

doi : 10.26879/1168 .

ISSN 1094-8074 .

^ Feldman, Howard R. (2005).

"Paleoecology, Taphonomy, and Biogeography of a Coenothyris Community (Brachiopoda, Terebratulida) from the Triassic (Upper Anisian–Lower Ladinian) of Israel" .

American Museum Novitates (3479): 1.

doi : 10.1206/0003-0082(2005)479[0001:PTABOA]2.0.CO;2 .

ISSN 0003-0082 .

^ Klug, Christian; Spiekman, Stephan N. F.; Bastiaans, Dylan; Scheffold, Beat; Scheyer, Torsten M. (4 March 2024).

"The marine conservation deposits of Monte San Giorgio (Switzerland, Italy): the prototype of Triassic black shale Lagerstätten" .

Swiss Journal of Palaeontology .

143 (1): 11.

doi : 10.1186/s13358-024-00308-7 .

ISSN 1664-2384 .

PMC 10912274 .

PMID 38450287 .

^ Dominici, Stefano; Danise, Silvia; Tintori, Andrea (15 August 2024).

"A Middle Triassic Cassian-type fauna (Pelsa-Vazzoler Lagerstätte) and the adaptive radiation of the Modern evolutionary fauna" .

Papers in Palaeontology .

10 (4).

doi : 10.1002/spp2.1579 .

ISSN 2056-2799 .

^ Lukeneder, Alexander; Surmik, Dawid; Gorzelak, Przemysław; Niedźwiedzki, Robert; Brachaniec, Tomasz; Salomon, Mariusz A. (25 November 2020).

"Bromalites from the Upper Triassic Polzberg section (Austria); insights into trophic interactions and food chains of the Polzberg palaeobiota" .

Scientific Reports .

10 (1): 20545.

doi : 10.1038/s41598-020-77017-x .

PMC 7689505 .

PMID 33239675 .

^ Lukeneder, P.; Lukeneder, A. (2022).

"Mineralized belemnoid cephalic cartilage from the late Triassic Polzberg Konservat-Lagerstätte (Austria)" .

PLOS ONE .

17 (4): e0264595.

Bibcode : 2022PLoSO..1764595L .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0264595 .

PMC 9020720 .

PMID 35442996 .

^ Lukeneder, Alexander; Lukeneder, Petra (17 August 2021).

"The Upper Triassic Polzberg palaeobiota from a marine Konservat-Lagerstätte deposited during the Carnian Pluvial Episode in Austria" .

Scientific Reports .

11 (1): 16644.

Bibcode : 2021NatSR..1116644L .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-021-96052-w .

PMC 8370992 .

PMID 34404880 .

^ Frankowiak, K.; Mazur, M.; Gothmann, A. M.; Stolarski, J. (15 July 2013).

"Diagenetic Alteration of Triassic Coral from the Aragonite Konservat-Lagerstatte in Alakir Cay, Turkey: Implications for Geochemical Measurements" .

PALAIOS .

28 (6): 333– 342.

doi : 10.2110/palo.2012.p12-116r .

ISSN 0883-1351 .

^ Ren, Ting-Cong; Ma, Xin-Ying; Wang, Qing-Dong; Xu, Guang-Hui (21 November 2024).

"An exceptionally preserved fossil assemblage from the early Jurassic of Chongqing (China) reveals a complex lacustrine ecosystem" .

Scientific Reports .

14 (1): 26147.

doi : 10.1038/s41598-024-77084-4 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 11582640 .

PMID 39572595 .

^ Duffin, Christopher J.; Garassino, Alessandro; Pasini, Giovanni (19 May 2023).

" Squaloraja Riley 1833 (Holocephala: Squalorajidae) from the Lower Jurassic of Osteno Konservat-Lagerstätte (Como, NW Italy)" .

Natural History Sciences .

10 (1).

doi : 10.4081/nhs.2023.642 .

ISSN 2385-0922 .

S2CID 258822179 .

^ CONYBEARE, W. D. (1824).

"XXI.—On the Discovery of an almost perfect Skeleton of the Plesiosaurus" .

Transactions of the Geological Society of London .

1 (2): 381– 389.

doi : 10.1144/transgslb.1.2.381 .

ISSN 2042-5295 .

^ Lomax, Dean R.; Massare, Judy A. (4 March 2015).

"A new species of Ichthyosaurus from the Lower Jurassic of West Dorset, England, U.K." Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology .

35 (2): e903260.

Bibcode : 2015JVPal..35E3260L .

doi : 10.1080/02724634.2014.903260 .

ISSN 0272-4634 .

S2CID 85745787 .

^ Norman, David B (29 November 2019).

"Scelidosaurus harrisonii from the Early Jurassic of Dorset, England: cranial anatomy" .

Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society .

188 (1): 1– 81.

doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlz074 .

ISSN 0024-4082 .

^ Zeuner, F. E. (1962).

"Fossil insects from the Lower Lias of Charmouth, Dorset" .

Bulletin of the British Museum (Natural History), Geology .

7 (1): 155– 171.

^ BASSI, DAVIDE; FUGAGNOLI, ANNA; POSENATO, RENATO; SCOTT, DAVID B. (2008).

"Testate Amoebae from the Early Jurassic of the Western Tethys, North-East Italy" .

Palaeontology .

51 (6): 1335– 1339.

Bibcode : 2008Palgy..51.1335B .

doi : 10.1111/j.1475-4983.2008.00817.x .

ISSN 0031-0239 .

S2CID 129670565 .

^ Neri, M.; Roghi, G.; Ragazzi, E.; Papazzoni, C. A. (2017).

"First record of Pliensbachian (Lower Jurassic) amber and associated palynoflora from the Monti Lessini (northern Italy)" .

Geobios .

50 (1): 49– 63.

Bibcode : 2017Geobi..50...49N .

doi : 10.1016/j.geobios.2016.10.001 . Retrieved 3 January 2022 .

^ MERINO-TOMÉ, ÓSCAR; PORTA, GIOVANNA DELLA; KENTER, JEROEN A. M.; VERWER, KLAAS; HARRIS, PAUL (MITCH); ADAMS, ERWIN W.; PLAYTON, TED; CORROCHANO, DIEGO (2011).

"Sequence development in an isolated carbonate platform (Lower Jurassic, Djebel Bou Dahar, High Atlas, Morocco): influence of tectonics, eustacy and carbonate production" .

Sedimentology .

59 (1): 118– 155.

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-3091.2011.01232.x .

ISSN 0037-0746 .

^ Scheibner, Christian; Reijmer, J. G. (1999).

"Facies patterns within a Lower Jurassic upper slope to inner platform transect (Jbel Bou Dahar, Morocco)" .

Facies .

41 (1): 55– 80.

Bibcode : 1999Faci...41...55S .

doi : 10.1007/bf02537460 .

ISSN 0172-9179 .

^ Beauvais, L. (1986).

"Monographie des Madreporaires du Jurassique Inferieur du Maroc (Monograph on Lower Jurassic Corals of Morocco)" .

Palaeontographica Abteilung A .

194 (3): 1– 68.

^ Thuy, Ben; Gale, Andrew S.; Reich, Mike (2 December 2010).

"A new echinoderm Lagerstätte from the Pliensbachian (Early Jurassic) of the French Ardennes" .

Swiss Journal of Palaeontology .

130 (1): 173– 185.

doi : 10.1007/s13358-010-0015-y .

ISSN 1664-2376 .

^ Bomfleur, B.; McLoughlinVajda, V. (2014). Fossilized nuclei and chromosomes reveal 180 million years of genomic stasis in royal ferns. Science, 343(6177), 1376-1377, S.; Vajda, V. (2014).

"Fossilized nuclei and chromosomes reveal 180 million years of genomic stasis in royal ferns" .

Science .

343 (6177): 1376– 1377.

Bibcode : 2014Sci...343.1376B .

doi : 10.1126/science.1249884 .

PMID 24653037 .

S2CID 38248823 . Retrieved 30 July 2021 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ McLoughlin, S.; Bomfleur, B. (2016).

"Biotic interactions in an exceptionally well preserved osmundaceous fern rhizome from the Early Jurassic of Sweden" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

464 (1): 86– 96.

Bibcode : 2016PPP...464...86M .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2016.01.044 .

^ Qu, Y.; McLoughlin, M.; van Zuilen, M. A.; Whitehouse, M.; Engdahl, A.; Vajda, V. (2019).

"Evidence for molecular structural variations in the cytoarchitectures of a Jurassic plant" .

Geology .

47 (4): 325– 329.

Bibcode : 2019Geo....47..325Q .

doi : 10.1130/g45725.1 .

S2CID 84841297 .

^ Marroquín, Selva M.; Martindale, Rowan C.; Fuchs, Dirk (7 February 2018).

"New records of the late Pliensbachian to early Toarcian (Early Jurassic) gladius-bearing coleoid cephalopods from the Ya Ha Tinda Lagerstätte, Canada" .

Papers in Palaeontology .

4 (2): 245– 276.

doi : 10.1002/spp2.1104 .

S2CID 135120464 . Retrieved 8 April 2023 .

^ Martindale, Rowan C.; Aberhan, Martin (15 July 2017).

"Response of macrobenthic communities to the Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event in northeastern Panthalassa (Ya Ha Tinda, Alberta, Canada)" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

478 : 103– 120.

Bibcode : 2017PPP...478..103M .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2017.01.009 . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

^ Martindale, Rowan C.; Them, Theodore R.; Gill, Benjamin C.; Marroquín, Selva M.; Knoll, Andrew H. (1 July 2017).

"A new Early Jurassic (ca. 183 Ma) fossil Lagerstätte from Ya Ha Tinda, Alberta, Canada" .

Geology .

45 (3): 255– 258.

Bibcode : 2017Geo....45..255M .

doi : 10.1130/G38808.1 .

hdl : 10919/81874 .

S2CID 56182151 .

^ Muscente, A. D.; Martindale, Rowan C.; Schiffbauer, James D.; Creighton, Abby L.; Bogan, Brooke A. (4 November 2019).

"Taphonomy of the Lower Jurassic Konservat-Lagerstätte at Ya Ha Tina (Alberta, Canada) and Its Significance for Exceptional Fossil Preservation During Oceanic Anoxic Events" .

PALAIOS .

34 (11): 515– 541.

Bibcode : 2019Palai..34..515M .

doi : 10.2110/palo.2019.050 .

S2CID 208268686 . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

^ Williams, Matt; Benton, Michael James; Ross, Andrew (15 July 2015).

"The Strawberry Bank Lagerstätte reveals insights into Early Jurassic life" .

Journal of the Geological Society .

172 (6): 683– 692.

Bibcode : 2015JGSoc.172..683W .

doi : 10.1144/jgs2014-144 .

hdl : 1983/a7fc8bb4-889c-4fe9-b049-86d284141316 .

S2CID 52971056 . Retrieved 18 June 2023 .

^ Little, Crispin T. S.; Gale, Andy; Williams, Matt; Hammer, Øyvind; Fernandez, Vincent (24 January 2023).

"Bivalve-barnacle pseudoplanktonic colonisation of wood from the Toarcian, Lower Jurassic, Strawberry Bank Lagerstätte, Somerset, UK" .

Acta Palaeontologica Polonica .

68 (1): 133– 142.

doi : 10.4202/app.01018.2022 .

S2CID 256258263 . Retrieved 18 June 2023 .

^ Srdic, Alexander; Beardmore, Susan; Lomax, Dean R. (10 September 2019).

"A rediscovered Lower Jurassic ichthyosaur skeleton possibly from the Strawberry Bank Lagerstätte, Somerset, UK" .

Historical Biology .

33 (6): 814– 822.

doi : 10.1080/08912963.2019.1663840 .

S2CID 203358919 . Retrieved 18 June 2023 .

^ Jamison-Todd, Sarah; Moon, Benjamin C.; Rowe, Andre J.; Williams, Matt; Benton, Michael James (29 September 2022).

"Dietary niche partitioning in Early Jurassic ichthyosaurs from Strawberry Bank" .

Journal of Anatomy .

241 (6): 1409– 1423.

doi : 10.1111/joa.13744 .

PMC 9644957 .

PMID 36175086 .

^ Konwert, M.; Hörnig, M. (2018).

"Grimmenichthys ansorgei, gen. et sp. nov. (Teleostei, "Pholidophoriformes"), and other "pholidophoriform" fishes from the early Toarcian of Grimmen (Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Germany)" .

Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology .

38 (3): 1– 16.

doi : 10.1080/02724634.2018.1451872 .

hdl : 11336/84457 .

S2CID 90344418 . Retrieved 24 October 2021 .

^ Stumpf, Sebastian (2017).

"A synoptic review of the vertebrate fauna from the "Green Series"(Toarcian) of northeastern Germany with descriptions of new taxa: A contribution to the knowledge of Early Jurassic vertebrate palaeobiodiversity patterns" (PDF) .

Greifswald University (PhD Thesis): 1– 47 . Retrieved 9 September 2021 .

^ Ansorge, J. (2003).

"Insects from the Lower Toarcian of Middle Europe and England" .

Proceedings of the Second Palaeoentomological Congress, Acta Zoologica Cracoviensia .

46 (1): 291– 310 . Retrieved 30 July 2021 .

^ Ruebsam, W.; Schmid-Röhl, A.; Al-Husseini, M. (2023).

"Astronomical timescale for the early Toarcian (Early Jurassic) Posidonia Shale and global environmental changes" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

623 111619.

Bibcode : 2023PPP...62311619R .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2023.111619 .

S2CID 258545235 . Retrieved 10 July 2023 .

^ Röhl, Hans-Joachim; Schmid-Röhl, Annette; Oschmann, Wolfgang; Frimmel, Andreas; Schwark, Lorenz (1 January 2011).

"The Posidonia Shale (Lower Toarcian) of SW-Germany: an oxygen-depleted ecosystem controlled by sea level and palaeoclimate" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

165 ( 1– 2): 27– 52.

doi : 10.1016/S0031-0182(00)00152-8 . Retrieved 1 July 2023 .

^ Carvalho, Carlos Neto de; Pereira, Bruno Claro; Klompmaker, Adiel; Baucon, Andrea; Moita, José António; Pereira, Pedro; Machado, Susana; Belo, João; Carvalho, Jorge M. F.; Mergulhão, Lia (3 May 2016).

"Running crabs, walking crinoids, grazing gastropods: behavioral diversity and evolutionary implications in the Cabeço da Ladeira lagerstätte (Middle Jurassic, Portugal)" .

Comunicações Geológicas : 39– 54.

ISSN 0873-948X . Retrieved 8 June 2024 .

^ Bravi, Sergio; Garassino, Alessandro; Bartiromo, Antonello; Audo, Denis; Charbonnier, Sylvain; Schweigert, Günter; Thévenard, Frédéric; Longobardi, Cristiano (1 April 2014).

"Middle Jurassic Monte Fallano Plattenkalk (Campania, southern Italy): first report on terrestrial plants, decapod crustaceans and fishes" .

Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie - Abhandlungen .

272 : 79– 107.

doi : 10.1127/0077-7749/2014/0398 .

^ Hart, Malcolm B.; De Jonghe, Alex; Page, Kevin N.; Price, Gregory D.; Smart, Christopher W. (1 May 2016).

"EXCEPTIONAL ACCUMULATIONS OF STATOLITHS IN ASSOCIATION WITH THE CHRISTIAN MALFORD LAGERSTÄTTE (CALLOVIAN, JURASSIC) IN WILTSHIRE, UNITED KINGDOM" .

PALAIOS .

31 (5): 203– 220.

doi : 10.2110/palo.2015.066 .

ISSN 0883-1351 . Retrieved 12 May 2024 – via GeoScienceWorld.

^ Wings, Oliver; Rabi, Márton; Schneider, Jörg W.; Schwermann, Leonie; Sun, Ge; Zhou, Chang-Fu; Joyce, Walter G. (2012), "An enormous Jurassic turtle bone bed from the Turpan Basin of Xinjiang, China", Naturwissenschaften , 114 (11): 925– 35, Bibcode : 2012NW.....99..925W , doi : 10.1007/s00114-012-0974-5 , PMID 23086389 , S2CID 17423081 ^ Ponomarenko, A. G.; Aristov, D. S.; Bashkuev, A. S.; Gubin, Yu. M.; Khramov, A. V.; Lukashevich, E. D.; Popov, Yu. A.; Pritykina, L. N.; Sinitsa, S. M.; Sinitshenkova, N. D.; Sukatsheva, I. D.; Vassilenko, D. V.; Yan, E. V. (1 December 2014).

"Upper Jurassic Lagerstätte Shar Teg, southwestern Mongolia" .

Paleontological Journal .

48 (14): 1573– 1682.

doi : 10.1134/S0031030114140160 .

ISSN 1555-6174 .

^ Zell, Patrick; Beckmann, Seija; Stinnesbeck, Wolfgang (December 2014).

"Age and depositional conditions of the marine vertebrate concentration Lagerstätte at Gomez Farías, southern Coahuila, Mexico" .

Journal of South American Earth Sciences .

56 : 91– 109.

doi : 10.1016/j.jsames.2014.08.009 . Retrieved 8 June 2024 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Frese, Michael; Gloy, Gerda; Oberprieler, Rolf G.; Gore, Damian B. (5 June 2017).

"Imaging of Jurassic fossils from the Talbragar Fish Bed using fluorescence, photoluminescence, and elemental and mineralogical mapping" .

PLOS ONE .

12 (6): e0179029.

Bibcode : 2017PLoSO..1279029F .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0179029 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 5459505 .

PMID 28582427 .

^ Kin, Adrian; Gruszczyński, Michał; Martill, David; Marshall, Jim D.; Błażejowski, Błażej (2013).

"Palaeoenvironment and taphonomy of a Late Jurassic (Late Tithonian) Lagerstätte from central Poland" .

Lethaia .

46 (1): 71– 81.

doi : 10.1111/j.1502-3931.2012.00322.x .

ISSN 0024-1164 .

^ Błażejowski, Błażej; Weryński, Łukasz; Wierzbowski, Andrzej; Michalska, Monika; Hryniewicz, Krzysztof; Uchman, Alfred; Kugler, Stanisław; Bącal, Paweł; Hołda-Michalska, Aleksandra (2023).

"Summary of a decade of research at the Owadów–Brzezinki Lagerstätte (Tithonian, central Poland): A review and perspectives for the future" .

Volumina Jurassica .

21 : 83– 98.

ISSN 1731-3708 .

^ Weryński, Łukasz; Błażejowski, Błażej; Kędzierski, Mariusz (2023).

"A COMPARISON OF LATE JURASSIC PREDATORY ACTINOPTERYGII TEETH FROM OWADÓW-BRZEZINKI LÄGERSTATTE AND ITS PALAEOECOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS" .

Acta Palaeontologica Polonica .

68 .

doi : 10.4202/app.01058.2023 . Retrieved 11 April 2025 .

^ Cardoso, Alexandre Ribeiro; Romero, Guilherme Raffaeli; Osés, Gabriel Ladeira; Nogueira, Afonso César Rodrigues (15 March 2020).

"Taphonomy of lacustrine fish fossils of the Parnaíba Basin, northeastern Brazil: Spatial and causative relations of Konservat Lagerstätten in West Gondwana during Jurassic-Cretaceous" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

542 109602.

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2020.109602 .

ISSN 0031-0182 .

^ Rozada, Lee; Allain, Ronan; Vullo, Romain; Goedert, Jean; Augier, Dominique; Jean, Amandine; Marchal, Jonathan; Peyre de Fabrègues, Claire; Qvarnström, Martin; Royo-Torres, Rafael (23 January 2021).

"A Lower Cretaceous Lagerstätte from France: a taphonomic overview of the Angeac-Charente vertebrate assemblage" .

Lethaia .

54 (2): 141– 165.

doi : 10.1111/let.12394 .

S2CID 234299378 . Retrieved 29 June 2023 .

^ Gil-Delgado, Alejandro; Delclòs, Xavier; Sellés, Albert; Galobart, Àngel; Oms, Oriol (17 April 2023).

"The Early Cretaceous coastal lake Konservat-Lagerstätte of La Pedrera de Meià (Southern Pyrenees)" .

Geologica Acta .

21 : 1–XIII.

doi : 10.1344/GeologicaActa2023.21.3 .

hdl : 2445/201820 .

ISSN 1696-5728 .

^ Sánchez-García, Alba; Peñalver, Enrique; Delclòs, Xavier; Engel, Michael S. (2019). Smith, Andrew (ed.).

"Jumping bristletails (Insecta, Archaeognatha) from the Lower Cretaceous amber of Lebanon" .

Papers in Palaeontology .

5 (4): 679– 697.

doi : 10.1002/spp2.1261 .

hdl : 2445/163385 .

ISSN 2056-2799 .

^ Sibelle, Maksoud; Dany, Azar (2023).

"Lebanese Amber: A Fantastic Journey into the Time of Dinosaurs" (PDF) .

Journal of Gems & Gemmology .

25 (4): 136– 145.

doi : 10.15964/j.cnki.027jgg.2023.04.012 .

ISSN 2096-9120 .

^ El Hajj, Layla; Baudin, François; Gèze, Raymond; Cavin, Lionel; Dejax, Jean; Garcia, Géraldine; Horne, David J.; Maksoud, Sibelle; Otero, Olga; Azar, Dany (1 April 2021).

"Dysodiles from the lower Barremian of Lebanon: Insights on the fossil assemblages and the depositional environment reconstruction" .

Cretaceous Research .

120 104732.

doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2020.104732 .

ISSN 0195-6671 .

^ Schädel, Mario; Azar, Dany; El Hajj, Layla; Maksoud, Sibelle; Robin, Ninon (2 April 2025).

"A 125 million-year-old freshwater isopod shines new light on the origin of subterranean freshwater species" .

Royal Society Open Science .

12 (4): 241512.

doi : 10.1098/rsos.241512 .

PMC 11962533 .

PMID 40177107 .

^ Kopylov, D. S.; Rasnitsyn, A. P.; Aristov, D. S.; Bashkuev, A. S.; Bazhenova, N. V.; Dmitriev, V. Yu.; Gorochov, A. V.; Ignatov, M. S.; Ivanov, V. D.; Khramov, A. V.; Legalov, A. A.; Lukashevich, E. D.; Mamontov, Yu. S.; Melnitsky, S. I.; Ogłaza, B. (1 December 2020).

"The Khasurty Fossil Insect Lagerstätte" .

Paleontological Journal .

54 (11): 1221– 1394.

doi : 10.1134/S0031030120110027 .

ISSN 1555-6174 .

^ Poropat, Stephen F.; Martin, Sarah K.; Tosolini, Anne-Marie P.; Wagstaff, Barbara E.; Bean, Lynne B.; Kear, Benjamin P.; Vickers-Rich, Patricia; Rich, Thomas H. (3 April 2018).

"Early Cretaceous polar biotas of Victoria, southeastern Australia—an overview of research to date" .

Alcheringa: An Australasian Journal of Palaeontology .

42 (2): 157– 229.

Bibcode : 2018Alch...42..157P .

doi : 10.1080/03115518.2018.1453085 .

ISSN 0311-5518 .

S2CID 133845914 .

^ Filho, Edilson Bezerra dos Santos; Adami-Rodrigues, Karen; Lima, Flaviana Jorge de; Bantim, Renan Alfredo Machado; Wappler, Torsten; Saraiva, Antônio Álamo Feitosa (9 August 2019).

"Evidence of plant–insect interaction in the Early Cretaceous Flora from the Crato Formation, Araripe Basin, Northeast Brazil" .

Historical Biology .

31 (7): 926– 937.

doi : 10.1080/08912963.2017.1408611 .

ISSN 0891-2963 . Retrieved 21 May 2024 – via Taylor and Francis Online.

^ Voltani, Cibele Gasparelo; Osés, Gabriel Ladeira; Freitas, Bernardo Tavares; Prado, Gustavo Marcondes Evangelista Martins; Rohn, Rosemarie; Pacheco, Mírian Liza Alves Forancelli; Anelli, Luiz Eduardo; de Almeida, Renato Paes; Simões, Marcello Guimarães; Caldeira do Prado, Ludmila Alves; Araripe, Rilda Verônica Cardoso de; Galante, Douglas; Rangel, Elidiane Cipriano (2023).

"Taphonomy of fish, invertebrates and plant remains in the first Tethyan-South Atlantic marine ingression along Cretaceous rift systems in NE-Brazil" .

Cretaceous Research .

147 105508.

doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2023.105508 .

ISSN 0195-6671 .

^ "Vertebrates from the uppermost stratigraphic sequence of the Pietraroja plattenkalk (Early Cretaceous, Southern Italy)" .

iris.unito.it . Retrieved 12 July 2024 .

^ Bartiromo, Antonello (1 November 2013).

"Plant remains from the Lower Cretaceous Fossil-Lagerstätte of Pietraroja, Benevento, southern Italy" .

Cretaceous Research .

46 : 65– 79.

doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2013.08.013 .

ISSN 0195-6671 .

^ Lee, Soo Bin; Li, Yan-Da; Cai, Chenyang; Engel, Michael S.; Nam, Gi Soo; Park, Jong Kyun; Nel, André; Jenkins Shaw, Josh; Jouault, Corentin; Legalov, Andrei; Kundrata, Robin (June 2024).

"Cretaceous beetles of the Jinju Formation (Coleoptera): An overview of the Jinju Formation, its coleopteran diversity, and past and future research" .

Journal of Asia-Pacific Entomology .

27 (2): 102236.

doi : 10.1016/j.aspen.2024.102236 . Retrieved 8 June 2024 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Kim, Haang-Mook; Chang, Mee-Mann; Wu, Feixiang; Kim, Yang-Hee (1 January 2014).

"A new ichthyodectiform (Pisces, Teleostei) from the Lower Cretaceous of South Korea and its paleobiogeographic implication" .

Cretaceous Research .

47 : 117– 130.

doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2013.11.007 .

ISSN 0195-6671 .

^ Park, Tae-Yoon; Wilson, George D. F.; Lee, Dong-Chan; Choi, Duck K. (2012).

"Occurrence of the isopod Archaeoniscus coreaensis new species from the Lower Cretaceous Jinju Formation, Korea" .

Journal of Paleontology .

86 (4): 626– 640.

doi : 10.1666/11-131R.1 .

ISSN 0022-3360 .

^ Kim, Kyung Soo; Lockley, Martin G.; Lim, Jong Deock; Kim, Dong Hee (April 2019).

"The oldest known anuran (frog) trackways from the Jinju Formation, Lower Cretaceous, Korea" .

Cretaceous Research .

96 : 142– 148.

doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2018.12.008 . Retrieved 8 June 2024 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Than-Marchese, Bruno Andrés; Alvarado-Ortega, Jesús (October 2022).

"Armigatus felixi sp. nov. An Albian double armored herring (Clupeomorpha, Ellimmichthyiformes) from the Tlayúa lagerstätte, Mexico" .

Journal of South American Earth Sciences .

118 103905.

Bibcode : 2022JSAES.11803905T .

doi : 10.1016/j.jsames.2022.103905 . Retrieved 29 June 2023 .

^ López-Palomino, Isabel; González-Rodríguez, Katia Adriana; Schultze, Hans-Peter; Palma-Ramírez, Arturo; Contreras-Cruz, Diana (1 November 2021).

"Ammonites from the La Negra Facies (El Doctor Formation, late Albian) of the Muhi Quarry, Hidalgo, central Mexico" .

Journal of South American Earth Sciences .

111 103400.

doi : 10.1016/j.jsames.2021.103400 .

ISSN 0895-9811 .

^ Néraudeau, Didier; Vullo, Romain; Bénéfice, Pierre; Breton, Gérard; Dépré, Éric; Gaspard, Danièle; Girard, Vincent; Le Couls, Matthieu; Moreau, Jean-David; Nel, André; Perrichot, Vincent; Solórzano-Kraemer, Mónica M.; Wappler, Torsten (July 2020).

"The paralic Albian–Cenomanian Puy-Puy Lagerstätte (Aquitaine Basin, France): An overview and new data" .

Cretaceous Research .

111 104124.

Bibcode : 2020CrRes.11104124N .

doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2019.03.022 .

S2CID 133649140 . Retrieved 18 June 2023 .

^ Vullo, Romain; Néraudeau, Didier; Dépré, Eric (October 2013).

"Vertebrate remains from the Cenomanian (Late Cretaceous) plant-bearing Lagerstätte of Puy-Puy (Charente-Maritime, France)" .

Cretaceous Research .

45 : 314– 320.

Bibcode : 2013CrRes..45..314V .

doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2013.06.002 . Retrieved 18 June 2023 .

^ Santos, Artai A.; Xiao, Lifang; Labandeira, Conrad C.; Néraudeau, Didier; Dépré, Eric; Moreau, Jean-David; Perrichot, Vincent; Wappler, Torsten (1 July 2022).

"Plant–insect interactions from the mid-Cretaceous at Puy-Puy (Aquitaine Basin, western France) indicates preferential herbivory for angiosperms amid a forest of ferns, gymnosperms, and angiosperms" .

Botany Letters .

169 (4): 568– 587.

doi : 10.1080/23818107.2022.2092772 .

S2CID 250241945 . Retrieved 18 June 2023 .

^ Santos, Artai A.; McLoughlin, Stephen; Rubalcava-Knoth, Marco A.; Hernández-Damián, Ana L.; Villanueva-Amadoz, Uxue; Cevallos-Ferriz, Sergio R. S. (10 July 2024).

"Plant-insect interactions in the mid-Cretaceous paleotropical El Chango Lagerstätte (Cintalapa Fm., Mexico)—patterns of herbivory during the Angiosperm Terrestrial Revolution" .

Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution .

12 .

doi : 10.3389/fevo.2024.1381539 .

ISSN 2296-701X .

^ Friedman, Matt; Beckett, Hermione T.; Close, Roger A.; Johanson, Zerina (2016).

"The English Chalk and London Clay: two remarkable British bony fish Lagerstätten" .

Geological Society, London, Special Publications .

430 (1): 165– 200.

doi : 10.1144/SP430.18 .

ISSN 0305-8719 .

^ a b George, Hady; Bazzi, Mohamad; Hossny, Tamara El; Ashraf, Nida; Saad, Pierre Abi; Clements, Thomas (29 April 2024).

"The famous fish beds of Lebanon: the Upper Cretaceous Lagerstätten of Haqel, Hjoula, Nammoura, and Sahel Aalma" .

Journal of the Geological Society .

181 (5).

doi : 10.1144/jgs2023-210 .

ISSN 0016-7649 .

^ Rieppel, Olivier; Zaher, Hussam; Tchernov, Eitan; Polcyn, Michael J. (2003).

"The anatomy and relationships of Haasiophis terrasanctus, a fossil snake by well-developed hind limbs from the Mid-Cretaceous of the Middle East" .

Journal of Paleontology .

77 (3): 536– 558.

doi : 10.1666/0022-3360(2003)077<0536:TAAROH>2.0.CO;2 .

ISSN 0022-3360 .

^ Palci, Alessandro; Jurkovšek, Bogdan; Kolar-Jurkovšek, Tea; Caldwell, Michael W. (2008).

"New palaeoenvironmental model for the Komen (Slovenia) Cenomanian (Upper Cretaceous) fossil lagerstätte" .

Cretaceous Research .

29 (2): 316– 328.

doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2007.05.003 .

ISSN 0195-6671 .

^ a b Cawley, John; Lehmann, Jens; Wiese, Frank; Kriwet, Jürgen (2020).

"Njoerdichthys dyckerhoffi gen. et sp. nov. (Pycnodontiformes, lower Turonian) northward migration caused by the Cretaceous Thermal Maximum" .

Cretaceous Research .

116 104590.

doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2020.104590 .

ISSN 0195-6671 .

PMC 7611863 .

PMID 34690488 .

^ Klug, Christian; Riegraf, Wolfgang; Lehmann, Jens (2012).

"Soft–part preservation in heteromorph ammonites from the Cenomanian–Turonian Boundary Event (OAE 2) in north–west Germany" .

Palaeontology .

55 (6): 1307– 1331.

doi : 10.1111/j.1475-4983.2012.01196.x .

ISSN 0031-0239 .

^ Salamon, Mariusz A.; Gorzelak, Przemyslaw; Borszcz, Tomasz; Gajerski, Artur; Kaźmierczak, Jolanta (May–June 2009).

"A crinoid concentration Lagerstätte in the Turonian (Late Cretaceous) Conulus Bed (Miechów-Wolbrom area, Poland)" .

Geobios .

42 (3): 351– 357.

doi : 10.1016/j.geobios.2008.10.008 . Retrieved 9 March 2025 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Cooper, Samuel L. A.; Martill, David M. (1 December 2020).

"Pycnodont fishes (Actinopterygii, Pycnodontiformes) from the Upper Cretaceous (lower Turonian) Akrabou Formation of Asfla, Morocco" .

Cretaceous Research .

116 104607.

doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2020.104607 .

ISSN 0195-6671 .

PMC 7442934 .

PMID 32863512 .

^ Martill, David M.; Ibrahim, Nizar; Brito, Paulo M.; Baider, Lahssen; Zhouri, Samir; Loveridge, Robert; Naish, Darren; Hing, Richard (2011).

"A new Plattenkalk Konservat Lagerstätte in the Upper Cretaceous of Gara Sbaa, south-eastern Morocco" .

Cretaceous Research .

32 (4): 433– 446.

doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2011.01.005 .

ISSN 0195-6671 .

^ Brothers, D. J.; Rasnitsyn, A. P. (1 September 2003).

"Diversity of Hymenoptera and other insects in the Late Cretaceous (Turonian) deposits at Orapa, Botswana : a preliminary review" .

African Entomology .

11 (2): 221– 226.

ISSN 1021-3589 . Retrieved 8 June 2024 – via Sabinet.

^ Woolley, Christopher (6 June 2016).

"The first scarabaeid beetle (Coleoptera, Scarabaeidae, Melolonthinae) described from the Mesozoic (Late-Cretaceous) of Africa" .

African Invertebrates .

57 (1): 53– 66.

doi : 10.3897/AfrInvertebr.57.8416 .

ISSN 2305-2562 . Retrieved 8 June 2024 .

^ Mnguni, Sandiso; McKay, Ian James; Badenhorst, Shaw (29 April 2024).

"A Fossil Paederinae from a Lacustrine Deposit at Orapa Diamond Mine in Botswana1" .

Journal of Entomological Science .

59 (4).

doi : 10.18474/JES23-99 .

ISSN 0749-8004 . Retrieved 8 June 2024 .

^ Grimaldi, David; Agosti, Donat (5 December 2000).

"A formicine in New Jersey Cretaceous amber (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) and early evolution of the ants" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

97 (25): 13678– 13683.

doi : 10.1073/pnas.240452097 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 17635 .

PMID 11078527 .

^ Trzęsiok, Dawid; Krzykawski, Tomasz; Niedźwiedzki, Robert; Brom, Krzysztof; Gorzelak, Przemysław; Salamon, Mariusz A. (1 May 2014).

"Palaeoenvironment of the Upper Cretaceous (Coniacian) concretion-bearing Lagerstätten from Poland" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

401 : 154– 165.

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2014.02.030 .

ISSN 0031-0182 .

^ Dalla Vecchia, F.M; Tentor, M. (2004).

"Il Carso 85 milioni di anni fa: Gli straordinari fossili di Polazzo" (PDF) .

Gruppo Speleologico Monfalconese A.d.F : 1– 75.

^ Chiarenza, Alfio Alessandro; Fabbri, Matteo; Consorti, Lorenzo; Muscioni, Marco; Evans, David C.; Cantalapiedra, Juan L.; Fanti, Federico (2 December 2021).

"An Italian dinosaur Lagerstätte reveals the tempo and mode of hadrosauriform body size evolution" .

Scientific Reports .

11 (1): 23295.

Bibcode : 2021NatSR..1123295C .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-021-02490-x .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 8640049 .

PMID 34857789 .

^ Marco, Muscioni; Chiarenza, Alfio Alessandro; Delfino, Massimo; Fabbri, Matteo; Milocco, Kevin; Fanti, Federico (2023).

"Acynodon adriaticus from Villaggio del Pescatore (Campanian of Italy): Anatomical and chronostratigraphic integration improves phylogenetic resolution in Hylaeochampsidae (Eusuchia)" .

Cretaceous Research .

151 105631.

Bibcode : 2023CrRes.15105631M .

doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2023.105631 .

hdl : 11093/5418 .

ISSN 0195-6671 .

^ Brownstein, Chase Doran (1 April 2019).

"First Record of a Small Juvenile Giant Crocodyliform and its Ontogenetic and Biogeographic Implications" .

Bulletin of the Peabody Museum of Natural History .

60 (1): 81.

doi : 10.3374/014.060.0104 .

ISSN 0079-032X .

^ a b Self-Trail, Jean M.; Gardner, Kristina F.; O'Keefe, Jennifer; Mason, Patricia H.; Puckett, Mark; Gibson, Michael A.; McCarty, M. Maeve (2024).

"Microfossils and biostratigraphy of the Upper Cretaceous Coon Creek Formation Lagerstätte, Mississippi Embayment, USA" .

Geological Society, London, Special Publications .

545 (1): 717– 738.

doi : 10.1144/SP545-2023-137 .

ISSN 0305-8719 .

^ Vrazo, M. B.; Diefendorf, A. F.; Crowley, B. E.; Czaja, A. D. (2018).

"Late Cretaceous marine arthropods relied on terrestrial organic matter as a food source: Geochemical evidence from the Coon Creek Lagerstätte in the Mississippi Embayment" .

Geobiology .

16 (2): 160– 178.

doi : 10.1111/gbi.12270 .

ISSN 1472-4677 .

PMID 29350453 .

^ "PBDB" .

paleobiodb.org . Retrieved 12 July 2024 .

^ Paparella, Ilaria; Palci, Alessandro; Nicosia, Umberto; Caldwell, Michael W. (2018).

"A new fossil marine lizard with soft tissues from the Late Cretaceous of southern Italy" .

Royal Society Open Science .

5 (6): 172411.

doi : 10.1098/rsos.172411 .

ISSN 2054-5703 .

PMC 6030324 .

PMID 30110414 .

^ Jagt, John W.M.; Jagt-Yazykova, Elena A.; Kaddumi, Hani F.; Lindgren, Johan (2 October 2018).

"Ammonite dating of latest Cretaceous mosasaurid reptiles (Squamata, Mosasauroidea) from Jordan—preliminary observations" .

Alcheringa: An Australasian Journal of Palaeontology .

42 (4): 587– 596.

doi : 10.1080/03115518.2017.1308011 .

ISSN 0311-5518 .

^ Lindgren, Johan; Kaddumi, Hani F.; Polcyn, Michael J. (10 September 2013).

"Soft tissue preservation in a fossil marine lizard with a bilobed tail fin" .

Nature Communications .

4 (1): 2423.

doi : 10.1038/ncomms3423 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMID 24022259 .

^ DePalma, Robert; et al. (2 April 2019).

"A seismically induced onshore surge deposit at the KPg boundary, North Dakota" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

116 (17): 8190– 8199.

Bibcode : 2019PNAS..116.8190D .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1817407116 .

PMC 6486721 .

PMID 30936306 .

^ Lauridsen, B. W.; Bjerager, M. (15 December 2021).

"The fauna of a Danian fossil Conservation Lagerstätten from the cold-water coral mound complex at Faxe, Denmark" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

584 110700.

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2021.110700 .

ISSN 0031-0182 .

^ Cantalice, Kleyton Magno; Martínez-Melo, Alejandra; Romero-Mayén, Violeta Amparo (30 August 2019).

"The paleoichthyofauna housed in the Colección Nacional de Paleontología of Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México" .

Zoosystematics and Evolution .

95 (2): 429– 452.

doi : 10.3897/zse.95.35435 .

ISSN 1860-0743 .

^ Alvarado-Ortega, J; Cuevas-García, M; Melgarejo-Damián, M; Cantalice, KS.; Alaniz-Galvan, A; Solano-Templos, G; Than-Marchese, B (2015).

"Paleocene fishes from Palenque, Chiapas, southeastern Mexico" .

Palaeontologia Electronica .

doi : 10.26879/536 .

ISSN 1094-8074 .

^ Wedmann, Sonja; Uhl, Dieter; Lehmann, Thomas; Garrouste, Romain; Nel, Andre; Gomez, Bernard; Smith, Krister T.; Schaal, S. F. K. (June 2018).

"The Konservat-Lagerstätte Menat (Paleocene; France) – an overview and new insights" .

Geologica Acta .

16 (2): 189– 213.

doi : 10.1344/GeologicaActa2018.16.2.5 . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

^ Michez, Denis; De Meulemeester, Thibaut; Rasmont, Pierre; Nel, André; Patiny, Sébastien (18 February 2009).

"New fossil evidence of the early diversification of bees: Paleohabropoda oudardi from the French Paleocene (Hymenoptera, Apidae, Anthophorini)" .

Zoologica Scripta .

38 (2): 171– 181.

doi : 10.1111/j.1463-6409.2008.00362.x .

ISSN 0300-3256 . Retrieved 7 July 2024 – via Wiley Online Library.

^ a b Friedman, Matt; Carnevale, Giorgio (2018).

"The Bolca Lagerstätten: shallow marine life in the Eocene" .

Journal of the Geological Society .

175 (4): 569– 579.

doi : 10.1144/jgs2017-164 .

ISSN 0016-7649 .

^ Bannikov, A. F.; Erebakan, I. G. (2023).

"On the Evolution of Some Groups of Marine Bony Fishes in the Cenozoic of the Tethys and Paratethys" .

Paleontological Journal .

57 (5): 475– 490.

doi : 10.1134/S0031030123050015 .

ISSN 0031-0301 .

^ Giusberti, Luca; Bannikov, Alexander; Boscolo Galazzo, Flavia; Fornaciari, Eliana; Frieling, Joost; Luciani, Valeria; Papazzoni, Cesare Andrea; Roghi, Guido; Schouten, Stefan; Sluijs, Appy; Bosellini, Francesca R.; Zorzin, Roberto (1 June 2014).

"A new Fossil-Lagerstätte from the Lower Eocene of Lessini Mountains (northern Italy): A multidisciplinary approach" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

403 : 1– 15.

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2014.03.012 .

hdl : 1874/309076 .

ISSN 0031-0182 .

^ a b Perkovsky, E. E.; Rasnitsyn, A. P.; Vlaskin, A. P.; Taraschuk, M. V. (2007). "A comparative analysis of the Baltic and Rovno amber arthropod faunas: representative samples".

African Invertebrates .

48 (1): 229– 245.

^ Rikkinen, Jouko; Schmidt, Alexander R. (2018), "Morphological Convergence in Forest Microfungi Provides a Proxy for Paleogene Forest Structure" , Transformative Paleobotany , Elsevier, pp.

527– 549, doi : 10.1016/b978-0-12-813012-4.00022-x , ISBN 978-0-12-813012-4 , retrieved 12 July 2024 ^ Heinrichs, Jochen; Feldberg, Kathrin; Bechteler, Julia; Regalado, Ledis; Renner, Matthew A.M.; Schäfer-Verwimp, Alfons; Gröhn, Carsten; Müller, Patrick; Schneider, Harald (2018), "A Comprehensive Assessment of the Fossil Record of Liverworts in Amber" , Transformative Paleobotany , Elsevier, pp.

213– 252, doi : 10.1016/b978-0-12-813012-4.00012-7 , ISBN 978-0-12-813012-4 , retrieved 12 July 2024 ^ a b Wolfe, Alexander P.; McKellar, Ryan C.; Tappert, Ralf; Sodhi, Rana N.S.; Muehlenbachs, Karlis (2016).

"Bitterfeld amber is not Baltic amber: Three geochemical tests and further constraints on the botanical affinities of succinite" .

Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology .

225 : 21– 32.

doi : 10.1016/j.revpalbo.2015.11.002 .

ISSN 0034-6667 .

^ Greenwalt, Dale E.; Rose, Tim R.; Siljestrom, Sandra M.; Goreva, Julia S.; Constenius, Kurt N.; Wingerath, Jonathan G. (24 June 2014).

"Taphonomy of the Fossil Insects of the Middle Eocene Kishenehn Formation" .

Acta Palaeontologica Polonica .

60 (4): 931– 947.

doi : 10.4202/app.00071.2014 .

S2CID 53364401 .

^ Herendeen, Patrick S.; Jacobs, Bonnie F. (September 2000).

"Fossil Legumes from the Middle Eocene (46.0 Ma) Mahenge Flora of Singida, Tanzania" .

American Journal of Botany .

87 (9): 1358– 1366.

doi : 10.2307/2656727 .

JSTOR 2656727 .

PMID 10991905 . Retrieved 29 June 2023 .

^ Schlüter, Thomas (2018).

"Eocene insects from a Maar Lagerstätte at Mahenge, northern Tanzania" .

Entomologia Generalis .

37 ( 3– 4): 375– 392.

doi : 10.1127/entomologia/2017/0653 .

S2CID 91844938 . Retrieved 29 June 2023 .

^ Lalloy, F.; Rage, J. C.; Evans, S.E.; Boistel, R.; Lenoir, N.; Laurin, M. (2013).

"A re-interpretation of the Eocene anuran Thaumastosaurus based on microCT examination of a 'mummified' specimen" .

PLOS ONE .

8 (9): 1– 11.

Bibcode : 2013PLoSO...874874L .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0074874 .

PMC 3783478 .

PMID 24086389 .

^ Halaçlar, Kazım; Rummy, Paul; Liu, Jia; Hunt, Adrian P.; Van Do, Truong; Minh, Nguyen Trung; Deng, Tao (15 September 2023).

"Exceptionally well-preserved crocodilian coprolites from the Late Eocene of Northern Vietnam: Ichnology and paleoecological significance" .

iScience .

26 (9): 107607.

doi : 10.1016/j.isci.2023.107607 .

PMC 10470398 .

PMID 37664591 .

^ Mirzaie Ataabadi, Majid; Bahrami, Ali; Yazdi, Mehdi; Nel, André (28 May 2019).

"A locust witness of a trans-oceanic Oligocene migration between Arabia and Iran (Orthoptera: Acrididae)" .

Historical Biology .

31 (5): 574– 580.

doi : 10.1080/08912963.2017.1378651 .

ISSN 0891-2963 .

^ Gasparelo Voltani, Cibele; Menegazzo, Mirian Costa; Galeazzi, Cristiano Padalino; Montefeltro, Felipe Chinaglia; Almeida, Renato Paes de; Anelli, Luiz Eduardo (1 September 2023).

"Fish biostratinomy applied to lacustrine paleoenvironmental reconstructions: Oligocene deposits of Taubaté Basin, Brazil" .

Journal of South American Earth Sciences .

129 104530.

doi : 10.1016/j.jsames.2023.104530 .

ISSN 0895-9811 .

^ Leonowicz, Paulina; Bienkowska-Wasiluk, Małgorzata; Ochmanski, Tomasz (15 May 2021).

"Benthic microbial mats from deep-marine flysch deposits (Oligocene Menilite Formation from S Poland): Palaeoenvironmental controls on the MISS types" .

Sedimentary Geology .

417 105881.

doi : 10.1016/j.sedgeo.2021.105881 .

ISSN 0037-0738 .

^ Bienkowska-Wasiluk, M.; Paldyna, M. (26 March 2018).

"Taxonomic revision of the Oligocene percoid fish Oligoserranoides budensis (Heckel, 1856), from the Paratethys and paleobiogeographic comments" .

Geologica Acta .

16 (1): 75– 92.

doi : 10.1344/GeologicaActa2018.16.1.5 .

ISSN 1696-5728 .

^ CoBabe, E. A. (1 June 2002).

"A new insect and plant Lagerstatte from a Tertiary lake deposit along the Canyon Ferry Reservoir, southwestern Montana" .

Rocky Mountain Geology .

37 (1): 13– 30.

doi : 10.2113/gsrocky.37.1.13 .

ISSN 1555-7332 . Retrieved 8 June 2024 – via GeoScienceWorld.

^ Coster, Pauline; Legal, Stephane (8 November 2021).

"An Early Oligocene Fossil LagerstÃ¤tten from the Lacustrine Deposits of the Luberon UNESCO Global Geopark" .

Geoconservation Research .

4 (2).

doi : 10.30486/gcr.2021.1915524.1068 (inactive 12 July 2025).

ISSN 2588-7343 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Maxwell, Erin E.; Alexander, Stefanie; Bechly, Günter; Eck, Kristina; Frey, Eberhard; Grimm, Kirsten; Kovar-Eder, Johanna; Mayr, Gerald; Micklich, Norbert; Rasser, Michael; Roth-Nebelsick, Anita; Salvador, Rodrigo B.; Schoch, Rainier R.; Schweigert, Günter; Stinnescbeck, Wolfgang; Wolf-Schwenniger, Karin; Ziegler, Reinhard (1 December 2016).

"The Rauenberg fossil Lagerstätte (Baden-Württemberg, Germany): A window into early Oligocene marine and coastal ecosystems of Central Europe" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

463 : 238– 260.

Bibcode : 2016PPP...463..238M .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2016.10.002 . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

^ Quan, Cheng; Fu, QiongYao; Shi, GongLe; Liu, YuSheng; Li, Long; Liu, XiaoYan; Jin, JianHua (9 January 2016).

"First Oligocene mummified plant Lagerstätte at the low latitudes of East Asia" .

Science China Earth Sciences .

59 (3): 445– 448.

doi : 10.1007/s11430-015-5250-z .

ISSN 1674-7313 .

^ Shi, Xiang-Gang; Fu, Qiong-Yao; Jin, Jian-Hua; Quan, Cheng (21 June 2017).

"Mummified Oligocene fruits of Schima (Theaceae) and their systematic and biogeographic implications" .

Scientific Reports .

7 (1): 4009.

doi : 10.1038/s41598-017-04349-6 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 5479851 .

PMID 28638066 .

^ Fu, Qiong-Yao; Li, Long; Jin, Jian-Hua; Liu, Xiao-Yan; Quan, Cheng (17 May 2017).

"Mummified fruits of Choerospondias nanningensis sp. nov. (Anacardiaceae) from the upper Oligocene of a low latitude site in East Asia" .

Journal of Systematics and Evolution .

55 (5): 477– 483.

doi : 10.1111/jse.12255 .

ISSN 1674-4918 . Retrieved 12 May 2024 – via Wiley Online Library.

^ Han, Meng; Manchester, Steven R.; Wu, Yan; Jin, Jianhua; Quan, Cheng (2 August 2017).

"Fossil fruits of Canarium (Burseraceae) from Eastern Asia and their implications for phytogeographical history" .

Journal of Systematic Palaeontology .

16 (10): 841– 852.

doi : 10.1080/14772019.2017.1349624 .

ISSN 1477-2019 . Retrieved 12 May 2024 – via Taylor and Francis Online.

^ Wedmann, Sonja; Poschmann, Markus; Hörnschemeyer, Thomas (19 November 2009).

"Fossil insects from the Late Oligocene Enspel Lagerstätte and their palaeobiogeographic and palaeoclimatic significance" .

Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments .

90 : 49– 58.

doi : 10.1007/s12549-009-0013-5 .

S2CID 84729592 .

^ Gaudant, Jean; Nel, André; Nury, Denise; Véran, Monette; Carnevale, Giorgio (August–September 2018).

"The uppermost Oligocene of Aix-en-Provence (Bouches-du-Rhône, Southern France): A Cenozoic brackish subtropical Konservat-Lagerstätte, with fishes, insects and plants" .

Comptes Rendus Palevol .

17 (7): 460– 478.

Bibcode : 2018CRPal..17..460G .

doi : 10.1016/j.crpv.2017.08.002 .

S2CID 134885555 . Retrieved 29 June 2023 .

^ George Poinar, Jr. and Roberta Poinar, 1999.

The Amber Forest: A Reconstruction of a Vanished World , (Princeton University Press) ISBN 0-691-02888-5 ^ Lee, Daphne E.; Kaulfuss, Uwe; Conran, John G.; Bannister, Jennifer M.; Lindqvist, Jon K. (11 August 2016).

"Biodiversity and palaeoecology of Foulden Maar: an early Miocene Konservat-Lagerstätte deposit in southern New Zealand" .

Alcheringa: An Australasian Journal of Palaeontology .

40 (4): 525– 541.

Bibcode : 2016Alch...40..525L .

doi : 10.1080/03115518.2016.1206321 .

S2CID 132004293 . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

^ a b Kaulfuss, Uwe; Bannister, Jennifer M.; Conran, John G.; Kennedy, Elizabeth M.; Mildenhall, Dallas C.; Lee, Daphne E. (April 2023).

"Review of flowers and inflorescences with in situ pollen from the Miocene Foulden and Hindon Konservat-Lagerstätten, southern New Zealand" .

Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology .

311 104830.

Bibcode : 2023RPaPa.31104830K .

doi : 10.1016/j.revpalbo.2022.104830 .

S2CID 255325092 . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

^ Grunert, Patrick; Harzhauser, Mathias; Rögl, Fred; Sachsenhofer, Reinhard; Gratzer, Reinhard; Soliman, Ali; Piller, Werner E. (2010).

"Oceanographic conditions as a trigger for the formation of an Early Miocene (Aquitanian) Konservat-Lagerstätte in the Central Paratethys Sea" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

292 ( 3– 4): 425– 442.

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2010.04.001 .

ISSN 0031-0182 .

^ Riquelme, Francisco; Hernández-Patricio, Miguel; Martínez-Dávalos, Arnulfo; et al. (2014).

"Two Flat-Backed Polydesmidan Millipedes from the Miocene Chiapas-Amber Lagerstätte, Mexico" .

PLOS ONE .

9 (8): e105877.

Bibcode : 2014PLoSO...9j5877R .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0105877 .

PMC 4146559 .

PMID 25162220 .

^ Mah, Christopher L.; Blake, Daniel B. (27 April 2012).

"Global Diversity and Phylogeny of the Asteroidea (Echinodermata)" .

PLOS ONE .

7 (4): e35644.

Bibcode : 2012PLoSO...735644M .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0035644 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 3338738 .

PMID 22563389 .

^ Moser, Markus; Rössner, Gertrud E.; Göhlich, Ursula B.; Böhme, Madelaine; Fahlbusch, Volker (7 February 2009).

"The fossil lagerstätte Sandelzhausen (Miocene; southern Germany): history of investigation, geology, fauna, and age" .

PalZ .

83 : 7– 23.

doi : 10.1007/s12542-009-0012-x .

S2CID 55172519 . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

^ McCurry, Matthew; Cantrill, David; Smith, Patrick; et al. (2022).

"A Lagerstätte from Australia provides insight into the nature of Miocene mesic ecosystems" .

Science Advances .

8 (1): eabm1406.

Bibcode : 2022SciA....8.1406M .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.abm1406 .

PMC 8741189 .

PMID 34995110 .

^ Kočí, Tomáš; GašParič, Rok; Buckeridge, John; KočOvá Veselská, Martina; šOster, Aleš (29 May 2023).

"The first record of a Konservat-Lagerstätten in which early post-settlement stages of fossil archaeobalanids (Cirripedia: Balanomorpha) are preserved" .

Integrative Zoology .

19 (2): 200– 223.

doi : 10.1111/1749-4877.12728 .

ISSN 1749-4877 .

PMID 37248329 . Retrieved 12 May 2024 – via Wiley Online Library.

^ a b Kaulfuss, Uwe; Lee, Daphne E.; Wartho, Jo-Anne; Bowie, Elliot; Lindqvist, Jon K.; Conran, John G.; Bannister, Jennifer M.; Mildenhall, Dallas C.; Kennedy, Elizabeth M.; Gorman, Andrew R. (1 July 2018).

"Geology and palaeontology of the Hindon Maar Complex: A Miocene terrestrial fossil Lagerstätte in southern New Zealand" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

500 : 52– 68.

Bibcode : 2018PPP...500...52K .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2018.03.022 .

S2CID 134962038 . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

^ Rasmussen, Cornelia; Reichenbacher, Bettina; Lenz, Olaf; Altner, Melanie; Penk, Stefanie B. R.; Prieto, Jerome; Brüsch, Dennis (28 December 2015).

"Middle–late Miocene palaeoenvironments, palynological data and a fossil fish Lagerstätte from the Central Kenya Rift (East Africa)" .

Geological Magazine .

154 (1): 24– 56.

doi : 10.1017/S0016756815000849 .

S2CID 130521301 . Retrieved 29 June 2023 .

^ Uhl, Dieter; Wuttke, Michael; Aiglstorfer, Manuela; Gee, Carole T.; Grandi, Federica; Höltke, Olaf; Kaiser, Thomas M.; Kaulfuss, Uwe; Lee, Daphne; Lehmann, Thomas; Oms, Oriol; Poschmann, Markus J.; Rasser, Michael W.; Schindler, Thomas; Smith, Krister T. (1 December 2024).

"Deep-time maar lakes and other volcanogenic lakes as Fossil-Lagerstätten – An overview" .

Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments .

104 (4): 763– 848.

doi : 10.1007/s12549-024-00635-0 .

ISSN 1867-1608 .

^ Belaústegui, Zain; Domènech, Rosa; Martinell, Jordi (16 January 2018).

"An Ichnofossil-Lagerstätte From the Miocene Vilanova Basin (NE Spain): Taphonomic and Paleoecologic Insights Related to Bioerosion Structures" .

PALAIOS .

33 (1): 16– 28.

Bibcode : 2018Palai..33...16B .

doi : 10.2110/palo.2017.082 .

S2CID 135386238 . Retrieved 1 May 2023 .

^ Žalohar, Jure; Hitij, Tomaž (1 April 2017).

"The first known fossil record of pipehorses (Teleostei: Syngnathidae: Haliichthyinae) from the Miocene Coprolitic Horizon from the Tunjice Hills, Slovenia" .

Annales de Paléontologie .

103 (2): 113– 125.

doi : 10.1016/j.annpal.2017.04.001 .

ISSN 0753-3969 .

^ Métais, Grégoire; Sen, Sevket (August–September 2018).

"The late Miocene mammals from the Konservat-Lagerstätte of Saint-Bauzile (Ardèche, France) Conservation exceptionnelle de mammifères du Miocène supérieur à Saint-Bauzile (Ardèche, France)" .

Comptes Rendus Palevol .

17 (7): 479– 493.

doi : 10.1016/j.crpv.2018.05.001 .

S2CID 134016889 .

^ Saint Martin, Jean-Paul (April–June 2010).

"The Girvanella-like remains from Messinian marine deposits (Sardinia, Italy): Lagerstätten paradigm for microbial biota?" .

Annales de Paléontologie .

96 (2): 33– 50.

doi : 10.1016/j.annpal.2010.10.002 . Retrieved 12 May 2024 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Bustillo, María Ángeles; Díaz-Molina, Margarita; López-García, María José; Delclòs, Xavier; Peláez-Campomanes, Pablo; Peñalver, Enrique; Rodríguez-Talavera, Rosario; Sanchiz, Borja (3 August 2017).

"Geology and paleontology of Tresjuncos (Cuenca, Spain), a new diatomaceous deposit with Konservat-Lagerstätte characteristics from the European late Miocene" .

Journal of Iberian Geology .

43 (3): 395– 411.

doi : 10.1007/s41513-017-0032-4 .

hdl : 2445/163339 .

S2CID 133950518 . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

^ Mcnamara, M. E.; Orr, P. J.; Alcala, L.; Anadon, P.; Penalver, E. (20 March 2012).

"What Controls the Taphonomy of Exceptionally Preserved Taxa--Environment or Biology? A Case Study Using Frogs from the Miocene Libros Konservat-Lagerstatte (Teruel, Spain)" .

PALAIOS .

27 (2): 63– 77.

doi : 10.2110/palo.2010.p10-126r .

ISSN 0883-1351 .

^ Kolibáč, Jiří; Adroit, Benjamin; Gröning, Elke; Brauckmann, Carsten; Wappler, Torsten (8 August 2016).

"First record of the family Trogossitidae (Insecta, Coleoptera) in the Late Pliocene deposits of Willershausen (Germany)" .

PalZ .

90 (4): 681– 689.

doi : 10.1007/s12542-016-0316-6 .

ISSN 0031-0220 . Retrieved 8 June 2024 – via Springer Link.

^ Rijsdijk, Kenneth F.; Hume, Julian P.; Bunnik, Frans; Florens, F. B. Vincent; Baider, Claudia; Shapiro, Beth; van der Plicht, Johannes; Janoo, Anwar; Griffiths, Owen; van den Hoek Ostende, Lars W.; Cremer, Holger; Vernimmen, Tamara; De Louw, Perry G. B.; Bholah, Assenjee; Saumtally, Salem (1 January 2009).

"Mid-Holocene vertebrate bone Concentration-Lagerstätte on oceanic island Mauritius provides a window into the ecosystem of the dodo (Raphus cucullatus)" .

Quaternary Science Reviews .

28 (1): 14– 24.

doi : 10.1016/j.quascirev.2008.09.018 .

ISSN 0277-3791 .

^ Krueger, Andrea; McCarthy, Francine (2016).

"Great Canadian Lagerstätten 5. Crawford Lake – A Canadian Holocene Lacustrine Konservat-Lagerstätte with Two-Century-Old Viable Dinoflagellate Cysts" .

Geoscience Canada .

43 (2): 123– 132.

doi : 10.12789/geocanj.2016.43.086 .

ISSN 0315-0941 .

Further reading [ edit ] Penney, D. (ed.) 2010.

Biodiversity of Fossils in Amber from the Major World Deposits . Siri Scienfic Press, Manchester, 304 pp.

"Fossil Lagerstätten" . Department of Earth Sciences, University of Bristol. 2003. Archived from the original on 12 June 2007 . Retrieved 21 November 2005 .

– A catalogue of sites of exceptional fossil preservation produced by MSc palaeobiology students at University of Bristol's Department of Earth Sciences.

Orr, Patrick J.; David J. Siveter (1 January 2000).

"Three-dimensional preservation of a non-biomineralized arthropod in concretions in Silurian volcaniclastic rocks from Herefordshire, England" .

Journal of the Geological Society .

157 (1): 173– 86.

Bibcode : 2000JGSoc.157..173O .

doi : 10.1144/jgs.157.1.173 .

S2CID 129635160 . Retrieved 26 October 2006 .

Kimmig, Julien; James D. Schiffbauer (25 April 2024).

"A modern definition of Fossil-Lagerstätten" .

Trends in Ecology and Evolution .

39 (6): 621– 624.

doi : 10.1016/j.tree.2024.04.004 .

PMID 38670863 . Retrieved 5 May 2024 .

v t e Burgess Shale-type preservation Cambrian localities Burgess Shale Chengjiang Emu Bay Shale Kinzers Formation Pioche Shale Poleta Formation Qingjiang biota Sirius Passet Spence Shale Wheeler Shale Zawiszyn Formation Ordovician localities Castle Bank Soom Shale Fezouata Formation Winneshiek Shale Llanfallteg Formation Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐sx64v
Cached time: 20250814220125
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.118 seconds
Real time usage: 3.496 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 19908/1000000
Revision size: 247304/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 830238/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2311/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1139532/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.991/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19137011/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2598.689      1 -total
 80.96% 2103.785      1 Template:Reflist
 71.02% 1845.637    249 Template:Cite_journal
  3.96%  102.932      1 Template:IPA
  3.47%   90.064      1 Template:Paleontology
  3.40%   88.475      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  3.33%   86.509      1 Template:Short_description
  2.04%   52.927      2 Template:Pagetype
  1.27%   33.005      5 Template:Citation
  1.15%   29.786      6 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:346568:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220125 and revision id 1304456470. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lagerstätte&oldid=1304456470 " Category : Lagerstätten Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from January 2022 CS1: long volume value CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2020 Pages with German IPA Articles containing German-language text Dynamic lists All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 04:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lagerstätte 22 languages Add topic

