Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Application 2 Influences and impetus 3 Criticisms 4 Examples 5 See also Toggle See also subsection 5.1 Suburbs classified as villages 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Urban village 3 languages فارسی Français 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Decentralized urban development For another urban planning concept in China, see Urban village (China) .

The main square of Saifi Village in Beirut Central District in Beirut , Lebanon In urban planning and design , an urban village is an urban development typically characterized by medium-density housing , mixed use zoning,  good public transit and an emphasis on pedestrianization and public space .

[ 1 ] Contemporary urban village ideas are closely related to New Urbanism and smart growth ideas initiated in the United States.

[ 2 ] Urban villages are seen to provide an alternative to recent patterns of urban development in many cities, especially decentralization and urban sprawl . They are generally purported to: Reduce car reliance and promote cycling, walking and transit use Provide a high level of self-containment (people working, recreating and living in the same area) Help facilitate strong community institutions and interaction The concept of urban villages was formally born in Britain in the late 1980s with the establishment of the Urban Villages Group (UVG).

[ 3 ] Following pressure from the UVG, the concept was prioritized in British national planning policy between 1997 and 1999.

[ 4 ] Urban villages also come in the form of suburbs of metropolitan areas that are politically designated as villages.

Application [ edit ] Urban village ideals have been applied to new greenfield and brownfield developments and urban renewal projects. The concept has been widely adopted in many countries and used by both government development agencies as well as private enterprise as a guiding concept for many projects.

Influences and impetus [ edit ] The ideas of the urban commentator Jane Jacobs are widely regarded as having had the largest influence on the urban village concept.

[ 5 ] Jacobs rejected the modernist views that dominated urban planning and architecture in the 1950s–60s and constructed an alternative philosophy that values traditional neighborhoods and the role of the inner city.

[ 6 ] Proponents believe that urban villages provide a viable alternative to the social ills that characterize modernism in cities, such as freeways and high-rise estates.

Another strong impetus for urban villages has been growing disenchantment with the urban sprawl that has characterized the development of many cities since World War II . Urban villages are seen to create self-contained communities that reduce the need to travel large distances and reduce the subsequent reliance on the automobile. The decline of noxious industry and the emergence of the service economy allows the mixing of employment and residential activities without detriment to residents. This is in contrast to the single-use zoning that helped fuel urban sprawl during the industrial and manufacturing eras. Through more consolidated development, urban villages can reduce the intrusion of urban growth on the countryside. These environmental consequences of urban sprawl have come to dominate discussion promoting urban villages in recent years.

[ 7 ] Urban villages are widely seen to provide a solution to the demise of community that is often associated with modernism and sprawl. The concept uses the social and physical morphology of the traditional rural village as an inspiration for creating better functioning communities. The urban village movement has been influenced by Ebenezer Howard ’s Garden City ideals which also emphasize environmental determinism in relation to community. Urban design techniques such as public space and pedestrianization are employed to facilitate the development of community by encouraging human interaction. This philosophy shares many attributes with the new urbanism school of thought.

Criticisms [ edit ] Many urban village developments, both Government and privately initiated, have been seen to depart from the original ideals of the concept. Private developments often use the "urban village" label as an advertising pitch or to win Government support for their project.

[ 8 ] Many developments, although intended to create a true urban village form, have not achieved their objectives. Some planners question whether a genuine urban village has actually been built.

[ 9 ] The objectives of urban villages are often criticized as unrealistic because they ignore broader social and economic realities. The ability to create self-contained villages is questionable as employment and activity patterns continue to become more complex. The viability of creating a variety of employment and activity within an area with a small population base can also be questioned.

[ 10 ] It has been suggested that the demise of the neighborhood community is a function of "conscious economic and social choice" rather than a product of urban form.

[ 11 ] The limitations of the urban village concept to achieve sustainability in urban areas have also been studied in developing countries, which further emphasizes the institutional barriers against such an application in the case of the developing countries. This issue becomes more critical when we accept that the institutional landscape in rural environments is more complex than urban areas and that incompatible institutional structure of the developing countries would add to the idealistic nature of the urban village concept.

[ 12 ] Some urban commentators believe that urban villages are not a new concept and are simply a re-formulation of ideas that have been prevalent in urban planning for decades.

[ 13 ] Examples [ edit ] The following is a brief list of a few projects claimed to be urban villages that have evolved or already been completed, or are in planning stages: Bulimba & Hawthorne Urban Village - Brisbane Queensland Australia Kelvin Grove Urban Village , Brisbane , Australia Doncaster Hill , Melbourne , Australia Westboro Village , Ottawa , Ontario , Canada Commercial Drive , Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada Willowgrove and Rosewood , Saskatoon , Canada (Planned communities based on the urban village concept) Parkside Village in Mississauga, Ontario , Canada Osborne Village in Winnipeg , Manitoba , Canada Canal Street and the surrounding areas that make up Manchester Gay Village, Manchester , United Kingdom Holbeck Urban Village , Leeds , United Kingdom Poundbury , Dorset, England Fairford Leys , Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, England Coed Darcy , Wales, United Kingdom Greenwich Millennium Village , London, United Kingdom Metro Walk , Richmond, California Adamstown , Dublin , Ireland Saifi Village in Centre Ville , Beirut , Lebanon Franklin, Michigan , United States Bensenville, Illinois , United States Ballston , Clarendon , Courthouse , Crystal City , Pentagon City , Rosslyn , Shirlington and Virginia Square in Arlington County, Virginia , United States Santana Row in San Jose, California , United States City of Phoenix Urban Villages , Phoenix, Arizona, United States Central Village, East Village, and South Village in Sandy, Utah , United States (master-planned villages under development) The Village, Oklahoma , a city in the Oklahoma City metropolitan area that has "village" in its name Bayshore Town Center in Whitefish Bay, Wisconsin , north of Milwaukee Corners of Brookfield (Wisconsin) , west of Milwaukee See also [ edit ] 15-minute city New Urbanism Peri Urban Regions Platform Europe Principles of Intelligent Urbanism Rubanisation Transit oriented development Urban planning Urban sprawl Suburbs classified as villages [ edit ] Bensenville, Illinois , a suburb of Chicago Franklin, Michigan , a suburb of Detroit Lathrup Village, Michigan , a suburb of Detroit Ottawa Hills , Ohio , a suburb of Toledo References [ edit ] ^ Homs, Clement.

"Localism and the city: the example of "urban villages" " .

www.inclusivedemocracy.org .

The International Journal of Inclusive Democracy . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

^ Caves, R. W. (2004).

Encyclopedia of the City . Routledge. p. 733.

ISBN 978-0415862875 .

^ Tony Aldous (1992) Urban villages : a concept for creating mixed-use urban developments on a sustainable scale , London: Urban Villages Group, pp. 11-13 ^ Department of the Environment (DOE) (1997) PPG1: General Policies and Proposals , London: DOE ^ Robert Gratz (2003), 'Authentic urbanism and the Jane Jacobs legacy' in Urban villages and the making of communities , London: Spon Press, pp. 17-23 ^ Jane Jacobs (1961) The death and life of American cities , New York: Random House ^ Michael Biddulph, Bridgett Franklin & Malcolm Tait (2003) 'From concept to completion: A critical analysis of the urban village', Town and Regional Planning , 74:2 ^ Michael Biddulph, Bridgett Franklin & Malcolm Tait (2003) 'From concept to completion: A critical analysis of the urban village', Town and Regional Planning , 74:2 ^ Bridget Franklin and Malcolm Tait (2003), 'Constructing an image: The urban village concept in the UK', Planning Theory , 1:3 ^ Malcolm Tait (2003), 'Urban Villages as self-sufficient, integrated communities: a case study in London's Docklands', Urban Design International , 8 ^ Hugh Barton (2000), 'Do Neighbourhoods Matter?', Sustainable Communities: The Potential for Eco-Neighbourhoods , London: Earthscan ^ Hossein Bahrainy and Mehdi Azizkhani (2012), 'Institutional Barriers to the Application of Urban Village as A Tool for Achieving Urban Sustainability in Developing Countries-the Case of Asheghabaad, Isfahan, Iran', Armanshahr Journal , 5(8), 43:57 ^ Bridget Franklin and Malcolm Tait (2003), 'Constructing an image: The urban village concept in the UK', Planning Theory , 1:3 External links [ edit ] Urban Villages - an introduction The Case for Urban Villages , Randall Fleming, 2000 Urban Villages - the best of both worlds?

, Andrew Rossiter 2001 v t e Designations for types of administrative division English terms Common English terms Area Insular area Local government area Special area Unincorporated area Unorganized area Borough County borough Metropolitan borough Canton Half-canton Capital Federal capital Imperial capital City Autonomous city Charter city Independent city Incorporated city Imperial city Free imperial city Royal free city Community Autonomous community Residential community County Administrative county Autonomous county Consolidated city-county County seat County town Metropolitan county Non-metropolitan county Regional county municipality Viscounty Country Overseas country Department Overseas department District Capital district City district Congressional district Electoral district Federal district Indian government district Land district Local government district Metropolitan district Non-metropolitan district Military district Municipal district Police district Regional district Rural district Sanitary district Service district Educational service district Local service district School district Intermediate school district Special district in the US Urban district Division Census division Police division Subdivision of India Indian reserve/reservation Indian reservation (United States) Indian reserve (Canada) Municipality City municipality County municipality Direct-controlled municipality District municipality Neutral municipality Regional municipality Resort municipality Mountain resort municipality Rural municipality Specialized municipality Prefecture Autonomous prefecture Subprefecture Super-prefecture Praetorian prefecture Province Autonomous province Overseas province Roman province Region Administrative region Special administrative region Autonomous region Capital region National capital region Development region Mesoregion Microregion Overseas region Subregion State Proto-state City-state Federal state Free state Sovereign state Territory Capital territory Federal capital territory National capital territory Dependent territory Federal territory Incorporated territory Organized incorporated territory Overseas territory Union territory Town Census town Market town Township Charter township Civil township Paper township Survey township Urban township Unit Regional unit Zone Economic zone Exclusive economic zone Free economic zone Special economic zone Exclusion zone Military exclusion zone Free speech zone Neutral zone Self-administered zone Trade zone Free-trade zone Other English terms Current Alpine resort Bailiwick Banner Autonomous Block Cadastre Circle Circuit Colony Commune Condominium Constituency Duchy District Eldership Emirate Enclave and exclave Federal dependency Governorate Hamlet Manor Royal Muftiate Neighbourhood Parish Precinct Principality Protectorate Quarter Regency Autonomous republic Riding Sector Autonomous Shire Sultanate Suzerainty Townland Village Summer Ward Historical Agency Barony Burgh Exarchate Hide Hundred Imperial Circle March Monthon Presidency Residency Roman diocese Seat Tenth Tithing Viceroyalty Non-English terms or loanwords Current Amt Apskritis Bakhsh Barangay Bashki Bezirk Regierungsbezirk Comarca Comune Frazione Freguesia Fu Gemeinde Austria Germany South Tyrol Switzerland Gemeente Gmina Hromada Județ Kampong Kommun/Kunta Finland Sweden Län (Sweden) Landskap Finland Località Maakunta Megye Muban Mukim Njësi administrative Obec Oblast Autonomous Okrug Ostān Poblacion Purok Qark Raion Savivaldybė Selsoviet Sitio Seniūnija Shahrestān Sum China Sýsla Tehsil Townlet Vingtaine Historical Commote Gau Heerlijkheid Komunë Köping Korale Län/Lääni Landskap Sweden Landskommun Maalaiskunta Nome Egypt Greece Pagus Pargana Plasă Rreth Satrapy Socken Subah Syssel Zhou Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics .

See also Autonomous administration Census division Electoral district List of administrative divisions by country Greek administrative divisions Slavic administrative divisions Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Urban_village&oldid=1280803369 " Categories : Sustainable urban planning Decentralization Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 March 2025, at 15:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Urban village 3 languages Add topic

