Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Gaspard Bauhin 28 languages العربية Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Galego Italiano עברית Latina മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Swiss botanist (1560–1624) Gaspard Bauhin Born 17 January 1560 Basel , Switzerland Died 5 December 1624 (1624-12-05) (aged 64) Basel, Switzerland Other names Caspar Bauhin; Casparus Bauhinus Alma mater University of Basel ( M.D.

, 1581) Known for Pinax theatri botanici Scientific career Fields Botany Notable students Emmanuel Stupanus Author abbrev. (botany) C.Bauhin Gaspard Bauhin or Caspar Bauhin ( Latin : Casparus Bauhinus ; 17 January 1560 – 5 December 1624), was a Swiss botanist whose Pinax theatri botanici (1623) described thousands of plants and classified them in a manner that draws comparisons to the later binomial nomenclature of Linnaeus . He was a disciple of the famous Italian physician Girolamo Mercuriale and he also worked on human anatomical nomenclature.

Bauhin described the ileocecal valve in 1588—hence the name Bauhin's Valve or Valve of Bauhin—in the preface of his first writing, De corporis humani partibus externis tractatus, hactenus non editus.

Linnaeus honored the Bauhin brothers Gaspard and Jean in the genus name Bauhinia .

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Caspar Bauhin (1623), Pinax Theatri Botanici , page 291. On this page, a number of Tithymalus species (now Euphorbia ) is listed, described and provided with synonyms and references. Bauhin already used binomial names but did not consistently give all species throughout the work binomials.

Jean and Gaspard were the sons of Jean Bauhin (1511–1582), a French physician who had to leave his native country on becoming a convert to Protestantism . Gaspard was born in Basel. From 1572 he studied in his hometown, Padua , Bologna , Montpellier , Paris and Tübingen . He was awarded his medical doctorate at the University of Basel in 1581, and gave private lectures in botany and anatomy . In 1581 he obtained a doctorate in medicine from the University of Basel and was in 1582 appointed to the Greek professorship at the same university, as well as in 1588 to the chair of anatomy and botany.

[ 2 ] He was later made city physician ( Stadtarzt ), professor of the practice of medicine, rector of the university, and dean of his faculty.

[ 3 ] He was rector of the university of Basel in 1592, then again in 1611 and 1619; during the second rectorate the university tried in vain to win back from the city council the freedoms of 1460, which were lost in 1532.

[ 4 ] The Pinax theatri botanici (English, Illustrated exposition of plants ) is a landmark of botanical history , describing some 6,000 species and classifying them.

[ 1 ] The classification system was not particularly innovative, using traditional groups such as "trees", "shrubs", and "herbs", and using other characteristics such as utilization, for instance grouping spices into the Aromata . He did correctly group grasses , legumes , and several others. His most important contribution is in the description of genera and species. He introduced many names of genera that were later adopted by Linnaeus , and remain in use.

[ 2 ] For species he carefully pruned the descriptions down to as few words as possible; in many cases a single word sufficed as description, thus giving the appearance of a two-part name. However, the single-word description was still a description intended to be diagnostic, not an arbitrarily-chosen name (in the Linnaean system, many species names honor individuals, for instance).

[ citation needed ] In addition to Pinax Theatri Botanici , Gaspard planned another work, a Theatrum Botanicum , meant to be comprised in twelve parts folio, of which he finished three; only one, however, was published (1658), long after his death. He also gave a copious catalogue of the plants growing in the environs of Basel, its flora , and edited the works of Pietro Andrea Mattioli (1500–1577) with considerable additions.

[ 2 ] His principal work on anatomy was Theatrum Anatomicum infinitis locis auctum (1592).

[ 3 ] The standard author abbreviation C.Bauhin is used to indicate this person as the author when citing a botanical name .

[ 5 ] Works [ edit ] Animadversiones in historiam generalem plantarum , 1601 (as editor), Petri Andreae Matthioli Opera Omnia , Johannes König, Basel, 1574.

Theatrum anatomicum infinitis locis auctum, ad morbos accommodatum , Basel, 1592.

Theatrum Anatomicum , Frankfurt am Main, 1605.

Phytopinax seu enumeratio plantarum (in Latin). Basel. 1596 – via Sebastian Henricpetri.

Anatomica corporis virilis et muliebris historia , Leiden, 1597.

Animadversiones in historiam generalem plantarum (in Latin). Frankfurt am Main. 1601 – via Melchior Hartmann.

Prodromos theatri botanici (in Latin). 1620.

The introduction to his projected magnum opus .

Prodromos theatri botanici (in Latin). Basel. 1671 – via Johann König.

Pinax theatri botanici , Basel, 1623.

Pinax theatri botanici (in Latin). Basel. 1671 – via Johann König.

Vivae imagines partium corporis humani (in Latin). Frankfurt am Main. 1640 – via Matthäus Merian (I).

Theatrum Botanicum , 1658.

Histoire des plantes de l'Europe, et des plus usitées qui viennent d'Asie, d'Afrique, & de l'Amérique […] , 2 voll., Lyon, 1671.

See also [ edit ] Herman Boerhaave Joseph Pitton de Tournefort Ileocecal valve References [ edit ] ^ a b Gunn, Mary (1981).

Botanical exploration of southern Africa : an illustrated history of early botanical literature on the Cape flora : biographical accounts of the leading plant collectors and their activities in southern Africa from the days of the East India Company until modern times . L. E. W. Codd. Cape Town: Published for the Botanical Research Institute by A.A. Balkema. p. 15.

ISBN 0-86961-129-1 .

OCLC 8591273 .

^ a b c Isely, Duane (2002).

One hundred and one botanists .

West Lafayette, Indiana : Purdue University Press . pp.

49– 52.

ISBN 1-55753-283-4 .

OCLC 947193619 .

^ a b Chisholm 1911 .

^ "Bauhin Caspar" . University of Basel.

Archived from the original on 28 October 2021 . Retrieved 14 December 2020 .

^ International Plant Names Index .

C.Bauhin .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Bauhin, Gaspard ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 3 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 539.

External links [ edit ] University of Kyoto Archived 17 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine Online Pinax theatri botanici (1623) Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries High resolution images of works by and/or portraits of Gaspard Bauhin in .jpg and .tiff format.

Images from Theatrum anatomicum From The College of Physicians of Philadelphia Digital Library Caspari (Gaspard) Bauhini, Prodromos Theatri Botanici (1620) Digitized Copy on Archive.org v t e Natural history Pioneering naturalists Classical antiquity Aristotle ( History of Animals ) Theophrastus ( Historia Plantarum ) Aelian ( De Natura Animalium ) Pliny the Elder ( Natural History ) Dioscorides ( De Materia Medica ) Renaissance Ulisse Aldrovandi Gaspard Bauhin ( Pinax theatri botanici ) Otto Brunfels Hieronymus Bock Andrea Cesalpino Valerius Cordus Leonhart Fuchs Conrad Gessner ( Historia animalium ) Frederik Ruysch William Turner ( Avium Praecipuarum , New Herball ) John Gerard ( Herball, or Generall Historie of Plantes ) Enlightenment Robert Hooke ( Micrographia ) Marcello Malpighi Antonie van Leeuwenhoek William Derham Hans Sloane Jan Swammerdam Regnier de Graaf Carl Linnaeus ( Systema Naturae ) Georg Steller Joseph Banks Johan Christian Fabricius James Hutton John Ray ( Historia Plantarum ) Comte de Buffon ( Histoire Naturelle ) Bernard Germain de Lacépède Gilbert White ( The Natural History of Selborne ) Thomas Bewick ( A History of British Birds ) Jean-Baptiste Lamarck ( Philosophie zoologique ) 19th century George Montagu ( Ornithological Dictionary ) Georges Cuvier ( Le Règne Animal ) William Smith Charles Darwin ( On the Origin of Species ) Alfred Russel Wallace ( The Malay Archipelago ) Henry Walter Bates ( The Naturalist on the River Amazons ) Alexander von Humboldt John James Audubon ( The Birds of America ) William Buckland Charles Lyell Mary Anning Jean-Henri Fabre Louis Agassiz Philip Henry Gosse Asa Gray William Jackson Hooker Joseph Dalton Hooker William Jardine ( The Naturalist's Library ) Ernst Haeckel ( Kunstformen der Natur ) Richard Lydekker ( The Royal Natural History ) 20th century Martinus Beijerinck Abbott Thayer ( Concealing-Coloration in the Animal Kingdom ) Hugh B. Cott ( Adaptive Coloration in Animals ) Niko Tinbergen ( The Study of Instinct ) Konrad Lorenz ( On Aggression ) Karl von Frisch ( The Dancing Bees ) Ronald Lockley ( Shearwaters ) Topics Natural history museums ( List ) Parson-naturalists ( List ) Natural History Societies List of natural history dealers v t e Carl Linnaeus Published works Linnaeus bibliography Systema Naturae (1735) Fundamenta Botanica (1736) Bibliotheca Botanica (1736) Musa Cliffortiana (1736) Critica Botanica (1737) Flora Lapponica (1737) Genera Plantarum (1737) Hortus Cliffortianus (1737) Classes Plantarum (1738) Flora Svecica (1745) Fauna Svecica (1746) Philosophia Botanica (1751) Species Plantarum (1753) Centuria Insectorum (1763) Mantissa Plantarum Altera (1771) Systema Vegetabilium (1774) General Taxonomy (biology) Linnaean Herbarium Linnaean taxonomy (Linnaean classification) Botanical nomenclature Zoological nomenclature Binomial nomenclature Taxa named by Linnaeus Natural history History of biology History of botany Scientific racism Apostles of Linnaeus Adam Afzelius Andreas Berlin Johan Peter Falk Peter Forsskål Pehr Kalm Pehr Löfling Pehr Osbeck Daniel Rolander Göran Rothman Daniel Solander Anders Sparrman Carl Peter Thunberg Related people Family ( Carl Linnaeus the Younger (son) Elisabeth Christina von Linné (daughter)) Students of Linnaeus Gaspard Bauhin Johann Bauhin Peter Artedi Herman Boerhaave Johannes Burman George Clifford III Recognitions Expedition Linné Linnaea Linnaean Garden ( including the Linnaeus Museum ) Linnaeite Linnaemya Linnaemyini 7412 Linnaeus Linnaeus Arboretum Linnaeus University Linnaeus's Hammarby Linné (crater) Linnéa Linnean Medal Linnean Society of London Swedish Linnaeus Society Linnean Society of New South Wales Linnean Tercentenary Medal Linneus, Maine Linneus, Missouri Category Wikiquote Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Chile Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii International Plant Names Index People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gaspard_Bauhin&oldid=1300958110 " Categories : 1560 births 1624 deaths Scientists from Basel-Stadt 17th-century Swiss botanists Swiss mycologists 16th-century Swiss physicians Academic staff of the University of Basel Members of the Lincean Academy 16th-century Swiss botanists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 Articles with hCards Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 Botanists with author abbreviations CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 09:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gaspard Bauhin 28 languages Add topic

