Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Gallery 3 Use as an alchemical symbol 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Globus cruciger 33 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Christian symbol of authority Imperial Orb of the Holy Roman Empire , part of the Imperial Regalia Part of the Politics series Monarchy Central concepts Monarch Monarchism Divine right of kings Mandate of Heaven Royal prerogative Types Abdication system Absolute Chinese Legalist Composite Constitutional Crowned republic Diarchy Dual Duchy Grand Dynastic union Elective Emirate Ethnarch Federal Hereditary Khanate Lordship Non-sovereign Pentarchy Personal union Popular Principality Real union Regency Coregency Self-proclaimed Signoria Tetrarch Triarchy Universal Philosophy Philosophers Aquinas Dante Bodin Bellarmine Filmer Hobbes Bossuet Maistre Bonald Chateaubriand Novalis Balzac Crétineau-Joly Gogol Cortés Balmes Kierkegaard Dostoevsky Youwei Maurras Bainville Seca Evola Kuehnelt-Leddihn Bogdanor Scruton Hoppe Yarvin Works De Regno (1265-1266) Monarchia (1313) Les Six livres de la République (1576) Leviathan (1651) Patriarcha (1680) Considerations on France (1796) Democracy: The God That Failed (2001) Politicians Mazarin Pius VI Ruffo Consalvi Plessis Metternich Villèle Polignac Decazes Disraeli Cortés Castillo Bismarck Mella Maurras Metaxas Churchill Renouvin Zhirinovsky Popescu-Tăriceanu Zourabichvili History Birth of the Roman Empire Magna Carta Foundation of the Ottoman Empire Tsarist autocracy Birth of the Dutch Republic Glorious Revolution French Revolution Establishment of the Dutch monarchy Trienio Liberal First French Empire Liberal Wars Second French Empire Unification of Italy Meiji Restoration Austro-Hungarian Compromise German unification 5 October 1910 Revolution Proclamation of the Republic in Brazil Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution Siamese revolution of 1932 Birth of the Italian Republic Spanish transition to democracy Iranian Revolution Modern Cambodia Nepalese Civil War Polity Aristocracy Autocracy Oligarchy Administration Court Appointment Great Officers Household Retinue Camarilla Courtier Favourite Royal guard Privy council Crown Council Makhzen Riksråd Royal assent Related ideologies Conservatism Authoritarian Traditionalist Despotism Enlightened absolutism Legal despotism Noblesse oblige Royalism National variants Brazil Canada France Bonapartism Legitimism Ultra-royalist Orléanism Georgia Germany Bavaria Iran Low Countries Belgium Dutch Republic Netherland Luxembourg Mexico Portugal Miguelism Romania Russia Serbia Spain Alfonsism Carlism United States United Kingdom Jacobitism Toryism High Uruguay Related topics Coronation Criticism Dynasty Lists Family Consort Descent Family trees Illegitimate Emperor system of Japan Figurehead Heir apparent presumptive Kingmaker List of monarchies Current Former Non-sovereign Nobility Peerage Realm Philosopher king Pretender List Rank Realm Empire Reich Regicide Regnal list Regnal number Sovereign Style Succession Anti-king Crisis Interregnum Rebellion War Usurper list Politics portal v t e The globus cruciger ( Latin for 'cross-bearing orb') [ 1 ] , also known as stavroforos sphaira ( Greek : σταυροφόρος σφαίρα ) [ 2 ] or "the orb and cross", is an orb surmounted by a cross . It has been a Christian symbol of authority since the Middle Ages , used on coins , in iconography , and with a sceptre as royal regalia .

The cross laid over the globus represents Christ's dominion over the world, literally held in the hand of a worthy earthly ruler. In the iconography of Western art , when Christ himself holds the globe, he is called Salvator Mundi (Latin for 'Saviour of the World').  For instance, the  16th-century Infant Jesus of Prague statue holds a globus cruciger in this manner.

History [ edit ] The globus cruciger was used in the Byzantine Empire , as shown in this coin of Emperor Leontius (died 705) Holding the world in one's hand, or, more ominously, under one's foot, has been a symbol since antiquity. To citizens of the Roman Empire , the plain spherical globe held by the god Jupiter represented the world or the universe, as the dominion held by the Emperor. A 2nd-century coin from the reign of Emperor Hadrian shows the Roman goddess Salus with her foot upon a globus , and a 4th-century coin from the reign of Emperor Constantine I shows him with a globus in hand. The orbis terrarum was central to the iconography of the Tetrarchy , in which it represented the Tetrarchs' restoration of security to the Roman world. Constantine I claimed to have had a vision of symbol of Christ above the sun, with the words "In this sign, you shall conquer" ( Latin : " In hoc signo vinces "), before the Battle of Milvian Bridge in AD 312. This symbol is usually assumed to be the "Chi-Rho (X-P)" symbol, but some think it was a cross. Consequently, his soldiers painted this symbol on their shields and then defeated their foe, Maxentius .

Christ as Salvator Mundi by Andrea Previtali Danish globus cruciger , part of the Danish Crown Regalia With the growth of Christianity in the 5th century, the orb (in Latin works orbis terrarum , the 'world of the lands', whence "orb" derives) was surmounted with a cross , hence globus cruciger , symbolizing the Christian God's dominion of the world. The Emperor held the world in his hand to show that he ruled it on behalf of God. To non-Christians already familiar with the pagan globe, the surmounting of a cross indicated the victory of Christianity over the world.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] In medieval iconography, the size of an object relative to those of nearby objects indicated its relative importance; therefore the orb was small and the one who held it was large to emphasize the nature of their relationship.

[ 6 ] Although the globe symbolized the whole Earth, many Christian rulers, some of them not even sovereign , who reigned over small territories of the Earth, used it symbolically.

[ 5 ] [ 3 ] One of the first known depictions in art of the symbol was in the late 4th century AD, possibly as early as AD 388, namely on the reverse side of the gold tremissii of Emperor Theodosius I .

[ 7 ] The globus cruciger was associated with powerful rulers and angels ; it adorned portrayals of both emperors and kings , and also archangels . It remained popular throughout the Middle Ages in coinage, iconography , and royal regalia . For example, it was often used by Byzantine emperors in order to symbolize their authority and sovereignty over the Christian world, usually being done via coinage. The symbol was meant to demonstrate that the emperor ruled both politically and divinely.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The papacy , which in the Middle Ages rivaled the Holy Roman Emperor in temporal power, also used the symbol on top of the Papal tiara , which consisted of a triple crown; the Pope did not use a separate orb as a symbol. The globus cruciger (made up of a monde and cross) was generally featured as the finial of European royal crowns, whether on physical crowns or merely in royal heraldry, for example, in Denmark, the Holy Roman Empire, Hungary, Italy, The Netherlands, Portugal, Romania, Spain, Sweden, and Yugoslavia.  It is still depicted not only in the arms of European polities for which a monarchy survives, yet also, since the end of communism in 1991, in the arms of some eastern European polities, despite the termination of their historical monarchies. Even in the modern era in the United Kingdom , the Sovereign's Orb symbolizes both the state and Church of England under the protection and domain of the monarchy.

Gallery [ edit ] Emperor Frederick I Barbarossa The Golden Bull of 1356 by the Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor Charles II of Naples and Hungary Mary of Hungary Wenceslaus III of Bohemia Charlemagne by Albrecht Dürer Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor by Albrecht Dürer Frederick V holding the orb Elizabeth I of England in coronation robes, with orb and sceptre Primary Crown Jewels of the United Kingdom , with Sovereign's Orb at upper left (in late 1952 before the coronation of Elizabeth II ) Dutch globus cruciger , part of the Regalia of the Netherlands Regalia of Sweden with the orb Regalia of Russia Regalia of Hungary [ hu ; de ] with the orb; note the patriarchal cross on the orb Coat of arms of Uppland Coat of arms of Vologda Orb and sceptre in the coat of arms of Montenegro ; several other coats of arms use them in the same manner.

Chromolithograph of Jesus as a child, holding an orb and a crown of thorns Statue of Virgin Mary holding an orb Statue of Archangel Gabriel holding an orb Wall sculpture in Sainte-Chapelle, Paris The Harris tweed orb Use as an alchemical symbol [ edit ] The globus cruciger was used as the alchemical symbol ( ♁ ) for antimony . It was also used as an alchemical symbol for lupus metallorum "the grey wolf", supposedly used to purify alloyed metals into pure gold.

Lupus metallorum ( stibnite ) was used to purify gold, as the sulphur in the antimony sulphide bonds to the metals alloyed with the gold, and these form a slag which can be removed. The gold remains dissolved in the metallic antimony which can be boiled off to leave the purified gold.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] The Ball and the Cross Holy Hand Grenade of Antioch Monde (crown) Earth symbol Celestial spheres T and O map Apfelgroschen – coin depicting the orb and cross of the Holy Roman Empire Venus symbol Cintamani References [ edit ] ^ "Cruciger" and the synonymous term "crucifer" are compounds of "crux, crucis" (cross) and two different Latin terms for carrying something: -ger = "gero, gerere" or -fer "fero, ferre". While "globus crucifer" is likewise attested, "globus cruciger" appears to be the more common terminology. On Latin compounds, see Raphael Kühner, Ausfürliche Grammatik der lateinischen Sprache , vol. 1, Elementar-, Formen- und Wortlehre (Hannover: Hahn, 1912), 1032. The preference for "cruciger" can be seen already through its use in Charles du Fresne, sieur du Cange 's De imperatorum constantinopolitanorum seu inferioris aevi, vel imperii, uti vocant numismatibus dissertatio , chs 26(18)-27(19), originally printed as an appendix to the third volume of his hugely influential medieval latin dictionary, the Glossarium ad scriptores mediae et infimae latinitatis , 3 vols (Paris, 1678), 3:15-16; repr. by G. A. L. Henschel and Léopold Favre, 10 vols (Paris, 1883-1887), 10:130-131.

^ "Sphaira" .

wordreference.com . Retrieved 2024-02-29 .

^ a b Rhys, Dani (2023-07-29).

"Globus Cruciger: A Powerful Christian Symbol" .

Symbol Sage . Retrieved 2024-08-04 .

^ "Globus Cruciger" .

Ancient Symbols . Retrieved 2024-08-04 .

^ a b Pyrgies, Joanna (2021-02-20).

" 'Globus cruciger' in the Hands of Monarchs - ARCHAEOTRAVEL.eu" . Retrieved 2024-08-04 .

^ "Scaling the Middle Ages: Size and scale in medieval art" .

The Courtauld . Retrieved 2024-08-04 .

^ Pearce, J.W.E. (1972).

Roman Imperial Coinage . Vol. IX. London: Spink & Son Ltd. p. 232.

ISBN 9780900696633 .

^ Society, American Numismatic (2021-05-06).

"The Changing Iconography of Byzantine Gold Coins" .

CoinWeek: Rare Coin, Currency, and Bullion News for Collectors . Retrieved 2024-08-04 .

^ "globus cruciger | Acropolis Museum | Official website" .

www.theacropolismuseum.gr . Retrieved 2024-08-04 .

^ Stockdale, D. (1924). "Historical Notes on the Assay of Gold".

Science Progress in the Twentieth Century (1919-1933) .

18 (71): 476– 479.

JSTOR 43430908 .

Leslie Brubaker, Dictionary of the Middle Ages , vol 5, pg. 564, ISBN 0-684-18161-4 Picture of the 10th century Orb, Scepter and Crown insignia of the Holy Roman Empire Archived 2018-08-12 at the Wayback Machine Stockdale, D. (1924). "Historical Notes on the Assay of Gold".

Science Progress in the Twentieth Century .

18 (71): 476– 479.

JSTOR 43430908 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Globus cruciger at Wikimedia Commons v t e Crosses In modern use Alcoraz Anchored/Saint Clement Anuradhapura Archangels Archiepiscopal Armenian Arrow/Barby Balkenkreuz Bolnisi Bottony Branch Bulgarian Burgundy Byzantine Calvary Camargue Canterbury Catherine wheel Celtic Variant Cercelée Coptic Cossack Crosslet Fitchy Crucifix Cruciform halo Double Ethiopian Evangelists Fleury Fitchy Forked Fourchy Fylfot Globus cruciger Archbishop 's variant Gnostic Grapevine/Saint Nino Greek Greek Orthodox Huguenot Iron Jeremiah Jerusalem/Crusaders Jerusalem (Kingdom) Latin/Roman Macedonian Maltese Marada Marian Maronite Moline Nordic Novgorod Occitan Order of Christ Papal Patonce Pattée Fitchée Patriarchal Pommy Portate/Saint Gilbert Potent Quadrate Resistance Ringed Russian Russian Orthodox Salem Saltire/Saint Andrew Saint Chad Saint David Saint Florian Saint George Saint James/Santiago Saint John Saint Patrick Saint Peter Saint Philip Saint Piran Saint Thomas Serbian Serbian Orthodox Short Sword Syriac (Eastern) Syriac (Western) Tau / Saint Anthony Historical Avellane Aviz Black Blanc croix rouge Brigid Carolingian Chouan Consecration Coptic Coptic (Early) Cross cramponnée Crown Cuthbert's pectoral Engrailed Erminée Gammadion Jewelled Katanga Lazarus Lorraine Neith Nestorian Peñalba Pierced Quarterly Saint Alban Saint Julian Templar Teutonic Order Two-barred Victory Voided By function Altar Blessing Conciliation Heraldry Nordic Pisan High Market Mercat Memorial Mission Necklace Pectoral Plague Preaching Processional Lalibela Rood/Triumphal cross Summit Wayside Christograms , Chrismons Chi Rho IX monogram Labarum Signum manus Staurogram/Monogrammatic / Tau Rho Related Ankh Armenian eternity sign Chakana Ichthys Irminsul Kolovrat Lauburu Mjölnir Rose Rota Solomon's knot Scientology Shamrock Shield of the Trinity Sunwheel swastika Sun Swastika Triskelion/Triskele Descriptions in antiquity of the execution cross List of tallest crosses in the world Christianity portal Arts portal v t e Coronation and enthronement Regalia Crown Coronation crown Crown jewels Diadem Tiara Armill Ring Globus cruciger (orb) Sceptre Sword Mantle Items rituals Throne Anointing Enthronement Investiture By continent Africa the Americas Asia Europe Oceania Specific customs Antiquity Ancient Egyptian Bohemian Brazilian British Bulgarian Burmese Byzantine Central African Danish Dutch French royal Napoleon Holy Roman Hungarian Indian Japanese Malaysian Nepalese Norwegian Ottoman Papal Polish Russian Serbian Swedish Thai See also Pretender List of current Papabile Order of succession Coronation anthem Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Globus_cruciger&oldid=1304982324 " Categories : Christian iconography Christian symbols Cross symbols Formal insignia Latin religious words and phrases Regalia Religious symbols Heraldic charges Byzantine regalia Spherical objects Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Greek-language text Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 09:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Globus cruciger 33 languages Add topic

