Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Petrology 2 Blueschist facies 3 History and etymology 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Blueschist 17 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Italiano עברית Magyar Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of metavolcanic rock This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Blueschist" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Blueschist on Île de Groix , France Photomicrograph of a thin section of blueschist facies metamorphosed basalt , from Sivrihisar, Turkey Blueschist ( / ˈ b l uː ʃ ɪ s t / ), also called glaucophane schist , is a metavolcanic rock [ 1 ] that forms by the metamorphism of basalt and similar rocks at relatively low temperatures (200–500 °C (392–932 °F)) but very high pressure corresponding to a depth of 15–30 km (9.3–18.6 mi). The blue color of the rock comes from the presence of the predominant minerals glaucophane and lawsonite .  This combination of low temperature occurring at significant depth can only be explained in the context of plate subduction , followed by exhumation , which accounts for the rarity of this rock.

Blueschists are schists typically found within orogenic belts as terranes of lithology in faulted contact with greenschist or rarely eclogite facies rocks.

Petrology [ edit ] Blueschist, as a rock type, is defined by the presence of the minerals glaucophane + ( lawsonite or epidote ) +/- jadeite +/- albite or chlorite +/- garnet +/- muscovite in a rock of roughly basaltic composition.

Blueschist often has a lepidoblastic , nematoblastic or schistose rock microstructure defined primarily by chlorite , phengitic white mica , glaucophane, and other minerals with an elongate or platy shape.

Grain size is rarely coarse, as mineral growth is retarded by the swiftness of the rock's metamorphic trajectory and perhaps more importantly, the low temperatures of metamorphism and in many cases the anhydrous state of the basalts. However, porphyritic varieties do occur. Blueschists may appear blue, black, gray, or blue-green in outcrop.

Blueschist facies [ edit ] Photomicrograph of garnet-lawsonite-glaucophane blueschist from Sivrihisar, Turkey (Field of view is 3 mm) Blueschist facies is determined by the particular temperature and pressure conditions required to metamorphose basalt to form blueschist.

Felsic rocks and pelitic sediments which are subjected to blueschist facies conditions will form different mineral assemblages than metamorphosed basalt. Thereby, these rocks do not appear blue overall in color.

Blueschist mineralogy varies by rock composition, but the classic equilibrium assemblages of blueschist facies are: Basalts: glaucophane + lawsonite and/or epidote + albite + titanite +/- garnet +/- quartz jadeite + quartz - diagnostic of pressures ~> 10 kbar Ultramafic rocks: serpentinite / lizardite +/- talc +/- zoisite Pelites : Fe-Mg-carpholite +/- chloritoid +/- kyanite + zoisite +/- pargasite or phengite +/- albite +/- quartz +/- talc +/- garnet Granites : kyanite +/- paragonite +/- chlorite +/- albite +/- quartz +/- pargasite or phengite Calc-silicates : Various Limestones and marble : calcite transforms to aragonite at high pressure, but typically reverts to calcite when exhumed Blueschist facies generally is considered to form under pressures of >0.6 GPa , equivalent to depth of burial in excess of 15–18 km, and at temperatures of between 200 and 500 °C. This is a 'low temperature, high pressure' prograde metamorphic path and is also known as the Franciscan facies series , after the west coast of the United States where these rocks are exposed. Well-exposed blueschists also occur in Greece , Turkey , Japan , New Zealand and New Caledonia .

Photomicrograph of blueschist facies quartz sediment, Sivrihisar, Turkey Continued subduction of blueschist facies oceanic crust will produce eclogite facies assemblages in metamorphosed basalt (garnet + omphacitic clinopyroxene). Rocks which have been subjected to blueschist conditions during a prograde trajectory will gain heat by conduction with hotter lower crustal rocks if they remain at the 15–18 km depth. Blueschist which heats up to greater than 500 °C via this fashion will enter greenschist or eclogite facies temperature-pressure conditions, and the mineral assemblages will metamorphose to reflect the new facies conditions.

Thus in order for blueschist facies assemblages to be seen at the Earth's surface, the rock must be exhumed swiftly enough to prevent total thermal equilibration of the rocks which are under blueschist facies conditions with the typical geothermal gradient .

Blueschists and other high-pressure subduction zone rocks are thought to be exhumed rapidly by flow and/or faulting in accretionary wedges or the upper parts of subducted crust, or may return to the Earth's surface in part owing to buoyancy if the metabasaltic rocks are associated with low-density continental crust (marble, metapelite, and other rocks of continental margins).

It has been held that the absence of blueschist dating to before the Neoproterozoic Era indicates that currently exhumed rocks never reached blueschist facies at subduction zones before 1,000 million years ago. This assertion is arguably wrong because the earliest oceanic crust would have contained more magnesium than today's crust and, therefore, would have formed greenschist-like rocks at blueschist facies.

[ 2 ] History and etymology [ edit ] Garnetiferous blueschist, an uncommon rock (Ward Creek, Sonoma County, California ) In Minoan Crete blueschist and greenschist were used to pave streets and courtyards between 1650 and 1600 BC. These rocks were likely quarried in Agia Pelagia on the north coast of central Crete.

[ 3 ] In 1962, Edgar Bailey of the U.S. Geological Survey , introduced the concept of "blueschist" into the subject of metamorphic geology . His carefully constructed definition established the pressure and temperature conditions which produce this type of metamorphism.

See also [ edit ] List of minerals List of rock types Metamorphism References [ edit ] ^ "Blueschist" .

About.com Education. Archived from the original on 2016-10-08 . Retrieved 2015-12-12 .

^ Palin, Richard M.; White, Richard W. (2016).

"Emergence of blueschists on Earth linked to secular changes in oceanic crust composition" .

Nature Geoscience .

9 (1): 60– 64.

Bibcode : 2016NatGe...9...60P .

doi : 10.1038/ngeo2605 .

S2CID 130847333 .

^ Tziligkaki, Eleni K. (2010).

"Types of schist used in buildings of Minoan Crete" (PDF) .

Hellenic Journal of Geosciences .

45 : 317– 322 . Retrieved December 1, 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Blueschist .

Blueschist facies - Rock Library Glossary, Imperial College London v t e Metamorphic facies Zeolite Prehnite-pumpellyite Greenschist Blueschist Eclogite Amphibolite Granulite Minerals portal v t e Types of rocks Igneous rock Adakite Alkali feldspar granite Andesite Anorthosite Aplite Basalt Alkali basalt Picrite basalt Basaltic trachyandesite Mugearite Shoshonite Basanite Blairmorite Boninite Carbonatite Charnockite Enderbite Dacite Diabase Diorite Napoleonite Dunite Essexite Foidolite Gabbro Granite Granodiorite Granophyre Harzburgite Hornblendite Hyaloclastite Icelandite Ignimbrite Ijolite Kimberlite Komatiite Lamproite Lamprophyre Latite Lherzolite Monzogranite Monzonite Nepheline syenite Nephelinite Norite Obsidian Pegmatite Peridotite Phonolite Phonotephrite Porphyry Pumice Pyroxenite Quartz diorite Quartz monzonite Quartzolite Rhyodacite Rhyolite Comendite Pantellerite Scoria Shonkinite Sovite Syenite Tachylyte Tephriphonolite Tephrite Tonalite Trachyandesite Benmoreite Trachybasalt Hawaiite Trachyte Troctolite Trondhjemite Tuff Websterite Wehrlite Sedimentary rock Argillite Arkose Banded iron formation Breccia Calcarenite Chalk Chert Claystone Coal Conglomerate Coquina Diamictite Diatomite Dolomite Evaporite Flint Geyserite Greywacke Gritstone Itacolumite Jaspillite Laterite Lignite Limestone Lumachelle Marl Mudstone Oil shale Oolite Phosphorite Sandstone Shale Siltstone Sylvinite Tillite Travertine Tufa Turbidite Varve Wackestone Metamorphic rock Anthracite Amphibolite Blueschist Cataclasite Eclogite Gneiss Granulite Greenschist Hornfels Calcflinta Itabirite Litchfieldite Marble Migmatite Mylonite Metapelite Metapsammite Phyllite Pseudotachylite Quartzite Schist Serpentinite Skarn Slate Suevite Talc carbonate Soapstone Tectonite Whiteschist Specific varieties Adamellite Appinite Aphanite Borolanite Blue Granite Epidosite Felsite Flint Ganister Gossan Hyaloclastite Ijolite Jadeitite Jasperoid Kenyte Lapis lazuli Larvikite Litchfieldite Llanite Luxullianite Mangerite Novaculite Pietersite Pyrolite Rapakivi granite Rhomb porphyry Rodingite Shonkinite Taconite Tachylite Teschenite Theralite Unakite Variolite Wad Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Blueschist&oldid=1291496275 " Categories : Schist Metamorphic petrology Volcanic rocks Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2025 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 May 2025, at 16:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Blueschist 17 languages Add topic

