Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 2.1 Landscape 2.2 Climate 2.3 Natural resources 2.4 Cultural subdivisions 2.4.1 East Sápmi 2.4.2 Central Sápmi 2.4.3 South Sápmi 3 Sámi languages 4 Demography 5 Politics Toggle Politics subsection 5.1 Sámi Parliaments 5.2 Sámi Parliamentary Council 5.3 Saami Council 5.4 Russia 5.5 Norway 5.6 Sweden 5.7 Finland 5.8 Coats of Arms of Sami Communities 6 Sports 7 Notable places Toggle Notable places subsection 7.1 North Sámi area 7.2 South Sápmi 7.3 East Sápmi 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Citations 9.2 Sources 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Sápmi 81 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Davvisámegiella Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски مازِرونی Mirandés Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Sardu Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Tyap Українська Tiếng Việt West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 68°N 20°E ﻿ / ﻿ 68°N 20°E ﻿ / 68; 20 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sámi cultural region of Fennoscandia "Sámi homeland" redirects here. For the part of the Lappi administrative region in Finland, see Sámi homeland (Finland) .

Not to be confused with Sampi .

68°N 20°E ﻿ / ﻿ 68°N 20°E ﻿ / 68; 20 This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Sápmi" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Sápmi Flag Anthem: Sámi soga lávlla Location of Sápmi: dark red line showing the Southern limit of the areas traditionally inhabited by the Sámi Regional Sámi languages , Norwegian , Swedish , Finnish , Meänkieli , Kven and Russian Demonym(s) Sámi Integrated parts of Norway , Sweden , Finland and Russia respectively, but with varying degrees of autonomy for the Sami Time zone UTC +1 to +3 ( CET , EET , FET ) Sápmi is the cultural region traditionally inhabited by the Sámi people . Sápmi includes the northern parts of Fennoscandia , stretching over four countries: Norway , Sweden , Finland , and Russia . Most of Sápmi lies north of the Arctic Circle , bounded by the Barents Sea , Norwegian Sea , and White Sea .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In south, Sápmi extends to the counties of Trøndelag in Norway and Jämtland in Sweden.

Most of the Sámi population is concentrated in a few traditional areas in the northernmost part of Sápmi, such as Kautokeino and Karasjok .

Inari is considered one of the centres of Sámi culture .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In past, the Sámi settlement reached much farther to south, possibly to present-day Oslo in west and the lakes Ladoga and Onega in east.

[ 5 ] Sápmi has never been a sovereign political entity.

[ 5 ] Since 1970s–1990s, the Sámi have a limited self-governance in the Nordic states, represented by the Sámi Parliaments. The interstate cooperation is organized by the umbrella organization Sámi Council .

Historically, the Scandinavian peoples referred to the Sámi using the exonyms Finns and Lapps , terms now considered outdated or pejorative.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] In Scandinavian languages, historical names for the region include Finnmǫrk , Lappmarken and Lappland , [ 5 ] and in English, Sápmi has traditionally been called Lapland ( / ˈ l æ p l æ n d / ). Today, variations of these names persist in smaller cultural, geographic and administrative designations within each country, such as Finnmark County in Norway, Lapland Province in Sweden and Lapland Region in Finland, all of which overlap with Sápmi.

[ 5 ] The Russian part of the Sápmi is covered by Murmansk Oblast .

[ 8 ] Etymology [ edit ] Sápmi (and corresponding terms in other Sámi languages) refers to both the Sámi land and the Sámi people. The word Sámi is the accusative-genitive form of the noun Sápmi —making the name's ( Sámi olbmot ) meaning "people of Sápmi". The origin of the word is speculated to be related to the Baltic word *žēmē , meaning "land".

[ 9 ] Also Häme , the Finnish name for Tavastia , a historical province of Finland, is thought to have the same origin, and the same word is at least speculated to be the origin of Suomi , the Finnish name for Finland .

Sápmi is the name in Northern Sámi, the most widely spoken of the Sámi languages. In other languages,  the following terms are used: Lule Sami : Sábme / Sámeednam Southern Sami : Saepmie Pite Sami : Sämijednam Ume Sami : Sábmie Inari Sami : Säämi Skolt Sami : Sääʹmjânnam Kildin Sami : Са̄мь е̄ммьне , romanized: Saam' jiemm'n'e Lapponia , the first reliable map of the northern regions of both Sweden and Finland (1611), is also an important source for discussions about the early modern history of Sámi peoples.

In modern Swedish and Norwegian , Sápmi is known as either Sapmi or Sameland . In Finnish it is known as Saamenmaa or saamelaisalue .

[ 10 ] In Old Norse , it was historically called Finnmǫrk , a name that later evolved into Finnmark , the name of Norway's northernmost county.

[ 6 ] In older Swedish, Sápmi was known as Lappmarken or Lappland .

[ 11 ] Some English language sources refer to Northern Norway and Murmansk Oblast as Norwegian Lapland [ 12 ] and Russian Lapland , respectively, especially in the context of tourism marketing.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Lappland became the name of Sweden's northernmost province ( landskap ) which was divided in 1809, leaving one part in Sweden and other under Finland, which became part of the Russian Empire . The name Lappland remains in use for both the Swedish province of Lapland and the Finnish region of Lapland . Finnish Lapland includes Peräpohjola , a region traditionally considered part of Ostrobothnia . Consequently.

Lapland and Sápmi are not interchangeable in the Finnish context. While Rovaniemi is located in Lapland, it is not part of Sápmi.

[ 15 ] In the 17th century, Johannes Schefferus assumed the etymology of the term Lapland to be related to the Swedish word for "running", löpa (cognate with English, to leap ).

[ 16 ] The terms Lapp and Lappland are now regarded as outdated or offensive by many Sámi people, who prefer the area's name in their language Sápmi , because over time the term Lapp has acquired the pejorative connotation of "silly", "uneducated", "backwards", etc. in the major languages of the Scandinavian countries that include Sápmi.

[ 7 ] [ 17 ] Geography [ edit ] Landscape [ edit ] The largest part of Sápmi lies north of the Arctic Circle . The western portion is an area of fjords , deep valleys, glaciers and mountains, the highest point being Mount Kebnekaise (2,096.8 m [6,879 ft]). The Swedish part of Sápmi is characterized by great rivers running from the northwest to the southeast. From the former Norwegian county of Troms and Finnmark and eastward, the terrain is that of a low plateau with many marshes and lakes, the largest of which is Lake Inari in Finnish Lapland. The extreme northeastern section lies within the tundra region, but it does not have permafrost . In the 19th century, scientific expeditions to Sápmi were undertaken, for instance by Jöns Svanberg .

[ 18 ] Climate [ edit ] The climate is subarctic / tundra and vegetation is sparse, except in the densely forested southern portion. The mountainous west coast has significantly milder winters and more precipitation than the large areas east of the mountain chain. North of the Arctic Circle polar nights characterize the winter season and the midnight sun the summer season—both phenomena are longer the further north you go. Traditionally, the Sami divide the year into eight seasons instead of four.

In Inari, the climate is warm-end subarctic, with summer highs of 18 °C (64 °F), and winter lows of −15 °C (5 °F). The average winter sees 131 days of snowfall, with the first flakes falling to the ground in September.

[ 19 ] Snow cover lasts about two-thirds of the year and may persist past the last flake and even the last frost.

Even without permafrost or a true tundra climate, much of Sápmi is arctic moorland with stunted, scattered trees.

Natural resources [ edit ] Reindeers , wolves , bears, and birds are the main forms of animal life, in addition to a myriad of insects in the short summer. Sea and river fisheries abound in the region. Steamers are operated on some of the lakes, and many ports are ice-free throughout the year. All ports along the Norwegian Sea in the west and the Barents Sea in the northeast to Murmansk are ice-free all year. The northern part of the Gulf of Bothnia usually freezes over in winter.

[ 20 ] The ocean floor to the north and west of Sápmi has deposits of petroleum and natural gas. Sápmi contains valuable mineral deposits, particularly iron ore in Sweden, copper in Norway, and nickel and apatite in Russia.

Cultural subdivisions [ edit ] East Sápmi [ edit ] East Sápmi consists of the Kola peninsula and the Lake Inari region and is home to the eastern Sami languages. While being the most heavily populated part of Sápmi, this is also the region where the Indigenous population and their culture are weakest. Corresponds to the regions marked 6 through 9 on the map below.

Central Sápmi [ edit ] Central Sápmi consists of the western part of Finland's Sami Domicile Area, the parts of Norway north of the Saltfjellet mountains and areas on the Swedish side corresponding to this. Central Sápmi is the region where Sami culture is strongest and home to North Sami—the most widely used Sami language, with around 20,000 speakers as of 2024. In the southernmost part of this subregion, however, Sami culture is rather weak—this is where the moribund Bithun Sami language is used. The areas around the Tysfjorden fjord in Norway and the river Lule in Sweden are home to the Julev Sami language, one of the more widely used Sami languages. These correspond to the regions marked 3 through 5 on the map below.

South Sápmi [ edit ] South Sápmi consists of the areas south of Saltfjellet and corresponding areas in Sweden and is home to the southern languages. In this area, Sami culture is mostly visible inland and on the coast of the Baltic Sea, and the languages are spoken by few. Corresponds to the regions marked 1 and 2 on the map below to the southeast of region 1 in Sweden.

Sámi languages [ edit ] Map of Sámi language areas: Southern (Åarjil) Sámi Ume (Upme) Sámi Pite (Bitthun) Sámi Lule (Julev) Sámi Northern (Davvi) Sámi Eastern (Skolt) Sámi Inari (Ánár) Sámi Kildin (Kola) Sámi Ter (Kill) Sámi Darkened areas represent municipalities that recognize Sami as an official language.

Main article: Sámi languages The Saamic languages are the region's main minority languages and its oldest attested languages. They belong to the Uralic language family and are most closely related to the Finnic languages. Many Sami languages are mutually unintelligible, but the languages originally formed a dialect continuum stretching southwest and northeast, so that a message could hypothetically be passed between Sami speakers from one end to the other and be understood by all. Today, however, many of the languages are moribund and thus there are "gaps" in the original continuum.

On the map to the right numbers indicate Sámi languages. Of these languages, Northern Sámi is by far the most vital; whereas Ume Sámi and Pite Sámi are critically endangered.

[ 21 ] Kemi Sámi has been extinct for over a century.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] North Sami is subdivided into three main dialects: West, East, and Coast. The written standard is based on the Western dialect.

Demography [ edit ] It is difficult to give estimates of inhabitants since Sápmi is not precisely defined. It is also difficult to account for the distribution of ethnic groups as many people have double or multiple ethnic identities—both seeing themselves as members of the majority population and being part of one or more minority groups.

The number of Sámi is generally estimated to be between 80,000 and 100,000.

[ 24 ] Many live in areas outside Sápmi such as Oulu , Oslo , Stockholm and Helsinki . Some Sámi people have migrated to places outside the Sápmi vernacular region, such as Canada and the United States.

Groups of Sámi people have settled in the northern parts of Minnesota .

[ 25 ] The Sami are a small minorities in the Russian part of Sápmi.

As of 2016, 13,226 people inhabited the Sami native region of Finnish Lapland many of whom are Sami.

[ 26 ] [ better source needed ] Politics [ edit ] Norway, Finland and Sweden all have Sámi Parliaments that to varying degrees are involved in governing the region—though mostly they only have authority over the matters of the Sámi citizens of the states in which they are situated.

Sámi Parliaments [ edit ] The Sámi Parliament of Norway Every Norwegian citizen registered as a Sámi has the right to vote in the elections for the Sámi Parliament of Norway . Elections are held every four years by direct vote from seven constituencies covering all of Norway (six of which are in Sápmi) and run parallel to the general Norwegian parliamentary elections. This is the Sámi Parliament with the most influence over any part of Sápmi, as it is involved in the autonomy established by the Finnmark Act . The parliament is in the village of Kárášjohka and its current president is Silje Karine Muotka from the Norwegian Sámi Association .

The Sámi Parliament of Sweden , situated in Kiruna ( Northern Sami : Giron ), is elected by a general vote which all registered Sámi citizens of Sweden may attend. The current president is Lars-Anders Baer.

Voting for elections to the Sámi Parliament of Finland is restricted to inhabitants of the Sámi Domicile Area . The Parliament is in Inari ( Inari Sami : Aanaar ), and its current president is Tuomas Aslak Juuso .

In Russia, there is no Sámi Parliament. Two Sámi organisations are members of the national umbrella organisation of Indigenous peoples, the Russian Association of Indigenous Peoples of the North (RAIPON), and represent the Russian Sámi in the Sámi Council. RAIPON is represented in Russia's Public Chamber by Pavel Sulyandziga . On 14 December 2008, the first Congress of the Russian Sámi took place. The Conference decided to demand the formation of a Russian Sámi Parliament, to be elected by the local Sámi. A suggestion to have the Russian Federation pick representatives for the Parliament was voted down with a clear majority. The Congress also chose a Council of Representatives that was to work for the establishment of a parliament and otherwise represent the Russian Sámi. It is headed by Valentina Sovkina .

[ 27 ] Sámi Parliamentary Council [ edit ] On 2 March 2000, the Sámi parliaments of Norway and Finland founded the Sámi Parliamentary Council, and the Sámi Parliament of Sweden joined two years later. Each parliament sends seven representatives, and observers are sent from the Sámi organisations of Russia and the Sámi Council. The Sámi Parliamentary Council discuss cross-border cooperation, hands out the annual Gollegiella language development award, and represents the Sámi people abroad.

[ 28 ] Saami Council [ edit ] In addition to the parliaments and their common council, there is a Saami Council based on Saami organisations. This council also organises interstate cooperation between the Saami, and also often represents the Saami in international fora such as the Barents Region . This organisation is older than the Parliamentary Council, but not connected to the parliaments except that some of the NGOs double as party lists in Sami parliament elections.

Russia [ edit ] Lapland Nature Reserve, Russia See also: Sámi politics § Russia The Russian side of Sápmi is within Murmansk Oblast .

Oblasts are governed by popularly elected parliaments and formally headed by governors. The governors are nominated by the president of Russia and accepted or rejected by the local parliaments. However, should the parliament refuse to accept the president's nominee, the president is entitled to dissolve parliament and call local elections.

Murmansk Oblast covers the Kola Peninsula and is home to Murmansk, the largest city north of the Arctic Circle and in the Sápmi. It is subdivided into several districts , of which the geographically largest is Lovozersky District . This is also part of Russia where the Sami population is most numerous and visible.

The Lapland Nature Reserve ( Russian : Лапландский заповедник , Laplandskiy zapovednik) is a Russian zapovednik (strict nature reserve) in Murmansk Oblast, above the Arctic Circle . Its administrative centre is the rural locality of Laplandsky Zapovednik . First established between 1930-1951 and reestablished in 1957, the reserve protects an area of 2,784 km 2 (1,075 sq mi) to the northwest of Lake Imandra , including 86 km 2 of inland water.

Norway [ edit ] The counties of Norway are governed by popularly elected assemblies , headed by county mayors. Formally, the counties are headed by county governors , but in practice, these have limited influence today.

The largest of Norway's landscapes, Finnmárku ( Northern Sami ) or Finnmark ( Norwegian ) county, is in Sápmi and has a special form of autonomy: 95% (about 46,000 km 2 [18,000 sq mi]) of the area is owned by the Finnmark Estate . The board of the Estate consists of many representatives from the Sami Parliament of Norway and Finnmark's county council. The two institutions appoint leaders of the board alternately. The administrative centre of Finnmárku (Finnmark) is Čáhcesuolu or Vadsø, in the far east of the county. The current county governor is Runar Sjåstad from the Norwegian Labour Party .

Romsa (or Troms) county is southwest of Finnmárku. Its administrative centre is the city after which the county is named, Romsa or Tromsø. Romsa is North Norway's biggest city and Sápmi's biggest city after Murmansk . The current fylkesordfører is Terje Olsen from the Conservative Party . A similar solution to the Finnmark Estate, Hålogalandsallmenningen , has been proposed for Romsa County and its southern neighbour Nordlánda .

Nordland covers a long strip of coast that includes both North Sami, Julev Sami, Bithun Sami, and South Sami areas. Its administrative centre is Bådåddjo or Bodø. The current county governor is Mariette Korsrud from the Norwegian Labour Party .

[ 29 ] The southernmost parts of Norwegian Sapmi lie in Trøndelag county (mostly the northern part of the county). The administrative centre is Steinkjer . The largest city in Trøndelag is Trondheim . Trondheim is outside Sápmi but is well known for being the site of the first international Sami conference in February 1917. The county governor is Frank Jenssen from the Conservative Party .

Sweden [ edit ] Lapland is a large northwestern province of Sweden , wholly within Sápmi. The traditional provinces of Sweden are cultural and historical entities; for administrative and political purposes they were replaced by the counties of Sweden (län) in 1634.

Five counties are wholly or partially within Sápmi.

Län is formally governed by the landshövding , who is an envoy of the government and runs the government-appointed länsstyrelse that coordinates administration with national political goals for the county. Much of county politics is run by the county council or landsting , which is elected by the inhabitants of the county; but the counties' top positions are still determined by those who win the general elections of Sweden.

Norrbotten County is mostly covered by Sápmi, although the lower Tornedalen region is often excluded. The administrative centre is Luleå in the Julev Sami area (Norrbotten includes North, Julev and Bithun areas). Current landshövding is Per-Ola Eriksson of the Centre Party .

Sápmi covers the interior majority of Västerbotten County , which are Ubmeje and South Sami regions. The administrative centre is Umeå , and the current landshövding is Chris Heister from the conservative Moderate Party .

Västernorrland County is an old part of Sapmi and still is. There are a lot of Sami on the coast of the Baltic Sea ( Gulf of Bothnia ).

Jämtland County is sometimes considered a part of the Sápmi cultural region and is a South Sami county. The administrative centre is Östersund . Current landshövding is Jöran Hägglund from the centre party Centerpartiet .

Finland [ edit ] Finland is divided into nineteen regions ( maakunta ), each governed by regional councils. These councils serve as cooperative forums for municipalities rather than being elected through a direct popular vote.

Lapland ( Lappi , Lappland ) is the northernmost region, extending further south than Sápmi and encompassing Southern Lapland ( Peräpohjola , Nordbotten ), historically regarded as the northernmost part of Ostrobothnia . The administrative centre is Rovaniemi . North Sami, Skolt Sami, and Aanaar Sami are Indigenous to the region.

Four municipalities, Anár (Inari), Eanodat (Enontekiö), Ohcejohka (Utsjoki) and Soađegilli (Sodankylä) in the northern part of Finnish Lapland constitute the Sami Domicile Area , Sámiid Ruovttoguovlu , a region that is autonomous on issues regarding Sami culture and language. Ohcejohka is the only municipality in Finland with a Sami majority.

[ 30 ] Coats of Arms of Sami Communities [ edit ] Coats of Arms Finnmárku (Norway) Romsa (Norway) Nordlánda (Norway) Trööndelage (Norway) Lapplánda (Sweden) Norrbottena (Sweden) Västerbottena (Sweden) Jämtlándda (Sweden) Härjedaelie (Sweden) Lappi (Finland) Murmánska (Russia) Sports [ edit ] The region has its own football team, the Sápmi football team , which is organised by FA Sápmi . It is a member of ConIFA and the host of the 2014 ConIFA World Football Cup . The Sápmi football team won the 2006 VIVA World Cup and hosted the 2008 event.

Notable places [ edit ] The following towns and villages have a significant Sami population or host Sami institutions. Norwegian, Swedish, Finnish, or Russian toponyms are in parentheses.

North Sámi area [ edit ] Deatnu (Tana) has a significant Sami population.

Divtasvuodna (Tysfjord) is a centre for the Lule (Julev) Sami population. The Árran Lule-Sami centre is here.

Eanodat (Enontekiö).

Gáivuotna (Kåfjord) is an important centre for the Coastal Sami culture, which is host to the Riddu Riđđu international Indigenous festival each summer. The municipality has a Sami language centre and hosts the Ája Sami Centre. The opposition against Sami language and culture revitalization in Gáivuotna was infamous in the late 1990s and included Sami language road signs being shot to pieces repeatedly.

Giron (Kiruna) is the seat of the Swedish Sami Parliament and the largest urban settlement in Swedish Lapland.

Guovdageaidnu (Kautokeino): About 90% of the population speaks North Sami, and several Sami institutions are here. These include Beaivváš Sami Theatre, a Sami High School and Reindeer Herding School, the Sami University College, the Nordic Sami Research Institute, the Sami Language Board, the Resource Centre for the Rights of Indigenous People, and the International Centre For Reindeer Husbandry. In addition, several Sami media are based in Kautokeino. These include the Sami language newspaper Áššu and the DAT Sami publishing house/record company. Kautokeino also hosts the Sami Easter Festival. The Kautokeino rebellion in 1852 was one of the few Sami rebellions against the Norwegian government's oppression of the Sami.

Jiellevárri or Váhčir (Gällivare) Johkamohkki (Jokkmokk) holds a large Sami market and festival the first weekend of every February. It is also the location of Ájtte .

Kárášjohka (Karasjok) is the seat of the Norwegian Sami Parliament. Other important Sami institutions include NRK Sami Radio, the Sami Collections Museum, the Sami Art Centre, the Sami Specialist Library, the legal office of Middle Finnmark, the Inner Finnmark Child and Youth Psychiatric Policlinic, the Sami Specialist Medical Centre, and the Sami Health Research Institute. In addition, the Sápmi cultural park is in the township, and the Sami language Min Áigi newspaper is published here.

Leavdnja (Lakselv) in Porsáŋgu (Porsanger) municipality is the location of the Finnmark Estate and the Ságat Sami newspaper. The Finnmarkseiendommen organisation owns and manages about 95% of the land in Finnmark, and 50% of its board members are elected by the Norwegian Sami Parliament.

Ohcejohka (Utsjoki).

Romsa or Tromsa (Tromsø) is the largest city in the Central Sami area and has a university that specialises in Sami subjects. It also has a notable and very active Sami population.

Unjárga (Nesseby) is an important centre for the Coastal Sami culture. It is also the site for the Várjjat Sami Museum and the Norwegian Sami Parliament's Department of Culture and Environment. The first Sami to be elected into the Norwegian Parliament, Isak Saba , was born here.

South Sápmi [ edit ] Aarborte (Hattfjelldal) is a southern Sami centre with a southern Sami language school and a Sami culture centre.

Arjeplog .

Snåase (Snåsa) is a centre for the Southern Sami language and the only municipality in Norway where Southern Sami is an official language. The Saemien Sijte southern Sami museum is in Snåase.

East Sápmi [ edit ] Aanaar, Anár, or Aanar (Inari) is the seat of the Finnish Sami Parliament Lujávri (Lovozero) is the largest settlement of Sami on the Russian side.

See also [ edit ] Listen to this article ( 10 minutes ) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 14 February 2006 ( 2006-02-14 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.

( Audio help · More spoken articles ) Sámi cuisine Environmental injustice in Europe French Geodesic Mission to Lapland Laestadian Lapland War Lapland Biosphere Reserve References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "Lapland." Encyclopædia Britannica.

Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Encyclopædia Britannica , 2009. Web. 24 November 2009 http://search.eb.com/eb/article-9047170 .

^ We are the Sámi – Fact sheets . Gáldu Resource Centre for the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.

^ HS: Inarin kirkonkylästä tullut saamelaisten pääkaupunki (in Finnish) ^ Saamenmaasta, kulttuurista ja mytologiasta – Rantapallo (in Finnish) ^ a b c d Berg-Nordlie, Mikkel; Dankertsen, Astri; Winsvold, Marte (14 January 2022).

An Urban Future for Sápmi?

. New York: Berghahn Books. pp.

31– 32.

ISBN 978-1-80073-265-0 .

^ a b Berg-Nordlie, Mikkel (7 November 2021), "Finnmǫrk" , Store norske leksikon (in Norwegian Bokmål) , retrieved 5 December 2021 ^ a b Anderson, Myrdene (November 1983). "The Saami People of Lapland: Four Recent Works on the Interplay of History, Ethnicity and Reindeer Pastoralism".

Nomadic Peoples .

14 (14): 57– 58.

JSTOR 43123201 .

; "The Lapp or Sami people" .

Yokmok . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

At present, the Scandinavian media use no other term than Sámis. Institutions and the media use the word Sámi. The term "lapp" is considered pejorative.

; "Saamis or Lapps" .

SURI . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

They call themselves saam´ or saam´lja (on the Kola Peninsula), sabme, sabmelas^ (pl. sabmela at). Other nations have called them Fenn (Finn) and since the 12th century, Lapp (e.g. the form Lop' appears in Old Russian Chronicles at about 1000 AD). The use of the name Saam has been propagated in Russia since the 1920s and in Scandinavia within the last decades. The Saamis themselves consider the name Lapp pejorative.

^ Berg-Nordlie, Mikkel; Dankertsen, Astri; Winsvold, Marte (14 January 2022).

An Urban Future for Sápmi?

. New York: Berghahn Books. p. 43.

ISBN 978-1-80073-265-0 .

^ "Article on the subject by the Finno-Ugrian Society" .

^ "Saamenmaa: mihin nimi viittaa?" .

Kielitoimiston ohjepankki (in Finnish). 28 December 2022 . Retrieved 24 March 2025 .

^ "Egil's Saga, Chapter XIV" .

^ "Lapland | Location, People, & Facts | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 5 December 2021 .

^ "Stereotypes have fueled a tourism boom in Europe's icy North. Can things change?" .

National Geographic: Travel . 3 February 2021. Archived from the original on 17 February 2021 . Retrieved 5 December 2021 .

The Sámi Homeland in Finland is one part of Sápmi, a large, diverse area that encompasses northern Norway, Sweden, and Russia's Kola Peninsula. While the northernmost regions of Sweden and Finland are both called Lapland, the entire Sápmi area has been imprecisely referred to as "Lapland" and promoted as an "untouched wilderness", despite the long presence of people living and working there.

^ Presentation of Finnmark by Norway's Ministry of Trade and Industry Archived 28 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine in their official travel guide to Norway.

^ "Same, samisk, Sápmi och Lappland - Mediespråk" .

www.mediesprak.fi . Retrieved 24 March 2025 .

^ The History of Lapland: Chap. I: Of the name of Lapland , Scheffer, John, Oxford, 1674 ^ Rapp, Ole Magnus; Stein, Catherine (8 February 2008).

"Samis don't want to be 'Lapps' " .

Aftenposten . Archived from the original on 15 March 2008.

^ Svanberg, Jons (1805).

Exposition des opérations faites en Lapponie, pour la détermination d'un arc du méridien en 1801, 1802 et 1803 (in French). Johan Pehr Lindh.

^ "MSN" .

www.msn.com . Retrieved 26 October 2023 .

^ Szaniawska, Anna (2018), "The Gulf of Bothnia" , Baltic Crustaceans , Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

27– 28, doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-56354-1_7 , ISBN 978-3-319-56353-4 , retrieved 19 May 2025 ^ Huss, Leena; Lindgren, Anna-Riitta (7 June 2022).

The Futures of Sami Languages . Taylor & Francis. pp.

217– 231.

doi : 10.4324/9781003025511-16 .

ISBN 978-1-003-02551-1 . Archived from the original on 9 July 2024.

^ Berg-Nordlie, Mikkel; Andersen, Anna (14 January 2022), "Chapter 1. The Sámi and Sápmi: The People and the Land" , An Urban Future for Sápmi?

, Berghahn Books, pp.

30– 53, doi : 10.1515/9781800732650-004 , ISBN 978-1-80073-265-0 , retrieved 19 May 2025 ^ Kovář, Michal (19 December 2019).

"Sami Texts From Kemi Sápmi Recorded by Jenny and Samuli Paulaharju" .

AUC Philologica .

2019 (3): 39– 44.

doi : 10.14712/24646830.2019.28 .

^ Sami religion . Taylor & Francis. 11 September 2014.

doi : 10.4324/9781315728971-30 . Archived from the original on 4 September 2024.

^ "Sami Cultural Center of North America" .

www.samiculturalcenter.org .

^ "Pykeija, Pikku-Suomi kaukana Pohjois-Norjassa – Retkipaikka" .

Retkipaikka . 17 October 2016 . Retrieved 26 November 2023 .

^ "RUSSLAND: Samene vil ha et eget Sameting" . Galdu.org. 14 December 2008. Archived from the original on 17 February 2012 . Retrieved 13 August 2012 .

^ "Samiskt parlamentariskt råd" .

Sametinget .

^ Korsrud Nordlands første , NRK, Retrieved 31 July 2008 ^ Puuronen, Vesa (8 April 2022), "Municipal Politics in the Sámi Homeland in Finland" , The Sámi World (1 ed.), London: Routledge, pp.

348– 363, doi : 10.4324/9781003025511-24 , ISBN 978-1-003-02551-1 , retrieved 25 March 2025 Sources [ edit ] A Norwegian Government report Swedish Sami Parliament web page External links [ edit ] Works on the topic Lapland at Wikisource v t e Movements of regionalism , separatism and stateless nationalism in Europe Albania Northern Epirus Azerbaijan Artsakh Kurdish Lezgin Talysh Belgium Flemish Walloon Bosnia and Herzegovina Republika Srpska Croatia Istrian Cyprus Turkish Cypriot Greek Cypriot Denmark Greenlandic Faroese Finland Ålandic Sámi France Alsatian Basque Breton Corsican Occitan North Catalan Georgia Abkhazian Adjarian Javakheti Ossetian Germany Bavarian Sorbs Swabians Greece Cham Albanian Italy Lombard Padanian Sardinian Sicilian South Tyrolean Venetian Kazakhstan North Kazakhstan Kosovo North Kosovo North Macedonia Ilirida Moldova Gagauzia Transnistria Netherlands Frisian Norway Sámi Poland Kashubian Silesian Free City of Danzig Romania Székely Transylvania–Banat Russia Balkar and Karachay Bashkir Chechen Chuvash Circassian Crimean Tatar Ingush Karelian Lezgin Manchu Ossetian Sámi Siberian Tatar Serbia Vojvodina Presevo Valley Sandzak Spain Andalusian Aragonese Asturian Basque Canarian Castilian Catalan Galician Leonese Murcian Navarrese Valencian Sweden Sámi Scania Turkey Assyrian Eastern Greek Kurdish Western Armenian Ukraine Crimean Donetsk Luhansk United Kingdom Cornish Northern Irish Scottish United Ireland Welsh See also First-level NUTS of the European Union v t e The Sámi General History Religion Languages Media Music Politics Sápmi ČSV Languages Eastern Mainland Akkala Sámi † Inari Sámi Kainuu Sámi † Kemi Sámi † Skolt Sámi Peninsular Kildin Sámi Ter Sámi Western Central Western Lule Sámi Northern Sámi Pite Sámi Southwestern Southern Sámi Ume Sámi Pidgin Borgarmålet Russenorsk Media Newspapers Northern Sámi Áššu Ávvir Min Áigi Muitalægje Nuorttanaste Saǥai Muittalægje Sámi Áigi Southern Sámi Daerpies Dierie Snåsningen Skolt Sámi Sääʹmođđâz Norwegian Ságat Waren Sardne Magazines Northern Sámi Dieđut Gába Š Sámi Dieđalaš Áigečála Sápmelaš Sámi magasiidna Sami Usteb Samealbmug Lule Sámi Bårjås English Árran Báiki Swedish Samefolket Television Ođđasat Unna Junná Yle Ođđasat Radio NRK Sápmi Sameradion Yle Sámi Radio Guovdageainnu Lagasradio Kola Sámi Radio Online Kierâš SR Sápmi v t e Nordic Council Full members Denmark Finland Iceland Norway Sweden Associate members Åland Faroe Islands Greenland Observer / offices Sápmi Estonia ( identity ) Latvia Lithuania Schleswig-Holstein v t e Nordic countries States Denmark Finland Iceland Norway Sweden Autonomous countries Åland Faroe Islands Greenland ( Territory ) Special status / cultural area Svalbard Sápmi Related Climate of the Nordic countries Comparison of the Nordic countries Nordic Council Nordic Cross flag Subdivisions of the Nordic countries LGBT in the Nordic countries Nordic diplomatic missions See also Norsemen Old Norse Nordic identity in Estonia Scandinavia Category v t e Earth 's polar regions Antarctic Antarctic Peninsula East Antarctica West Antarctica Eklund Islands Ecozone Extreme points Islands Arctic Arctic Alaska British Arctic Territories Canadian Arctic Archipelago Finnmark Greenland Northern Canada Northwest Territories Nunavik Nunavut Russian Arctic Sakha Sápmi Yukon North American Arctic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐5zd4p
Cached time: 20250817044811
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.932 seconds
Real time usage: 1.156 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6779/1000000
Revision size: 38774/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 177856/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7081/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 150307/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.553/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20411452/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  947.882      1 -total
 24.76%  234.731      1 Template:Reflist
 11.51%  109.134      7 Template:Lang
 10.04%   95.157     10 Template:Navbox
  9.93%   94.116      5 Template:Cite_book
  9.14%   86.604      1 Template:Infobox_country
  7.77%   73.654      1 Template:Stateless_nationalism_in_Europe
  7.30%   69.230     14 Template:Cite_web
  6.52%   61.816      1 Template:Short_description
  6.00%   56.828      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:27861:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044811 and revision id 1306035377. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sápmi&oldid=1306035377 " Categories : Sápmi Lands inhabited by indigenous peoples Sámi peoples Historical regions in Russia Geography of Finland Regions of Norway Regions of Sweden Geography of Europe Geography of Scandinavia Regions of the Arctic Cultural regions Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 Norwegian Bokmål-language sources (nb) CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2009 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from January 2015 Articles containing Northern Sami-language text Articles containing Old Norse-language text Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles containing Lule Sami-language text Articles containing Southern Sami-language text Articles containing Pite Sami-language text Articles containing Ume Sami-language text Articles containing Inari Sami-language text Articles containing Skolt Sami-language text Articles containing Kildin Sami-language text Articles containing Finnish-language text All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2025 Articles containing Russian-language text Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 14:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sápmi 81 languages Add topic

