Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Family 2 Description 3 Cumaean Sibyl 4 Killed by Bellerophon 5 Iconography 6 Similar creatures 7 Classical sources 8 Hypothesis about origin 9 Use for Chinese mythological creatures 10 In popular culture 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Chimera (mythology) 68 languages العربية ܐܪܡܝܐ Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Corsu Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mythical or fictional creature with parts taken from various animals "Khimaira" redirects here. For the arachnid genus, see Khimaira fossus .

Chimera The Chimera on a red-figure Apulian plate, c.

350–340 BC ( Musée du Louvre ) Abode Lycia Genealogy Parents Typhon and Echidna Siblings Lernaean Hydra , Orthrus , Cerberus [ a ] Consort Orthrus [ b ] Offspring Nemean lion , Sphinx [ b ] According to Greek mythology , [ 1 ] the Chimera , Chimaera , Chimæra , or Khimaira ( / k aɪ ˈ m ɪər ə , k ɪ -, - m ɛər -/ ky- MEER -ə, kih-, -⁠ MAIR - ; Ancient Greek : Χίμαιρα , romanized : Chímaira , lit.

'she-goat') [ 2 ] was a monstrous fire-breathing hybrid creature from Lycia , Asia Minor , composed of different animal parts. Typically, it is depicted as a lion with a goat 's head protruding from its back and a tail ending with a snake 's head. Some representations also include dragon's wings.

[ 3 ] It was an offspring of Typhon and Echidna and a sibling of monsters like Cerberus and the Lernaean Hydra .

The term "chimera" has come to describe any mythical or fictional creature with parts taken from various animals, to describe anything composed of disparate parts or perceived as wildly imaginative, implausible, or dazzling.

[ citation needed ] In other words, a chimera can be any hybrid creature.

In figurative use, derived from the mythological meaning, "chimera" refers to an unrealistic, or unrealisable, wild, foolish or vain dream, notion or objective.

Family [ edit ] " Chimera of Arezzo ": an Etruscan bronze According to Hesiod , the Chimera's mother was a certain ambiguous "she", which may refer to Echidna , in which case the father would presumably be Typhon , though possibly (unlikely) the Hydra or even Ceto was meant instead.

[ 4 ] However, the mythographers Apollodorus (citing Hesiod as his source) and Hyginus both make the Chimera the offspring of Echidna and Typhon.

[ 5 ] Hesiod also has the Sphinx and the Nemean lion as the offspring of Orthus , and another ambiguous "she", often understood as probably referring to the Chimera, although possibly instead to Echidna, or again even Ceto.

[ 6 ] Description [ edit ] A Roman mosaic of Bellerophon riding Pegasus and slaying the Chimera, 2nd to 3rd centuries AD, Musée de la Romanité Homer described the Chimera in the Iliad , saying that "she was of divine stock not of men, in the fore part a lion, in the hinder a serpent, and in the midst a goat, breathing forth in terrible wise the might of blazing fire." [ 7 ] Hesiod and Apollodorus gave similar descriptions: a three-headed creature with a lion in front, a fire-breathing goat in the middle, and a serpent in the rear.

[ 8 ] Cumaean Sibyl [ edit ] In a lesser known tale, the Cumaean Sibyl encountered the Chimera in a vision, interpreting it as an omen. She advised her followers to establish harmony in their community to prevent the chaos and destruction that might have been brought about by the Chimera.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Killed by Bellerophon [ edit ] A Hellenistic Greek pebble mosaic depicting Bellerophon riding Pegasus while killing the Chimera, Archaeological Museum of Rhodes , dated 300–270 BC Bellerophon riding Pegasus and slaying the Chimera, central medallion of a Gallo-Roman mosaic from Autun , Musée Rolin , 2nd to 3rd century AD According to Homer, the Chimera, who was reared by Araisodarus (the father of Atymnius and Maris, Trojan warriors killed by Nestor 's sons Antilochus and Trasymedes), was "a bane to many men".

[ 11 ] As told in the Iliad , the hero Bellerophon was ordered by the king of Lycia to slay the Chimera (hoping the monster would kill Bellerophon). Still, the hero, "trusting in the signs of the gods", succeeded in killing the Chimera.

[ 12 ] Hesiod adds that Bellerophon had help in killing the Chimera, saying, "her did Pegasus and noble Bellerophon slay".

[ 13 ] Apollodorus gave a more complete account of the story.

Iobates , the king of Lycia , had ordered Bellerophon to kill the Chimera (who had been killing cattle and had "devastated the country") since he thought that the Chimera would instead kill Bellerophon, "for it was more than a match for many, let alone one".

[ 14 ] But the hero mounted his winged horse Pegasus (who had sprung from the blood of Medusa ) [ 15 ] "and soaring on high shot down the Chimera from the height." [ 16 ] Iconography [ edit ] Chimera depicted on an Attic vase Although the Chimera was, according to Homer, situated in foreign Lycia, [ 17 ] her representation in the arts was wholly Greek.

[ 18 ] An autonomous tradition that did not rely on the written word was represented in the visual repertory of the Greek vase painters. The Chimera first appeared early in the repertory of the proto-Corinthian pottery painters, providing some of the earliest identifiable mythological scenes that may be recognized in Greek art . After some early hesitation, the Corinthian type was fixed in the 670s BC; the variations in the pictorial representations suggest multiple origins to Marilyn Low Schmitt.

[ 19 ] The fascination with the monstrous devolved by the end of the seventh century into a decorative Chimera motif in Corinth, [ 20 ] while the motif of Bellerophon on Pegasus took on a separate existence alone. A separate Attic tradition, where the goats breathe fire and the animal's rear is serpentine, begins with the confidence that Marilyn Low Schmitt is convinced that there must be unrecognized or undiscovered local precursors.

[ 21 ] Two vase painters employed the motif so consistently they were given the pseudonyms the Bellerophon Painter and the Chimaera Painter.

Similar creatures [ edit ] Gold reel, possibly an ear-stud, with a winged Pegasus (outer band) and the Chimera (inner band), Magna Graecia or Etruria , fourth century BC ( Louvre ) A fire-breathing lioness was one of the earliest solar and war deities in Ancient Egypt (representations from 3000 years prior to the Greeks), and influences are feasible. The lioness represented the war goddess and protector of both cultures that would unite as Ancient Egypt.

Sekhmet was one of the dominant deities in upper Egypt and Bast in lower Egypt. As the divine mother , and more especially as protector, for Lower Egypt, Bast became strongly associated with Wadjet , the patron goddess of Lower Egypt.

[ citation needed ] In the Etruscan civilization , the Chimera appears in the Orientalizing period that precedes Etruscan Archaic art. The Chimera appears in Etruscan wall paintings of the fourth century BC.

[ citation needed ] In the Indus Valley Civilisation , the Chimera is depicted in many seals. There are different kinds of Chimera composed of animals from the Indian subcontinent . It is not known what the Indus people called the Chimera.

[ citation needed ] Although the Chimera of antiquity was forgotten in Medieval art, chimerical figures appear as embodiments of the deceptive, even satanic , forces of raw nature. They were depicted with a human face and a scaly tail, as in Dante 's vision of Geryon in Inferno xvii.7–17, 25–27, hybrid monsters, more akin to the Manticore of Pliny's Natural History (viii.90), provided iconic representations of hypocrisy and fraud well into the seventeenth century through a symbolic representation in Cesare Ripa 's Iconological .

[ 22 ] Classical sources [ edit ] The myths of the Chimera may be found in the Bibliotheca of Pseudo-Apollodorus (book 1), the Iliad (book 16) by Homer , the Fabulae 57 and 151 by Hyginus , the Metamorphoses (book VI 339 by Ovid ; IX 648), and the Theogony 319ff by Hesiod .

Virgil , in the Aeneid (book 5) employs Chimaera for the name of a gigantic ship of Gyas in the ship-race, with possible allegorical significance in contemporary Roman politics.

[ 23 ] Hypothesis about origin [ edit ] Main article: Mount Chimaera The eternal fires of Chimera in Lycia , modern-day Turkey, where the myth takes place Pliny the Elder cited Ctesias and quoted Photius identifying the Chimera with an area of permanent gas vents that still may be found by hikers on the Lycian Way in southwest Turkey . Called in Turkish, Yanartaş (flaming rock), the area contains some two dozen vents in the ground, grouped in two patches on the hillside above the Temple of Hephaestus approximately 3 km north of Çıralı , near ancient Olympos , in Lycia . The vents emit burning methane thought to be of metamorphic origin. The fires of these were landmarks in ancient times and were used for navigation by sailors.

Neo-Hittite Chimera from Karkemish , at the Museum of Anatolian Civilizations The Neo-Hittite Chimera from Carchemish , dated 850–750 BC, which is now housed in the Museum of Anatolian Civilizations , is believed to be a basis for the Greek legend. It differs, however, from the Greek version in that a winged body of a lioness also has a human head rising from her shoulders.

Use for Chinese mythological creatures [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( April 2018 ) Some western scholars of Chinese art, starting with Victor Segalen , use the word "chimera" generically to refer to winged leonine or mixed species quadrupeds, such as bixie , tianlu , and even qilin .

[ 24 ] In popular culture [ edit ] The term, and often the general concept, has been adopted by various works of popular culture, and chimeras of differing description can be found in contemporary works of fantasy and science fiction.

[ 25 ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( July 2025 ) See also [ edit ] Grotesque (architecture) Anzû (older reading: Zû) – a Mesopotamian monster The Beast in Christian eschatology Chimera of Arezzo Chimaera – genus of fish named after the mythical creature Dābbat al-Arḍ in Islamic eschatology Dragon – a reptilian monster sharing similar hybrid, flying and fire-breathing traits Garuda – a mythical creature and Demigod from Indian sub-continent Griffin , a.k.a. griffon or gryphon – a lion/eagle hybrid Hybrid creatures in mythology Kotobuki – a Japanese Chimera with the parts of the animals on the Chinese Zodiac Lamassu – an Assyrian deity described to be bull/lion/eagle/human hybrid List of hybrid creatures in folklore Hippocampus - a mythical creature depicted as having the upper body of a horse with the lower body of a fish.

Manticore – a mythical creature with a human head, a lion body, a scorpion tail, spines like a porcupine, and bat wings in some iterations Nue – a Japanese Chimera with the head of a monkey, the body of a tanuki, the legs of a tiger, and a snake-headed tail Pegasus – a winged stallion in Greek mythology Pixiu or Pi Yao – Chinese mythical creature Snallygaster – a mythical creature with metal beak, reptilian body, bird-like wings and octopus tentacles Sphinx – a mythical creature with a woman's head and breasts, lion's body and eagle's wings Simurgh – an Iranian mythical flying creature Ziz – a giant griffin-like bird in Jewish mythology Notes [ edit ] ^ Both Hesiod and Pseudo-Apollodorus agree that these were the Chimera's siblings. However, the latter states, in his Bibliotheca , that her other siblings are the Sphinx , Nemean Lion , Crommyonian Sow , Ladon , Caucasian Eagle .

^ a b According to Hesiod 's Theogony .

^ Becchio, Bruno; Schadé, Johannes P. (2006).

Encyclopedia of World Religions . Foreign Media Group.

ISBN 9781601360007 . Retrieved 27 April 2019 .

^ Graves, Robert (2017).

The Greek Myths: The Complete and Definitive Edition .

Penguin Books Limited. p. 11.

ISBN 9780241983386 .

^ Peck, "Chimaera" .

^ The referent of "she" in Theogony 319 is uncertain, see  Clay, p. 159, with n. 34 ;  Gantz, p. 22 ("Echidna ... the Hydra ... or even less probably Keto"); Most, p. 29 n. 18 ("probably Echidna"); Caldwell, p. 47 lines 319-325 ("probably Echidna, not Hydra"); West, pp. 254–255 line 319 ἡ δὲ ("Echidna or Hydra?").

^ Hyginus , Fabulae Theogony 39, 151; Apollodorus , 2.3.1 .

^ The referent of "she" at Hesiod , Theogony 326 is uncertain, see Clay, pp. 159–160, with n. 34 ; Most, p. 29 n. 20 ("Probably Chimaera"); Hard, p. 63 ("Chimaira (or conceivably with his mother Echidna)"); Gantz, p. 23 ("[Chimera] ... or just possibly Echidna"); Caldwell, p. 47 lines 326 ("either Echidna or Chimaira"); West 1966, p. 356 line 326 ἡ δ' ἄρα ("much more likely ... Chimaera" than Echidna).

^ Homer , Iliad 6.180–182 ^ Hesiod Theogony 319–324 (Evelyn-White) : "a creature fearful, great, swift-footed and strong, who had three heads, one of a grim-eyed lion ; in her hinderpart, a dragon ; and in her middle, a goat , breathing forth a fearful blast of blazing fire."; Apollodorus , 2.3.1 : it had the fore part of a lion, the tail of a dragon, and its third head, the middle one, was that of a goat, through which it belched fire ... a single creature with the power of three beasts".

^ "VIRGIL, AENEID BOOK 6" .

Theoi Classical Texts Library . Retrieved 2025-08-09 .

^ "The Cumaean Sibyl" .

Greek Mythology Link . Retrieved 2025-08-09 .

^ Homer , Iliad 16.317–329 ; compare with Apollodorus , 2.3.1 .

^ Homer , Iliad 6.160–183 .

^ Hesiod , Theogony 325 , so also Pindar , Olympian 13.84–90 .

^ Apollodorus , 2.3.1 .

^ "Pegasus | Greek mythology | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2022-12-10 .

^ Apollodorus , 2.3.2 ; compare with Hyginus , Fabulae 57.

^ Homer, Iliad 16.328–329 , links her breeding to the non-Trojan ally Amisodarus of Lycia, as a plague for humans.

^ Anne Roes "The Representation of the Chimaera" The Journal of Hellenic Studies 54 .1 (1934), pp. 21–25, adduces Ancient Near Eastern conventions of winged animals whose wings end in animal heads.

^ This outline of Chimera motifs follows Marilyn Low Schmitt, "Bellerophon and the Chimaera in Archaic Greek Art" American Journal of Archaeology 70 .4 (October 1966), pp. 341–347.

^ Later coins struck at Sicyon , near Corinth, bear the chimera-motif. (Schmitt 1966:344 note.

^ Schmitt 1966.

^ John F. Moffitt, "An Exemplary Humanist Hybrid: Vasari's 'Fraude' with Reference to Bronzino's 'Sphinx'" Renaissance Quarterly 49 .2 (Summer  1996), pp. 303–333, traces the chimeric image of Fraud backward from Bronzino .

^ W.S.M. Nicoll, "Chasing Chimaeras" The Classical Quarterly New Series, 35 .1 (1985), pp. 134–139.

^ Barry Till (1980), "Some Observations on Stone Winged Chimeras at Ancient Chinese Tomb Sites", Artibus Asiae , 42 (4): 261– 281, doi : 10.2307/3250032 , JSTOR 3250032 ^ Jendza, Craig (2016). "Chimera". In Weinstock, Jeffrey Andrew (ed.).

The Ashgate Encyclopedia of Literary and Cinematic Monsters .

Routledge . pp.

90– 93.

ISBN 9781317044260 .

References [ edit ] Apollodorus , Apollodorus, The Library, with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes.

Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press ; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Caldwell, Richard, Hesiod's Theogony , Focus Publishing/R. Pullins Company (June 1, 1987).

ISBN 978-0-941051-00-2 .

Clay, Jenny Strauss, Hesiod's Cosmos , Cambridge University Press, 2003.

ISBN 978-0-521-82392-0 .

Gantz, Timothy , Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources , Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996, Two volumes: ISBN 978-0-8018-5360-9 (Vol. 1), ISBN 978-0-8018-5362-3 (Vol. 2).

Hard, Robin, The Routledge Handbook of Greek Mythology: Based on H.J. Rose's "Handbook of Greek Mythology" , Psychology Press, 2004, ISBN 9780415186360 .

Google Books .

Hesiod , Theogony , in The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White , Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press ; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Homer , The Iliad with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes . Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press ; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Hyginus, Gaius Julius , Fabulae in Apollodorus' Library and Hyginus' Fabulae : Two Handbooks of Greek Mythology, Translated, with Introductions by R. Scott Smith and Stephen M. Trzaskoma , Hackett Publishing Company, 2007.

ISBN 978-0-87220-821-6 .

Most, G.W.

, Hesiod, Theogony, Works and Days, Testimonia, Edited and translated by Glenn W. Most, Loeb Classical Library No. 57, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press , 2018.

ISBN 978-0-674-99720-2 .

Online version at Harvard University Press .

Peck, Harry Thurston, 1898.

Harpers Dictionary of Classical Antiquities : "Chimaera" West, M. L.

, Hesiod: Theogony , Oxford University Press.

External links [ edit ] Look up chimera in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chimera .

Theoi Project: Khimaira Harappan Chimaeras as 'Symbolic Hypertexts'. Some Thoughts on Plato, Chimaera and the Indus Civilization "Chimaera" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 164.

v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Religion and religious practice Main beliefs Ages of Man Golden Age Heroic Age Ancient accounts of Homer Apotheosis Arete Daemon Destiny Eudaimonia Euhemerism Eunoia Eusebeia Golden mean Golden Rule Greek words for love Hemitheos Hero cult Hubris Interpretatio graeca Katabasis Kleos Know thyself Metamorphosis Metempsychosis Nympholepsy Paradoxography Patron gods Pederasty Phronesis Polytheism Sophrosyne Soter Theia mania Xenia Texts / odes / epic poems Epic Cycle Aethiopis Cypria Iliad Iliupersis Little Iliad Nostoi Odyssey Telegony Theban Cycle Oedipodea Thebaid Epigoni Alcmeonis Others Aesop's Fables Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Catalogue of Women Cyranides Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Golden Verses of Pythagoras Greek Magical Papyri Homerica Homeric Hymns Interpretation of Dreams Oneirocritica Orphic Hymns Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Sortes Astrampsychi Stories from Plato Atlantis Myth of Er Ring of Gyges Theogony Works and Days Religions Antecedents Minoan religion Mycenaean religion List of Mycenaean deities Paleo-Balkan mythology Proto-Indo-European mythology Religions of the ancient Near East Expressions Atheism Henotheism Monotheism Polytheism Hellenistic religions Early Christianity Christianization Relationship with Greek philosophy Esoteric systems Early alchemy Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Hellenistic Judaism God-fearers Syncretic religions Alexander Ptolemaic cult Etruscan religion Greco-Buddhism Roman religion Imperial cult Religious views of emperor Julian Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Arcadian Mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Orphism Samothracian Mysteries New religious movements Discordianism Feraferia Gaianism Hellenism Religious practice Worship / rituals Amphidromia Arotoi Hieroi Astragalomancy Baptes Cult of Artemis at Brauron Daduchos Divination Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Greco-Roman mysteries Hero cult Heroön Hierophany Hieros gamos Hymns Incubation Komos Nekyia Omophagia Orgia Panegyris Prayer Sacrifice Animal sacrifice Hecatomb Holocaust Libation Pharmakos Votive offering Theatre Religious offices Amphictyonic league Archon basileus Basilinna Gerarai Hiereia Hierophant Hierophylakes Iatromantis Kanephoros Mystagogue Oracle Sibyl Thiasus Religious objects Baetyl Cult image Chryselephantine sculpture Xoanon Greek terracotta figurines Kernos Kykeon Loutrophoros Omphalos Panathenaic amphora Rhyton Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Thymiaterion Magic Apotropaic magic Curse tablet Divination Greek Magical Papyri Hermeticism Hermetica Necromancy Philia Events Festivals / feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Halieia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Leucophryna Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Ptolemaieia Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Heraean Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Actia Sacred places Temples / sanctuaries Asclepieion Delphinion Mithraeum Necromanteion of Acheron Nymphaeum Panionium Parthenon Ploutonion Telesterion Temenos Temple of Artemis, Ephesus Temple of Zeus, Olympia Oracles Amphiareion of Oropos Aornum Claros Delphi Didyma Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros Oracle of Menestheus Sanctuary of the Great Gods Tegyra Mountains Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Caves of Pan Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Island of Achilles Delos Islands of Diomedes Springs Castalian Spring Hippocrene Pierian Spring Others Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Theatre of Dionysus Myths and mythology Deities ( Family tree ) Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Water deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Proteus River gods Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Charon Hermes Hermanubis Thanatos Angelos Cabeiri The Erinyes (Furies) Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Darrhon Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Pasiphaë Art and beauty deities Aphrodite Apollo The Charites (Graces) Aglaea Euphrosyne Thalia Dionysus The Muses Calliope Clio Polyhymnia Euterpe Terpsichore Erato Melpomene Thalia Urania Other major deities The Anemoi (Winds) Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Azone Chrysaor Cybele Eileithyia Glycon Harmonia Nemesis Pan Pegasus Zelus Heroes / heroines Individuals Abderus Achilles Actaeon Adonis Aeneas Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Menelaus Narcissus Nestor Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Otrera Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Groups Argonauts Calydonian hunters Epigoni Seven against Thebes Oracles / seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyls Cimmerian Cumaean Delphic Erythraean Hellespontine Libyan Persian Phrygian Samian Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Other mortals Aegeus Aegisthus Agamemnon Andromache Andromeda Antigone Augeas Briseis Cassiopeia Creon of Thebes Chryseis Chrysothemis Clytemnestra Damocles Deidamia Deucalion Electra Eteocles Europa Gordias Hecuba Helen of Troy Hellen The Heracleidae Hermione Hippolyta Io Iphigenia Ismene Jocasta Laius Lycian peasants Lycaon The Maenads Memnon Messapian shepherds Midas Minos Myrrha Neoptolemus Niobe Orestes Paris Patroclus Penelope Philomela Phoenix Polybus of Corinth Polynices Priam Procne Pylades Pyrrha Telemachus Troilus Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Necromanteion (necromancy temple) Necromanteion of Acheron Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Isles of the Blessed Mourning Fields Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Residents Anticlea Danaïdes Eurydice Ixion Ocnus Salmoneus The Shades Sisyphus Tantalus Tiresias Titans Tityos Visitors Dionysus Heracles Hermes Odysseus Orpheus Pirithous Psyche Theseus Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Charon's obol Animals, daemons, and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Menoetius Mythical Beings Lists Deities Mythological creatures Mortals Minor figures Trojan War characters Minor spirits Daemon Agathodaemon Cacodaemon Eudaemon Nymph Satyr Beasts / creatures Centaur Centaurides Ichthyocentaur Cyclops Dragon Drakaina Echidna Giant Gorgon Harpy Hecatonchires Hippocampus Horses of Helios Lamia Phoenix Python Siren Scylla and Charybdis Sphinx Typhon Captured / slain by heroes Calydonian boar Cerberus Cerynian Hind Chimera Cretan Bull Crommyonian Sow Erymanthian boar Khalkotauroi Lernaean Hydra Mares of Diomedes Medusa Minotaur Nemean lion Orthrus Polyphemus Stymphalian birds Talos Teumessian fox Tribes Achaeans Amazons Anthropophagi Bebryces Cicones Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Laestrygonians Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Spartoi Telchines Places / Realms Aethiopia Ara Colchis Erytheia Hyperborea Ismarus Ithaca Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Phlegra Scheria Scythia Symplegades Tartessos Themiscyra Thrinacia Troy Events Apollo and Daphne Calydonian boar hunt Eros and Psyche Judgment of Paris Labours of Heracles Orpheus and Eurydice Returns from Troy Odyssey Wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Gigantomachy Indian War Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Argo Dragon's teeth Diipetes Eidolon Galatea Girdle of Aphrodite Golden apple Golden Fleece Gordian knot Harpe Ichor Labyrinth Lotus tree Milk of Hera Moly Necklace of Harmonia Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos ( Winged helmet ) Phaeacian ships Philosopher's stone Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thyrsus Trident of Poseidon Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of fire Symbols Bowl of Hygieia Caduceus Cornucopia Gorgoneion Kantharos Labrys Orphic egg Ouroboros Owl of Athena Phallus Rod of Asclepius Swan song Wind East West North South Modern treatments Classical mythology in western art and literature Classicism Classics Greek mythology in popular culture Modern understanding of Greek mythology v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Accidental travel Action-adventure Lost world Sword and sorcery Wuxia Alternate history Chuanyue Contemporary Children's fantasy Comedy Bangsian Dark fantasy Grimdark Fairy tale parodies Fairytale fantasy Fantastique Fantasy of manners Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai LitRPG Low fantasy Magical girl Mythic Mythpunk Mythopoeia Omegaverse Progression Romantic Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Shenmo Urban fantasy Occult detective fiction Paranormal romance Weird fiction New weird Weird West Fantasy Western Xianxia Media Film and television Anime Films highest-grossing S&S Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels A–H I–R S–Z List of story collections Publishers Magazines Fantastic Fantastic Adventures Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Other Dungeons & Dragons Féeries Podcasts Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Saturn Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Fandom Art Fanspeak Filk music Harry Potter fandom The Inklings Lovecraft fandom Mythopoeic Society Tolkien fandom Tolkien's influence Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Devils Ghouls Elementals Faeries Familiars Fire-breathing monsters Chimera Dragons Gargoyles Imps Jinn Nymphs Shapeshifters Werecats Werewolves Skin-walkers Spirits Talking animals Undead Death Ghosts Liches Mummies Skeletons Vampires Zombies Unicorns Yōkai Characters Barbarian Caveman Damsel in distress Dark lord Donor Dragonslayer Fairy godmother Heroes Magicians Occult detective list Wild man Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / neutral / light Ceremonial Love Moon Magic item Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Runes Wand Schools Alchemy Demonology Divination Egregore Evocation Incantation Necromancy Runecraft Shamanism Shapeshifting Thaumaturgy Theurgy Witchcraft Fantasy races Centaurs Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Kobolds Leprechauns Merfolk Mermaids Mermen Ogres Oni Orcs Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Maps Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Magic school Related Allegory Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Ghost stories Gothic fiction Horror fiction LGBT themes in speculative fiction Mecha Mythology Science fiction Supernatural fiction Superhero Tokusatsu Kaiju Urban legend Outline Category v t e Horror fiction Speculative fiction Media Anime Comics Creepypasta List Films History Magazines Podcasts Television programs Video games List Types Analog Art Black Body Cannibal Christmas Comedy Zombie Creepypasta Cosmic Dark fantasy Dark Romanticism Faustian Grimdark Splatterpunk Erotic Guro Monster erotica Zombie pornography Folk Found footage Ghost Giallo List of films Gothic American Southern Southern Ontario Suburban Tasmanian Urban Japanese Korean Lovecraftian Monsters Jiangshi Vampire Werewolf Occult detective Organ transplantation Penny dreadful Postmodern horror Psychological Survival Techno Weird fiction New weird Weird menace Weird West Zombie apocalypse Monsters Demons Devils Ghouls Div Evil clowns Extraterrestrials Fire-breathing monsters Chimera Dragons Gargoyles Kaiju Killer toy Mutants Ogres Sea monster Piranha Therianthropes Werecats Werewolves Undead Death Ghosts Mummies Skeletons Vampires Zombies Witches Related genres Black comedy Fantastique Fantasy fiction Mystery Paranormal Science fiction Shenmo Supernatural Thriller Tokusatsu Urban legend Other Conventions Deathrock Grand Guignol Horror host Horror punk Horrorcore Macabre LGBTQ themes characters Vulgar auteurism Writers Related Bram Stoker Award Internet Speculative Fiction Database Pulp magazine Video nasties Category Portal Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany France BnF data Other IdRef NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nsfbq
Cached time: 20250817043715
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.765 seconds
Real time usage: 0.955 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4750/1000000
Revision size: 23453/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 408654/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5733/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 93361/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.374/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18873266/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  649.515      1 -total
 29.67%  192.686     26 Template:Navbox
 18.53%  120.364      2 Template:Reflist
 15.46%  100.400      1 Template:Greek_religion
 13.11%   85.153      3 Template:Cite_book
 12.62%   81.951      1 Template:Infobox_deity
 12.11%   78.641      1 Template:Langx
  7.81%   50.709      1 Template:Short_description
  7.60%   49.351      1 Template:Infobox
  4.95%   32.163      4 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:88454:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043715 and revision id 1304948037. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chimera_(mythology)&oldid=1304948037 " Categories : Mythological hybrids Monsters in Greek mythology Mythological lions Corinthian mythology Mythological caprids Legendary serpents Pegasus Mythical many-headed creatures Fire-breathing monsters Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles having same image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 Articles to be expanded from April 2018 All articles to be expanded Articles to be expanded from July 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 03:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chimera (mythology) 68 languages Add topic

