Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and career 2 Work 3 Personal life 4 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 4.1 Novels 4.2 Socio-political works 4.3 Collaborations 4.4 Selected articles 5 Sayings 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn 15 languages العربية Deutsch Español Esperanto Français مصرى Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Svenska Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Austrian noble and political theorist (1909–1999) Erik Ritter von Kuehnelt-Leddihn Born 31 July 1909 Tobelbad, Duchy of Styria , Austria-Hungary (now Haselsdorf-Tobelbad , Styria , Austria) Died 26 May 1999 ( 1999-05-27 ) (aged 89) Lans , Tyrol , Austria Spouse Countess Christiane Gräfin von Goess Children 3, including Gottfried Academic background Alma mater University of Vienna University of Budapest ( MA , PhD ) Influences Plato Aristotle Aquinas Goethe Tocqueville Montalembert Burckhardt Taine Acton Mises Rüstow Jünger Röpke Academic work Era 20th-century Discipline Political philosophy Political science Intellectual history School or tradition Monarchism Liberal conservatism Conservative liberalism Elitism Main interests Monarchy · Comparative politics · History of political thought · Criticism of socialism · Criticism of democracy Influenced Eastman · Buckley · Hoppe · Moldbug Erik Maria Ritter [ a ] von Kuehnelt-Leddihn [ b ] (31 July 1909 – 26 May 1999) was an Austrian-American nobleman and polymath , whose areas of interest included philosophy , history , political science , economics , linguistics , art and theology . He opposed the ideas of the French Revolution , as well as those of communism and Nazism .

[ 1 ] Describing himself as a "conservative arch-liberal" or "extreme liberal", Kuehnelt-Leddihn often argued that majority rule in democracies is a threat to individual liberties. He declared himself a monarchist and an enemy of all forms of totalitarianism , although he also supported what he defined as "non-democratic republics", such as Switzerland and the early United States.

[ citation needed ] Kuehnelt-Leddihn cited the U.S. Founding Fathers , Tocqueville , Burckhardt , and Montalembert as the primary influences for his skepticism towards democracy.

[ 2 ] Described as a "Walking Book of Knowledge" by William F. Buckley Jr.

, Kuehnelt-Leddihn had an encyclopedic knowledge of humanities and was a polyglot, being able to speak eight languages and read seventeen others.

[ 3 ] His early books The Menace of the Herd (1943) and Liberty or Equality (1952) were influential within the American conservative movement . An associate of Buckley Jr., his best-known writings appeared in National Review , where he was a columnist for 35 years.

Early life and career [ edit ] Kuehnelt-Leddihn was born in Tobelbad , Styria , Austria-Hungary . At 16, he became the Vienna correspondent of The Spectator . From then on, he wrote for the rest of his life. He studied civil and canon law at the University of Vienna at 18. Then he went to the University of Budapest , from which he received an M.A. in economics , studying under Pál Teleki , and later his doctorate in political science . Moving back to Vienna, he took up studies in theology . In 1935, Kuehnelt-Leddihn traveled to England to become a schoolmaster at Beaumont College , a Jesuit public school . Subsequently, he moved to the United States, where he taught at Georgetown University (1937–1938), Saint Peter's College, New Jersey (head of the History and Sociology Department, 1938–1943), Fordham University (Japanese, 1942–1943), and Chestnut Hill College , Philadelphia (1943–1947).

In a 1939 letter to the editor of The New York Times , Kuehnelt-Leddihn critiqued the design of every American coin then in circulation except for the Washington quarter , which he allowed was "so far the most satisfactory coin" and judged the Mercury dime to be "the most deplorable." [ 4 ] After publishing books like Jesuiten, Spießer und Bolschewiken in 1933 (published in German by Pustet, Salzburg) and The Menace of the Herd in 1943, in which he criticized the National Socialists as well as the Socialists, he remained in the United States, as he could not return to the Austria that had been incorporated into the Third Reich. Kuehnelt-Leddihn moved to Washington, D.C.

in 1937, where he taught at Georgetown University . He also lectured at Fordham University , teaching a course in Japanese .

[ 5 ] Following the Second World War , he resettled in Lans , where he lived until his death.

[ 6 ] He was an avid traveler: he had visited over seventy-five countries (including the Soviet Union in 1930–1931), as well as all fifty states in the United States and Puerto Rico .

[ 7 ] [ 2 ] In October 1991, he appeared on an episode of Firing Line , where he debated monarchy with Michael Kinsley and William F. Buckley Jr.

[ 8 ] Kuehnelt-Leddihn wrote for a variety of publications, including Chronicles , Thought , the Rothbard-Rockwell Report , Catholic World , and the Norwegian business magazine Farmand . He also worked with the Acton Institute , which declared him after his death "a great friend and supporter." [ 9 ] He was an adjunct scholar of the Ludwig von Mises Institute .

[ 10 ] For much of his life, Kuehnelt was also a painter; he illustrated some of his own books.

Work [ edit ] Part of a series on Conservatism in Austria Ideologies Austrian nationalism Christian democracy Conservative corporatism Green conservatism Liberal conservatism Principles Austrian culture Catholic social teaching Class collaboration Clericalism Duty Family values Imperialism Liberty Monarchism Organicism Political Catholicism Subsidiarity Tradition History Austria-Hungary Austrian Civil War Austrian Empire Carlsbad Decrees Congress of Vienna Federal State of Austria Habsburg monarchy Intellectuals Berger Burger von Gentz von Hayek Höbelt von Hofmannsthal Kaltenbrunner von Kuehnelt-Leddihn Mannheim Müller Schoeck Spann von Vogelsang Winter Literature Sex and Character (1903) The Menace of the Herd (1943) Envy: A Theory of Social Behavior (1966) Politicians von Coudenhove-Kalergi Dollfuss Figl von Gentz von Habsburg Haider von Hohenwart Kickl Klaus Kurz Nehammer Schuschnigg von Metternich de Paula Maria Raab Rosenkranz Seipel Schüssel Stadler Starhemberg Strache Taaffe von Vogelsang Waldheim Activists Dichand Feigl Sabaditsch-Wolff Schönfeld Tschugguel Winter Parties Active Alliance for the Future of Austria Austrian People's Party Christian Party of Austria Freedom Party of Austria Defunct Catholic People's Party Christian Social Party Fatherland Front The Reform Conservatives Team Stronach Organisations Black-Yellow Alliance Heimwehr Identitäre Bewegung Österreich Viennese Association of Academics Media Kleine Zeitung Neues Volksblatt Salzburger Nachrichten Tiroler Tageszeitung Wiener Zeitung Österreich Related topics Austrian nobility Conservatism in Germany German nationalism in Austria Pan Germanism Remigration Überfremdung Conservatism portal Austria portal v t e This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e His socio-political writings dealt with the origins and the philosophical and cultural currents that formed Nazism . He endeavored to explain the intricacies of monarchist concepts and the systems of Europe, cultural movements such as Hussitism and Protestantism , and what he saw as the disastrous effects of an American policy derived from antimonarchical feelings and ignorance of European culture and history.

Kuehnelt-Leddihn directed some of his most significant critiques towards Wilsonian foreign policy activism. Traces of Wilsonianism could be detected in the foreign policies of Franklin Roosevelt ; specifically, the assumption that democracy is the ideal political system in any context. Kuehnelt-Leddihn believed that Americans misunderstood much of Central European culture such as the Austro-Hungarian Empire , [ 11 ] which Kuehnelt-Leddihn claimed as one of the contributing factors to the rise of Nazism. He also highlighted characteristics of the German society and culture (especially the influences of both Protestant and Catholic mentalities) and attempted to explain the sociological undercurrents of Nazism. Thus, he concludes that sound Catholicism, sound Protestantism, or even, probably, sound popular sovereignty (German-Austrian unification in 1919) would have prevented National Socialism although Kuehnelt-Leddihn rather dislikes the latter two.

Contrary to the prevailing view that the Nazi Party was a radical right-wing movement with only superficial and minimal leftist elements, Kuehnelt-Leddihn asserted that Nazism (National Socialism) was a strongly leftist , democratic movement ultimately rooted in the French Revolution that unleashed forces of egalitarianism , conformity , materialism and centralization .

[ 12 ] He argued that Nazism, fascism , radical-liberalism , anarchism , communism and socialism were essentially democratic movements, based upon inciting the masses to revolution and intent upon destroying the old forms of society. Furthermore, Kuehnelt-Leddihn claimed that all democracy is basically totalitarian and that all democracies eventually degenerate into dictatorships . He said that it was not the case for "republics" (the word, for Kuehnelt-Leddihn, has the meaning of what Aristotle calls πολιτεία), such as Switzerland, or the United States, as it was originally intended in its constitution. However, he considered the United States to have been to a certain extent subject to a silent democratic revolution in the late 1820s.

In Liberty or Equality , his masterpiece, Kuehnelt-Leddihn contrasted monarchy with democracy and presented his arguments for the superiority of monarchy: diversity is upheld better in monarchical countries than in democracies. Monarchism is not based on party rule and "fits organically into the ecclesiastic and familistic pattern of Christian society." After insisting that the demand for liberty is about how to govern and by no means by whom to govern a given country, he draws arguments for his view that monarchical government is genuinely more liberal in this sense, but democracy naturally advocates for equality, even by enforcement, and thus becomes anti-liberal.

[ 13 ] As modern life becomes increasingly complicated across many different sociopolitical levels, Kuehnelt-Leddihn submits that the Scita (the political, economic, technological, scientific, military, geographical, psychological knowledge of the masses and of their representatives) and the Scienda (the knowledge in these matters that is necessary to reach logical-rational-moral conclusions) are separated by an incessantly and cruelly widening gap and that democratic governments are totally inadequate for such undertakings.

In February 1969, Kuehnelt-Leddihn wrote an article arguing against seeking a peace deal to end the Vietnam War .

[ 14 ] Instead, he argued that the two options proposed, a reunification scheme and
the creation of a coalition Vietnamese government, were unacceptable concessions to the Marxist North Vietnam .

[ 14 ] Kuehnelt-Leddihn urged the US to continue the war [ 14 ] until the Marxists were defeated.

Kuehnelt-Leddihn also denounced the US Bishops' 1983 pastoral The Challenge of Peace .

[ 15 ] He wrote that "The Bishops' letter breathes idealism... moral imperialism, the attempt to inject theology into politics, ought to be avoided except in extreme cases, of which abolition and slavery are examples." [ 15 ] The complete work and correspondence of Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn is available at the Brenner Archive, University of Innsbruck https://www.uibk.ac.at/de/brenner-archiv/bestaende/kuehnelt/#werke Personal life [ edit ] Kuehnelt-Leddihn was married to Countess Christiane Gräfin von Goess, [ 16 ] with whom he had three children.

[ 17 ] At the time of his death in 1999, he was survived by all four of them, as well as seven grandchildren.

[ 9 ] He and his wife were buried at their village church in Lans.

[ 5 ] Kuehnelt held friendships with many of the major conservative intellectuals and figures of the 20th century, including William F. Buckley Jr.

, Russell Kirk , Crown Prince Otto von Habsburg , Friedrich A. Hayek , Mel Bradford , Ludwig von Mises , Wilhelm Röpke , Ernst Jünger , and Joseph Ratzinger (later Pope Benedict XVI) .

[ 18 ] According to Buckley, Kuehnelt-Leddihn was "the world's most fascinating man." [ 19 ] Catholic apologist Karl Keating stated that Kuehnelt-Leddihn was the most intelligent man he ever met.

[ 5 ] In 1931, while in Hungary , Kuehnelt-Leddihn stated that he had a supernatural experience. While conversing with a friend, the two men saw Satan appear before them. Kuehnelt-Leddihn recounts this experience as so: "Slowly, in that moment, to both of us, Satan appeared as Satan appears in primitive books. Naked, reddish, horns, long tongue, trident, and we both exploded laughing. In other words, laughing hysterically. As I later found out, in apparitions of the Devil, this is a natural reaction, that you laugh hysterically." [ 20 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Novels [ edit ] The Gates of Hell: An Historical Novel of the Present Day . London: Sheed & Ward, 1933.

Night Over the East . London: Sheed & Ward, 1936.

Moscow 1979 . London: Sheed & Ward, 1940 (with Christiane von Kuehnelt-Leddihn).

Black Banners . Aldington, Kent: Forty-Five Press & Hand and Flower Press, 1952.

Socio-political works [ edit ] The Menace of the Herd . Milwaukee: The Bruce Publishing Co., 1943 (under the pseudonym of "Francis S. Campbell" to protect relatives in wartime Austria).

Liberty or Equality . Front Royal, Virginia: Christendom Press, 1952; 1993.

The Timeless Christian . Chicago: Franciscan Herald Press, 1969.

Leftism, From de Sade and Marx to Hitler and Marcuse . New Rochelle, New York: Arlington House Publishers, 1974.

[ 21 ] The Intelligent American's Guide to Europe . New Rochelle, N.Y.: Arlington House Publishers, 1979.

Leftism Revisited, From de Sade and Marx to Hitler and Pol Pot . Washington, D.C.: Regnery Gateway, 1990.

[ 22 ] Collaborations [ edit ] "Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn." In: F.J. Sheed (Ed.), Born Catholics . New York: Sheed & Ward, 1954, pp. 220–238.

"Pollyanna Catholicism." In: Dan Herr & Clem Lane (Ed.), Realities . Milwaukee: The Bruce Publishing Company, 1958, pp. 1–12.

"The Age of the Guillotine." In: Stephen Tonsor (Ed.), Reflections on the French Revolution: A Hillsdale Symposium . Washington, D.C.: Regnery Gateway, 1990.

Selected articles [ edit ] “Credo of a Reactionary”, The American Mercury 57 , July 1943.

“An Anti-Nazi Allegory”, The American Mercury 59 , July 1944.

“Recuperating Spain”, Modern Age 1 (1), March 1957.

“Revolution, Crime, and Sin in the Catholic World”, Modern Age 2 (2), June 1958.

“The Artist and the Intellectual in Anglo-Saxonry and on the Continent”, Modern Age 3 (4), December 1959.

"The Thorny Problem of the Vernacular" The Catholic World , December 1962.

"The Roots of Leftism in Christendom", The Freeman 18 (2), February 1968.

"Latin America in Perspective", The Freeman 18 (4), April 1968.

"The Woes of the Underdeveloped Nations", The Freeman 21 (1), January 1971.

"The Western Dilemma: Calvin or Rousseau?", Modern Age 15 (1), March 1971.

"We and the Third World", The Freeman 22 (2), February 1972.

"The Years of Godlessness", Modern Age 16 (1), March 1972.

"Free Enterprise and the Russians", The Freeman 22 (8), August 1972.

"The Roots of ‘Anticapitalism’", The Freeman 22 (11), November 1972.

"Portrait of an Evil Man", The Freeman 23 (9), September 1973.

"Scita Et Scienda: The Dwarfing of Modern Man" , Imprimis , October 1974.

"The Unholy Ikons", Modern Age 20 (1), March 1976.

"Utopias and Ideologies: Another Chapter in the Conservative Demonology", Modern Age 21 (3), September 1977.

"Controversy", Policy Review 15 , January 1981.

"The Problems of a Successful American Foreign Policy" , Imprimis 14 (11), November 1985.

"Democracy’s Road to Tyranny", The Freeman 38 (5), May 1988.

"Operation Parricide: Sade, Robespierre, and the French Revolution" , Fidelity Magazine , October 1989.

“The Four Liberalisms” , Religion & Liberty 2 (4), July/August 1992.

“Economics in the Catholic World” , Religion & Liberty 4 (4), July/August 1994.

“Christianity, the Foundation and Conservator of Freedom” , Religion & Liberty 7 (6), November – December 1997.

“Liberalism in America”, The Intercollegiate Review 33 (1), Fall 1997.

"Hebrews and Christians", The Rothbard-Rockwell Report 9 (4), April 1998.

"Monarchy and War", The Journal of Libertarian Studies 15 (1), December 2000.

“The Cultural Background of Ludwig von Mises” , Studies in Classical Liberalism , n.d.

Sayings [ edit ] "'Welfare State' is a misnomer, for every state must care for the common good." [ 23 ] "For the average person, all problems date to World War II ; for the more informed, to World War I ; for the genuine historian, to the French Revolution ." [ 24 ] "Liberty and equality are in essence contradictory." [ 25 ] "There is little doubt that the American Congress or the French Chambers have a power over their nations which would rouse the envy of a Louis XIV or a George III , were they alive today. Not only prohibition , but also the income tax declaration, selective service , obligatory schooling, the fingerprinting of blameless citizens, premarital blood tests—none of these totalitarian measures would even the royal absolutism of the seventeenth century have dared to introduce." [ 26 ] "I am for the word Rightist . Right is right and left is wrong, you see, and in all languages 'right' has a positive meaning and 'left' a negative one. In Italian, typically, la sinistra is 'the left' and il sinistro is 'the mishap' or 'the calamity.' Japanese describes evil as hidar-imae , 'the thing in front of the left.' And in the Bible, it says in Ecclesiastes , which the Hebrews call Koheleth , that “the heart of the wise man beats on his right side and the heart of the fool on his left.' [ 27 ] See also [ edit ] Hermann Rauschning Family as a model for the state Monarchism Notes [ edit ] ^ Regarding personal names: Ritter was originally a title, translated approximately as 'Sir' (denoting a knight ). In 1919 all titles of nobility were abolished in Germany and Ritter , together with the noble particles von and zu , became part of the surname.

^ German: [ˈkyːnəlt lɛˈdiːn] References [ edit ] ^ Campbell, William F. (18 September 2008).

"Erik Ritter von Kuehnelt-Leddihn: A Remembrance" .

American Conservative Thought . Archived from the original on 24 September 2015.

^ a b Kuehnelt-Leddihn, Erik von (1986).

"Erik Kuehnelt-Leddihn Curriculum Vitae" . Archived from the original on 11 April 2020.

^ William F., Jr., Buckley (31 December 1985). "A Walking Book of Knowledge".

National Review . p. 104.

^ Kuehnelt-Leddihn, Erik von (26 November 1939). "Our Coins Criticized: Visitor Finds Artistic Faults in All Except the Quarter".

The New York Times . p. 75.

^ a b c Keating, Karl (22 June 2015).

"The Smartest Man I Ever Met" .

Catholic.com .

^ Rutler, George W. (19 November 2007).

"Erik Von Kuehnelt-Leddihn" .

Crisis Magazine . Retrieved 7 January 2020 .

^ Kuehnelt-Leddihn, Erik von. (1990) Leftism Revisited . Back Cover ^ "Firing Line with William F. Buckley Jr.; S0915; The New Europe and the Uses of Monarchy" .

American Archive . 28 October 1991.

^ a b "Erik Ritter von Kuehnelt-Leddihn (1909–1999)" .

Acton Institute . Archived from the original on 26 June 2009 . Retrieved 16 April 2009 .

^ Rockwell, Lew (31 July 2008).

"Remembering Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn" .

LewRockwell.com . Archived from the original on 7 January 2020 . Retrieved 7 January 2020 .

^ Baltzersen, Jørn K. (31 July 2009).

"The Last Knight of the Habsburg Empire" .

LewRockwell.com . Retrieved 7 January 2020 .

^ Congdon, Lee (26 March 2012).

"Kuehnelt-Leddihn and American Conservatism" .

Crisis Magazine . Retrieved 7 January 2020 .

^ Lukacs, John (1999).

"Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn: A Memoir" (PDF) .

The Intercollegiate Review . Vol. 35, no. 1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016.

^ a b c Von Kuehnelt-Leddihn, Erik (11 February 1969). "No Quick Peace In Vietnam".

National Review .

^ a b Kari, Camilla J. (2004).

Public Witness: The Pastoral Letters of the American Catholic Bishops . Collegeville, Minn.: Liturgical Press. p. 86.

ISBN 978-0-8146-5833-8 .

OCLC 260105860 .

^ Member, Acton Staff (9 March 2022).

"Erik Ritter von Kuehnelt-Leddihn" .

Acton Institute .

^ St. Mary's University (San Antonio, Tex ) (5 December 1958).

"The Rattler (San Antonio, Tex.), Vol. 41, No. 7, Ed. 1 Friday, December 5, 1958" .

The Portal to Texas History .

^ Adamo, F. Cooper (November 2021).

"Remembering Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn" .

Chronicles Magazine .

^ "Erik Ritter von Kuehnelt-Leddihn" .

Religion & Liberty . Vol. 9, no. 5. 1 September 1999. p. 3.

^ Klinghoffer, David (7 December 2020).

"When Erik Saw the Devil" .

National Review . Archived from the original on 10 December 2020.

^ Brownfeld, Allan C. (1 July 1974). "Leftism, by Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn".

The Freeman .

^ Chamberlain, John (1 July 1991). "Leftism Revisited".

The Freeman . Vol. 41, no. 7.

^ Kuehnelt-Leddihn, Erik von (1969).

The Timeless Christian . Franciscan Herald Press. p. 211.

^ Kuehnelt-Leddihn, Erik von (1990).

Leftism Revisited: From de Sade and Marx to Hitler and Pol Pot . Regenery Gateway. p. 319.

^ Kuehnelt-Leddihn, Erik von (2014).

Liberty or Equality: The Challenge of Our Time . The Mises Institute. p. 3.

^ Kuehnelt-Leddihn, Erik von (2014).

Liberty or Equality: The Challenge of Our Time . The Mises Institute. p. 10.

^ "Christianity, the Foundation and Conservator of Freedom" .

Religion & Liberty: Volume 7, Number 6 . 20 July 2010.

Further reading [ edit ] Nash, George H. (2006).

The Conservative Intellectual Movement in America since 1945 . ISI Books ISBN 9781933859125 Frohnen, Bruce; Jeremy Beer & Jeffrey O. Nelson (2006).

American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia . ISI Books ISBN 9781932236439 Bernhard Valentinitsch,Max-Erwin von Scheubner-Richter(1885-1923) - Zeuge des Genozids an den Armeniern und früher,enger Mitarbeiter Hitlers.Diplomarbeit.Graz 2012. (also digitalised at Harvard University Library,with many reflexions about books by Kuehnelt-Leddihn and similar ways of thinking in the work of his friend John Lukacs) Bernhard Valentinitsch, Graham Greenes Roman 'The Human Factor'(1978) und Otto Premingers gleichnamige Verfilmung (1979).In: JIPSS(=Journal for Intelligence,Propaganda and Security Studies),Nr.14.(the first publication in which letters between Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn and Graham Greene were used and quite possibly also the first publication in which the unpublished memoirs by Kuehnelt-Leddihn were with allowance of his family used) External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn .

Intellectual Conservative's Review of Leftism Revisited .

Philadelphia Society tribute to Kuehnelt-Leddihn .

Memorial page by his grandson.

The Principles of The Portland Declaration Compiled by Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn .

Info page at Lexikon Literatur .

v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal Authority control databases International ISNI 2 3 VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Croatia Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐r8q5l
Cached time: 20250817043828
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.941 seconds
Real time usage: 1.172 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6632/1000000
Revision size: 28694/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 228111/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13828/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 136661/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.533/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17739237/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  860.040      1 -total
 24.62%  211.699      2 Template:Reflist
 20.38%  175.257      1 Template:Infobox_academic
 15.17%  130.448      2 Template:Efn
 14.20%  122.096      1 Template:IPA
 12.71%  109.338     11 Template:Cite_web
 10.11%   86.986      1 Template:Conservatism_in_Austria
  9.86%   84.786      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.29%   62.724      1 Template:Short_description
  5.74%   49.326      1 Template:Conservatism_navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:633682:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043828 and revision id 1300333951. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Erik_von_Kuehnelt-Leddihn&oldid=1300333951 " Categories : 1909 births 1999 deaths 20th-century Austrian philosophers Austrian anti-communists Austrian monarchists Austrian libertarians Catholic philosophers Conservative liberalism Conservatism in Austria Criticism of democracy Historians of fascism Historians of Nazism National Review people Austrian Roman Catholic writers Georgetown University faculty Fordham University faculty Saint Peter's University faculty University of Vienna alumni People from Graz-Umgebung District Austrian literary critics 20th-century Austrian historians Emigrants from Austria after the Anschluss Critics of Freemasonry Member of the Mont Pelerin Society Hidden categories: Pages with German IPA Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2022 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 Articles containing German-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 18:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn 15 languages Add topic

