Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Plagues Toggle Plagues subsection 1.1 First bowl 1.2 Second bowl 1.3 Third bowl 1.4 Fourth bowl 1.5 Fifth bowl 1.6 Sixth bowl 1.7 Seventh bowl 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Seven bowls 11 languages Boarisch Deutsch Español Bahasa Indonesia עברית Lombard Magyar Polski Português Română தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Biblical apocalyptic set of plagues This article uses texts from within a religion or faith system without referring to secondary sources that critically analyse them.

Please help improve this article .

( December 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Christian eschatology Contrasting beliefs Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Futurism Dispensationalism Preterism Idealism The Millennium Amillennialism Postmillennialism Premillennialism Prewrath rapture Posttribulation rapture Dispensationalism Biblical texts Daniel Seventy Weeks Synoptic Gospels Olivet Discourse Mark 13 Matthew 24 Sheep and Goats Pauline Epistles 2 Thessalonians Johannine literature Revelation (Events) Pseudepigrapha 1 Enoch 2 Esdras Key terms Abomination of desolation Antichrist Apocalypse Apocatastasis Armageddon The Beast False prophet Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Gog and Magog Great Apostasy Great Tribulation Katechon Kingdom of God Lake of fire Last Judgment Man of sin New Earth New Jerusalem Number of the Beast Rapture Resurrection of the dead Second Coming Seven bowls Seven seals Son of perdition Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Woman of the Apocalypse World to come Christianity portal v t e The Giving of the Seven Bowls of Wrath / The First Six Plagues, Revelation 16:1-16.

Matthias Gerung , c. 1531 Fifth Bowl, the Seven-headed Beast.

Escorial Beatus Statue of an Etruscan priest, holding a phialē from which he is to pour a libation ; the plagues of Revelation are poured out on the world like offerings.

The seven bowls ( Greek : φιάλας , phialas (acc. pl.), nom. sing. φιάλη, phialē ; also translated as cups or vials ) are a set of plagues mentioned in Revelation 16 .

[ 1 ] They are recorded as apocalyptic events that were seen in the vision of the Revelation of Jesus Christ , by John of Patmos . Seven angels are given seven bowls of God's wrath, each consisting of judgements full of the wrath of God.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] These seven bowls of God's wrath are poured out on the wicked and the followers of the Antichrist .

[ 4 ] Plagues [ edit ] First bowl [ edit ] The first bowl is poured out upon the earth, and causes painful sores to break out upon all those bearing the mark of the beast .

[ 5 ] Second bowl [ edit ] The second bowl is poured out upon the sea. The sea turns to blood, and every living creature in it dies.

[ 6 ] Third bowl [ edit ] The third bowl is poured out upon the rivers and springs of water, and they turn to blood. The "angel of the waters" makes a speech in praise of God's justice, which is echoed by a voice from the altar.

[ 7 ] Fourth bowl [ edit ] The fourth bowl is poured out upon the sun. The sun scorches the people, but they only curse the name of God and do not repent.

[ 8 ] Fifth bowl [ edit ] The fifth bowl is poured out upon the throne of the beast. A thick darkness overwhelms the kingdom of the beast, and the wicked still do not repent.

[ 9 ] Sixth bowl [ edit ] The sixth bowl is poured out upon the river Euphrates . The river dries up to allow "the kings of the east" to cross.  Three unclean spirits with the appearance of frogs come, one each, out of the mouths of the dragon, the beast, and the false prophet. These spirits, referred to as unclean (meaning unfit for consumption in Biblical literature), work miracles to gather the nations of the world to battle against the forces of good during the Battle of Armageddon . The vision is interrupted by a voice that says "Behold, I am coming like a thief", and urges believers to stay alert.

[ 10 ] Other biblical scholars believe that the great eschatological battle is not described in these verses, having already been won at the time of the crucifixion of Jesus.

[ 11 ] Seventh bowl [ edit ] The seventh bowl is poured out into the air. A great 
voice from the throne says: "It is done." There is thunder and lightning, and an earthquake which destroys the cities of the world, and splits "the great city" into three parts. The islands and mountains are destroyed, and hailstones weighing a talent each fall upon the earth. The people continue to curse God.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Events of Revelation (Chapter 16) Seven seals Seven trumpets References [ edit ] ^ "Revelation 16 (ESV)" .

Bible Gateway .

^ "Revelation 15:7 (ESV)" .

Bible Gateway .

^ "Revelation 16:1 (ESV)" .

Bible Gateway .

^ "Antichrist" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2020-05-26 .

^ "Revelation 16:2 (ESV)" .

Bible Gateway .

^ "Revelation 16:3 (ESV)" .

Bible Gateway .

^ "Revelation 16:4-7 (ESV)" .

Bible Gateway .

^ "Revelation 16:8-9 (ESV)" .

Bible Gateway .

^ "Revelation 16:10-11 (ESV)" .

Bible Gateway .

^ "Revelation 16:12-16 (ESV)" .

Bible Gateway .

^ Barr, David L. (1998).

Tales of the End: A Narrative Commentary on the Book of Revelation . Santa Rosa, CA: Polebridge. p. 132.

^ "Revelation 16:17-21 (ESV)" .

Bible Gateway .

v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Seven_bowls&oldid=1296637317 " Categories : Angelic apparitions in the Bible New Testament words and phrases Book of Revelation Christian terminology Biblical phrases Seven in the Book of Revelation Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from December 2013 All articles lacking reliable references Articles needing more viewpoints from December 2013 Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 21 June 2025, at 07:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Seven bowls 11 languages Add topic

