Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production 4 Accolades 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Copernicus' Star 2 languages Български Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2009 Polish film Copernicus' Star Directed by Zdzisław Kudła Andrzej Orzechowski Written by Zdzisław Kudła Andrzej Orzechowski Produced by Romana Miś Starring Piotr Adamczyk Jerzy Stuhr Anna Cieślak Jan Peszek Piotr Fronczewski Olgierd Łukaszewicz Edited by Irena Hussar Music by Abel Korzeniowski Production company Studio Filmów Rysunkowych Distributed by Kino Świat Release date 22 October 2009 ( 2009-10-22 ) Country Poland Language Polish Copernicus' Star ( Polish : Gwiazda Kopernika ) is a Polish-language children's animated film, directed and written by Zdzisław Kudła and Andrzej Orzechowski. It was produced by Studio Filmów Rysunkowych in Bielsko-Biała , Poland, and released on 2 October 2009. The main cast included Piotr Adamczyk , Jerzy Stuhr , Anna Cieślak , Jan Peszek , Piotr Fronczewski , and Olgierd Łukaszewicz . The story follows Nicholas, an astronomy student as he makes the world-changing discovery. It was based on life of Nicholas Copernicus , a 15th- and 16th-century Renaissance scientist, and the author of the heliocentric model of the universe.

Plot [ edit ] Nicholas Copernicus , son of a merchant, is a smart curious child that lives in the 15-century Toruń . When he is ten years old, Paul van de Volder, a Dutch astrologer , visits his house and foretells him a brilliant future. With the help of his father, the boy begins to take an interest in the stars hoping to find some answers. When his father dies Nicolaus does not lose faith. Some time later he starts to study at the Jagiellonian University in Kraków . It is here that he meets Paul van de Volder again. The battle for Nicolaus’s soul begins. On the one side there is the charlatan astrologer Van de Volder, on the other, Albert of Brudzewo and the other professors at the University. The young Nicolaus discovers the secrets of the sky. Astrology and astronomy are in conflict. Searching for the answers, Nicolaus is lead to an astounding discovery. Uncertain of his findings, he goes to Rome and Bologna , where his further studies confirm his theory. However, before he publishes it, he has to face his antagonist one last time.

[ 1 ] Cast [ edit ] Piotr Adamczyk as Nicholas Copernicus Jerzy Stuhr as Paul van de Volder, Anna Cieślak as Anna Jan Peszek as professor Novarra Piotr Fronczewski as Albert of Brudzew Małgorzata Zajączkowska as Barbara, Nicholas's mother Olgierd Łukaszewicz Andrzej Grabowski Piotr Piecha Krzysztof Gosztyła Robert Mazurkiewicz Grażyna Bułka Michał Piela Kazimierz Czapla Lucyna Sypniewska Grzegorz Drojewski Joanna Pach Barbara Zielińska Paweł Ciołkosz Michał Głowacki Production [ edit ] Copernicus' Star was written and directed by Zdzisław Kudła and Andrzej Orzechowski, with Kudła also being the executive producer and art director, while Romana Miś was the producer. The music was done by Abel Korzeniowski , sound by Tomasz Dukszta, and editing by Irena Hussar.

[ 2 ] Illustrator Janusz Stanny developed the initial concept of the art design. The film was produced by Studio Filmów Rysunkowych in Bielsko-Biała , Poland, and was its first feature production since 1986 Bolek and Lolek in the Wild West . The film was animated predominantly in traditional 2D technique, with some 3D computer-generated elements. The production lasted two years, with over 70 animators and illustrators working on the project, and over 450,000 drawings being made, making it one of the largest 2D-animated productions in Poland at the time.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] The main cast included Piotr Adamczyk , Jerzy Stuhr , Anna Cieślak , Jan Peszek , Piotr Fronczewski , and Olgierd Łukaszewicz . It total, the production included 23 actors, including members of the Polish Theatre in Bielsko-Biała. The film was distributed by Kino Świat , and released in cinemas in Poland on 22 October 2009. The date was chosen as it coincided with the International Year of Astronomy .

[ 3 ] Accolades [ edit ] Accolades received by Copernicus' Star Award Year Category Result Ref.

International Film Festival for Children and Youth in Armenia 2010 Animated Feature Film Won [ 2 ] Tehran International Animation Festival 2011 The CIFEJ Award Won [ 4 ] Se-Ma-For Film Festival 2011 People's Choice Won [ 5 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Wanda Then (30 December 2008).

"Gwiazda Kopernika jest już prawie gotowa" .

dziennikzachodni.pl (in Polish).

^ a b "Gwiazda Kopernika" .

filmpolski.pl (in Polish).

^ a b "Gwiazda Kopernika w kinach" .

kultura.wiara.pl (in Polish). 22 October 2022.

^ " 'Lost and Found' tops at Tehran animation festival" .

tehrantimes.com (in Polish). 12 March 2011.

^ "Gwiazda Kopernika, film Studia Filmów Rysunkowych zdobył nagrodę na 2. Se-Ma-For Film Festival" .

bielskobiala.naszemiasto.pl (in Polish). 28 September 2011.

External links [ edit ] Copernicus' Star at IMDb Copernicus' Star at FilmPolski.pl (in Polish) Copernicus' Star at Filmweb (in Polish) v t e Nicolaus Copernicus Scientific career Copernican heliocentrism Copernican Revolution Works Commentariolus De revolutionibus orbium coelestium Locationes mansorum desertorum " Monetae cudendae ratio " Translations of Theophylact Simocatta Family Lucas Watzenrode the Elder (grandfather) Lucas Watzenrode (uncle) Related Scientific Revolution Nicolaus Copernicus Gesamtausgabe Copernicus law Copernican principle Frombork Cathedral Astronomer Copernicus, or Conversations with God Monuments Chicago Los Angeles Montreal Toruń Kraków Warsaw Copernicium Copernicus (lunar crater) Copernicus (Martian crater) Films Copernicus Copernicus' Star Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Copernicus%27_Star&oldid=1278885240 " Categories : 2009 films Polish animated films 2009 animated films Polish children's films Children's animated films 2000s Polish-language films Cultural depictions of Nicolaus Copernicus Films about astronomy Films about astrology Films about scientists Films about students Animated films about children Films set in the 15th century Films set in Warmian–Masurian Voivodeship Films set in Kraków Animated films set in Rome Films set in Bologna Hidden categories: CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Template film date with 1 release date Articles containing Polish-language text This page was last edited on 5 March 2025, at 05:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Copernicus' Star 2 languages Add topic

