Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and similar terms 2 Advantages Toggle Advantages subsection 2.1 Water conservation and lower maintenance 2.2 Biodiversity 2.3 Environmental and thermal discomfort remediation 3 Legal issue Toggle Legal issue subsection 3.1 United States homeowners associations 3.2 Theft 4 Lawns and applications 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Xeriscaping 12 languages العربية Català Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Português Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Water conserving landscaping method An example of xeriscaping outside the United States Capitol in Washington, DC The Xeriscape Demonstration Garden at the headquarters of Denver Water in Denver, Colorado Xeriscaping is the process of landscaping , or gardening , that reduces or eliminates the need for irrigation .

[ 1 ] It is promoted in regions that do not have accessible, plentiful, or reliable supplies of fresh water and has gained acceptance in other regions as access to irrigation water has become limited, though it is not limited to such climates. Xeriscaping may be an alternative to various types of traditional gardening.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In some areas, terms such as water-conserving landscaping , drought -tolerant landscaping , and smart scaping are used instead. The use of plants whose natural requirements are appropriate to the local climate is emphasized, and care is taken to avoid losing water to evaporation and runoff . However, the specific plants used in xeriscaping vary based on climate as this strategy can be used in xeric, mesic, and hydric environments. Xeriscaping is different from natural landscaping , because the emphasis in xeriscaping is on selection of plants for water conservation, not necessarily selecting native plants.

Xeriscaping produces greenspaces that require low amounts of maintenance and irrigation, and promote biodiversity; however, due to societal norms and lack of landscape understanding, public perception of xeriscaping has frequently been negative, as some assume that these types of landscapes are ugly expanses of just cactus and gravel.

[ 4 ] However, studies have shown that education in water conservation practices and xeriscaping's benefits can greatly improve the public's perception of xeriscaping.

[ 5 ] Etymology and similar terms [ edit ] Nancy Leavitt, an environmental planner with Denver Water, coined the term xeriscape in 1981 by combining landscape with the Greek prefix xero- , from ξηρός ( xēros ), meaning 'dry'.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The term zero-scaping (or zeroscaping ) is sometimes substituted for xeriscaping due to phonetic similarity.

[ 8 ] When used seriously, zero-scaping usually refers to a different type of low-water landscaping that uses very few plants or none at all.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Because o is the most common connecting vowel in Greco-Roman vocabulary, xeriscaping is sometimes misspelled as xeroscaping . Similar terms and phrases include water-conserving landscaping , drought -tolerant landscaping , and smart scaping .

Advantages [ edit ] Cacti are some of the low-water-consuming plants often used in xeriscaping.

Xeriscaping has the potential to reduce water usage and maintenance, improve biodiversity, lower pollution, as well as mitigate heat within urban areas; however, the effectiveness of this sustainable process has not been evaluated on a long-term large-scale basis. It was found that in arid US states, like Arizona and Nevada , that 75% of households' potable water was used to water residential and urban lawns.

[ 4 ] Xeriscaping aims to help preserve water for people and animals amidst an increase in droughts brought about by climate change .

[ 11 ] Water conservation and lower maintenance [ edit ] Xeriscapes can reduce water consumption by 60% or more compared to regular lawn landscapes.

[ 12 ] In Turkey, one of the first large scale xeriscaping evaluations was conducted. It was found that switching an average city park to more native vegetation in the region can lower irrigation usage by 30–50%. Assuming a water usage reduction of 30% it was found that a city can save roughly $2 million annually (however, this exact value is dependent on location).

[ 13 ] The use of native plants lowers the necessity of watering as the vegetation has already adapted to thrive in the climate and does not require assistance with irrigation or fertilization.

The Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design program has recognized xeriscaping as an effective water reduction process and has started to incorporate credits in the certification process across all their programs for facilities that reduce their outside water use and irrigation. This credit can be met by using xeriscape strategies and efficient irrigation systems.

[ 14 ] This further validates the beneficial claims behind xeriscaping, and it is anticipated that more energy and environmental credit systems as well state ran programs will encourage and incentivize xeriscaping for greenspace development.

[ 13 ] [ 15 ] While evaluating the cost of annual maintenance and park construction, xeriscaping drastically lowers these costs by roughly 55% and 57%, respectively.

[ 13 ] Aside from occasional weeding and mulching , xeriscaping requires far less time and effort to maintain.

[ 16 ] This is the case because under xeriscaping principles the vegetation used for urban greenspaces are indigenous to the area; therefore, are less expensive and require less assistance to acclimate and survive in the environment when compared to imported vegetation. This means that the systems use less water as well as lower rates of pesticides, and fertilizers when compared to current urban and residential greenspaces; this further helps lower annual maintenance costs.

[ 13 ] Maintenance waste, such as lawn clippings, contribute organic waste to landfills and fertilizers contribute to urban runoff pollution ; however, xeriscaping eliminates these negative effects as clippings are encouraged to remain on the greenspace which allows for a lower use of fertilizers.

[ 17 ] Biodiversity [ edit ] Often times when areas develop there is a loss of forestation, and animal populations dwindle as they are forced to relocate. Implementing native vegetation in green spaces helps improve the insect and wildlife found in the environment as the habitat is reestablished to a degree, offering food and shelter to the wildlife.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] One application of xeriscaping that drastically improves biodiversity is the implementation of pocket forests .

Environmental and thermal discomfort remediation [ edit ] Xeriscaping has been theorized to help offset the urban heating island (UHI) effect. UHI refers to the phenomenon in which urban areas are found to be hotter than neighboring rural sites due to large amounts of human activity. This temperature difference of a city area and its surroundings is usually higher at night as winds are lower and cannot dissipate the large amounts of heat generated in an urban area’s boundaries as readily. Upon investigating xeriscaping strategies in Phoenix , Arizona, it was found that dry areas that utilized xeriscaping with shade trees were found to mitigate UHI effects during the day and night with an average temperature difference of roughly 2.5 o C (4.5 o F) cooler.

[ 20 ] However, when these same strategies were implemented in a mesic area, an environment with moderate amounts of moisture, it was found that thermal discomfort increased for residents and that these strategies had opposite effects to their intentions. Although xeriscaping strategies were found to mitigate UHI effects, it remains important to consider the climate and current landscape in which it is implemented in, in order to maximize its benefits and effectiveness.

[ 20 ] Legal issue [ edit ] United States homeowners associations [ edit ] Some homeowners associations (HOAs) have strict rules requiring a certain percentage of land to be used as lawns but these rules either have been or are in the process of being overturned in many areas.

[ 21 ] Some US states (such as Texas and Florida) have passed legislation that allows homeowners to design lawns using xeriscaping methods, by prohibiting HOAs from imposing restrictions (e.g. on plant types) that are not "reasonable".

[ 15 ] Theft [ edit ] As more homeowners take up xeriscaping, or drought-tolerant landscaping, garden retailers have struggled to keep up. A burgeoning poaching trade has filled the gap with cacti and succulents stolen from parks and private lands. Buyers as far away as Europe and Asia can end up with yuccas, agaves, and ocotillos uprooted illegally from southern North America and shipped overseas.

[ 22 ] Lawns and applications [ edit ] One of the major challenges to the public acceptance of xeriscaping is the cultural attachment to turf grass lawns . Originally implemented in England , lawns have become in some regions a symbol of prosperity, order, and community.

[ 23 ] In the United States, turf grasses are so common that it is the single most irrigated nonfood crop by surface area, covering nearly 128,000 square kilometres (49,000 sq mi).

[ 4 ] Despite the high water, fertilizer, and maintenance costs associated with lawns, they have become the social norm in urban and suburban areas, even if they are rarely used for recreational or other purposes.

[ 24 ] Xeriscaping offers an alternative to the over-use of turf grass lawns, but are not widely accepted because of preconceived notions of what it means to xeriscape.

[ citation needed ] Xeriscaping can include lawn areas but seeks to reduce them to areas that will actually be used, rather than using them as a default landscaping plan. Xeriscaping is closely linked to movements and ideologies that advocate for more natural vegetation in residential and urban areas. One form of xeriscaping that has received a lot of attention is the implementation of pocket forests .

[ citation needed ] Akira Miyawaki was a Japanese botanist who developed the idea of pocket forests which reintroduces indigenous trees and vegetation to developed environments in order to promote strong biodiversity. The method calls for the planting of naturally occurring trees and shrubbery densely into small compact areas, that can range from a size of a tennis court to a parking space. These pocket forests increase biodiversity, reduce noise (if placed near streets or noise polluters), improve air quality and soil retention, help with reforestation, and efficiently capture carbon dioxide.

[ 18 ] In order to promote fast growth and biodiversity the engineered ecosystem requires a layering of vegetation: the ground layer, a shrub layer, and a canopy layer. Due to this compact layering these forests usually are well established within two decades rather than the 70-plus years it takes for naturally occurring forests.

[ 18 ] Other forms of xeriscaping include rain gardens . These gardens are used to reduce the amount of runoff from impervious areas (such as roofs, driveways, sidewalks, etc.) and rely on water retentive plants and soil mediums to help filter pollutants from the storm water before it is reintroduced into aquifers and storm drains. These gardens require little irrigation and maintenance, and help protect waterways and remove pollutants.

[ 25 ] There are many other forms and applications of xeriscaping: it is essentially any form of landscaping that requires little to no irrigation. However, it is important to take note of the environment before implementation, and follow the principles, as success of one type of xeriscape in a xeric climate might not have the same effects if it were implemented in a mesic or hydric environment.

[ 13 ] Gallery [ edit ] Xeriscaping at the Dallas Arboretum and Botanical Garden Los Angeles Air Force Base Xeriscaping in Hidden Meadows, California Example of xeriscaping in Roseville, California See also [ edit ] Gardening portal Bioswale Climate-friendly gardening Dryland farming Foodscaping Gardening Green roof International Center for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas Masanobu Fukuoka Native plant Natural landscaping Rainwater harvesting Roof garden Sustainable farming Sustainable gardening Sustainable landscape architecture Wildlife garden References [ edit ] ^ "xeriscaping" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d.

^ Weinstein, Gayle (1999).

Xeriscape Handbook: A How-To Guide to Natural Resource-Wise Gardening .

Golden , Colorado: Fulcrum Publishing. p. 55.

ISBN 1555913466 .

^ Caldwell, Elizabeth (15 July 2007).

"With xeriscaping, grass needn't always be greener" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on 10 December 2011 . Retrieved 13 December 2017 .

^ a b c Ignatieva, Maria; Hedblom, Marcus (12 October 2018).

"An alternative urban green carpet" .

Science .

362 (6411): 148– 149.

Bibcode : 2018Sci...362..148I .

doi : 10.1126/science.aau6974 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 30309928 .

S2CID 52960875 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2022 . Retrieved 30 June 2022 .

^ McKenny, Cynthia; Terry, Robert Jr. (October–December 1995).

"The Effectiveness of Using Workshops to Change Audience Perception of and Attitudes about Xeriscaping" .

HortTechnology .

5 (4): 327– 329.

doi : 10.21273/HORTTECH.5.4.327 .

Archived from the original on 18 December 2018 . Retrieved 23 September 2014 .

^ Wilson, C.; Feuch, J. R.

"Xeriscaping: Creative Landscaping" .

Colorado State University Extension .

Colorado State University .

Archived from the original on 19 March 2018 . Retrieved 19 March 2018 .

^ "Denver Water Waterwise Landscape Handbook" (PDF) .

Denver Water . p. 3.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 March 2018 . Retrieved 19 March 2018 .

^ Loser, Marilyn.

"Alamosa Trees » Xeriscape is Healthy, Zeroscape is Not!" .

alamosatrees.net . Archived from the original on 16 August 2016 . Retrieved 25 July 2016 .

^ Ellefson, Connie Lockhart; Winger, David (2004).

Xeriscape Colorado: the complete guide .

Englewood , Colorado: Westcliffe Publishers. p. 15.

ISBN 9781565794955 .

^ "The Enchanted Xeriscape: A Guide to Water-wise Landscaping in New Mexico" (PDF) .

New Mexico Office of the State Engineer . State of New Mexico.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 April 2016 . Retrieved 25 July 2016 .

^ Alizadeh, Mohammad Reza; Adamowski, Jan; Nikoo, Mohammad Reza; AghaKouchak, Amir; Dennison, Philip; Sadegh, Mojtaba (September 2020).

"A century of observations reveals increasing likelihood of continental-scale compound dry-hot extremes" .

Science Advances .

6 (39): eaaz4571.

Bibcode : 2020SciA....6.4571A .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aaz4571 .

ISSN 2375-2548 .

PMC 7531886 .

PMID 32967839 .

^ "Xeriscape Colorado". Web. 23 May. 2016.

http://coloradowaterwise.org/XeriscapeColorado Archived 14 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c d e Çetin, Nefise; Mansuroğlu, Sibel; Önaç, Ayşe (12 March 2018).

"Xeriscaping Feasibility as an Urban Adaptation Method for Global Warming: A Case Study from Turkey" .

Polish Journal of Environmental Studies .

27 (3): 1009– 1018.

doi : 10.15244/pjoes/76678 .

ISSN 1230-1485 .

^ "LEED Credit library | U.S. Green Building Council" .

www.usgbc.org .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2020 . Retrieved 17 December 2020 .

^ a b HOAleader.com (27 December 2013).

"What HOA Boards Need to Know About Xeriscaping" .

Archived from the original on 11 November 2020 . Retrieved 17 December 2020 .

^ McCracken, Maureen (1 February 2009).

"Xeriscape: An Introduction" . Master Gardeners of Mecklenburg County NC, Meckelburg County Cooperative Extension, part of the "North Carolina Cooperative Extension [Service]", (see NCSU College of Ag and Life Sciences ). Archived from the original on 4 April 2016 . Retrieved 25 November 2014 .

^ "Environmental Fact Sheet: Recycling Grass Clippings" (PDF) .

Environmental Protection Agency . United States.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 August 2018 . Retrieved 23 May 2017 .

^ a b c Schirone, Bartolomeo; Salis, Antonello; Vessella, Federico (January 2011).

"Effectiveness of the Miyawaki method in Mediterranean forest restoration programs" .

Landscape and Ecological Engineering .

7 (1): 81– 92.

Bibcode : 2011LaEcE...7...81S .

doi : 10.1007/s11355-010-0117-0 .

ISSN 1860-1871 .

S2CID 25256096 .

^ Alam, Hasnain; Khattak, Jabar Zaman Khan; Ppoyil, Shaijal Babu Thru; Kurup, Shyam S.; Ksiksi, Taoufik Saleh (6 November 2017).

"Landscaping with native plants in the UAE: A review" .

Emirates Journal of Food and Agriculture : 729– 741.

doi : 10.9755/ejfa.2017.v29.i10.319 .

ISSN 2079-0538 .

Archived from the original on 21 February 2020 . Retrieved 17 December 2020 .

^ a b Chow, Winston T.L.; Brazel, Anthony J. (January 2012).

"Assessing xeriscaping as a sustainable heat island mitigation approach for a desert city" .

Building and Environment .

47 : 170– 181.

Bibcode : 2012BuEnv..47..170C .

doi : 10.1016/j.buildenv.2011.07.027 .

Archived from the original on 19 March 2022 . Retrieved 17 December 2020 .

^ Galbraith, Kate (31 January 2013).

"Texas Bills Aim to Douse HOAs' [sic] Limits on Xeriscaping" . The Texas Tribune.

Archived from the original on 6 March 2016 . Retrieved 17 April 2016 .

^ Magers, Phil.

"Texas bill cracks down on cactus poachers" .

UPI . United Press International . Retrieved 2 May 2023 .

^ Mustafa, Daanish, Thomas A Smucker, Franklin Ginn, Rebecca Johns, and Shanon Connely. "Xeriscape people and the cultural politics of turfgrass transformation." Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 28.4 (2010): 600–617.

^ Schindler, Sarah B.. "Banning Lawns (municipal police power to ban lawns as sustainability policy)." The George Washington law review 82.2 (2014): 394–454.

^ Alyaseri, Isam; Zhou, Jianpeng; Morgan, Susan M.; Bartlett, Andrew (August 2017).

"Initial impacts of rain gardens' application on water quality and quantity in combined sewer: field-scale experiment" .

Frontiers of Environmental Science & Engineering .

11 (4): 19.

Bibcode : 2017FrESE..11...19A .

doi : 10.1007/s11783-017-0988-5 .

ISSN 2095-2201 .

S2CID 103238454 .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Xeriscape .

Look up Xeriscape in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Sustainability Outline Index Principles Anthropocene Environmentalism Global governance Human impact on the environment Planetary boundaries Development Consumption Anthropization Anti-consumerism Circular economy Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological footprint Ethical Green consumption Micro-sustainability Over-consumption Product stewardship Simple living Social return on investment Steady-state economy Sustainability Advertising Brand Marketing myopia Sustainable Consumer behaviour Market Systemic change resistance Tragedy of the commons World population Control Demographic transition Dependency ratio List Family planning Intergenerational equity Population ageing Sustainable population Technology Appropriate Environmental technology Natural building Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable industries Sustainable packaging Biodiversity Biosecurity Biosphere Conservation biology Endangered species Holocene extinction Invasive species Energy Carbon footprint Renewable energy Sustainable energy Food Civic agriculture Climate-smart agriculture Community-supported agriculture Cultured meat Sustainable agriculture Sustainable diet Sustainable fishery Water Air well (condenser) Bioretention Bioswale Blue roof Catchwater Constructed wetland Detention basin Dew pond Footprint Hydroelectricity Hydropower Infiltration basin Irrigation tank Marine energy Micro hydro Ocean thermal energy conversion Pico hydro Rain garden Rainwater harvesting Rainwater tank Reclaimed water Retention basin Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity Scarcity Security Small hydro Sustainable drainage system Tidal power Tidal stream generator Tree box filter Water conservation Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Water-sensitive urban design Accountability Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate social responsibility Environmental accounting Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental planning Generational accounting Sustainability Accounting Measurement Metrics and indices Reporting Standards and certification Sustainable yield Economic Debt Sustainability Analysis Fiscal sustainability Applications Advertising Art Business City Cultural sustainability Climate finance Community Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco-cities Eco-investing Eco-socialism Ecovillage Environmental finance Green economy Construction Fashion Finance Gardening Geopark Green Development Infrastructure Marketing Green roof Greening Impact investing Landscape Livelihood Living Market Organic movement Organizations Procurement Refurbishment Socially responsible business Socially responsible marketing Sanitation Sourcing Space Sustainability organization Tourism Transport Urban drainage systems Urban infrastructure Sustainable management Environmental Fisheries Forest Humanistic capitalism Landscape Materials Natural resource Planetary Recycling Waste Agreements and conferences UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972) Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983) Our Common Future (1987) Earth Summit (1992) Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992) Agenda 21 (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) Lisbon Principles (1997) Earth Charter (2000) UN Millennium Declaration (2000) Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg) UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012) Sustainable Development Goals (2015) UNESCO MONDIACULT conferences Category Lists Science Studies Degrees Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Xeriscaping&oldid=1306220471 " Categories : Deserts and xeric shrublands Desert greening Sustainable gardening Types of garden Water conservation Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2025 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 15:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Xeriscaping 12 languages Add topic

