Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The inductive definition 2 Natural languages 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents T-schema 4 languages Deutsch Magyar Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Testing device for logical soundness The T-schema ("truth schema ", not to be confused with " Convention T ") is used to check if an inductive definition of truth is valid, which lies at the heart of any realisation of Alfred Tarski 's semantic theory of truth . Some authors refer to it as the "Equivalence Schema", a synonym introduced by Michael Dummett .

[ 1 ] The T-schema is often expressed in natural language , but it can be formalized in many-sorted predicate logic or modal logic ; such a formalisation is called a " T-theory ." [ citation needed ] T-theories form the basis of much fundamental work in philosophical logic , where they are applied in several important controversies in analytic philosophy .

As expressed in semi-natural language (where 'S' is the name of the sentence abbreviated to S): 'S' is true if and only if S.

Example: 'snow is white' is true if and only if snow is white.

The inductive definition [ edit ] By using the schema one can give an inductive definition for the truth of compound sentences.

Atomic sentences are assigned truth values disquotationally . For example, the sentence "'Snow is white' is true" becomes materially equivalent with the sentence "snow is white", i.e. 'snow is white' is true if and only if snow is white. Said again, a sentence of the form "A" is true if and only if A is true. The truth of more complex sentences is defined in terms of the components of the sentence: A sentence of the form "A and B" is true if and only if A is true and B is true A sentence of the form "A or B" is true if and only if A is true or B is true A sentence of the form "if A then B" is true if and only if A is false or B is true; see material implication .

A sentence of the form "not A" is true if and only if A is false A sentence of the form "for all x, A( x )" is true if and only if, for every possible value of x , A( x ) is true.

A sentence of the form "for some x, A( x )" is true if and only if, for some possible value of x , A( x ) is true.

Predicates for truth that meet all of these criteria are called "satisfaction classes", a notion often defined with respect to a fixed language (such as the language of Peano arithmetic ); these classes are considered acceptable definitions for the notion of truth.

[ 2 ] Natural languages [ edit ] Joseph Heath points out that "the analysis of the truth predicate provided by Tarski's Schema T is not capable of handling all occurrences of the truth predicate in natural language. In particular, Schema T treats only "freestanding" uses of the predicate—cases when it is applied to complete sentences." [ 3 ] He gives as an "obvious problem" the sentence: Everything that Bill believes is true.

Heath argues that analyzing this sentence using T-schema generates the sentence fragment —"everything that Bill believes"—on the righthand side of the logical biconditional .

See also [ edit ] Principle of bivalence Law of excluded middle References [ edit ] ^ Künne, Wolfgang (2003).

Conceptions of truth . Clarendon Press. p.

18 .

ISBN 978-0-19-928019-3 .

^ H. Kotlarski, Full Satisfaction Classes: A Survey (1991, Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic , p.573). Accessed 9 September 2022.

^ Heath, Joseph (2001).

Communicative action and rational choice . MIT Press. p. 186.

ISBN 978-0-262-08291-4 .

External links [ edit ] Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Tarski's Truth Definitions" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Consequences of the Semantic Paradoxes" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Truth General Statement Propositions Truth-bearer Truth-maker Theories Coherence Consensus Constructivist Correspondence Deflationary Epistemic Pluralist Pragmatic Redundancy Semantic v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=T-schema&oldid=1266447377 " Categories : Mathematical logic Philosophical logic Truth Logical expressions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2019 This page was last edited on 31 December 2024, at 17:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents T-schema 4 languages Add topic

