Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Philosophy 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents In-joke 15 languages Deutsch Français Frysk हिन्दी Italiano עברית Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Inside joke ) Esoteric form of humor "Inside jokes" redirects here. For television series, see Inside Jokes (TV series) .

In-joke Secret , by Eugen von Blaas Alternative names in-joke inside joke private joke Type of joke Esoteric An in-joke , also known as an inside joke or a private joke , is a joke with humour that is understandable only to members of an ingroup ; that is, people who are in a particular social group, occupation, or other community of shared interest. It is, therefore, an esoteric joke, only humorous to those who are aware of the circumstances behind it.

[ 1 ] Typically, inside jokes use a reference in the punchline to imply that which is associated with the reference. Often, this reference refers to the punchline of another joke which was already heard by the ingroup.

In-jokes may exist within a small social clique, such as a group of friends, or extend to an entire profession or other relatively large group. When the ingroup only includes people which heard the previous portion of a comedic set, the type of inside joke is known as a callback .

An example is: Q: What's yellow and equivalent to the axiom of choice ?

A: Zorn's lemon.

[ 2 ] Individuals not familiar with the mathematical result Zorn's lemma are unlikely to understand the joke. The joke is a pun on the name of this result.

Ethnic or religious groups may also have in-jokes.

[ 3 ] Philosophy [ edit ] In-jokes are cryptic allusions to shared common ground that act as selective triggers; only those who share that common ground are able to respond appropriately.

[ 4 ] An in-joke may be used to build community, sometimes at the expense of outsiders. Part of the power of an in-joke is that its audience knows that many do not understand it.

[ 5 ] An in-joke can also be used as a subtext , where people in the know may find humor in something not explicitly spoken. They may even apologize for doing so to a rookie , directly or indirectly stating that what they were laughing at was an in-joke.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Shibboleth Cultural appropriation Fictitious entry Mathematical joke Military humor Order of the Occult Hand Dog-whistle politics References [ edit ] Look up inside joke in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

^ "Inside joke Definition & Meaning" .

Merriam-Webster Dictionary . April 14, 2023 . Retrieved June 2, 2023 .

^ Vanderbilt University Department of Mathematics (February 5, 2019).

"What's Yellow and Equivalent to the Axiom of Choice?" .

^ "Wales Online: "Are the Welsh Really Funny?", 14 October 2006. Retrieved 6 September 2012" . Archived from the original on 18 July 2012 . Retrieved 5 September 2020 .

^ Randy Y. Hirokawa and Marshall Scott Poole (1996).

Communication and Group Decision Making . Sage Publications Inc. p. 96.

ISBN 076190462X .

^ Paul Brooks Duff (2001).

Who Rides the Beast?: Prophetic Rivalry and the Rhetoric of Crisis in the Churches of the Apocalypse . Oxford University Press. p. 81.

ISBN 019513835X .

^ Ben Tousey (2003).

Acting Your Dreams: Use Acting Techniques to Interpret Your Dreams . Ben Tousey. pp.

118– 119.

ISBN 1-4140-0542-3 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to In-jokes at Wikimedia Commons v t e Appropriation in the arts By field Music Bootleg recording Chopped and screwed Contrafact list Contrafactum Cover version DJ mix Interpolation Medley Music mashup Music plagiarism Musical quotation Nightcore Parody music Pasticcio Plunderphonics Potpourri Quodlibet Remix Riddim Sampling Sound collage Standard Tribute act Trope Variation Vaporwave Literature / theatre Assemblage Cut-up technique Flarf poetry Found poetry Jukebox musical Trope Verbatim theatre Visual arts Collage Combine painting Photographic mosaic Readymades of Marcel Duchamp Swipe By source material Mona Lisa Michelangelo's David Michelangelo's Pietà Statue of Liberty Cinema / television / video Abridged series Anime music video Collage film Found footage Literal music video Parody film Re-cut trailer Remake Shot-for-shot Supercut TV format Vidding Video mashup YouTube Poop Other arts In-joke Internet meme Joke theft Parody advertisement Revivalism (architecture) Video game modding General concepts Intertextual figures Allusion Calque Parody Pastiche Plagiarism Quotation Translation Adaptation Film Literary Theatre Other concepts After (art) Assemblage (art) Bricolage Citation Détournement Found object Homage Imitation in art Mashup Reprise Satire Source criticism in the arts Related artistic concepts Aesthetic interpretation Anti-art Archetypal literary criticism Artistic inspiration " The Death of the Author " Divine inspiration Afflatus Genius (literature) Muses Fan labor Fan fiction Genre Genre studies Originality Simulacrum Western canon Standard blocks and forms Archetype Formula fiction Genre fiction Jazz standard Plot device Stock character Story structure Epoch-marking works L.H.O.O.Q.

(1919) " Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote " (1939) Reality Hunger: A Manifesto (2010) Theorization Dada De Copia Rerum Diegesis Dionysian imitatio Mimesis Nachahmung Palimpsests: Literature in the Second Degree The Pictures Generation Pop art Postmodernism Russian formalism Related non- artistic concepts Academic dishonesty Appropriation in sociology Articulation in sociology Cultural appropriation History of printing Information society Intellectual property Copyright infringement Derivative work Fair use Meme Open source Participatory culture Pirate politics Recontextualisation Remix culture Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=In-joke&oldid=1299380097 " Categories : In-jokes Humor research Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 02:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents In-joke 15 languages Add topic

