Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Liberal Party/Party for Freedom and Progress 1.2 Progressive Party 1.3 (Flemish) Party for Freedom and Progress/Flemish Liberals and Democrats 1.4 (Francophone) Party for Freedom and Progress/Liberal Reformist Party 1.5 (Brussels) Liberal Party 1.6 (German speaking) Party for Freedom and Progress 1.7 Libertine party during the 1990s 1.8 Right-liberal parties 1.9 Other liberal parties formed in the 2000s 2 Liberal leaders 3 Liberal thinkers 4 References 5 See also Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Belgium Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Liberalism in Belgium" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2023 ) Overview of liberalism in Belgium Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e This article gives an overview of liberalism in Belgium . Liberalism was a dominant force since the Belgian independence from the Netherlands . It is limited to liberal parties with substantial support, mainly proved by having had a representation in parliament . The sign ⇒ denotes another party in that scheme. For inclusion in this scheme it is not necessary that parties labeled themselves as a liberal party.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Since 1972 the traditional liberal current is divided in parties for each language. In Flanders the liberal Flemish Liberals and Democrats ( Vlaamse Liberalen en Democraten , member LI , ELDR ), comprising both market and left of center liberals, is one of the dominant parties. Smaller liberal parties are Spirit , allied with the social democrats, and Vivant , allied to the VLD. In the French-speaking part of the country the nowadays center liberal Reformist Movement ( Mouvement Réformateur , member LI , ELDR ) is one of the major parties.  Affiliated with this party is the German-speaking Party for Freedom and Progress ( Partei für Freiheit und Fortschritt ).

[ 1 ] Liberal Party/Party for Freedom and Progress [ edit ] 1846: Liberals formed the Liberal Party ( Parti Libéral ) 1887: A radical faction seceded as the ⇒ Progressive Party 1900: The ⇒ Progressive Party rejoined the party The party name gradually included the Dutch version Liberale Partij (LP/PL) 1961: The LP/PL is reorganised into Party for Freedom and Progress ( Partij voor Vrijheid en Vooruitgang/Parti pour la Liberté et le Progrès ) (PVV/PLP) 1972: The PVV/PLP fell apart in three parties with the same name in the three state languages ( French , Dutch and German ) Progressive Party [ edit ] 1887: A radical faction of the ⇒ Liberal Party formed the Progressive Party ( Parti Progressiste ) 1900: The PP merged into the ⇒ Liberal Party (Flemish) Party for Freedom and Progress/Flemish Liberals and Democrats [ edit ] 1972: The Flemish section of the ⇒ PVV/PLP formed the Party for Freedom and Progress ( Partij voor Vrijheid en Vooruitgang ) 1992: The PVV is reorganised into the Flemish Liberals and Democrats ( Vlaamse Liberalen en Democraten or VLD) 2007: VLD is regorganised into the Open Flemish Liberals and Democrats ( Open Vlaamse Liberalen en Democraten , or open vld) (Francophone) Party for Freedom and Progress/Liberal Reformist Party [ edit ] 1972: The francophone section of the ⇒ PVV/PLP became the Party for Freedom and Progress ( Parti pour la Liberté et le Progrès ) 1973: The Brussels section of the PLP formed the ⇒ Liberal Party 1976: The PLP merged with a faction of the Walloon Rally ( Rassemblement Wallon ) into the Party for Reforms and Freedom of Wallonia ( Parti pour les Réformes et la Liberté de Wallonie ) 1979: The party merged with the ⇒ Liberal Party into the Reformist Liberal Party ( Parti Réformateur Libéral ) 2002: The PRL is reorganised into the present-day Reformist Movement ( Mouvement Réformateur or MR) (Brussels) Liberal Party [ edit ] 1973: The Brussels section of the ⇒ PLP formed the Liberal Party ( Parti Libéral ) 1979: The Liberal Party merged into the ⇒ Liberal Reform Party (German speaking) Party for Freedom and Progress [ edit ] 1976: The German-speaking section of the ⇒ PLP became the present-day Party for Freedom and Progress ( Partei für Freiheit und Fortschritt ) 2002: The PFF became affiliated to the ⇒ Reformist Movement 2023: The PFP is renamed into Perspectives. Freedom. Progress.

( Perspektiven. Freiheit. Fortschritt.

) Libertine party during the 1990s [ edit ] 1991: ROSSEM was founded around Jean-Pierre Van Rossem .

1994: ROSSEM collapsed.

1995: A group centered around Roland Duchâtelet splits from ROSSEM and found BANAAN .

1995: A group centered around Jan Decorte splits from ROSSEM and found HOERA , which vanishes in the same year.

1997: BANAAN merges into Vivant (social-liberalism).

2004: Vivant becomes cartel partner of the VLD.

2007: Flemish Vivant gets absorbed into ⇒ Open Vld and becomes de facto a German-speaking party.

2009: ROSSEM is re-founded under the new full name Party of the Future .

2014: ROSSEM is renamed into Anderz .

2014: Anderz dissolves.

Right-liberal parties [ edit ] Liberal Appeal (2002–2007), cartel partner of the VLD; merged into ⇒ Open Vld.

Veilig Blauw ( Safe Blue ), local party, defunct.

Verstandig Rechts ( Smart Right ), local party, defunct, led by Willy Vermeulen.

VLOTT (2006–2012), cartel partner of the Vlaams Belang .

List Dedecker (populist right-liberalism) founded in 2007.

Libéral Démocrate [ fr ] , local party led by Rudy Aernoudt, cartel partner of the MR.

People's Party , far-right liberal party (2009–2019), founded by  Rudy Aernoudt and Mischaël Modrikamen, merged into ⇒ Chez Nous .

Liberal Democrats , founded in 2019 in inspiration by New Flemish Alliance .

Other liberal parties formed in the 2000s [ edit ] FlemishProgressives (left-liberalism), cartel partner of the Different Socialist Party .

Liberal leaders [ edit ] Parti Libéral Charles Rogier Walthère Frère-Orban (1812-1896), wrote the first charter of the liberal party Paul Janson Paul Hymans Paul-Emile Janson Mouvement Réformateur Charles Michel Sophie Wilmès Vlaamse Liberalen en Democraten Guy Verhofstadt Alexander De Croo Liberal thinkers [ edit ] In the Contributions to liberal theory the following Belgian thinkers are included: Dirk Verhofstadt (born 1955) Boudewijn Bouckaert References [ edit ] ^ a b Rudd, Christopher (1988-11-03), Kirchner, Emil J. (ed.), "The Belgian liberal parties: economic radicals and social conservatives" , Liberal Parties in Western Europe (1 ed.), Cambridge University Press, pp.

178– 212, doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511521843.011 , ISBN 978-0-521-32394-9 , retrieved 2023-08-28 See also [ edit ] Liberal Archive History of Belgium Politics of Belgium List of political parties in Belgium v t e Liberalism in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalism_in_Belgium&oldid=1292696506 " Categories : Liberalism in Belgium Politics of Belgium Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 09:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Belgium Add languages Add topic

