Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Products and services Toggle Products and services subsection 2.1 DTIC Public Website 2.2 R&E Gateway 2.3 DTIC Online Classified 2.4 Information Analysis Centers 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Defense Technical Information Center 4 languages Deutsch Español 日本語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia US Department of Defense repository for research and engineering information Defense Technical Information Center DTIC Department overview Formed June 1945 ( 1945-06 ) Preceding agencies Air Documents Research Center (ADRC) Air Documents Division (ADD) Central Air Documents Office (CADO) Headquarters Fort Belvoir , Virginia Department executive Christopher Thomas, Administrator of the Defense Technical Information Center [ 1 ] Parent Department United States Department of Defense Website discover .dtic .mil The Defense Technical Information Center ( DTIC , / ˈ d iː t ɪ k / [ 2 ] ) is the repository for research and engineering information for the United States Department of Defense (DoD). DTIC's services are available to DoD personnel, federal government personnel, federal contractors and selected academic institutions. The general public can access unclassified information through its public website.

History [ edit ] The DTIC traces its history to the June 1945 formation of the Air Documents Research Center (ADRC), a joint effort of the US Army Air Force , US Navy and Royal Air Force to build a single collection of captured German aeronautical research, based in London. The ADRC was initially tasked with the sorting of the document collection into three broad groups; documents that would assist the war in the Pacific theater, documents of immediate intelligence interest to the United States or British forces and documents of interest for future research.

[ 3 ] With the ending of the war in 1945, the ADRC moved to Wright Field in Dayton, Ohio and became the Air Documents Division (ADD). In 1948, the secretaries of the Navy and Air Force redesigned ADD into the Central Air Documents Office (CADO) giving it the collection of captured documents and also broadened its mission to include collecting, processing and disseminating information.

[ 3 ] In 1951, the group was renamed the Armed Services Technical Information Agency (ASTIA) to "provide an integrated program of scientific and technical services for the Department of Defense and its contractors". As part of this reorganization, a branch office was opened in the Library of Congress , Washington.

[ 4 ] One major project during the ASTIA era was to develop library catalog systems to organize the growing body of work. This led to the Uniterm indexing system in the early 1950s.

In 1963, the group was once again reorganized to become the Defense Documentation Center for Science and Technical Information (DDC), and placed under the direction of the Defense Supply Agency (DSA). The DDC moved to Cameron Station, Alexandria, Virginia . The name changed again in 1969 to become the DTIC. In 1995, it moved to Andrew T. McNamara Headquarters Complex, Fort Belvoir, Virginia , as part of the reformed Defense Logistics Agency .

[ 3 ] Products and services [ edit ] DTIC Public Website [ edit ] DTIC Public Website https://discover.dtic.mil , is the public gateway to DTIC's products and services. Access to the unclassified information on this site is available.

R&E Gateway [ edit ] The R&E Gateway—the Department of Defense's (DoD) authoritative and secure online resource for research, development, testing and evaluation (RDT&E) information. There are over 4.7 million Science and Technical (S&T) assets available on the R&E Gateway: DoD scientific and technical reports,  planned and completed research, projects, DoD-funded research and engineering journal articles, budget exhibits (R2 and P40), DoD grant awards, International Agreements, etc.

[ 5 ] DTIC Online Classified [ edit ] The Secure Internet Protocol Routing Network (SIPRNet), DTIC Online Classified provides access to DTIC's complete collection (unclassified, unlimited; unclassified, limited; classified up to SECRET) of technical reports. In addition, registered users have access to other websites housed on the SIPRNet, including DoDTechipedia Classified.

Information Analysis Centers [ edit ] The DoD IAC's Research & Analysis Services provide access to information, knowledge, and best practices from the Government, industry, and academia to fulfill the mission and objectives applicable to the DoD RDT&E and Acquisition communities' needs.  These services are provided by the DoD IAC's three Basic Centers of Operation (BCOs); Cyber-Security and Information Systems, Defense Systems, and Homeland Defense and Security.  The BCO's rely on their extensive Subject Matter Expert (SME) network; which includes experienced engineers and scientists, retired senior military leaders, leading academic researchers, and industry experts; to solve our customer's toughest scientific and technical problems.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Cyber Security and Information Systems Information Analysis Center (CSISIAC) National Technical Information Service Office of Scientific and Technical Information References [ edit ] ^ "Biography View: Christopher E. Thomas" . Defense Technical Information Center . Retrieved 3 August 2019 .

^ Schwalb, Sandy (July–August 2005).

"The Information Business: A Profile of the Defense Technical Information Center" (PDF) .

Defense AT&L . Vol. XXVII, no. 4. pp.

44– 46.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 April 2019 . Retrieved 3 August 2019 .

Full issue .

^ a b c "DITC's History" .

DTIC .

^ ASTIA Services available at NSA (PDF) (Technical report). 22 July 1955.

^ "DOD IAC" . Archived from the original on 3 May 2019 . Retrieved 3 May 2019 .

^ "ABOUT THE DOD IAC" .

DTIC.mil .

v t e United States Department of Defense Headquarters: The Pentagon Pete Hegseth , Secretary of Defense Steve Feinberg , Deputy Secretary of Defense Office of the Secretary of Defense (including defense agencies and DoD field activities) Deputy Secretary of Defense Deputy's Advisory Working Group Office of Net Assessment Special Access Program Oversight Committee Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) Defense Contract Audit Agency Defense Finance and Accounting Service Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment Defense Contract Management Agency Defense Logistics Agency Defense Threat Reduction Agency Office of Local Defense Community Cooperation Defense Acquisition University Defense Acquisition Board Defense Microelectronics Activity Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security Defense Intelligence Agency Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency Defense Information Systems Agency White House Communications Agency National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency National Reconnaissance Office National Security Agency/Central Security Service Director/Chief Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness Defense Commissary Agency Department of Defense Education Activity Defense Human Resources Activity Defense Activity for Non-Traditional Education Support Defense Equal Opportunity Management Institute Defense Travel Management Office Defense Civilian Personnel Advisory Service Defense Health Agency Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Defense Security Cooperation Agency Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency Defense Policy Board Advisory Committee Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs Defense Media Activity American Forces Network Defense Information School Defense Visual Information Distribution Service Stars and Stripes Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Defense Innovation Unit Defense Technical Information Center Department of Defense Test Resource Management Center Missile Defense Agency General Counsel of the Department of Defense Defense Legal Services Agency (Office of Military Commissions) Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense Pentagon Force Protection Agency Washington Headquarters Services ( White House Military Office ) Reports directly Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs Military Departments Department of the Army Secretary of the Army The Secretariat : Under Secretary of the Army Assistant Secretary for Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology Assistant Secretary for Civil Works Assistant Secretary (Financial Management and Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Army for Installations, Energy and Environment Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower and Reserve Affairs General Counsel of the Army The Administrative Assistant The Army Staff: Chief of Staff of the Army Vice Chief of Staff of the Army Sergeant Major of the Army Deputy Chief of Staff G-8 Programs Chief of Chaplains Judge Advocate General Provost Marshal General Surgeon General U.S. Army field organizations: see Structure of the United States Army Department of the Navy Secretary of the Navy The Secretariat : Under Secretary of the Navy Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Energy, Installations and Environment) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Research, Development and Acquisition) General Counsel of the Navy Judge Advocate General Naval Criminal Investigative Service Naval Inspector General Headquarters Marine Corps : Commandant of the Marine Corps Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps Chaplain U.S. Marine Corps field organizations: see Organization of the United States Marine Corps Office of the Chief of Naval Operations : Chief of Naval Operations Vice Chief of Naval Operations Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy Director of Naval Reactors Chief of Chaplains Chief of Naval Personnel Surgeon General United States Navy field organizations: see Structure of the United States Navy Department of the Air Force Secretary of the Air Force The Secretariat : Under Secretary of the Air Force Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition, Technology and Logistics) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial Management & Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Installations, Environment & Energy) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Manpower & Reserve Affairs) General Counsel of the Department of the Air Force Air Force Office of Special Investigations The Air Staff : Chief of Staff of the Air Force Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force Chief of Chaplains Chief of Safety Chief Scientist Judge Advocate General Surgeon General U.S. Air Force field organizations: Major Commands Direct Reporting Units Field Operating Agencies Space Staff : Chief of Space Operations United States Space Force field organizations Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman Joint Requirements Oversight Council Director of the Joint Staff Joint Staff National Military Command Center Alternate National Military Command Center National Defense University Joint Personnel Recovery Agency Combatant Commands Africa Command Central Command European Command Northern Command Indo-Pacific Command Southern Command Space Command Cyber Command Special Operations Command Strategic Command Transportation Command National Guard Bureau Chief of the National Guard Bureau Air National Guard Army National Guard Office of the Inspector General Defense Criminal Investigative Service Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Defense_Technical_Information_Center&oldid=1298648007 " Categories : Defense Technical Information Center United States Department of Defense agencies Archives in the United States Government databases in the United States United States Department of Defense information technology Government agencies established in 1945 1945 establishments in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from July 2017 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from July 2017 This page was last edited on 3 July 2025, at 20:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Defense Technical Information Center 4 languages Add topic

