Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of bias in a political context 2 Political neutrality 3 Political bias and framing 4 Evidence of political bias in search engines 5 Political bias in the media 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Political bias 6 languages العربية Español 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bias towards a political side in supposedly-objective information This article discusses bias in a political context. For bias in other contexts, see Bias .

The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Portuguese .

(August 2025) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the Portuguese article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 547 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Portuguese Wikipedia article at [[:pt:Viés político]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|pt|Viés político}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Political bias refers to the bias or manipulation of information to favor a particular political position, party, or candidate. Closely associated with a media bias , it often describes how journalists, television programs, or news organizations party political figures or policy issues.

Bias emerges in a political context when individuals engage in an inability or an unwillingness to understand a politically opposing point of view. Such bias in individuals may have its roots in their personality traits and thinking styles; it is unclear whether individuals at particular positions along the political spectrum are more biased than any other individuals.

[ 1 ] Political bias exists beyond simple presentation and understanding of view-points favouring a particular political leader or party, but transcends into the readings and interactions undertaken daily among individuals.

[ 2 ] The prevalence of political bias has a lasting impact with proven effects on voter behaviour and consequent political outcomes.

[ 2 ] With an understanding of political bias comes the acknowledgment of its violation of expected political neutrality, and with that the creation of political bias.

[ 3 ] [ 3 ] Types of bias in a political context [ edit ] Concision bias: Refers to perspective reporting using only the words necessary to explain a view quickly and spends little or no time to detail unconventional , difficult-to-explain views.

[ 4 ] Concision bias aims to increase communication by selectively focusing on important information and eliminating redundancy.

[ 4 ] In a political context, this can mean the omission of seemingly unnecessary details can constitute bias, depending on what information is deemed unnecessary.

[ 5 ] Political opinions are often reduced to a simple party understanding or belief system, with other challenging information excluded in its presentation.

[ 4 ] Coverage bias: When political parties address topics and issues to different extents.

[ 5 ] This makes certain issues seem more prevalent and presents ideas as more important or necessary.

[ 5 ] In a political atmosphere, this applies to the presentation of policies and the issues they address, along with the actual coverage by media and politicians.

[ 5 ] Issue salience is another term for this phenomenon, in which the frequency and focus given to specific topics affect how important the public believes them to be. For instance, even though statistics indicate otherwise, the public may view immigration or crime as more urgent if a party continuously emphasizes these topics.

[ 6 ] By setting the political agenda, this strategic focus can influence undecided voters in addition to mobilizing committed voters. By prioritizing coverage of issues brought to light by powerful political figures, media outlets frequently promote these narratives, producing a feedback loop that highlights certain topics while excluding others.

[ 7 ] Because partisan priorities are given priority over thorough discussion, political discourse becomes distorted and can influence democratic decision-making.

Confirmation bias : A cognitive bias favours and seeks information that affirms pre-existing beliefs and opinions.

[ 8 ] When set in a political atmosphere, individuals with like-minded political beliefs will seek and affirm their opinions, discounting contradictory information.

[ 9 ] A recent meta-analysis attempted to compare levels of confirmation bias among liberals and conservatives in the United States and found that both groups were roughly equally biased.

[ 10 ] The idea that one side of the political spectrum is more biased is called into question by this research. It implies that cognitive biases are not exclusive to any one ideology but rather are a universal feature of human reasoning. The implications are important because they show how hard it is to overcome ideological differences and how crucial it is to promote critical thinking and an open mind to other points of view in political conversation. The study also emphasizes how motivated thinking influences political attitudes. People actively evaluate and interpret information to support their preexisting opinions rather than simply taking it in.

[ 11 ] As people get more set in their ways and less open to hearing different points of view, this dynamic adds to the polarization seen in modern politics.

False consensus bias : Exists when the normalisation of an individual's opinions, beliefs and values are believed to be common.

[ 12 ] This bias exists in a group setting where the collective group opinion is attributed to the wider population, with little to no inter group challenges.

[ 4 ] This is the basis of political party formation and engages in the ongoing attempt to normalise these views within the wider population with little recognition of different beliefs outside the party.

[ 5 ] According to research, such biases can cause political polarization as people and groups solidify their opinions and start to see opposing views as less valid. Social media platforms can produce echo chambers where users are largely exposed to content supporting their preexisting views, contributing to this polarization and increasing the false consensus effect.

[ 13 ] According to studies, people who are exposed to social media news feeds that are favorably biased tend to believe that there is more public support for their views than there actually is, which strengthens their beliefs and may even push them toward more extreme stances.

[ 14 ] In addition, the false consensus bias may influence political elites' assessments of public opinion, which can affect democratic processes. According to a study, political elites' judgments were shown to be 20 to 25 percentage points off.

[ 15 ] This suggests that these misperceptions can result in policies that do not fully reflect the electorate's genuine preferences, compromising democratic accountability and responsiveness.

Speculative content : When stories focus on what can potentially occur with speculative phrasing such as "may", "what if", and "could" rather than focusing on the evidence of what has and/or definitely will occur.

[ 8 ] When a piece is not specifically labelled as an opinion and analysis article, it can lead to further speculative bias.

[ 5 ] This occurs in a political context, particularly introducing policies, or addressing opposing policies.

[ 16 ] This bias allows parties to make their policies more appealing and appear to address issues more directly, by speculating positive and negative outcomes.

[ 16 ] Without enough information, such speculation frequently presents stories in ways that provoke emotions or exaggerate the perceived importance or effectiveness of a proposed policy. This gradually decreases public confidence in journalism, particularly when predicted outcomes fail to pass. Additionally, by emphasizing speculative scenarios over confirmed facts, speculative content might unintentionally be used as a platform for political propaganda or manipulation, influencing public opinion. When algorithms on social media and news collection sites highlight speculative information because it is emotionally charged or dramatic and tends to generate higher engagement, this problem gets more complicated.

[ 17 ] Such stories, particularly when read by audiences who might not be able to distinguish between reporting and opinion, confuse journalism with speculation in the lack of clear labeling and open sourcing.

[ 18 ] Gatekeeping bias: This type of bias exists through the use of ideological selection, deselection and/or omission of stories based on individualised opinions.

[ 16 ] This is similarly related to agenda bias, primarily when focusing on politicians and how they choose to cover and present preferred policy discussions and issues.

[ 5 ] Partisan bias: Exists in the media when reporters serve and create the leaning of a particular political party.

[ 19 ] When journalists intentionally or unintentionally show material in a way that prioritizes one political ideology or party over another, they are engaging in bias and affecting the public's perception of political events and individuals. Story selection, framing, tone, and the frequency of criticism or support of specific parties or people are all examples of partisan bias. Fox News, for example, has a history of favoring Republican opinions while disparaging Democratic leaders, especially during election seasons.

[ citation needed ] Furthermore, significant partisan bias in reporting was discovered by empirical research that examined over 800,000 news stories from major U.S. broadcasters. Other networks, such as ABC, CBS, and NBC, were shown to have a slight liberal bias, however, their slant varied according to the political administration in power, whereas Fox News showed a strong conservative bias.

[ 20 ] According to a Gallup study, 62% of Americans think the media favors one political party, with Republicans majority stating that the media favors Democrats. This divide is reflected in the public's opinion.

[ 21 ] Political neutrality [ edit ] Political neutrality is the counteraction to political bias, looking to ensure the ability of public servants to carry out any official duties impartially, relative to their political beliefs.

[ 22 ] In areas like media coverage, legal and bureaucratic decisions and academic teachings, the need for taking corrective action against politically biased actions is the foundation of neutral enforcement.

[ 3 ] Research suggests that nonpartisanship is favoured over political bias, with Republicans , Independents , and Democrats preferring to get their news from politically neutral media.

[ 3 ] Individuals' responses to political bias and motivations are challenged when the engagement of bias furthers and assists their political party or ideology.

[ 3 ] Calling out attempts to stay neutral, can lead to stronger reactions, since people often see neutrality as the right way to handle political topics and issues. In the media aspect, trying to stay fair may not always easy and can still lead to claims of bias if something seems one sided. This is a result of different political groups competing, and the way messages are shared can either challenge other beliefs or make one side's views stronger.

[ 3 ] [ 23 ] Political bias and framing [ edit ] Political bias exists primarily through the concept of framing.

[ 5 ] Framing is the social construction of political or social issues in ways that emphasize certain aspects over others, often creating a positive or negative representation of events, individuals, or policies.

[ 24 ] In this context , political leaders and parties use framing to highlight specific problems while offering solutions that align with and promote political agendas. This makes their stance appear more favorable and their policies seem as the logical or  necessary course of action.

[ 25 ] The framing effect looks at situations in which people are only presented with options within two frames, one presented negatively and the other positively.

[ 26 ] The framing effect is increasingly significant in opinion polls designed to encourage specific organisations that are commissioned to poll.

[ 24 ] [ clarification needed ] If reliable, credible and sufficient information is provided, this bias can be significantly reduced.

[ 26 ] Framing further looks at the impact of slanting in political campaigning and its potential impact on the distribution of political power where political bias is present.

[ 27 ] It is important to understand framing is an omnipresent process used in analysis to discern connections between aspects of reality and to convey an interpretation of opinions that may not be entirely accurate.

[ 24 ] Evidence of political bias in search engines [ edit ] Search results from search engines like Google often shape opinions and perceptions of political issues and candidates.

[ 28 ] Google does not design algorithms to provide a balanced or equal representation of controversial issues.

[ 28 ] Search engines influence democracy because of the potential distrust of media, leading to increasing online searches for political information and understanding.

[ 28 ] Looking specifically at America, the Fairness Doctrine was introduced in 1949 to avoid political bias in all licensed broadcasting media.

[ 29 ] Within the context of polarising topics such as political bias, the top search results can play a significant role in shaping opinions.

[ 30 ] Through the use of a bias quantification framework, [ 31 ] bias can be measured within political bias by rank within the search system. It can further address the sources of bias through the input data and ranking system.

[ 32 ] Within the context of information queries, a ranking system determines the search results, which in the case of topics such as politics, can return politically biased search results.

[ 32 ] The bias presented in search results can directly result from either biased data that collaborates with the ranking system or because of the structure of the ranking system itself.

[ 32 ] This questionable nature of search results raises questions of the impact on users and to what degree the ranking system can impact political opinions and beliefs, which can directly translate into voter behaviour.

[ 32 ] This can also affirm or encourage biased data within Google search results.

[ 32 ] Whilst research has shown users do not place exclusive trust on information provided by search engines, [ 32 ] studies have shown that individuals who are undecided politically are susceptible to manipulation by bias relative to political candidates and the light in which their policies and actions are presented and conveyed.

[ 32 ] In the quantification of political bias, both the input data for search results and the ranking system in which they are presented to the user encapsulates bias to varying degrees.

[ 32 ] There is distinctive political bias in social media where the algorithm that structures user content facilitates confirmation bias .

[ 32 ] This involves presenting political information dependent on common searches and users' focus, further re-affirming political bias and reducing exposure to politically neutral content.

[ 32 ] Determining the difference between content and source bias is a significant focus of determining the role of political bias in search engines.

[ 32 ] This focus looks directly at the actual content of the information present and whether it is purposefully selective in the information presented, or rather whether the source of information is projecting personalised opinions relative to their political opinions.

[ 32 ] Political bias in the media [ edit ] Media bias highlights political bias in the reporting of political topics and the representation of politicians.

[ 29 ] Where a reporter sometimes emphasises particular points of view and conveys selected information to further their own political view, they may present biased information favouring their own political opinion [ 33 ] or that of their readership.

[ 34 ] There are distinctive regulations which protect against the fabrication of information.

[ 30 ] The media, may alter the representation of information to promote political positions.

[ 33 ] Media bias can change political opinions, which directly impact voter behaviour and decisions, because of the failed representation of information.

[ 30 ] This form of political bias has continuing impacts when used to change the opinions of others.

[ 30 ] Where media remains a powerful information source for political information, it can create political bias in the informational representation of political actors [ 34 ] and policy issues.

[ 30 ] Use of media to further political bias An example of quantification of political bias in the media is a propaganda model , a concept introduced by Edward S. Herman and Noam Chomsky . It is a political economy model, looking at the "manufacturing" of political policies through the manipulation of mass media.

[ 35 ] This model further looked at the capital funding of media outlets and their ownership, which often relates to political ties.

[ 35 ] Political bias in the media is also discussed, showing how social leaders discuss political issues.

[ 33 ] To determine the existence of political bias, agenda determination is used.

[ 30 ] Agenda determination is designed to provide an understanding of the agenda behind the presentation of political issues and attempt to determine political bias that is present.

[ 30 ] Within a 2002 study by Jim A. Kuypers : Press Bias and Politics: How the Media Frame Controversial Issues , [ 36 ] he looks at the omission of left leaning points of view from the mainstream print press.

[ 36 ] Kuypers determined politicians would receive positive press coverage only when covering and delivering topics that aligned with press-supported beliefs.

[ 36 ] This meant the press was engaging in bias within the media through their coverage and selection/release of political information, which was challenging the neutral conveyance of political messages.

[ 36 ] David Baron similarly presents a game-theoretic model of media behaviour, [ 37 ] suggesting that mass media outlets only hire journalists whose writing is aligned with their political positions.

[ 37 ] This engages false consensus bias, as beliefs are determined to be common due to being surrounded by aligned views. This effectively heightens political bias within media representation of information, and creates false narratives about the nations' political climate.

[ 37 ] See also [ edit ] Fake news False equivalence Framing (social sciences) Freedom of speech by country Mainstream media Manufacturing Consent § Five filters of editorial bias Mass media impact on spatial perception Media in Alberta § Political bias Pink-slime journalism Political censorship Political correctness Schismogenesis Self-censorship References [ edit ] ^ Vyse, Stuart (2019).

"Who Are More Biased: Liberals or Conservatives?" .

Skeptical Inquirer . Vol. 43, no. 4. pp.

24– 27 . Retrieved 22 October 2019 .

^ a b Gentzknow, Matthew; Shapiro, Jesse; Stone, Daniel (2014). "Media Bias in the Marketplace: Theory".

NBER Paper .

^ a b c d e f Yair, Omer; Sulitzeanu-Kenan, Raanan (2018).

"When do we care about political neutrality? The hypocritical nature of reaction to political bias" .

PLOS ONE .

13 (5): e0196674.

Bibcode : 2018PLoSO..1396674Y .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0196674 .

PMC 5933769 .

PMID 29723271 .

^ a b c d "Media Bias" .

Boundless Political Science .

^ a b c d e f g h Saez-Trumper, Diego. "Gatekeeping, Coverage and Statement bias".

Social Media News Communities .

^ McCombs, Maxwell E.; Shaw, Donald L. (1972).

"The Agenda-Setting Function of Mass Media" .

Public Opinion Quarterly .

36 (2): 176.

doi : 10.1086/267990 . Archived from the original on 13 January 2025 . Retrieved 13 May 2025 .

^ Entman, Robert M. (2007).

"Framing Bias: Media in the Distribution of Power" .

Journal of Communication .

57 : 163– 173.

doi : 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2006.00336.x . Archived from the original on 26 April 2019 . Retrieved 13 May 2025 .

^ a b Plous, Scott (1993). "Confirmation Bias".

The Psychology of Judgement and Decision Making : 233.

^ Shermer, Michael (2006). "The Political Brain".

Scientific American .

295 (1): 36.

Bibcode : 2006SciAm.295a..36S .

doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican0706-36 .

PMID 16830675 .

^ Ditto, Peter H.; Liu, Brittany S.; Clark, Cory J.; Wojcik, Sean P.; Chen, Eric E.; Grady, Rebecca H.; Celniker, Jared B.; Zinger, Joanne F. (2018).

"At Least Bias Is Bipartisan: A Meta-Analytic Comparison of Partisan Bias in Liberals and Conservatives" (PDF) .

Perspectives on Psychological Science .

14 (2): 273– 291.

doi : 10.1177/1745691617746796 .

PMID 29851554 .

S2CID 46921775 .

^ Pennycook, Gordon; Rand, David G. (12 February 2019).

"Fighting misinformation on social media using crowdsourced judgments of news source quality" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

116 (7): 2521– 2526.

Bibcode : 2019PNAS..116.2521P .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1806781116 .

ISSN 1091-6490 .

PMC 6377495 .

PMID 30692252 .

^ "False Consensus and False Uniqueness" .

Psychology Campus . Archived from the original on 17 November 2007 . Retrieved 15 May 2019 .

^ Kolbert, Elizabeth (27 December 2021).

"How Politics Got So Polarized" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved 18 May 2025 .

^ Luzsa, Robert; Mayr, Susanne (16 February 2021).

"False consensus in the echo chamber: Exposure to favorably biased social media news feeds leads to increased perception of public support for own opinions" .

Cyberpsychology: Journal of Psychosocial Research on Cyberspace .

15 (1).

doi : 10.5817/CP2021-1-3 .

ISSN 1802-7962 .

^ "How False Consensus Effects Can Impact Democracy | Psychology Today" .

www.psychologytoday.com . Retrieved 18 May 2025 .

^ a b c Hofstetter, C. Richard; Buss, Terry F. (1978). "Bias in television news coverage of political events: A methodological analysis".

Journal of Broadcasting .

22 (4): 517– 530.

doi : 10.1080/08838157809363907 .

^ Tandoc, Edson C.; Lim, Zheng Wei; Ling, Richard (7 February 2018).

"Defining "Fake News" " .

Digital Journalism .

6 (2): 137– 153.

doi : 10.1080/21670811.2017.1360143 .

ISSN 2167-0811 .

^ Wardle, Claire; Derakhshan, Hossein (2017).

INFORMATION DISORDER: Toward an interdisciplinary framework for research and policy making . The Council of Europe.

^ Soroka, Stuart (2016). "Gatekeeping and Negativity Bias".

Political Communication .

^ Bernhardt, Lea; Dewenter, Ralf; Thomas, Tobias (1 June 2023).

"Measuring partisan media bias in US newscasts from 2001 to 2012" .

European Journal of Political Economy .

78 : 102360.

doi : 10.1016/j.ejpoleco.2023.102360 .

ISSN 0176-2680 .

^ "Six in 10 in U.S. See Partisan Bias in News Media" .

Gallup.com . 5 April 2017 . Retrieved 18 May 2025 .

^ Kernaghan, Kenneth (1986). "Political Rights and Political Neutrality: finding the bland point".

Canadian Public Administration .

29 (4): 639– 652.

doi : 10.1111/j.1754-7121.1986.tb00205.x .

^ Yair, Omar; Sulitzeanu-Kenan, Raanan (2018).

"When do we care about political neutrality? The hypocritical nature of reaction to political bias" .

PLOS One .

13 (5): e0196674.

Bibcode : 2018PLoSO..1396674Y .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0196674 .

PMC 5933769 .

PMID 29723271 .

^ a b c Sheufele, Dietram (1999). "Framing as a Theory of Media Effects".

Journal of Communication .

49 .

^ Entman, Robert (2010). "Media framing biases and political power: Explaining slant in news of Campaign 2008".

Journalism: Theory, Practice & Criticism .

11 (4): 389– 408.

doi : 10.1177/1464884910367587 .

S2CID 145491355 .

^ a b Druckman, James (2001). "On the Limits of Framing Effects: Who can Frame?".

Political Science .

^ Entman, Robert (2008). "Media framing biases and political power: Explaining slant in news of Campaign 2008".

Journalism: Theory, Practice & Criticism .

11 (4): 389– 408.

doi : 10.1177/1464884910367587 .

S2CID 145491355 .

^ a b c Bentley, Matt (2017).

"Study: Does Google have a Political Bias?" .

^ a b Patterson, Thomas (2013). "The News Media: Communicating Political Images".

We the People .

10 .

^ a b c d e f g Bernhardt, Dan (2007). "Political Polarization and the Electoral Effects of Media Bias".

Journal of Public Economics .

92 ( 5– 6): 1092– 1104.

doi : 10.1016/j.jpubeco.2008.01.006 .

hdl : 10419/25843 .

S2CID 7821669 .

^ Kulshrestha, Juhi (2019).

"Search bias quantification: investigating political bias in social media and web search" .

Information Retrieval Journal .

22 ( 1– 2): 188– 227.

doi : 10.1007/s10791-018-9341-2 .

hdl : 21.11116/0000-0005-F9A1-C .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Kulshrestha, Juhi (2018).

"Search bias quantification: investigating political bias in social media and web search" .

Information Retrieval Journal .

22 ( 1– 2): 188– 227.

doi : 10.1007/s10791-018-9341-2 .

hdl : 21.11116/0000-0005-F9A1-C .

^ a b c Stromberg, David (2002). "Mass Media Competition, Political Competition, and Public Policy".

Institute for International Economic Studies .

^ a b Haselmayer, Martin; Wagner, Markus; Meyer, Thomas M. (3 July 2017).

"Partisan Bias in Message Selection: Media Gatekeeping of Party Press Releases" .

Political Communication .

34 (3): 367– 384.

doi : 10.1080/10584609.2016.1265619 .

ISSN 1058-4609 .

PMC 5679709 .

PMID 29170614 .

^ a b Robinson, Piers (25 October 2018). "Does the Propaganda Model Actually Theorise Propaganda?".

The Propaganda Model Today: Filtering Perception and Awareness .

University of Westminster Press . pp.

53– 67.

doi : 10.16997/book27.e .

ISBN 9781912656165 .

^ a b c d Kuypers, Jim (2002).

Press Bias and Politics: How the Media Frame Controversial Issues .

Praeger Publishing .

ISBN 978-0275977597 .

^ a b c Baron, David (9 April 2013).

Game Theory: An Introduction (2nd ed.). Wiley.

ISBN 978-1-118-53389-5 .

Further reading [ edit ] Game Theory: An Introduction , Baron, David The New Media's Role in Politics , Owen, Diana External links [ edit ] Kulshrestha, Juhi; Eslami, Motahhare; Messias, Johnnatan; Zafar, Muhammad Bilal; Ghosh, Saptarshi; Gummadi, Krishna P.; Karahalios, Karrie (2019). "Search bias quantification: Investigating political bias in social media and web search".

Information Retrieval Journal .

22 ( 1– 2): 188– 227.

doi : 10.1007/s10791-018-9341-2 .

hdl : 21.11116/0000-0005-F9A1-C .

Yair, Omer; Sulitzeanu-Kenan, Raanan (2018).

"When do we care about political neutrality? The hypocritical nature of reaction to political bias" .

PLOS ONE .

13 (5): e0196674.

Bibcode : 2018PLoSO..1396674Y .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0196674 .

PMC 5933769 .

PMID 29723271 .

v t e Biases Cognitive biases Acquiescence Ambiguity Affinity Anchoring Attentional Attribution Actor–observer Fundamental Group Ultimate Authority Automation Double standard Availability Mean world Belief Blind spot Choice-supportive Commitment Confirmation Selective perception Compassion fade Congruence Cultural Declinism Distinction Dunning–Kruger Egocentric Curse of knowledge Emotional Extrinsic incentives Fading affect Framing Frequency Frog pond effect Halo effect Hindsight Horn effect Hostile attribution Impact Implicit In-group Intentionality Illusion of transparency Mean world syndrome Mere-exposure effect Narrative Negativity Normalcy Omission Optimism Out-group homogeneity Outcome Overton window Precision Present Pro-innovation Proximity Response Restraint Self-serving Social comparison Social influence bias Spotlight Status quo Substitution Time-saving Trait ascription Turkey illusion von Restorff effect Zero-risk In animals Statistical biases Estimator Forecast Healthy user Information Psychological Lead time Length time Non-response Observer Omitted-variable Participation Recall Sampling Selection Self-selection Social desirability Spectrum Survivorship Systematic error Systemic Verification Wet Other biases Academic Basking in reflected glory Déformation professionnelle Funding FUTON Inductive Infrastructure Inherent In education Liking gap Media False balance Vietnam War South Asia United States Arab–Israeli conflict Ukraine Net Political bias Publication System justification Reporting White hat Ideological bias on Wikipedia Bias reduction Cognitive bias mitigation Debiasing Heuristics in judgment and decision-making Lists: General Memory v t e Censorship Media regulation Books books banned Films banned films Internet circumvention Music Postal Press Radio Speech and expression Student media Televisions banned televisions Thought Video games banned video games Methods Bleeping Book burning Broadcast delay By copyright Cancel culture Censor bars Chilling effect Collateral censorship Concision Conspiracy of silence Content-control software Damnatio memoriae De-banking Deplatforming Euphemism Minced oath Expurgation Fogging Gag order Gatekeeping Hallin's spheres Heckling Heckler's veto Hush money Internet police Malinformation Media blackout Memory hole National intranet News embargo Newspaper theft Non-disclosure agreement Opinion corridor Overton window Pixelization Political correctness Prior restraint Propaganda Purge Redaction Revisionism Sanitization Self-censorship Shadow banning Social rejection Speech code Spiral of silence Strategic lawsuit Super-injunction Surveillance computer and network mass Taboo Whitewashing Word filtering Contexts AI Algorithmic Chinese censorship abroad Criminal Corporate Apple Facebook Google Hate speech Online Ideological Academic LGBT issues Media bias Moral police Moralistic fallacy Naturalistic fallacy Political censorship Banned parties Political prisoner Propaganda model Religious Blasphemy law Islamic Police Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Wikipedia By location Censorship by country Blasphemy law Freedom of speech Internet censorship In the Middle East In South Asia v t e Conflict of interest Issues Chinese wall Conflict of interest in the healthcare industry Conflicts of interest on Wikipedia Dual loyalty Funding bias Insider trading Judicial disqualification Nepotism Pork barrel Regulatory capture Self-dealing Self-regulation State capture Shill Related AllTrials Arm's length principle Bias Business ethics Cochrane Corruption Cui bono Follow the money Legal ethics Lobbying Canada Germany United Kingdom United States Medical ethics cases Medical ghostwriter Moral hazard Pharmaceutical marketing Pharmaceutical sales representative Pharmacovigilance Political ethics Political bias Revolving door Sponsorship of continuing medical education Law Nemo iudex in causa sua R v Bow Street Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrate, ex parte Pinochet (No 2) R v Neil R v Sussex Justices, ex parte McCarthy Media Bad Pharma Big Pharma Inside Job Side Effects Who Killed the Electric Car?

Taken for a Ride Conflict of interest (category) Conflicts of interest on Wikipedia (category) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Political_bias&oldid=1303857293 " Categories : Bias Communication of falsehoods Barriers to critical thinking Prejudices Politics Media bias Cognitive biases Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from March 2021 United States-centric Articles needing translation from Portuguese Wikipedia Use British English from February 2021 Use dmy dates from January 2021 Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2021 This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 13:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Political bias 6 languages Add topic

