Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 References 4 Literature Toggle the table of contents Descriptive poetics 1 language Dansk Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Analytic approach within literary studies Descriptive poetics is an analytic approach within literary studies . While the concept of poetics goes back to Aristotle , the term "descriptive poetics" refers to an approach which, according to Brian McHale , represents a middle ground between theoretically oriented approaches and analyses of individual works of literature. David Gorman writes that "If criticism is the study of literary works, poetics is the study of the features of those works, that is, the properties they can share: [...] its topic is any shared or shareable feature of literary works." [ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] To McHale, the purpose of descriptive poetics is to give exhaustive accounts of different kinds of objects which can be a group of texts, the entire production of a single author, a particular genre , the style of a period in literary history or even specific styles of literature. McHale argues that the approach is not defined by what it examines but by the level of generalization achieved in this form of literary studies.

[ 2 ] The approach was given a formalized forum in the journal PTL: A Journal of Descriptive Poetics and Theory of Literature which only had a short run before it was succeeded by the more successful journal Poetics Today .

[ 3 ] According to literary scholar Uni Margolin, descriptive poetics was a rather prominent form of scholarship in the first half of the 20th century, especially in Germany, but has since "been neglected since 1968 because of its low level of theoretisation".

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Poetics Historical poetics References [ edit ] ^ Gorman, David (2011) "The Future of Literary Study: An Experiment in Guesswork." Modern Language Quarterly 72:1, p. 5.

^ McHale, Brian (1994) "Whatever Happened to Descriptive Poetics?", The Point of Theory: Practices of Cultural Analysis (red.

Mieke Bal & Inge E. Boer). Amsterdam:  Amsterdam University Press, p. 59 ^ Mintz, Alan (1984) "On the Tel Aviv School of Poetics" i Prooftexts , Vol. 4, No. 3 ^ Margolin, Uni (2007) " Response " i Journal of Literary Theory , Vol 1, No 1 Literature [ edit ] Harshav, Benjamin (2007) Explorations in Poetics . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press .

Olsen, Stein Haugom (1976) "What is Poetics?", The Philosophical Quarterly 26:105, pp. 338–351.

v t e Literary criticism Literary theory Archetypal criticism Biographical criticism Chicago school Cultural materialism Darwinian criticism Deconstruction Descriptive poetics Ecocriticism Feminist criticism Formalism Geneva school Geocriticism Marxist criticism New Criticism New historicism Postcolonial criticism Postcritique Psychoanalytic criticism Reader-response criticism Russian formalism Semiotic criticism Sociological criticism Source criticism Thing theory Theorists and critics Plato Aristotle Horace Longinus Plotinus St. Augustine Boethius Aquinas Dante Boccaccio de Pizan Valmiki Lu Ji Sidney Tasso Bacon Hobbes Corneille Dryden Boileau-Despréaux Locke Pope Addison Vico Burke (Edmund) Hume Johnson Young Lessing Reynolds Diderot Kant Wollstonecraft Blake Schiller Schlegel Wordsworth de Staël Schelling Coleridge von Humboldt Keats Schopenhauer Peacock Shelley von Goethe Hegel Leopardi De Sanctis Carlyle Mill Emerson Sainte-Beuve Lowell Poe Arnold Taine Baudelaire Marx Kierkegaard Nietzsche Pater Zola France Wilde Mallarmé Tolstoy Croce Gramsci Eco Freud de Saussure Lévi-Strauss Hulme Benjamin Shklovsky Eliot Jung Trotsky Woolf Richards Bakhtin Bataille Ransom Lacan Lukács Valéry Burke (Kenneth) Cassirer Brooks Mukařovský Sartre de Beauvoir Adorno Jakobson Frye Bachelard Gombrich Heidegger Chomsky Derrida Barthes Foucault Poulet Williams Trilling Kristeva de Man Bloom Achebe Said Deleuze Guattari Girard Cixous Iser White Gadamer Ricoeur Abrams Geertz Marinetti Tzara Breton Loy de Andrade Hu Paz This literary criticism -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Descriptive_poetics&oldid=1229459683 " Categories : Literary criticism Literary theory Literary criticism stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2022 All stub articles This page was last edited on 16 June 2024, at 23:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Descriptive poetics 1 language Add topic

