Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Almucantar staff 2 Solar almucantar 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Almucantar 22 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Igbo Italiano Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Română Русиньскый Slovenčina Slovenščina Тоҷикӣ Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Circle on the celestial sphere parallel to the horizon The celestial sphere with the zenith and almucantar marked in red, the horizon in green, and the path of a star or the Sun in blue.

An almucantar (also spelled almucantarat or almacantara ) is a circle on the celestial sphere parallel to the horizon . Two stars that lie on the same almucantar have the same altitude .

The term was introduced into European astronomy by monastic astronomer Hermann Contractus of Reichenau , Latinized from the Arabic word al-muqanṭarah ("the almucantar, sundial", plural: al-muqanṭarāt ), derived from qanṭarah ("arch, bridge") [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Almucantar staff [ edit ] An almucantar staff is an instrument chiefly used to determine the time of sunrise and sunset , in order to find the amplitude and consequently the variations of the compass .  Usually made of pear tree or boxwood , with an arch of 15° to 30°, [ 3 ] it is an example of a backstaff .

This is a drawing of an almucantar staff. There are three vanes - the horizon vane (A), the shadow vane (B) and the sighting vane (C).

The sun casts that shadow of a vane (B in the adjacent image) on a horizon vane (A).  The horizon vane has a slit or hole to allow the observer to see the horizon in the distance.  The observer aligns the horizon and shadow so they show at the same point on the horizon vane and sets the sighting vane (C) to align his line of sight with the horizon.  The altitude of the sun is the angle between the shadow vane and the sighting vane (B-A-C).

Solar almucantar [ edit ] The almucantar plane that contains the Sun is used to characterize multiple scattering of aerosols . Measurements are carried out rapidly at several angles at both sides of the Sun using a spectroradiometer or a photometer . There are several models to obtain aerosol properties from the solar almucantar. The most relevant were developed by Oleg Dubovik and used in the NASA AERONET network, and by Teruyuki Nakajima (named SkyRad.pack).

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Circle of equal altitude References [ edit ] ^ "almucantar" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ "almucantar" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster.

^ May, William Edward , A History of Marine Navigation , G. T. Foulis & Co. Ltd., Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, 1973, ISBN 0-85429-143-1 ^ SkyRad.pack Archived 2015-03-12 at the Wayback Machine (in Japanese) Adelaide Observatory: Almucantar graphs of hour angles, Adelaide, R. E. E. Rogers, Govt. printer, 1927.

Chandler, Seth Carlo, (1846–1913): The almucantar, Cambridge, J. Wilson and Son, 1887.

Dubovik, O. and M. D. King, 2000: A flexible inversion algorithm for retrieval of aerosol optical properties from Sun and sky radiance measurements," Journal of Geophysical Research , 105, 20 673-20 696 pdf version Nakajima T, Tonna G, Rao RZ, et al.:Use of sky brightness measurements from ground for remote sensing of particulate polydispersions, Applied Optics 35 (15), 2672–2686, 1996 External links [ edit ] "Compendium on Using the Device Known as the Almucantar Quarter" is an Arabic manuscript from 1757 about the Almucantar Quarter Wikimedia Commons has media related to Almucantar .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chambers, Ephraim , ed. (1728).

Cyclopædia, or an Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences (1st ed.). James and John Knapton, et al.

{{ cite encyclopedia }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Almucantar&oldid=1302861385 " Categories : Astronomical coordinate systems Measuring instruments Astronomical instruments Navigational equipment Celestial navigation Historical scientific instruments Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata CS1 errors: missing title Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1728 Cyclopaedia Wikipedia articles incorporating text from Cyclopaedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1728 Cyclopaedia without an article title parameter This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 20:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Almucantar 22 languages Add topic

