Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Foundation of the Illuminati 3 Activities in exile 4 Assessment of character and intentions 5 Works Toggle Works subsection 5.1 Philosophical works 5.2 Works relating to the Illuminati 5.3 Works by Adam Weishaupt in English translation 6 Notes 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Adam Weishaupt 45 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Latviešu Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German philosopher and founder of the Bavarian Illuminati (1748–1830) Adam Weishaupt 1799 portrait of Weishaupt Born Johann Adam Weishaupt ( 1748-02-06 ) 6 February 1748 Ingolstadt , Bavaria , Holy Roman Empire Died 18 November 1830 (1830-11-18) (aged 82) Gotha , Saxe-Coburg-Gotha , German Confederation Known for Founder of the Illuminati Philosophical work Era Enlightenment era Region Western Philosophy School Empiricism Main interests Epistemology , Metaphysics , Ethics Johann Adam Weishaupt ( pronounced [ˈjoːhan ˈʔaːdam ˈvaɪshaʊpt] ; 6 February 1748 – 18 November 1830) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] was a German philosopher, professor of civil law and later canon law, and founder of the Bavarian Illuminati .

Early life [ edit ] Adam Weishaupt was born on 6 February 1748 in Ingolstadt [ 1 ] [ 5 ] in the Electorate of Bavaria . Weishaupt's father Johann Georg Weishaupt (1717–1753) died [ 5 ] when Adam was five years old. After his father's death he came under the tutelage of his godfather Johann Adam von Ickstatt [ 6 ] who, like his father, was a professor of law at the University of Ingolstadt .

[ 7 ] Ickstatt was a proponent of the philosophy of Christian Wolff and of the Enlightenment , [ 8 ] and he influenced the young Weishaupt with his rationalism . Weishaupt began his formal education at age seven [ 1 ] at a Jesuit school. He later enrolled at the University of Ingolstadt and graduated in 1768 [ 9 ] at age 20 with a doctorate of law .

[ 10 ] In 1772 [ 11 ] he became a professor of law after conversion to Protestantism.

[ 12 ] The following year he married Afra Sausenhofer [ 13 ] of Eichstätt .

After Pope Clement XIV 's suppression of the Society of Jesus in 1773, Weishaupt became a professor of canon law , [ 14 ] a position that was held exclusively by the Jesuits until that time. In 1775 Weishaupt was introduced [ 15 ] to the empirical philosophy of Johann Georg Heinrich Feder [ 16 ] of the University of Göttingen . Both Feder and Weishaupt would later become opponents of Kantian idealism .

[ 17 ] Foundation of the Illuminati [ edit ] At a time, however, when there was no end of making game of and abusing secret societies, I planned to make use of this human foible for a real and worthy goal, for the benefit of people. I wished to do what the heads of the ecclesiastical and secular authorities ought to have done by virtue of their offices ...

[ 18 ] On 1 May 1776 Johann Adam Weishaupt founded the "Illuminati" in the Electorate of Bavaria. Initially, the term Illumination referred to a select group of exceptional and enlightened individuals within society. The word derives from the Latin illuminatus , meaning 'enlightened'. He also adopted the name of "Brother Spartacus " within the order. Even encyclopedia references vary on the goal of the order, such as Catholic Encyclopedia (1910) saying the Order was not egalitarian or democratic internally, but sought to promote the doctrines of equality and freedom throughout society; [ 19 ] while others such as Collier's have said the aim was to combat religion and foster rationalism in its place.

[ 20 ] The Illuminati was formed with the vision of liberating humans from religious bondage and undermining corrupted governments.

[ 21 ] The actual character of the society was an elaborate network of spies and counter-spies. Each isolated cell of initiates reported to a superior, whom they did not know: a party structure that was effectively adopted by some later groups.

[ 19 ] Weishaupt was initiated into the Masonic lodge "Theodor zum guten Rath", at Munich in 1777. His project of "illumination, enlightening the understanding by the sun of reason, which will dispel the clouds of superstition and of prejudice" was an unwelcome reform.

[ 19 ] [ failed verification ] He used Freemasonry to recruit for his own quasi-masonic society, with the goal of "perfecting human nature" through re-education to achieve a communal state with nature, freed of government and organized religion. Presenting their own system as pure masonry, Weishaupt and Adolph Freiherr Knigge , who organized his ritual structure, greatly expanded the secret organization.

[ 19 ] Contrary to Immanuel Kant's famous dictum that Enlightenment (and Weishaupt's Order was in some respects an expression of the Enlightenment Movement) was the passage by a man out of his 'self-imposed immaturity' through daring to 'make use of his own reason, without the guidance of another,' Weishaupt's Order of Illuminati prescribed in great detail everything which the members had obediently to read and think so that Dr. Wolfgang Riedel has commented that this approach to illumination or enlightenment constituted a degradation and twisting of the Kantian principle of Enlightenment.

[ 22 ] Riedel writes: ' The independence of thought and judgment required by Kant ... was specifically prevented by the Order of the Illuminati's rules and regulations. Enlightenment takes place here, if it takes place at all, precisely under the direction of another, namely under that of the "Superiors" [of the Order].

[ 23 ] Weishaupt's radical rationalism and vocabulary were not likely to succeed. Writings that were intercepted in 1784 were interpreted as seditious, and the Society was banned by the government of Karl Theodor , Elector of Bavaria, in 1784. Weishaupt lost his position at the University of Ingolstadt and fled Bavaria.

[ 19 ] Activities in exile [ edit ] He received the assistance of Duke Ernest II of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg (1745–1804), and lived in Gotha writing a series of works on illuminism, including A Complete History of the Persecutions of the Illuminati in Bavaria (1785), A Picture of Illuminism (1786), An Apology for the Illuminati (1786), and An Improved System of Illuminism (1787). Adam Weishaupt died in Gotha on 18 November 1830.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] He was survived by his second wife, Anna Maria (née Sausenhofer), and his children Nanette, Charlotte, Ernst, Karl , Eduard, and Alfred.

[ 2 ] His body was buried next to that of his son Wilhelm, who preceded him in death (in 1802), at Friedhof II der Sophiengemeinde Berlin , a Protestant cemetery.

After Weishaupt's Order of Illuminati was banned and its members dispersed, it left behind no enduring traces of influence, not even on its own erstwhile members, who went on to develop in quite different directions.

[ 24 ] Assessment of character and intentions [ edit ] Death mask of Adam Weishaupt Weishaupt's character and intentions have been variously assessed. Some took a negative view, such as Augustin Barruel , who despite writing that Weishaupt's goals were that "Equality and Liberty, together with the most absolute independence, are to be the substitutes for all rights and all property" saw this as more dangerous than beneficial, [ 25 ] and John Robison , who regarded Weishaupt as a 'human devil' and saw his mission as one of malevolent destructiveness. Others took a more positive view, including Thomas Jefferson , who wrote in a letter to James Madison that "Barruel’s own parts of the book are perfectly the ravings of a Bedlamite [ 26 ] and considered Weishaupt to be an "enthusiastic Philanthropist" who believed in the indefinite perfectibility of man, and believed that the intention of Jesus Christ was simply to "reinstate natural religion, and by diffusing the light of his morality, to teach us to govern ourselves".

[ 27 ] In his defence, Weishaupt wrote a Kurze Rechtfertigung meiner Absichten (A Brief Justification of my Intentions) [ 28 ] in 1787. Author Tony Page comments: "Weishaupt’s plan was to educate Illuminati followers in the highest levels of humanity and morality (basing his teachings on the supremacy of Reason, allied with the spirit of the Golden Rule of not doing to others what one would not wish done to oneself), so that if Illuminati alumni subsequently attained positions of significance and power (such as in the fields of education and politics), they could exert a benevolent and uplifting influence upon society at large. His project was utopian and naively optimistic, and he himself was certainly not without flaws of character – but neither he nor his plan was evil or violent in and of themselves. It is one of the deplorable and tragic ironies of history that a man who tried to inculcate virtue, philanthropy, social justice and morality has become one of the great hate-figures of 21st-century 'conspiracy' thinking." [ 29 ] Works [ edit ] Philosophical works [ edit ] (1775) De Lapsu Academiarum Commentatio Politica .

(1786) Über die Schrecken des Todes – eine philosophische Rede .

(in French) Discours Philosophique sur les Frayeurs de la Mort (1788).

Gallica (1786) Über Materialismus und Idealismus .

Torino (1788) Geschichte der Vervollkommnung des menschlichen Geschlechts .

(1788) Über die Gründe und Gewißheit der Menschlichen Erkenntniß .

(1788) Über die Kantischen Anschauungen und Erscheinungen .

(1788) Zweifel über die Kantischen Begriffe von Zeit und Raum .

(1793) Über Wahrheit und sittliche Vollkommenheit .

(1794) Über die Lehre von den Gründen und Ursachen aller Dinge .

(1794) Über die Selbsterkenntnis, ihre Hindernisse und Vorteile .

(1797) Über die Zwecke oder Finalursachen .

(1802) Über die Hindernisse der baierischen Industrie und Bevölkerung .

(1804) Die Leuchte des Diogenes .

(1817) Über die Staats-Ausgaben und Auflagen .

Google Books (1818) Über das Besteuerungs-System .

Works relating to the Illuminati [ edit ] (1786) Apologie der Illuminaten , ISBN 978-3-7448-1853-7 .

(1786) Vollständige Geschichte der Verfolgung der Illuminaten in Bayern .

(1786) Schilderung der Illuminaten .

(1787) Einleitung zu meiner Apologie .

(1787) Einige Originalschriften des Illuminatenordens ...

(1787) Nachtrage von weitern Originalschriften ...

(1787) Kurze Rechtfertigung meiner Absichten .

(1787) Nachtrag zur Rechtfertigung meiner Absichten .

(1787) Apologie des Mißvergnügens und des Übels .

(1787) Das Verbesserte System der Illuminaten .

(1788) Der ächte Illuminat, oder die wahren, unverbesserten Rituale der Illuminaten .

(1795) Pythagoras, oder Betrachtungen über die geheime Welt- und Regierungs-Kunst .

Source [ 30 ] Works by Adam Weishaupt in English translation [ edit ] (2008) Diogenes' Lamp, or an Examination of Our Present Day Morality and Enlightenment , translated by Amelia Gill, The Masonic Book Club.

Internet Archive (2015) The Secret School of Wisdom: The Authentic Rituals and Doctrines of the Illuminati , translated by Jeva Singh-Anand, edited by Josef Wäges and Reinhard Markner, London: Lewis Masonic, 447 pp., ISBN 978-0853184935 (2014) A Brief Justification of My Intentions: Casting Light on the Latest Original Writings , translated by Dr. Tony Page, Justice Publications, Amazon Kindle.

(2014) Supplement to the Justification of My Intentions , translated by Dr. Tony Page, Justice Publications, Amazon Kindle.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie Vol. 41, p. 539 .

^ a b c Engel, Leopold (1906).

Geschichte des Illuminaten-ordens (in German). Berlin: H. Bermühler Verlag.

^ a b van Dülmen, Richard.

Der Geheimbund der Illuminaten . Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog, 1975.

^ a b Stauffer, Vernon.

[New England] and the Bavarian Illuminati .

Columbia University , 1918.

^ a b Engel 1906 , p.

22 .

^ Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie Vol. 13, pp. 740–741 .

^ Freninger, Franz Xaver, ed. (1872).

Das Matrikelbuch der Universitaet Ingolstadt-Landshut-München (in German). Munich: A. Eichleiter. p. 31.

^ Hartmann, Peter Claus.

Bayerns Weg in die Gegenwart . Regensburg: Pustet, 1989. 262. Also, Bauerreiss, Romuald.

Kirchengeschichte Bayerns . Vol. 7. St. Ottilien: EOS Verlag, 1970. 405.

^ Freninger 1872 , p. 47.

^ Engel 1906 , pp.

25–28 .

^ Freninger 1872 , p. 32.

^ Ben-Menahem, A. (2009).

Historical Encyclopedia of Natural and Mathematical Sciences . Springer. p. 2057.

ISBN 978-3-540-68831-0 . Retrieved 13 June 2023 .

^ Engel 1906 , p.

31 .

^ Engel 1906 , p.

33 . Also, Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie Vol. 41, p. 540 .

^ Engel 1906 , pp.

61–62 .

^ Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie Vol. 6, pp. 595–597 .

^ Beiser, Frederick C.

The Fate of Reason . Harvard University Press, 1987.

186–88 .

^ Schneider, Heinrich (2005) [1947].

Quest for Mysteries: The Masonic Background for Literature in 18th Century Germany . Kessinger Publishing. p. 24 n.49.

ISBN 1419182145 .

^ a b c d e Catholic Encyclopedia: Illuminati , ^ Couch, William (1956).

Collier's Encyclopedia, Volume 10 . Crowell-Collier Publishing Company. p. 370.

^ "illuminati | Facts, History, Suppression, & Conspiracy | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 14 December 2021 .

^ Dr. Wolfgang Riedel, 'Aufklaerung und Macht', in Die Weimarer Klassik und ihre Geheimbuende , ed. by W. Mueller-Seidel and W. Riedel, Koenigshausen und Neumann, 2002, p. 112 ^ Dr. Wolfgang Riedel, Die Weimarer Klassik und ihre Geheimbuende , 2001, p. 112 ^ Dr. Eberhard Weis in Die Weimarer Klassik und ihre Geheimbünde , edited by Professor Walter Müller-Seidel and Professor Wolfgang Riedel (Königshausen und Neumann, 2003), 100–101.

^ "Code of the Illuminati, Part III of: Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism - Abbé Barreul" .

www.sacred-texts.com .

^ "Define Bedlamite" .

en.wiktionary.org . 27 September 2024.

^ "From Thomas Jefferson to Bishop James Madison, 31 January 1800" .

^ Weishaupt, Adam (1787).

"Kurze Rechtfertigung meiner Absichten - Adam Weishaupt" .

^ Tony Page (translator and editor), Supplement to the Justification of My Intentions by Adam Weishaupt , Justice Publications, Bangkok, Amazon Kindle, 2014, p. 1 ^ Weishaupt, Adam (2018).

The Collected Works of Adam Weishaupt . Malta Minerval Editions.

ISBN 978-1-946829-20-7 .

Further reading [ edit ] Jacoby, Daniel (1896). " Weishaupt, Adam ".

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie (in German). Vol. 41. Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot. pp.

539– 550.

McKeown, Trevor W. (20 October 2023) [2005].

"A Bavarian Illuminati primer" . Vancouver: Grand Lodge of British Columbia and Yukon A.F. & A.M.

Gruber, Hermann (1910).

"Illuminati" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 7. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Adam Weishaupt at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote v t e Order of the Illuminati History Age of Enlightenment Liberalism ( Liberalism in Germany ) Rationalism Freemasonry ( Freemasonry in Germany ) Anti-clericalism Secularism French Revolution ( Jacobinism ) Congress of Wilhelmsbad Charles Theodore, Elector of Bavaria Members Full list of members A–F Jacob Friedrich von Abel Franz von Albini August von Sachsen-Gotha-Altenburg Jens Baggesen Karl Friedrich Bahrdt Aloys Basselet von La Rosée August Batsch Rudolph Zacharias Becker Johann Joachim Bellermann Johann Erich Biester Aloys Blumauer Johann von Böber Johann Joachim Christoph Bode Johann Michael Böck Ignaz von Born Karl Böttiger Joachim Heinrich Campe Christian Cannabich Karl August, Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach Philipp von Cobenzl Hieronymus von Colloredo Ignaz Cornova Karl Theodor Anton Maria von Dalberg Anton Dereser Johann Georg von Dillis Christian Wilhelm von Dohm Karl von Eckartshausen Rudolf Eickemeyer Ernest II, Duke of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg Johann Georg Heinrich Feder Ferdinand, Prince of Brunswick-Lüneburg Junius Frey Frederick Christian II, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg Frederick V, Landgrave of Hesse-Homburg Friedrich Ferdinand Constantin von Sachsen-Weimar-Eisenach G–M Christian Garve Friedrich Gedike Otto Heinrich von Gemmingen-Hornberg Johann Wolfgang von Goethe Leopold Friedrich Günther von Goeckingk Johann Casimir Häffelin Karl August von Hardenberg Lorenz Leopold Haschka August Adolph von Hennings Johann Gottfried Herder Andreas Joseph Hofmann Christoph Wilhelm Hufeland Gottlieb Hufeland Isaak Iselin Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi Karl von Hesse-Kassel Wenzel Anton, Prince of Kaunitz-Rietberg Martin Gottlieb Klauer Johann Friedrich Kleuker Adolph Knigge Christian Gottfried Körner Karl Heinrich Lang Franz Michael Leuchsenring Justus Christian Loder Ludwig I, Grand Duke of Hesse Jakob Mauvillon Beda Mayr Christoph Meiners August Gottlieb Meißner Ludwig August Mellin Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau Daniel Gotthilf Moldenhawer Maximilian von Montgelas Johannes von Müller Friedrich Münter Johann Karl August Musäus N–Z Christian Gottlob Neefe Christoph Friedrich Nicolai Franz Oberthür Dietrich Heinrich Ludwig von Ompteda Christian Adolph Overbeck Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi Karl Leonhard Reinhold Franz Anton Ries Christian Gotthilf Salzmann Friedrich Schlichtegroll Johann Georg Schlosser Ernst Friedrich von Schlotheim Nikolaus Simrock Samuel Thomas von Sömmerring Joseph von Sonnenfels Ludwig Timotheus Spittler Anton Matthias Sprickmann Johan Philip Stadion von Warthausen Maximilian Stoll Gottfried van Swieten Johann Nepomuk von Triva François-Charles de Velbrück Franz Michael Vierthaler Wilderich of Walderdorf Adam Weishaupt Lorenz von Westenrieder Franz Xaver von Zach See also Owl of Minerva Rite of Strict Observance Josephinism Enlightened absolutism Weimar Classicism Sturm und Drang Anti-Catholicism New World Order (conspiracy theory) Augustin Barruel 's Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism John Robison Illuminati in popular culture Category Society portal v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adam_Weishaupt&oldid=1303154417 " Categories : 1748 births 1830 deaths People from Ingolstadt People from the Electorate of Bavaria Enlightenment philosophers 19th-century German philosophers 18th-century German philosophers University of Ingolstadt alumni Academic staff of the University of Ingolstadt German Freemasons 18th-century German male writers Empiricists Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2022 Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from December 2021 Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 10:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Adam Weishaupt 45 languages Add topic

