Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples of Antibiosis Toggle Examples of Antibiosis subsection 1.1 Antibiosis in biotech and medical treatment 1.2 Host plant resistance through antibiosis 1.3 Other examples 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Antibiosis 19 languages বাংলা Беларуская Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Igbo עברית Қазақша Magyar Polski Português Română Русский Татарча / tatarça Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Antibiosis" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Antibiosis , also referred to as antagonism , a process of biological interaction between two or more organisms that is detrimental to at least one of them; it can also be an antagonistic association between an organism and the metabolic substances produced by another.

[ 1 ] Antibiosis can occur through a variety of mechanisms, with "injury, death, reduced longevity, or reduced reproduction of the pest" [ 2 ] being common. The process of antibiosis is either reversible or irreversible, and is caused by the production of volatile organic compounds by plant-growth-promoting rhizobacterium (PGPR).

[ 3 ] Antibiosis is one of two forms of amensalism , the other form being competition . Primary examples of antibiosis include "antibacterial activity against bacteria, fungus, nematodes, insects, and occasionally against plants and algae".

[ 3 ] Examples of Antibiosis [ edit ] Antibiosis in biotech and medical treatment [ edit ] The study of antibiosis and its role in antibiotics has led to the expansion of knowledge in the field of microbiology. Molecular processes such cell wall synthesis and recycling, for example, have become better understood through the study of how antibiotics affect beta-lactam development through the antibiosis relationship and interaction of the particular drugs with the bacteria subjected to the compound.

[ 4 ] For example, the Penicillium fungi responds to bacterial infections by producing penicillin , which is toxic to bacteria and is commonly used in medical settings as an effective treatment for bacterial infections.

[ 5 ] Penicillin belongs to the beta-lactam antibiotic class.

Host plant resistance through antibiosis [ edit ] Antibiosis is typically studied in host plant populations and extends to the insects which feed upon them. Antibiosis can be seen in certain vegetables, as antibiosis mechanisms have been found in Brassica species to protect against cabbage whitefly.

[ 6 ] "Antibiosis resistance affects the biology of the insect so pest abundance and subsequent damage is reduced compared to that which would have occurred if the insect was on a susceptible crop variety. Antibiosis resistance often results in increased mortality or reduced longevity and reproduction of the insect." [ 7 ] During a study of antibiosis, it was determined that the key to achieving effective antibiosis relies on the organism being sessile. "When you give antibiotic-producing bacteria a structured medium, they affix to substrate, grow clonally, and produce a 'no man's land,' absent competitors, where the antibiotics diffuse outward." [ 8 ] Antibiosis is most effective when resources are neither plentiful nor sparse. Antibiosis should be considered as the median on the scale of resource, due to its ideal performance.

Other examples [ edit ] The black walnut, Juglans nigra , produces a secretion called juglone , which is toxic to a variety of flowers, herbaceous plants, and field crops. This toxic secretion creates an area surrounding the black walnut tree that is uninhabitable to most species.

In many environments, antibiosis can promote mutualisms and/or competition between species in an ecosystem.

Attine ants provide an example of a more complex antibiosis mechanism. Attine ants maintain cultivations of Leucocoprinus fungi as their primary source of consumption, however, a parasitic fungal genus, Escovopsis , feeds on Leucocoprinus and disrupts the food system of the ants. In response to this, attine ants encourage growth of the Pseudonocardia actinomycete, as it produces an antimicrobial compound that suppresses the parasitic Escovopsis . The attine ants, Leucocoprinus fungi and Pseudonocardia actinomycete all benefit in this interaction, however it is detrimental to the Escovopsis fungi.

See also [ edit ] Antibiotic Biological pest control Biotechnology Symbiosis Plant defense against herbivory Secondary metabolite Competition (biology) References [ edit ] ^ "antibiosis" .

The Free Dictionary .

^ "Host Plant Resistance | Wisconsin Vegetable Entomology" .

vegento.russell.wisc.edu . Retrieved 2024-05-03 .

^ a b Kumar, Devendra; T. s., Archana; Kumar, Vipul; Singh, Shivam; Sawant, Kartik; Hussain, Rafakat; Kumar, Gagan (2023-01-01), Parray, Javid A.; Shameem, Nowsheen; Egamberdieva, Dilfuza; Sayyed, R. Z. (eds.), "Chapter 4 - Role of rhizobacterial volatile compounds in increasing plant tolerance to biotic and abiotic stresses" , Rhizobiome , Microbiome Research in Plants and Soil, Academic Press, pp.

61– 79, doi : 10.1016/b978-0-443-16030-1.00002-x , ISBN 978-0-443-16030-1 , retrieved 2024-05-03 ^ Kong KF, Schneper L, Mathee K (January 2010).

"Beta-lactam antibiotics: from antibiosis to resistance and bacteriology" .

APMIS .

118 (1): 1– 36.

doi : 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2009.02563.x .

PMC 2894812 .

PMID 20041868 .

^ Yip, Derek W.; Gerriets, Valerie (2024), "Penicillin" , StatPearls , Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing, PMID 32119447 , retrieved 2024-05-03 ^ Hondelmann, Peter; Paul, Christina; Schreiner, Monika; Meyhöfer, Rainer (2020-01-17).

"Importance of Antixenosis and Antibiosis Resistance to the Cabbage Whitefly (Aleyrodes proletella) in Brussels Sprout Cultivars" .

Insects .

11 (1): 56.

doi : 10.3390/insects11010056 .

ISSN 2075-4450 .

PMC 7022423 .

PMID 31963455 .

^ Teetes GL.

"Plant Resistance to Insects: A Fundamental Component of IPM" .

Radcliffe's IPM World Textbook . University of Minnesota. Archived from the original on 2012-03-24 . Retrieved 2011-11-07 .

^ Kaspari M, Stevenson B (December 2008).

"Evolutionary ecology, antibiosis, and all that rot" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

105 (49): 19027– 8.

Bibcode : 2008PNAS..10519027K .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0810507105 .

PMC 2614706 .

PMID 19057009 .

Further reading [ edit ] Fravel DR (1988). "Role of Antibiosis in the Biocontrol of Plant Diseases".

Annual Review of Phytopathology .

26 (1): 75– 91.

Bibcode : 1988AnRvP..26...75F .

doi : 10.1146/annurev.py.26.090188.000451 .

External links [ edit ] Look up antibiosis in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Trophic components General Abiotic component Abiotic stress Behaviour Biogeochemical cycle Biomass Biotic component Biotic stress Carrying capacity Competition Ecosystem Ecosystem ecology Ecosystem model Green world hypothesis Keystone species List of feeding behaviours Metabolic theory of ecology Productivity Resource Restoration Producers Autotrophs Chemosynthesis Chemotrophs Foundation species Kinetotrophs Mixotrophs Myco-heterotrophy Mycotroph Organotrophs Photoheterotrophs Photosynthesis Photosynthetic efficiency Phototrophs Primary nutritional groups Primary production Consumers Apex predator Bacterivore Carnivores Chemoorganotroph Foraging Generalist and specialist species Intraguild predation Herbivores Heterotroph Heterotrophic nutrition Insectivore Mesopredators Mesopredator release hypothesis Omnivores Optimal foraging theory Planktivore Predation Prey switching Decomposers Chemoorganoheterotrophy Decomposition Detritivores Detritus Microorganisms Archaea Bacteriophage Lithoautotroph Lithotrophy Marine Microbial cooperation Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial intelligence Microbial loop Microbial mat Microbial metabolism Phage ecology Food webs Biomagnification Ecological efficiency Ecological pyramid Energy flow Food chain Trophic level Example webs Lakes Rivers Soil Tritrophic interactions in plant defense Marine food webs cold seeps hydrothermal vents intertidal kelp forests North Pacific Gyre San Francisco Estuary tide pool Processes Ascendency Bioaccumulation Cascade effect Climax community Competitive exclusion principle Consumer–resource interactions Copiotrophs Dominance Ecological network Ecological succession Energy quality Energy systems language f-ratio Feed conversion ratio Feeding frenzy Mesotrophic soil Nutrient cycle Oligotroph Paradox of the plankton Trophic cascade Trophic mutualism Trophic state index Defense, counter Animal coloration Anti-predator adaptations Camouflage Deimatic behaviour Herbivore adaptations to plant defense Mimicry Plant defense against herbivory Predator avoidance in schooling fish v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Other components Population ecology Abundance Allee effect Consumer-resource model Depensation Ecological yield Effective population size Intraspecific competition Logistic function Malthusian growth model Maximum sustainable yield Overpopulation Overexploitation Population cycle Population dynamics Population modeling Population size Predator–prey (Lotka–Volterra) equations Recruitment Small population size Stability Resilience Resistance Random generalized Lotka–Volterra model Species Biodiversity Density-dependent inhibition Ecological effects of biodiversity Ecological extinction Endemic species Flagship species Gradient analysis Indicator species Introduced species Invasive species / Native species Latitudinal gradients in species diversity Minimum viable population Neutral theory Occupancy–abundance relationship Population viability analysis Priority effect Rapoport's rule Relative abundance distribution Relative species abundance Species diversity Species homogeneity Species richness Species distribution Species–area curve Umbrella species Species interaction Antibiosis Biological interaction Commensalism Community ecology Ecological facilitation Interspecific competition Mutualism Parasitism Storage effect Symbiosis Spatial ecology Biogeography Cross-boundary subsidy Ecocline Ecotone Ecotype Disturbance Edge effects Foster's rule Habitat fragmentation Ideal free distribution Intermediate disturbance hypothesis Insular biogeography Land change modeling Landscape ecology Landscape epidemiology Landscape limnology Metapopulation Patch dynamics r / K selection theory Resource selection function Source–sink dynamics Niche Ecological trap Ecosystem engineer Environmental niche modelling Guild Habitat Marine Semiaquatic Terrestrial Limiting similarity Niche apportionment models Niche construction Niche differentiation Ontogenetic niche shift Other networks Assembly rules Bateman's principle Bioluminescence Ecological collapse Ecological debt Ecological deficit Ecological energetics Ecological indicator Ecological threshold Ecosystem diversity Emergence Extinction debt Kleiber's law Liebig's law of the minimum Marginal value theorem Thorson's rule Xerosere Other Allometry Alternative stable state Balance of nature Biological data visualization Ecological economics Ecological footprint Ecological forecasting Ecological humanities Ecological stoichiometry Ecopath Ecosystem based fisheries Endolith Evolutionary ecology Functional ecology Industrial ecology Macroecology Microecosystem Natural environment Regime shift Sexecology Systems ecology Urban ecology Theoretical ecology Outline of ecology Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX This ecology -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Antibiosis&oldid=1301314014 " Categories : Biological interactions Antibiotics Ecology stubs Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2010 All articles needing additional references All stub articles This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 05:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Antibiosis 19 languages Add topic

