Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Strategies Toggle Strategies subsection 2.1 Climate finance 3 Impact 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Environmental finance 5 languages العربية Español فارسی Igbo Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Field of finance focused on environmental policy Part of a series about Environmental economics Carbon price Carbon credit Carbon emission trading Carbon fee and dividend Carbon finance Carbon offset Carbon tax Emissions trading Environmental tax Personal carbon trading Pigovian tax Social cost of carbon Climate change Carbon footprint Climate change mitigation Food miles Concepts Bright green environmentalism Circular economy Climate finance Corporate sustainability Degrowth Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco commerce Eco-innovation Eco-investing Ecological economics Ecological footprint Ecological modernization Ecotechnology Efficient energy use Energy conservation Environmental accounting design enterprise finance full-cost accounting impact design planning Ethical banking Fiscal environmentalism Green accounting building development economy growth job marketing paradox recovery trading vehicle High-performance buildings Impact investing Marginal abatement cost Natural resource economics Pollution haven hypothesis Social accounting Socially responsible business Social return on investment Sustainability accounting organization reporting Sustainable advertising agriculture capitalism consumer behaviour consumption design design standards development development goals energy finance food systems industries livelihood management market procurement refurbishment sourcing tourism transport Thermoeconomics Used good Value of Earth Energy transition 2000-watt society Alternative fuel , Carbon neutrality Carbon-neutral fuel Environmental technology Feed-in tariff Fossil fuel divestment Fossil fuel phase-out Low-carbon economy Net metering Renewable energy commercialization Sustainable energy Policies Carbon leakage Environmental pricing reform Environmental tariff Free public transport Green industrial policy Green New Deal Green politics Rail subsidies v t e Environmental finance is a field within finance that employs market-based environmental policy instruments to improve the ecological impact of investment strategies.

[ 1 ] The primary objective of environmental finance is to regress the negative impacts of climate change through pricing and trading schemes.

[ 2 ] The field of environmental finance was established in response to the poor management of economic crises by governmental bodies globally.

[ 3 ] Environmental finance aims to reallocate business resources to improve the sustainability of investments whilst also retaining profit margins.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] In 1992, Richard L. Sandor proposed a new course outlining emission markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business , that would later be known as the course, Environmental Finance . Sandor anticipated a social shift in perspectives on the effects of global warming and wanted to be on the frontier of new research.

[ 4 ] Prior to this in 1990, Sandor had been involved with the passing of the Clean Air Act Amendment for the Chicago Board of Trade, which aimed to reduce high sulfur dioxide levels following WW2. Inspired by the theory of social cost , Sandor focused on cap-and-trade strategies such as emission trading schemes and more flexible mechanisms including taxes and subsidies to manage environmental crisis . The implementation of cap-and-trade mechanisms was a contributing factor to the success of the Clean Air Act Amendment.

[ 5 ] Dr Richard L. Sandor Following the Clean Air Act in 1990, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development approached the Chicago Board of Trade in 1991, to enquire about how the market-based instruments used to combat high atmospheric sulfur dioxide concentrations could be applied to the increasing levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide. Sandor created a framework consisting of four characteristics which could be used to describe the carbon market: [ 6 ] Standardisation Unit Trading Price Basis Delivery In 1997 the Kyoto Protocol was enacted and later enforced in 2005 by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change . Included nations agreed to focus on reducing global greenhouse gas emissions through the market-based mechanism of emissions trading. Reductions averaged approximately 5% by 2012 which equates to almost 30% in reduction of total emissions. Some nations made significant progress under the Kyoto protocol, however as it only became law in 2005, nations such as the United States and China reported increased emissions, substantially offsetting progress made by other regions.

[ 7 ] Nations involved in the 2005 Kyoto Protocol In 1999, the Dow Jones Sustainability Index was introduced to evaluate the ecological and social impact of stocks so shareholders could invest more sustainably. The index acts as an incentive for firms to improve their environmental footprint to attract more shareholders.

[ 8 ] Later in 2000, the United Nations introduced the Millennium Development Goal scheme which sought to promote a sustainable framework for large multinational corporations and countries to follow to improve the environmental impact of financial investments. This framework facilitated the development of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal scheme in 2015, which aimed to increase funding environmentally responsible investments in developing nations.

[ 9 ] Funding was targeted to improve areas such as primary education, gender equality, maternal health, and nutrition, with the overall goal of creating beneficial national relationships to decrease the ecological footprint of developing economies [ 10 ] .

Implementation of these frameworks has promoted greater participation and accountability of corporate environmental sustainability , with over 230 of the largest global firms reporting their sustainability metrics to the United Nations .

[ 9 ] The United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) has had a detailed history in providing infrastructure to improve the environmental effects of financial investments. In 2004, the institute provided training on responsible environmental credit budgeting and management for Eastern European nations. After the 2008 financial crisis , the UNEP provided substantial support for future sustainable investment choices for economies such as Greece which were impacted severely.

[ 10 ] The Portfolio Decarbonisation Coalition established in 2014 is a significantly notable initiative in the history of environmental finance as it aims to establish an economy that is not dependent on investments with large carbon footprints. This goal is achieved through large-scale stakeholder reinvestment and securing long-term, responsible, investment commitments.

[ 11 ] Most recently, the UNEP has recommended OECD nations to align investment strategies alongside the objectives of the Paris Agreement , to improve long-term investments with significant ecological effects.

[ 10 ] In 2008 the Climate Change Act enacted by the UK Government established a framework to limit greenhouse gasses and carbon emissions through a budgeting scheme, which motivated firms and businesses to reduce their carbon output for a financial reward.

[ 12 ] Specifically, by 2050 it seeks to reduce carbon emissions by 80% compared to levels in 1980. The Act seeks to achieve this goal by reviewing carbon budgeting schemes such emission trading credits, every 5 years to continually reassess and recalibrate relevant policies. The cost of reaching the 2050 goal has been estimated at approximately 1.5% of GDP , although the positive environmental impact of reducing carbon footprint and increased in investment into the renewable energy sector will offset this cost.

[ 13 ] A further implicated cost in the pursuit of the Act is a predicted £100 increase in annual household energy costs, however this price increase is set to be outweighed by an improved energy efficiency which will decrease fuel costs.

[ 14 ] The 2010 cap and trade scheme introduced in the metropolitan regions of Tokyo was mandatory for businesses heavily dependent on fuel and electricity, who accounted for almost 20% of total carbon emissions in the area.  The scheme aimed to reduce emissions by 17% by the end of 2019.

[ 15 ] In 2011 the Clean Energy Act was enacted by the Australian Government . The act introduced the Carbon Tax which aimed to reduce greenhouse gas emission by charging large firms for their carbon tonnage. The Clean Energy Act facilitated the transition to an emissions trading scheme in 2014 [ 16 ] .

The scheme also aims to fulfill the Australian Government's obligations in respect to the Kyoto Protocol and the Climate Change Convention. Additionally, the Act seeks to reduce emissions in a manner that will foster economic growth through increased market competition and investment into renewable energy sources.

[ 15 ] The Australian National Registry of Emissions Units regulates and monitors the use of emission credits utilised by the Act. Firms must enroll in the registry to buy and sell credits to compensate for their relevant reduction or over-consumption of carbon emissions.

[ 17 ] The Republic of Korea's 2015 emission trading scheme aims to reduce carbon emissions by 37% by 2030. It strives to achieve this through allocating a quota of carbon emission to the largest carbon emitting businesses, resetting at the beginning of the schemes 3 separate phases.

[ 18 ] In 2017 the National Mitigation Plan was passed by the Irish Government which aimed to regress climate change by decreasing emission levels through revised investment strategies and frameworks for power generation, agriculture, and transport The plan involves 106 separate guidelines for short and long term climate change mitigation .

[ 19 ] The European Union Emission Trading Scheme concluding at the end of 2020 is the longest single global carbon pricing scheme, which has been improved over its three 5-year phases.

[ 20 ] Current improvements include a centralised emission credit trading system, auctioning of credits, addressing a broader range of green house gasses and the introduction of a European-wide credit cap instead of national caps.

Strategies [ edit ] Renewable Energy Schematic Societal shifts from fossil fuels to renewable energy caused by an increased awareness of climate change has made government bodies and firms re-evaluate investment strategies to avoid irreparable ecological damage .

[ 21 ] Shifts away from fossil fuels also increase demand into alternate energy sources which requires revised investment strategies.

[ 21 ] The initial stage to mitigate climate change through financial tools involves ecological and economic forecasting to model future impacts of current investment methodologies on the environment.

[ 22 ] This allows for an approximate estimation of future environments; however, the impacts of continued harmful business trends need to be observed under a non-linear perspective.

[ 3 ] Cap-and-trade mechanisms limit the total amount of emissions a particular region or country can emit. Firms are issued with tradeable permits which they can buy or sell. This acts as a financial incentive to reduce emissions and as a disincentive to exceed emission caps.

[ 1 ] In 2005, the European Union Emission Trading Scheme was established and is now the largest emission trading scheme globally.

[ 1 ] Solar Panel Infrastructure In 2013, the Québec Cap-and-trade scheme was established and is currently the primary mitigation strategy for the area.

[ 23 ] Direct foreign investment into developing nations provide more efficient and sustainable energy sources.

[ 1 ] In 2006, the Clean Development Mechanism was formed under the Kyoto Protocol, providing solar power and new technologies to developing nations. Countries who invest into developing nations can receive emission reduction credits as a reward.

[ 24 ] Removal of atmospheric carbon dioxide has been proposed as a solution to mitigate climate change, by increasing tree densities to absorb carbon dioxide. Other methods involve new technologies which are still in research development stages.

[ 25 ] Research in environmental finance has sought how to strategically invest in clean technologies. When paired with international legislation, such as the case of the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, environmentally based investments have stimulated emerging industries and reduced the consequences of climate change. The international collaboration would ultimately lead to the changes that repaired the hole in the ozone layer.

[ 26 ] Climate finance [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Climate finance .

[ edit ] Investments in sustainable energy (clean energy) is an example of climate finance. It has increased due to high fossil fuel prices and growing policy support across various nations.

[ 27 ] By 2025, investment in the energy transition had grown to about twice that for fossil fuels (oil, natural gas and coal).

[ 28 ] Climate finance is an umbrella term for financial resources such as loans, grants, or domestic budget allocations for climate change mitigation , adaptation or resiliency . Finance can come from private and public sources. It can be channeled by various intermediaries such as multilateral development banks or other development agencies. Those agencies are particularly important for the transfer of public resources from developed to developing countries in light of UN Climate Convention obligations that developed countries have.

[ 29 ] : 7 There are two main sub-categories of climate finance based on different aims.

Mitigation finance is investment that aims to reduce global carbon emissions .

Adaptation finance aims to respond to the consequences of climate change.

[ 30 ] Globally, there is a much greater focus on mitigation, accounting for over 90% of spending on climate.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] : 2590 Renewable energy is an important growth area for mitigation investment and has growing policy support.

[ 33 ] : 5 Finance can come from private and public sources, and sometimes the two can intersect to create financial solutions. It is widely recognized that public budgets will be insufficient to meet the total needs for climate finance, and that private finance will be important to close the finance gap.

[ 34 ] : 16 Many different financial models or instruments have been used for financing climate actions. For example green bonds , carbon offsetting , and payment for ecosystem services are some promoted solutions. There is considerable innovation in this area. Transfer of solutions that were not developed specifically for climate finance is also taking place, such as public–private partnerships and blended finance .

There are many challenges with climate finance. Firstly, there are difficulties with measuring and tracking financial flows. Secondly, there are also questions around equitable financial support to developing countries for cutting emissions and adapting to impacts. It is also difficult to provide suitable incentives for investments from the private sector.

Impact [ edit ] European Union Map The European Union Emission Trading Scheme from 2008-2012 was responsible for a 7% reduction in emissions for the states within the scheme. In 2013, allowances were reviewed to accommodate for new emission reduction targets. The new annual recommended target was a reduction of 1.72%.

[ 1 ] It is estimated that reducing the amount of quoted credits was restricted more tightly, emissions could have been reduced by a total of 25%.

[ 20 ] Nations such as Romania , Poland and Sweden experienced significant revenue, benefiting from selling credits.  Despite successfully reducing emissions, the European Union Emission Trading Scheme has been critiqued for its lack of flexibility to accommodate to major shifts in the economic landscape and reassess currents contexts to provide a revised cap on trading credits, potentially undermining the original objective of the scheme.

[ 35 ] The New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme of 2008 was modelled to increase annual household energy expenditure to 0.8% and increase fuel prices by approximately 6%. The price of agricultural products such as beef and dairy were modelled to decrease by almost 1%. Price increases in carbon intensive sectors such as foresting and mining were also expected, incentivising a shift towards renewable energy system and improved investment strategies with a less harmful environmental impact.

[ 36 ] In 2016, the Québec Cap-and-trade scheme was responsible for an 11% reduction in emissions compared to 1990 emission levels [ 23 ] .

Due to the associated increased energy costs, fuel prices rose 2-3 cents per litre over the duration of the cap and trade scheme.

[ 23 ] In 2014, the Clean Development Mechanism was responsible for a 1% reduction in global greenhouse gas emissions.

[ 37 ] The Clean Development Mechanism has been responsible for removing 7 billion tons of greenhouse gasses from the atmosphere through the efforts of almost 8000 individual projects. Despite this success, as the economies of developing nations participating in Clean Development Mechanisms improves, the financial payout to the country supplying such infrastructure increases at a greater rate than economic growth, thus leading to an unoptimised and counterproductive system.

[ 38 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Chesney, Marc; Gheyssens, Jonathan; Pana, Anca Claudia; Taschini, Luca (2016).

Environmental Finance and Investments . Springer Texts in Business and Economics.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-662-48175-2 .

ISBN 978-3-662-48174-5 .

^ a b Sandor 2012 .

^ a b Linnenluecke, Martina K.; Smith, Tom; McKnight, Brent (December 2016). "Environmental finance: A research agenda for interdisciplinary finance research".

Economic Modelling .

59 : 124– 130.

doi : 10.1016/j.econmod.2016.07.010 .

^ Sandor 2012 , pp. 233–236.

^ Sandor 2012 , pp. 210–211.

^ Sandor 2012 , pp. 223–231.

^ "What is the Kyoto Protocol?" .

unfccc.int . Retrieved 2023-07-12 .

^ "DJSI Index Family - Pure Play Asset Management" . S&P Global. 2020.

^ a b "Green Business: Evolution of sustainable finance" .

Standard Chartered . 5 February 2019 . Retrieved 2023-07-12 .

^ a b c "The Evolution of Sustainable Finance" . UNEP Finance Initiative. June 6, 2017.

^ "What is climate mainstreaming?" .

www.mainstreamingclimate.org . Retrieved 2023-07-12 .

^ "Climate Change Act 2008" . Retrieved 2023-07-12 .

^ Pearce, Rosamund (2016-12-16).

"UK Climate Change Act: Understanding the costs and benefits" .

Carbon Brief . Retrieved 2023-07-12 .

^ Change, Extract from The Rough Guide to Climate (2011-03-11).

"What is the Kyoto protocol and has it made any difference?" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2023-07-12 .

^ a b Talberg, A.; Swoboda, K. (June 6, 2013).

"Emissions trading schemes around the world" . Parliament of Australia.

^ "The Carbon Tax in Australia" .

Centre For Public Impact (CPI) . 5 May 2017 . Retrieved 2023-07-12 .

^ "The Australian National Registry of Emissions Units (ANREU) - Emissions-EUETS.com" .

emissions-euets.com . Retrieved 2023-07-12 .

^ Kim, Ellie Jimin (2020-03-19).

"East Asia's First Mandatory Emissions Trading System" .

Climate Scorecard . Retrieved 2023-07-12 .

^ "National Mitigation Plan - Climate Change Laws of the World" .

climate-laws.org . Retrieved 2023-07-12 .

^ a b Laing, Tim; Sato, Misato; Grubb, Michael; Comberti, Claudia (January 2013). Assessing the effectiveness of the EU Emissions Trading System (Report).

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.365.6508 .

ProQuest 1698743158 .

^ a b Ding, Ashley; Daugaard, Dan; Linnenluecke, Martina K. (March 2020).

"The future trajectory for environmental finance: planetary boundaries and environmental, social and governance analysis" .

Accounting & Finance .

60 (1): 3– 14.

doi : 10.1111/acfi.12599 .

S2CID 213576271 .

^ White, Mark A. (1996). "Environmental Finance: Value and Risk in an Age of Ecology".

Business Strategy and the Environment .

5 (3): 198– 206.

doi : 10.1002/(SICI)1099-0836(199609)5:3<198::AID-BSE66>3.0.CO;2-4 .

^ a b c "The cap-and-trade system in Québec" .

Centre For Public Impact (CPI) . 13 June 2016 . Retrieved 2023-07-12 .

^ "The Clean Development Mechanism" .

unfccc.int . Retrieved 2023-07-12 .

^ Cho, R. (2019).

“Can Removing Carbon from the Atmosphere Save Us from Climate Catastrophe?” State of the Planet.

https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/2018/11/27/carbon-dioxide-removal-climate-change/ ^ Linnenluecke, Martina K.; Smith, Tom; McKnight, Brent (2016-12-01).

"Environmental finance: A research agenda for interdisciplinary finance research" .

Economic Modelling .

59 : 124– 130.

doi : 10.1016/j.econmod.2016.07.010 .

ISSN 0264-9993 .

^ "World Energy Investment 2023 / Overview and key findings" . International Energy Agency (IEA). 25 May 2023.

Archived from the original on 31 May 2023.

Global energy investment in clean energy and in fossil fuels, 2015-2023 (chart) — From pages 8 and 12 of World Energy Investment 2023 ( archive ).

^ "World Energy Investment 2025 / Executive summary" . International Energy Agency. 2025.

Archived from the original on 7 June 2025.

IEA. Licence: CC BY 4.0 ^ "Top-down Climate Finance Needs" .

CPI . Retrieved 2024-06-27 .

^ Kreibiehl, S., T. Yong Jung, S. Battiston, P. E. Carvajal, C. Clapp, D. Dasgupta, N. Dube, R. Jachnik, K. Morita, N. Samargandi, M. Williams, 2022: Investment and finance.

In IPCC, 2022: Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [P.R. Shukla, J. Skea, R. Slade, A. Al Khourdajie, R. van Diemen, D. McCollum, M. Pathak, S. Some, P. Vyas, R. Fradera, M. Belkacemi, A. Hasija, G. Lisboa, S. Luz, J. Malley, (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA.

doi : 10.1017/9781009157926.017 ^ OECD (2022), Aggregate trends of Climate Finance Provided and Mobilised by Developed Countries in 2013-2020 , https://www.oecd.org/climate-change/finance-usd-100-billion-goal .

^ New, M., D. Reckien, D. Viner, C. Adler, S.-M. Cheong, C. Conde, A. Constable, E. Coughlan de Perez, A. Lammel, R. Mechler, B. Orlove, and W. Solecki, 2022: Chapter 17: Decision-Making Options for Managing Risk . In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 2539–2654, doi : 10.1017/9781009325844.026 ^ "Global Landscape of Climate Finance 2023" (PDF) .

CPI .

^ United Nations Environment Programme (2023).

Adaptation Gap Report 2023: Underfinanced. Underprepared. Inadequate investment and planning on climate adaptation leaves world exposed . Nairobi.

https://doi . org/10.59117/20.500.11822/43796 ^ Abdel-Ati, Ibrahim (2020-03-11).

"The EU Emissions Trading System Seeking to Improve" .

Climate Scorecard . Retrieved 2023-07-12 .

^ Ministry for the Environment New Zealand (MFENZ). (2008).

“7 The Impacts of the Emissions Trading Scheme.” The framework for a New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme .

https://www.mfe.govt.nz/publications/climate-change/framework-new-zealand-emissions-trading-scheme/7-impacts-emissions ^ Warnecke, C., Day T., Tewari, R. (2015), “Impact of the Clean Development Mechanism.” New Climate Institute.

^ Stahlke, Theresa (January 2020). "The impact of the Clean Development Mechanism on developing countries' commitment to mitigate climate change and its implications for the future".

Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change .

25 (1): 107– 125.

Bibcode : 2020MASGC..25..107S .

doi : 10.1007/s11027-019-09863-8 .

S2CID 198632560 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Sandor, Richard L. (2012). Sandor, Richard L (ed.).

Good Derivatives: A Story of Financial and Environmental Innovation . John Wiley & Sons.

doi : 10.1002/9781119201069 .

ISBN 978-0-470-94973-3 .

v t e Human impact on the environment General Anthropocene Ecological footprint Environmental impact assessment Environmental issues list of issues Human impact on marine life List of global issues Impact assessment Planetary boundaries Social ecology (ethics) Causes Causes of climate change Agriculture animal agriculture cannabis cultivation irrigation meat production cocoa production palm oil (US) Bitcoin Corporate behavior Deforestation and climate change Energy industry biofuels biodiesel coal electricity energy fashion fracking (US) nuclear power oil shale petroleum reservoirs transport Genetic pollution Environmental crime Explosives Industrialisation Land use Manufacturing cleaning agents concrete fashion plastics nanotechnology paint paper pesticides pharmaceuticals and personal care Marine life fishing fishing down the food web marine pollution overfishing Mining Overconsumption Overdrafting Overexploitation Overgrazing Particulates Pollution Quarrying Reservoirs Tourism Transport aviation rail roads shipping Urbanization urban sprawl War Effects Biodiversity threats biodiversity loss decline in amphibian populations decline in insect populations Climate change runaway climate change in the United States Deforestation Defaunation Desertification Ecocide Ecological crisis Effects of climate change Effects of climate change on agriculture Multiple breadbasket failure Effects of climate change on livestock Environmental insecurity Environmental issues in the United States Coral reefs Externality Forest dieback Environmental degradation Erosion Freshwater cycle Greenhouse gas emissions Habitat destruction Holocene extinction Nitrogen cycle Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Loss and damage Loss of green belts Phosphorus cycle Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Technofossilization Tropical cyclones and climate change Water degradation Water pollution Water scarcity Mitigation Alternative fuel vehicle propulsion Birth control Cleaner production Climate change mitigation Community resilience Cultured meat Decoupling Ecological engineering Environmental engineering Environmental mitigation Industrial ecology Mitigation banking Organic farming Recycling Reforestation urban Restoration ecology Sustainability Sustainable consumption Waste minimization Commons Category by country assessment mitigation v t e Environmental social science Fields Ecological anthropology Ecological economics Environmental anthropology Environmental crime Environmental economics Environmental communication Environmental history Environmental politics Environmental psychology Environmental sociology Human ecology Human geography Political ecology Regional science Related Agroecology Anthrozoology Behavioral geography Community studies Demography Design ecological environmental Ecological humanities Economics energy thermo Environmental education ethics law science studies justice racism Ethnobiology botany ecology zoology Forestry Industrial ecology Integrated geography Permaculture Political representation of nature Rural sociology Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Sustainability science studies Systems ecology Urban ecology geography metabolism studies Applied Architecture landscape sustainable Ecopsychology Engineering ecological environmental Green criminology Health environmental epidemiology occupational public Management environmental fisheries forest natural resource waste Planning environmental land use regional spatial urban Policy energy environmental Environment portal Category Concepts Degrees Journals Research institutes Scholars v t e Sustainability Outline Index Principles Anthropocene Environmentalism Global governance Human impact on the environment Planetary boundaries Development Consumption Anthropization Anti-consumerism Circular economy Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological footprint Ethical Green consumption Micro-sustainability Over-consumption Product stewardship Simple living Social return on investment Steady-state economy Sustainability Advertising Brand Marketing myopia Sustainable Consumer behaviour Market Systemic change resistance Tragedy of the commons World population Control Demographic transition Dependency ratio List Family planning Intergenerational equity Population ageing Sustainable population Technology Appropriate Environmental technology Natural building Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable industries Sustainable packaging Biodiversity Biosecurity Biosphere Conservation biology Endangered species Holocene extinction Invasive species Energy Carbon footprint Renewable energy Sustainable energy Food Civic agriculture Climate-smart agriculture Community-supported agriculture Cultured meat Sustainable agriculture Sustainable diet Sustainable fishery Water Air well (condenser) Bioretention Bioswale Blue roof Catchwater Constructed wetland Detention basin Dew pond Footprint Hydroelectricity Hydropower Infiltration basin Irrigation tank Marine energy Micro hydro Ocean thermal energy conversion Pico hydro Rain garden Rainwater harvesting Rainwater tank Reclaimed water Retention basin Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity Scarcity Security Small hydro Sustainable drainage system Tidal power Tidal stream generator Tree box filter Water conservation Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Water-sensitive urban design Accountability Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate social responsibility Environmental accounting Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental planning Generational accounting Sustainability Accounting Measurement Metrics and indices Reporting Standards and certification Sustainable yield Economic Debt Sustainability Analysis Fiscal sustainability Applications Advertising Art Business City Cultural sustainability Climate finance Community Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco-cities Eco-investing Eco-socialism Ecovillage Environmental finance Green economy Construction Fashion Finance Gardening Geopark Green Development Infrastructure Marketing Green roof Greening Impact investing Landscape Livelihood Living Market Organic movement Organizations Procurement Refurbishment Socially responsible business Socially responsible marketing Sanitation Sourcing Space Sustainability organization Tourism Transport Urban drainage systems Urban infrastructure Sustainable management Environmental Fisheries Forest Humanistic capitalism Landscape Materials Natural resource Planetary Recycling Waste Agreements and conferences UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972) Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983) Our Common Future (1987) Earth Summit (1992) Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992) Agenda 21 (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) Lisbon Principles (1997) Earth Charter (2000) UN Millennium Declaration (2000) Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg) UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012) Sustainable Development Goals (2015) UNESCO MONDIACULT conferences Category Lists Science Studies Degrees Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Environmental_finance&oldid=1291872121 " Category : Environmental economics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 22:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Environmental finance 5 languages Add topic

