Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Demographics 2 History 3 External links Toggle External links subsection 3.1 Further reading 3.2 Further Listening 4 References 5 See also Toggle the table of contents Caribbean and West Indian Australians Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Jamaican Australians ) Ethnic group Caribbean and West Indian Australians Total population 4,242 (by ancestry, 2006) [ 1 ] 10,500 (by birth, 2023).

[ 2 ] Regions with significant populations New South Wales · Victoria Languages Caribbean English , Caribbean Spanish , Haitian Creole , Antillean Creole , Papiamento , French Related ethnic groups Cuban Australians , British Indo-Caribbean people , British African-Caribbean people , Caribbean Brazilians , African Australians , West Indian Americans , Black Canadians Caribbean and West Indian Australians are people of Caribbean ancestry who are citizens of Australia .

Demographics [ edit ] According to the 2006 Australian census, 4,852 Australians were born in the Caribbean [ 2 ] while 4,242 claimed the Caribbean ancestry, either alone or with another ancestry.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Connections between the West Indies and Australia began in the early days of European settlement.

Australia’s first newspaper publisher, and founder of the Sydney Gazette in 1803 was George Howe , a white convict from St Kitts .

[ 3 ] Eighteen convicts from the West Indies arrived on the convict ship the Moffatt in 1836 including William Buchanan and Richard Holt.

[ 4 ] Buchanan and James Smith, also from Jamaica, were two of 34 convicts from the West Indies known to have stayed at the Hyde Park Barracks.

[ 5 ] Billy Blue who had served in served in the British Army before being convicted of stealing sugar and transported to Australia was also thought to be a Jamaican.

[ 6 ] At the height of the British Empire , officers and administrators moved freely between far-flung colonies. Many came to Australia from the West Indies, while others, like Edward Eyre , [ 7 ] left Australia to take up appointments there. Another emigrant was barrister Robert Burnside . He was born and raised in the Bahamas, the son of the country's Solicitor-General.

[ 8 ] After qualifying in England, he set up practice in Perth, eventually becoming a Supreme Court judge.

Black convicts, servants and sailors from the West Indies also arrived in Australia and many of them later integrated into Aboriginal communities.

[ citation needed ] These relationships, and links forged through the sport of boxing, contributed to later alliances between the Black Consciousness Movements in Australia, the USA and the West Indies, including a branch of Marcus Garvey ’s UNIA-ACL in Sydney in the 1920s.

[ citation needed ] Caribbean people were also among the many nationalities flocking to the Victorian goldfields after 1851. One of the thirteen miners killed at the Eureka Stockade was a Jamaican , James Campbell.

Arthur Windsor , editor of the Age newspaper from 1872 to 1900 was born in Barbados .

[ 9 ] Especially since the abandonment of the White Australia policy , West Indians have arrived from many countries of the Commonwealth. From honky-tonk pianist Winifred Atwell to environmental engineer Ken Potter and writer Ralph de Boissière , they have brought wide-ranging skills, experience and cultural richness to Australia.

External links [ edit ] Further reading [ edit ] Smith, Dr. Karina, Pat Thomas, and Lisa Montague, eds.

Adding Pimento: Caribbean Migration to Victoria, Australia . Melbourne: Breakdown Press, 2014.

Pybus, Cassandra.

Black Founders: The Unknown Story of Australia's First Black Settlers.

Sydney: NewSouth Publishing, 2006.

Chingaipe, Santilla.

Black Convicts: How Slavery Shaped Australia . Sydney: Scribner Australia, 2024.

Further Listening [ edit ] ABC Radio National. “ Caribbean Convicts in Australia .” *The History Listen*, 30 November 2021.

References [ edit ] ^ a b "20680-Ancestry (full classification list) by Sex - Australia" (Microsoft Excel download) .

2006 Census .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . Retrieved 2 June 2008 .

Total responses: 25,451,383 for total count of persons: 19,855,288.

^ a b "20680-Country of Birth of Person (full classification list) by Sex - Australia" (Microsoft Excel download) .

2006 Census .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . Retrieved 2 June 2008 .

Total count of persons: 19,855,288.

^ J. V. Byrnes, ' Howe, George (1769–1821) ', Australian Dictionary of Biography , Volume 1, MUP , 1966, pp 557–559. Retrieved 13 March 2025 ^ "Caribbean Convicts in Australia" .

ABC listen . 30 November 2021 . Retrieved 13 March 2025 .

^ "The extraordinary life of William Buchanan: slave, convict, bushranger | MHNSW" .

Museums of History NSW . 5 December 2022 . Retrieved 13 March 2025 .

^ Freedom Is Mine Official (5 October 2021).

Billy Blue: The Extraordinary Black Australian Convict . Retrieved 15 March 2025 – via YouTube.

^ Geoffrey Dutton (1966), " Eyre, Edward John (1815–1901) ", Australian Dictionary of Biography , Volume 1 (Australian National University), accessed 13 March 2025.

^ Staples, G. T. (1979).

"Burnside, Robert Bruce (1862–1929)" .

Australian Dictionary of Biography . Vol. 7. National Centre of Biography, Australian National University .

ISBN 978-0-522-84459-7 .

ISSN 1833-7538 .

OCLC 70677943 . Retrieved 13 March 2025 .

^ Caribbean, Select Births and Baptisms, 1590-1928 See also [ edit ] African Australians American Australians Arab Australians Asian Australians Black Australians European Australians Indigenous Australians North African and Middle Eastern Australians v t e Caribbean diaspora Australia Brazil Canada ( Afro-Caribbean Indo-Caribbean ) United Kingdom ( Afro-Caribbean Indo-Caribbean ) United States v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Caribbean_and_West_Indian_Australians&oldid=1280628582 " Categories : Australian people of Caribbean descent Caribbean diaspora in Australia Caribbean diaspora by country Hidden categories: Use Australian English from January 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from January 2018 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 This page was last edited on 15 March 2025, at 16:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Caribbean and West Indian Australians Add languages Add topic

