Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Freshwater Toggle Freshwater subsection 1.1 Fish 1.2 Shrimp 1.3 Snails 2 Saltwater Toggle Saltwater subsection 2.1 Fish 2.2 Crabs 2.3 Sea urchins 2.4 Snails 3 References Toggle the table of contents Algae eater 8 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch فارسی עברית Polski Русский Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Algivore ) Algae-eating species of animals, such as fish Algae eater or algivore is a common name for any bottom-dwelling or filter-feeding aquatic animal species that specialize in feeding on algae and phytoplanktons . Algae eaters are important for the fishkeeping hobby and many are commonly kept by aquarium hobbyists to improve water quality .

[ 1 ] They are also important primary consumers that relay the biomass and energy from photosynthetic autotrophes up into the food web , as well as protecting the aquatic ecosystem against algae blooms .

Freshwater [ edit ] A Plecostomus uses its mouth, shaped like a suction-cup, to attach itself to surfaces and scrape off algae.

Fish [ edit ] Some of the common and most popular freshwater aquarium algae eaters include: Many loricariid catfish of South America , such as genera Otocinclus , [ 2 ] Ancistrus , and Plecostomus , constantly graze algae and biofilm , although many species of "plecos", which attain an adult length of over 10 inches, eat much less frequently as they near adulthood.

The Siamese algae eater ( Crossocheilus oblongus ) is a more gregarious and tolerant cyprinid that ranges up to 15 cm (5.9 in). It is one of the only fish that will graze on " black brush algae " (freshwater Rhodophyta , or red algae ), but even so will eat anything else in preference.

Fishes of the genus Gyrinocheilus , family Gyrinocheilidae . There are three species in this genus with the Chinese algae eater , Gyrinocheilus aymonieri , the most common. Small specimens make good community fish but may become territorial when older.

American-flag fish, Jordanella floridae , are also dependable algae-eating fish. They are one of the only fish to graze on black brush algae, as with the siamese algae eater, and will also indiscriminately graze on other algae such as diatoms and hair algae . However, like all pupfish , they can be nippy to fish smaller or slower than them. Males can also be territorial.

[ 3 ] Common freshwater algivorous fish: Loricariid Otocinclus , most often the common otocinclus .

Ancistrus Plecostomus Cyprinid Siamese algae eater ( Crossocheilus oblongus ) Chinese algae eater ( Gyrinocheilus aymonieri ) Japanese white crucian carp ( Carassius cuvieri ) Silver carp ( Hypophthalmichthys molitrix ) Bighead carp ( Hypophthalmichthys nobilis ) Grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idellus ) Pungtungia herzi Osmeridae ayu sweetfish ( Plecoglossus altivelis ) Shrimp [ edit ] Some freshwater shrimp are also excellent algae eaters: Almost all of them belong to the family Atyidae (the only family in the superfamily Atyoidea) including many genera Caridina : red rhinoceros shrimp , bee shrimp , etc... One shrimp well known for its ability to clean an aquarium is the Amano shrimp .

[ 2 ] Neocaridina : Neocaridina davidi (cherry shrimp), Neocaridina palmata , etc.

Some of them belong to the genus Palaemonetes (grass shrimp) Snails [ edit ] Most species of freshwater snails , discounting most adult specimens of species belonging to the family Ampullariidae , which primarily subsist on aquatic plants as adults.

Bellamyinae Lioplacinae Viviparinae Saltwater [ edit ] Some of the known types of fish to eat algae are blennies and tangs, but along with fish there are snails, crabs, and sea urchins who also eat algae. These species are known to eat red slime algae , green film algae, hair algae , diatoms , cyanobacteria , brown film algae , detritus , and microalgae .

[ 4 ] Diatoms Fish [ edit ] There are several saltwater fish species that eat algae. Two of the major algae eaters are blennies and tangs. These fish eat red slime algae, green film algae, and hair algae. Some of the known species are as follows: Blennies: [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Seaweed Blenny Leopard Blenny High Fin Blenny Linear Blenny One Spot Blenny Sailfin Blenny Segmented Sail Fin Blenny Starry Blenny Tail Spot Blenny Two Spot Benny Seaweed Blenny Tangs: [ 6 ] Regal Blue Tang Regal Blue Tang Blonde Naso Tang Red Sea Sailfin Tang Purple Tang Cheveron Tang Convict Tang Kole Tang Goldrim Tang Orangebar Tang Powder Blue Tang Yellow Tang Halloween Hermit Crab Arrow Crab Crabs [ edit ] Hermit crabs and other species of crabs eat algae. Crabs eat green algae, film algae, red slime algae, diatoms, cyanobacteria, and microalgae. Some of the known species are: Hermit Crabs: Dwarf Blue Leg Hermit Crab Dwarf Red Tip Hermit Crab Electric Blue Hermit Crab Halloween Hermit Crab Hawaiian Zebra Hermit Crab Anemone Carrying Hermit Crab [ 7 ] Other Species: [ 8 ] Arrow Crab Spotted Porcelain Crab Decorator Spider Crabs Sea urchins [ edit ] All species of sea urchin eat algae. They eat all sizes of algae, from something as small as macroalgae to something as large as kelp, and have been known to eat Coralline algae .

[ 9 ] In cooler waters, sea urchins have even been known to eat enough to control the size and compositions of kelp forests. Sea urchins act as scavengers and will also eat dead algae that they find. Some sea urchins, such as the variegated sea urchin or the red sea urchin , have become popular as pets for home aquariums because of their ability to proficiently eat algae.

[ 10 ] Snails [ edit ] Snails are known for eating hair algae, cyanobacteria, diatoms, green film algae, brown film algae, and detritus.

[ 11 ] Chestnut Cowrie Snail Zebra Turbo Snail Trochus Snails Mexican Turbo Snail Conch Snail Cerith Snail Orange Spot Butterscotch Nassarius Snail Lager Super Longan Nassarius Tropical balone Bumblebee Snails References [ edit ] ^ "Best Algae Eaters For The Freshwater Aquarium" . Oceanlifeaquatics.net. 2020-01-24 . Retrieved 2020-02-13 .

^ a b "The 10 best algae eaters for tropical tanks" .

Practical Fishkeeping . 2016-06-13 . Retrieved 2025-03-21 .

^ Huntley, W. (1995). Jordanella floridae The American-Flag Fish.

SF Bay Area Killifish Association http://www.sfbaka . net/ .

^ "saltwater algae eater" . Aquariumslife.com. 2010-02-01. Archived from the original on 2010-12-01 . Retrieved 2015-03-27 .

^ "Saltwater Fish That Eat Algae | Tropical Fish Hobbyist Magazine" .

Home | TFH Magazine . Retrieved 2020-12-12 .

^ a b "Reef Safe Algae Eaters" .

The Spruce Pets . Retrieved 2020-12-12 .

^ Chambers, Thomas E. (1949-05-01).

"The School Aquarium" .

The American Biology Teacher .

11 (5): 123– 124.

doi : 10.2307/4438056 .

ISSN 0002-7685 .

JSTOR 4438056 .

^ "Saltwater Aquarium Fish|Live Corals|Marine Invertebrates" .

www.aquariumcreationsonline.net . Retrieved 2020-11-26 .

^ Paletta, Michael.

"Echinoderms: Part 7 - Sea Urchins (Echinoidea)" .

^ Hauter, Stan.

"Reef Tank Janitors Like Shrimps, True Crabs, and Sea Urchins" .

^ "Snails" . Aquariumslife.com. Archived from the original on 2015-05-01 . Retrieved 2015-03-27 .

v t e Aquariums and fishkeeping Aquarium types Freshwater Marine Public Reef Brackish-water Community Biotope Aquarium décor and equipment Airstone Algae scrubber Berlin Method Bog-wood / Driftwood Calcium reactor Deep sand bed Filter Fishcam Fish feeder Heater Lighting Live rock / Live sand Powerhead Protein skimmer Refugium Substrate Sump Fish terms / types Algae eater Bottom feeder Coldwater Dither Hardy Painted Tropical Fish food Brine shrimp Daphnia Feeder fish Feeder shrimp Infusoria Shrimp mix Tubifex tubifex Other concepts Aquarium fishery Aquascaping Artificial seawater Bath treatment Book of Vermilion Fish The Cichlid Room Companion Clean-up crew Disease in ornamental fish Macquarium Project Piaba Reef safe Spawning trigger Water conditioner People Takashi Amano Herbert R. Axelrod Leonhard Baldner Pierre Carbonnier Edward Edwards George Farmer Ian A. M. Fuller Philip Henry Gosse William T. Innes Gerald H. Jennings Sven O. Kullander William Alford Lloyd Paul Matte George S. Myers Julian Sprung Anna Thynne Charles Haskins Townsend Jeanne Villepreux-Power Robert Warington Magazines Aquarium Fish International Koi Practical Fishkeeping Reef Hobbyist Magazine Tropical Fish Hobbyist Companies Dennerle Drs. Foster & Smith Hikari Hagen Sera Tetra Wardley Zoo Med Laboratories Organizations Aquarium fish clubs Marine Aquarium Council North American Native Fishes Association Lists Aquarium diseases Aquarium fish by scientific name Freshwater aquarium fish / amphibians / invertebrates / plants / algae Marine aquarium fish / invertebrates / plants Brackish aquarium fish / invertebrates / plants Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Algae_eater&oldid=1304526382 " Category : Algae eaters Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 15:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Algae eater 8 languages Add topic

