Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Method 3 Unit of length 4 Similar measuring chains 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Gunter's chain 5 languages Català Français Italiano 日本語 Norsk bokmål Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Distance measuring device used for surveying Gunter's chain Gunter's chain at Campus Martius Museum General information Unit system imperial / US units Unit of length Conversions 1 gunter's chain in ...

... is equal to ...

imperial/US units 22 yd metric ( SI ) units 20.1 m Gunter's link Unit system imperial/US units Unit of length Conversions 1 gunter's link in ...

... is equal to ...

imperial/US units 7.92 in metric (SI) units 201 mm Gunter's chain (also known as Gunter's measurement ) is a distance-measuring device used for surveying . It was designed and introduced in 1620 by English clergyman and mathematician Edmund Gunter (1581–1626). It enabled plots of land to be accurately surveyed and plotted, for legal and commercial purposes.

Gunter developed an actual measuring chain of 100 links. These, the chain and the link ,  became statutory measures in England and subsequently the British Empire .

Description [ edit ] The 66-foot (20.1 m) chain is divided into 100 links, usually marked off into groups of 10 by brass rings or tags which simplify intermediate measurement. Each link is thus 7.92 inches (201 mm) long. A quarter chain, or 25 links, measures 16 feet 6 inches (5.03 m) and  thus measures a rod (or pole ). Ten chains measure a furlong and 80 chains measure a statute mile .

[ 1 ] Gunter's chain reconciled two seemingly incompatible systems: the traditional English land measurements, based on the number four, and decimals based on the number 10. Since an acre measured 10 square chains in Gunter's system, the entire process of land area measurement could be computed using measurements in chains, and then converted to acres by dividing the results by 10.

[ 2 ] Hence 10 chains by 10 chains (100 square chains) equals 10 acres, 5 chains by 5 chains (25 square chains) equals 2.5 acres. By the 1670s the chain and the link had become statutory units of measurement in England.

...a Word or two of Dimensurators or Measuring Instruments, whereof the most usual has been the Chain, and the common length for English Measures 4 Poles, as answering indifferently to the English Mile and Acre, 10 such Chains in length making a Furlong, and 10 single square Chains an Acre, so that a square Mile contains 640 square Acres...' [ 3 ] — John Ogilby, Britannia , 1675 Method [ edit ] Standard chain mark in Whanganui , New Zealand, laid down in 1880 to standardize surveys Surveyor's chain, New York state, US, c.

1830 . Exhibit in National Museum of American History, Washington, DC, US The method of surveying a field or other parcel of land with Gunter's chain is to first determine corners and other significant locations, and then to measure the distance between them, taking two points at a time. The surveyor is assisted by a chainman. A ranging rod (usually a prominently coloured wooden pole) is placed in the ground at the destination point. Starting at the originating point the chain is laid out towards the ranging rod, and the surveyor then directs the chainman to make the chain perfectly straight and pointing directly at the ranging rod. A pin is put in the ground at the forward end of the chain, and the chain is moved forward so that its hind end is at that point, and the chain is extended again towards the destination point. This process is called ranging , or in the US, chaining; it is repeated until the destination rod is reached, when the surveyor notes how many full lengths (chains) have been laid, and he can then directly read how many links (one-hundredth parts of the chain) are in the distance being measured. The chain usually ends in a handle which may or may not be part of the measurement. An inner loop (visible in the NMAH photograph) is the correct place to put the pin for some chains.

[ 4 ] Many chains were made with the handles as part of the end link and thus were included in the measurement.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The whole process is repeated for all the other pairs of points required, and it is a simple matter to make a scale diagram of the plot of land. The process is surprisingly accurate and requires only very low technology. Surveying with a chain is simple if the land is level and continuous—it is not physically practicable to range across large depressions or significant waterways, for example. On sloping land, the chain was to be "leveled" by raising one end as needed, so that undulations did not increase the apparent length of the side or the area of the tract.

[ 7 ] Unit of length [ edit ] Main article: Chain (unit) Although link chains were later superseded by the steel ribbon tape (a form of tape measure ), its legacy was a new statutory unit of length called the chain, equal to 22 yards (66 feet) of 100 links .

[ 8 ] This unit still exists as a location identifier on British railways, as well as all across America in what is called the public land survey system. In the United States (US), for example, Public Lands Survey plats are published in the chain unit to maintain the consistency of a two-hundred-year-old database. In the Midwest of the US it is not uncommon to encounter deeds with references to chains, poles, or rod units, especially in farming country. Minor roads surveyed in Australia and New Zealand in the 19th and early 20th centuries are customarily one chain wide.

[ 9 ] The length of a cricket pitch is one chain (22 yards).

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Similar measuring chains [ edit ] A similar American system, of lesser popularity, is Ramsden's or the engineer's system , where the chain consists also of 100 links, each one foot (0.3048 m) long. The original of such chains was that constructed, to very high precision, for the measurement of the baselines of the Anglo-French Survey (1784–1790) and the Principal Triangulation of Great Britain .

The even less common Rathborn system , also from the 17th century, is based on a 200-link chain of two rods (33 feet, 10.0584 m) length. Each rod (or perch or pole) consists of 100 links, (1.98 inches, 50.292 mm each), which are called seconds (″), ten of which make a prime ( ′ , 19.8 inches, 0.503 m).

[ 12 ] Vincent Wing made chains with 9.90-inch links, most commonly as 33-foot half-chains of 40 links. These chains were sometimes used in the American colonies, particularly Pennsylvania.

[ 13 ] In India , surveying chains 20 metres (65 ft 7.4 in) (occasionally 30 metres) in length are used.

[ 14 ] Links are 200 millimetres (7.87 in) long.

[ 15 ] In France after the French Revolution , and later in countries that had adopted the Metric System , 10-metre (32 ft 9.7 in) chains, of 50 links each 200 millimetres (7.87 in) long were used until the 1950s.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Distance measurement References [ edit ] ^ Slater; Saunders.

"Rods, poles and perches" .

www.northcravenheritage.org.uk .

Archived from the original on 19 August 2016 . Retrieved 22 July 2018 .

^ John Love (1688). "VII : How to cast up the Contents of a Plot of Land".

Geodaesia: or, The art of surveying and measuring land made easy : shewing, by plain and practical rules, how to survey, protract, cast up, reduce or divide any piece of land whatsoever : with new tables for the ease of the surveyor in reducing the measure of land . London: J. Taylor. p. 122.

Archived from the original on 2024-04-28 . Retrieved 2018-07-26 .

^ "Preface" .

Britannia . 1675.

Archived from the original on 2023-08-11 . Retrieved 2023-08-09 – via Fulltable.com.

^ Manthey, David (2002).

"How to Make a Gunter's Chain" .

Orbital Central .

Archived from the original on 9 August 2018 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 .

^ "Types of Chains" .

The Constructor . 25 October 2016.

Archived from the original on 26 July 2018 . Retrieved 4 August 2018 .

^ Punmia, B. C. (2005).

Surveying . Vol. 1 (16th ed.). p.

39.

^ Holloway, Thomas (1881).

The practical surveyor Archived 2024-04-28 at the Wayback Machine . Horace Cox. London. pp. 22–24. Retrieved April 7, 2009.

^ Nesbit, Anthony (1847).

A complete treatise on practical land-surveying, Ninth edition Archived 2024-04-28 at the Wayback Machine . Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans. London. p. 29. Retrieved April 7, 2009.

^ McKay, Donald F. (ed.) (2009).

"Land Title Surveys in New Zealand" Archived 2015-05-23 at the Wayback Machine . Chapter 2, Section 8: Public Roads. New Zealand Institute of Surveyors.

^ Craven, Ian; Gray, Martin; Stoneham, Geraldine (1994).

Australian Popular Culture Archived 2024-04-28 at the Wayback Machine . Cambridge University Press. p. 27.

ISBN 0-521-46667-9 .

^ MCC (2018).

"Law 6 – the pitch" .

Archived from the original on 1 October 2017 . Retrieved 23 November 2018 .

^ Zupko, Ronald Edward. A Dictionary of Weights and Measures for the British Isles ^ Denny, Milton. "The Colonial Surveyor in Pennsylvania", Surveyors Historical Society, 2013.

^ Instruments used in Surveying Archived 2018-07-07 at the Wayback Machine My Agriculture information bank ^ Surveying I [ permanent dead link ] - R. Gopalakrishnan, Sri Venkateswara College of Engineering
 (pdf) ^ Plomion, Charles. Arithmétique-Cours élémentaire, Librairie A. Hatier, Paris, 1925 External links [ edit ] How to make a Gunter's Chain Image from 1675 Nineteenth century image v t e Measuring and alignment tools Architect's scale Beam compass Calipers Chalk line Combination square Compass Coordinate-measuring machine Diagonal scale Drafting machine Engineer's scale Feeler gauge Flat spline French curve Gunter's chain Jig Laser level Line laser level Laser measuring tool Lesbian rule Marking gauge Measuring rod Meterstick Micrometer Plumb-bob Protractor Radius gauge Ruler Set square Skirret Sliding T bevel Speed square Spirit level Steel square Stencil Straightedge Square T-square Tape measure Theodolite Thread pitch gauge Try square Vernier scale Vise Weighing scale Wiggler Winding sticks Types of tools Cleaning Cutting and abrasive Forestry Garden Hand Kitchen Machine and metalworking Masonry Measuring and alignment Mining Power Textile Woodworking v t e Imperial units Comparison with US customary system Length Twip Thousandth of an inch Barleycorn Inch Hand Link Foot Yard Fathom Rod Chain Gunter's chain Furlong Cable Mile Nautical mile League Area Square inch Square foot Square yard Perch Rood Acre Square mile Volume Derived Cubic inch Cubic foot Hoppus Cubic yard Cubic mile Tmcft Cooking Teaspoon Tablespoon Fluid ounce Cup Pint Quart Trade gallon Gallon Other Chaldron Minim Gill Fluid Scruple Fluid Drachm Peck Bushel Barrel Stuck Hogshead Speed Miles per hour Mass Grain Drachm Ounce Pound (mass) Stone Quarter Slug Long hundred Hundredweight Ship load Ton Pressure Ksi Pounds per square inch Other units and measures British thermal unit Degree Fahrenheit Rankine Foot-candle Foot-pound Foot-poundal Horsepower Horsepower-hour Kenning Pound (force) Pound-foot Poundal Span Spinning count Related systems Avoirdupois system English units Winchester Exchequer English Engineering units Foot–pound–second system (FPS) Twenty-foot equivalent unit v t e United States customary units Comparison with imperial unit system Length Thousandth of an inch Inch Hand Link Foot Yard Rod Chain Furlong Mile Statute mile Area Square inch Square foot Square yard Acre Square mile Volume Derived Cubic inch Cubic foot Cubic yard Cubic mile Cooking Teaspoon Tablespoon Fluid ounce Cup Pint Quart Gallon Wood Board foot Cord Face cord Other Minim Gill Peck Bushel Barrel Acre-foot Speed Foot per second Miles per hour Mass Grain Dram Ounce Pound Hundredweight Ton Long Short Force Poundal Pound-force Kip Pressure Inch of mercury Pound per square inch Kilopound per square inch Other units and measures Bolt (cloth) British thermal unit Degree (angle) Fahrenheit Foot-candle Foot-lambert Foot-pound (energy) Horsepower Perm Pound-foot (torque) Spinning count Ton of refrigeration Related systems American wire gauge Avoirdupois system Body jewelry sizes English Engineering Units Foot–pound–second system of units Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gunter%27s_chain&oldid=1280885083 " Categories : Surveying instruments Units of length Imperial units Customary units of measurement in the United States Length, distance, or range measuring devices Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 March 2025, at 00:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gunter's chain 5 languages Add topic

