Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Advantages 3 Disadvantages 4 Alternatives 5 References Toggle the table of contents 2D-plus-depth Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Not to be confused with 2D plus Delta .

Stereoscopic video coding format Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable .

Please help improve this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged and removed.

( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 2D image and its depth map, lighter depth map areas are regarded as closer to a viewer 2D-plus-Depth is a stereoscopic video coding format that is used for 3D displays, such as Philips WOWvx. Philips discontinued work on the WOWvx line in 2009, citing "current market developments".

[ 1 ] Currently, this Philips technology is used by SeeCubic company, led by former key 3D engineers and scientists of Philips. They offer autostereoscopic 3D displays which use the 2D-plus-Depth format for 3D video input.

[ 2 ] Overview [ edit ] The 2D-plus-Depth format is described in a Philips' white paper [ 3 ] and articles.

[ 4 ] Each 2D image frame is supplemented with a greyscale depth map which indicates if a specific pixel in the 2D image needs to be shown in front of the display (white) or behind the screen plane (black). The 256 greyscales can build a smooth gradient of depth within the image. Processing within the monitor used this input to render the multiview images.

Supported by various companies across the display industry, 2D-plus-Depth has been standardized in MPEG as an extension for 3D filed under ISO/IEC FDIS 23002-3:2007(E).

[ 5 ] There is also an extension on the 2D-plus-Depth format called the WOWvx Declipse format. It is described in the same Philips' white paper "3D Interface Specifications". In this advanced format, two more planes are added to the original 2D image and its depth map for each frame: the background areas covered by foreground objects and their respective depth map. So, each frame in the Declipse format is described with an image containing four parts, or quadrants. This extension improves potential visual quality by providing data for more correct and precise filling of the uncovered occlusion areas created by shifting foreground objects during the multiview generation process.

Advantages [ edit ] 2D-plus-Depth has the advantage that it has a limited bandwidth increase compared to 2D (compressed greyscale increases bandwidth 5–20%) so that it can be used in existing distribution infrastructures.

2D-plus-Depth offers flexibility and compatibility with existing production equipment and compression tools.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] It allows applications to use different 3D display screen sizes and designs in the same system.

Another advantage is that depth maps are created in the course of 2D-to-stereo 3D conversion using almost any approach to this video transformation.

[ 8 ] That is why there is the respective 2D-plus-Depth representation of a converted stereo footage in almost all cases. Considering the lack of 3D content shot in stereo and the number of converted 3D films , this is a big benefit.

Disadvantages [ edit ] 2D-plus-Depth is not compatible with existing 2D or 3D-Ready displays. The format has been criticized due to the limited amount of depth that can be displayed in an 8-bit greyscale.

2d-plus-Depth cannot handle transparency (semi-transparent objects in the scene) and occlusion (an object blocking the view of another). The 2d plus DOT format takes these factors into account.

[ 9 ] Additionally, it cannot handle reflection, refraction (beyond simple transparency) and other optical phenomena.

Creation of accurate 2D-plus-Depth can be costly and difficult, though recent advances in range imaging have made this process more accessible.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] 2d-plus-Depth lacks the potential increase in resolution of using two complete images.

Depth cannot be reliably estimated for a monocular video in most cases. Notable exceptions are camera motion scenes when object motion is static or almost absent, and landscape scenes when depth map can be approximated well enough with a gradient. This allows automatic depth estimation.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] In general case only semi-automatic approach is viable for 2D to 2D-plus-Depth conversion. Philips developed a 3D content creation software suite named BlueBox [ 14 ] which includes semi-automated conversion of 2D content into 2D-plus-Depth format and automatic generation of 2D-plus-Depth from stereo. A similar semiautomatic approach to high quality 2D to 2D-plus-Depth conversion is implemented in YUVsoft's 2D to 3D Suite, available as a set of plugins for After Effects and NUKE video compositing software.

[ 15 ] Stereoscopic to 2D-plus-Depth conversion involves several algorithms including scene change detection, segmentation, motion estimation and image matching. Automatic stereo to 2D+Depth conversion is now possible due to new high performance software and GPU technology, even in live real-time mode.

[ 16 ] Alternatives [ edit ] Other 3D formats are stereo (left-right or alternating frames) and multiview 3D format (such as Multiview Video Coding and Scalable Video Coding ), and 2D plus Delta .

References [ edit ] ^ "Philips Decides to Shut Down 3D Operation, March 27, 2009" . Archived from the original on 2010-08-23 . Retrieved 2010-06-03 .

^ "Dimenco's 3D Displays & Technology" . Archived from the original on 2014-03-17 . Retrieved 2014-03-17 .

^ "Philips 3D Solutions: 3D Interface Specifications White Paper" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-15 . Retrieved 2010-06-03 .

^ Redert, Andre; et al. (2006).

Philips 3D Solutions: From Content Creation to Visualization . Third International Symposium on 3D Data Processing, Visualization, and Transmission (3DPVT'06).

doi : 10.1109/3DPVT.2006.107 .

^ Preview of "ISO/IEC 23002-3. Information technology — MPEG video technologies — Part 3: Representation of auxiliary video and supplemental information" ^ "2D+Z and its advantages" . Archived from the original on 2014-03-17 . Retrieved 2014-03-17 .

^ Adaptation and optimization of coding algorithms for mobile 3DTV ^ 2D to 3D Conversions by Scott Squires ^ Bernard F. Coll, Faisal Ishtiaq, Kevin O'Connell (2010) "3DTV at home: Status, challenges and solutions for delivering a high quality experience" Archived 2011-07-19 at the Wayback Machine Proceedings VPQM 2010 ^ Wilson, Andrew (July 1, 2004).

“CMOS single-chip sensor captures 3-D images” Archived 2013-02-05 at archive.today .

Vision Systems .

^ Spare, James (August, 2004).

“Machine vision: Adding the Third Dimension. Electronic perception technology is a new way to make direct, rather than derived, depth measurements of target objects” Archived 2006-10-18 at the Wayback Machine .

Sensors .

^ Automatic 2D to 2D-plus-Depth conversion sample for a camera motion scene ^ Automatic depth estimation from scene geometry ^ "BlueBox -- a 3D content creation service suite generating 3D content in the 2D-plus-Depth format" . Archived from the original on 2011-07-15 . Retrieved 2010-06-03 .

^ YUVsoft 2D to 3D Suite software for human-guided 2D-to-stereo 3D conversion ^ An example of automatic stereo to 2D+Depth conversion v t e Stereoscopy and 3D display Perception 3D stereo view Binocular rivalry Binocular vision Chromostereopsis Convergence insufficiency Correspondence problem Peripheral vision Depth perception Epipolar geometry Kinetic depth effect Stereoblindness Stereopsis Stereopsis recovery Stereoscopic acuity Vergence-accommodation conflict Display technologies Active shutter 3D system Anaglyph 3D Autostereogram Autostereoscopy Bubblegram Head-mounted display Holography Integral imaging Lenticular lens Multiscopy Parallax barrier Parallax scrolling Polarized 3D system Specular holography Stereo display Stereoscope Vectograph Virtual retinal display Volumetric display Wiggle stereoscopy Other technologies 2D to 3D conversion 2D plus Delta 2D-plus-depth Computer stereo vision Multiview Video Coding Parallax scanning Pseudoscope Stereo photography techniques Stereoautograph Stereoscopic depth rendition Stereoscopic rangefinder Stereoscopic spectroscopy Stereoscopic video coding Product types 3D camcorder 3D film 3D television 3D-enabled mobile phones 4D film Blu-ray 3D Digital 3D Stereo camera Stereo microscope Stereoscopic video game Virtual reality headset Notable products AMD HD3D Dolby 3D Fujifilm FinePix Real 3D Infitec MasterImage 3D Nintendo 3DS New 3DS Nvidia 3D Vision Panavision 3D RealD 3D Sharp Actius RD3D View-Master XpanD 3D Miscellany Stereographer Stereoscopic Displays and Applications Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=2D-plus-depth&oldid=1305700256 " Categories : Graphics file formats Stereoscopy Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from January 2025 All articles lacking reliable references This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 15:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents 2D-plus-depth Add languages Add topic

