Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Differences from postmodernism 2 Radical movements in modern art Toggle Radical movements in modern art subsection 2.1 Fauvism, cubism, dada, surrealism as the precedent 2.2 High art and culture 2.3 Jackson Pollock: abstract expressionism 2.4 Neo-Dada, collage and assemblage 2.5 Abstract painting and sculpture in the 1960s and 1970s 2.6 Minimalism and post-minimalism 2.7 Process art 2.8 Pop art 2.9 Performance art and happenings 2.10 Fluxus 2.11 High and low 3 Movements associated with Postmodern art Toggle Movements associated with Postmodern art subsection 3.1 Conceptual art 3.2 Installation art 3.3 Intermedia and multi-media 3.4 Appropriation art and neo-conceptual art 3.5 Neo-expressionism 3.6 Institutional Critique 3.7 Late modernist painting and sculpture in the 21st century 4 See also 5 Notes and references 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Late modernism 4 languages العربية Español Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Modernist art and literature made after 1945 Not to be confused with late modernity or high modernism .

For the book by Robert Genter, see Late Modernism: Art, Culture, and Politics in Cold War America .

In the visual arts , late modernism encompasses the overall production of most recent art made between the aftermath of World War II and the early years of the 21st century. The terminology often points to similarities between late modernism and postmodernism , although there are differences. The predominant term for art produced since the 1950s is contemporary art . Not all art labelled as contemporary art is modernist or post-modern, and the broader term encompasses both artists who continue to work in modern and late modernist traditions, as well as artists who reject modernism for post-modernism or other reasons.

Arthur Danto argues explicitly in After the End of Art that contemporaneity was the broader term, and that postmodern objects represent a subsector of the contemporary movement which replaced modernity and modernism, while other notable critics: Hilton Kramer , [ 1 ] Robert C. Morgan , Kirk Varnedoe , [ 2 ] Jean-François Lyotard and others have argued that postmodern objects are at best relative to modernist works.

The jargon which encompasses the two terms late modernism and postmodern art is used to denote what may be considered as the ultimate phase of modern art , as art at the end of modernism or as certain tendencies of contemporary art.

There are those who argue against a division into modern and postmodern periods. Not all critics agree that the stage called modernism is over or even near the end. There is no agreement that all art after modernism is post-modern. Contemporary art is the more-widely used term to denote work since roughly 1960, though it has many other uses as well. Nor is post-modern art universally separated from modernism, with many critics seeing it as merely another phase in modern art or as another form of late modernism.

As with all uses of the term post-modern there are critics of its application, however, at this point, these critics are in the minority.

[ 1 ] This is not to say that the phase of art denoted by post-modernism is accepted, merely that the need for a term to describe movements in art after the peak of abstract expressionism is well established.

[ 3 ] However, although the concept of change has come to consensus, and whether it is a post-modernist change, or a late modernist period, is undetermined, the consensus is that a profound change in the perception of works of art has occurred and a new era has been emerging on the world stage since at least the 1960s.

In literature, the term late modernism refers to works of literature produced after World War II.

[ 4 ] However, several different definitions of late modernist literature exist. The most common refers to works published between 1930 and 1939, or 1945.

[ 5 ] However, there are modernists, such as Basil Bunting (1900–1985) and T. S. Eliot (1888–1965), writing later than 1945, and Samuel Beckett , who died in 1989, has been described as a "later modernist".

[ 6 ] African-American author James Baldwin has also been called a "late modernist" as were poets of the Beat Generation . Eliot published two plays in the 1950s and Bunting's long modernist poem " Briggflatts " was published in 1965. The poets Charles Olson (1910–1970) and J. H. Prynne (b. 1936) are, amongst other writing in the second half of the 20th century, who have been described as late modernists.

[ 7 ] There is the further question as to whether late modernist literature differs in any important way from the modernist works produced before 1930. To confuse matters, more recently the term late modernism has been redefined by at least one critic and used to refer to works written after 1945, rather than 1930. With this usage goes the idea that the ideology of modernism was significantly re-shaped by the events of World War II, especially the Holocaust and the dropping of the atom bomb .

[ 8 ] Differences from postmodernism [ edit ] Late modernism describes movements which both arise from, and react against, trends in modernism and reject some aspect of modernism, while fully developing the conceptual potentiality of the modernist enterprise.

[ 9 ] In some descriptions post-modernism as a period in art is completed, whereas in others it is a continuing movement in contemporary art . In art, the specific traits of modernism which are cited are generally formal purity, medium specificity , art for art's sake , the possibility of authenticity in art , the importance or even possibility of universal truth in art, and the importance of an avant-garde and originality. This last point is one of particular controversy in art, where many institutions argue that being visionary, forward looking, cutting edge and progressive are crucial to the mission of art in the present, and that postmodern therefore, represents a contradiction of the value of "art of our times".

One compact definition offered is that while post-modernism acts in rejection of modernism's grand narratives of artistic direction, and to eradicate the boundaries between high and low forms of art, to disrupt genre and its conventions with collision, collage and fragmentation. Post-modern art is seen as believing that all stances are unstable and insincere, and therefore irony, parody and humor are the only positions which cannot be overturned by critique or later events.

Many of these traits are present in modern movements in art, particularly the rejection of the separation between high and low forms of art. However, these traits are considered fundamental to post-modern art, as opposed to merely present in one degree or another. One of the most important points of difference, however, between post-modernism, and modernism, as movements in art, is modernism's ultimately progressive stance that new works be more "forward looking" and advanced, whereas post-modern movements generally reject the notion that there can be advancement or progress in art per se, and thus one of the projects of art must be the overturning of the "myth of the avant-garde ". This relates to the negation of what post-structuralist philosophers call " metanarratives ".

Rosalind Krauss was one of the important annunciators of the view that avant-gardism was over, and that the new artistic era existed in a post-liberal and post-progress normalcy.

[ 10 ] An example of this viewpoint is explained by Robert Hughes in The Shock of the New [ 11 ] in his chapter "The Future That Was": Where did this new academy begin? At its origins the avant-garde myth had held the artist to be a precursor; the significant work is the one that prepares the future. The cult of the precursor ended by cluttering the landscape with absurd prophetic claims. The idea of a cultural avant-garde was unimaginable before 1800. It was fostered by the rise of liberalism . Where the taste of religious or secular courts determined patronage, "subversive" innovation was not esteemed as a sign of artistic quality. Nor was the artist's autonomy, that would come with the Romantics .

— Robert Hughes , The Shock of the New [ 12 ] As with all uses of the term postmodern there are critics of its application.

Kirk Varnedoe , for instance, stated that there is no such thing as postmodernism, and that the possibilities of modernism have not yet been exhausted.

[ 13 ] These critics are currently in the minority.

[ 1 ] Hilton Kramer describes postmodernism as "a creation of modernism at the end of its tether".

[ 14 ] Jean-François Lyotard , in Frederic Jameson 's analysis, does not hold that there is a postmodern stage radically different from the period of high modernism ; instead, postmodern discontent with this or that high modernist style is part of the experimentation of high modernism, giving birth to new modernisms.

[ 15 ] Radical movements in modern art [ edit ] Radical movements in Modernism, Modern art, and radical trends regarded as influential and potentially as precursors to late modernism and postmodernism emerged around World War I and particularly in its aftermath. With the introduction of the use of industrial artifacts in art, movements such as Cubism , Dada and Surrealism as well as techniques such as collage and artforms such as cinema and the rise of reproduction as a means of creating artworks. Both Pablo Picasso the Modernist and Marcel Duchamp the rebel created important and influential works from found objects .

Fauvism, cubism, dada, surrealism as the precedent [ edit ] Main articles: Fauvism , Cubism , Dada , and Surrealism Henri Matisse , The Dance (second version) , 1909 Hermitage Museum , St. Petersburg, Russia In the early 20th century, following Henri Matisse and André Derain 's impact as Fauvist painters and Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque 's monumental innovations and the worldwide success of Cubism and the emboldening of the avant-garde , Marcel Duchamp exhibited a urinal as a sculpture. Duchamp's intention was to have the audience understand the urinal as if it were a work of art, because he said it was. He generally referred to his works as " Readymades ." The Fountain ,  was a urinal signed with the pseudonym R. Mutt, that shocked the art world in 1917. Duchamp's work is generally understood to be a part of the Dada movement.

Dadaism can be viewed as part of the modernist propensity to challenge established styles and forms, along with Surrealism , futurism and abstract expressionism .

[ 16 ] From a chronological point of view Dada is located solidly within modernism, however a number of critics have held that it anticipates postmodernism, while others, such as Ihab Hassan and Steven Connor , consider it a possible changeover point between modernism and postmodernism.

[ 17 ] Fauvism and Henri Matisse in particular became an important influence on both abstract expressionism and color field painting , important milestones of Late Modernism.

The Dance is commonly recognized as "a key point of Matisse's career and in the development of modern painting".

[ 18 ] With its large expanse of blue, simplicity of design and emphasis on pure feeling the painting was enormously influential to American artists who viewed it at MoMA in New York City.

High art and culture [ edit ] The ignition point for the definition of modernism as a movement was the austere rejection of popular culture as kitsch by important post-war artists and taste-makers, most notably Clement Greenberg with his essay Avant-Garde and Kitsch , first published in Partisan Review in 1939.

[ 19 ] During the 1940s and 1950s Greenberg proved to be an articulate and powerful art critic. In particular his writing on American Abstract expressionism, and 20th-century European modernism persuasively made the case for High art and culture. In 1961 Art and Culture , Beacon Press, a highly influential collection of essays by Clement Greenberg was first published. Greenberg is primarily thought of as a formalist art critic and many of his most important essays are crucial to the understanding of Modern art history, and the history of modernism and Late Modernism.

[ 20 ] Jackson Pollock: abstract expressionism [ edit ] Main articles: Jackson Pollock , Abstract expressionism , Process art , and Western painting During the late 1940s Pollock 's radical approach to painting revolutionized the potential for all contemporary art that followed him. To some extent Pollock realized that the journey toward making a work of art was as important as the work of art itself. Like Pablo Picasso 's innovative reinventions of painting and sculpture near the turn of the century via Cubism and constructed sculpture, Pollock redefined the way art gets made at the mid-century point. Pollock's move — away from easel painting and conventionality — was a liberating signal to his contemporaneous artists and to all that came after. Artists realized that Jackson Pollock's process — working on the floor, unstretched raw canvas, from all four sides, using artist materials, industrial materials, imagery, non-imagery, throwing linear skeins of paint, dripping, drawing, staining, brushing, essentially blasted artmaking beyond any prior boundary.

Abstract expressionism in general expanded and developed the definitions and possibilities that artists had available for the creation of new works of art. In a sense the innovations of Jackson Pollock, Willem de Kooning , Franz Kline , Mark Rothko , Philip Guston , Hans Hofmann , Clyfford Still , Barnett Newman , Ad Reinhardt and others opened the floodgates to the diversity and scope of all the art that followed them.

Neo-Dada, collage and assemblage [ edit ] Main articles: Collage , Assemblage art , and Installation art Related to abstract expressionism was the emergence of combined manufactured items — with artist materials, moving away from previous conventions of painting and sculpture. This trend in art is exemplified by the work of Robert Rauschenberg , whose "combines" in the 1950s were forerunners of Pop Art and Installation art , and made use of the assemblage of large physical objects, including stuffed animals, birds and commercial photography .

Leo Steinberg uses the term postmodernism in 1969 to describe Rauschenberg's "flatbed" picture plane, containing a range of cultural images and artifacts that had not been compatible with the pictorial field of premodernist and modernist painting.

[ 21 ] Craig Owens goes further, identifying the significance of Rauschenberg's work not as a representation of, in Steinberg's view, "the shift from nature to culture", but as a demonstration of the impossibility of accepting their opposition.

[ 22 ] Steven Best and Douglas Kellner identify Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns as part of the transitional phase, influenced by Marcel Duchamp , between modernism and postmodernism. Both used images of ordinary objects, or the objects themselves, in their work, while retaining the abstraction and painterly gestures of high modernism.

[ 23 ] Abstract painting and sculpture in the 1960s and 1970s [ edit ] David Smith , CUBI VI , 1963 In abstract painting and sculpture during the 1950s and 1960s Geometric abstraction emerged as an important direction in the works of many sculptors and painters. In painting color field painting , minimalism , hard-edge painting and lyrical abstraction [ 24 ] constituted radical new directions.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Helen Frankenthaler , Morris Louis , Frank Stella , Ellsworth Kelly , Richard Diebenkorn [ 27 ] David Smith , Sir Anthony Caro , Mark di Suvero , Gene Davis , Kenneth Noland , Jules Olitski , Isaac Witkin , Anne Truitt , Kenneth Snelson , Al Held , Ronald Davis , [ 28 ] Howard Hodgkin , Larry Poons , Brice Marden , Robert Mangold , Walter Darby Bannard , Dan Christensen , Larry Zox , Ronnie Landfield , Charles Hinman , Sam Gilliam , Peter Reginato , were some of the artists whose works characterized abstract painting and sculpture in the 1960s.

[ 29 ] Lyrical abstraction shares similarities with color field painting and abstract expressionism especially in the freewheeling usage of paint — texture and surface. Direct drawing, calligraphic use of line, the effects of brushed, splattered, stained, squeegeed, poured, and splashed paint superficially resemble the effects seen in abstract expressionism and color field painting. However the styles are markedly different. Setting it apart from abstract expressionism and action painting of the 1940s and 1950s is the approach to composition and drama. As seen in action painting there is an emphasis on brushstrokes, high compositional drama, dynamic compositional tension. While in lyrical abstraction there is a sense of compositional randomness, all over composition, low key and relaxed compositional drama and an emphasis on process, repetition, and an all over sensibility.
During the 1960s and 1970s artists as powerful and influential as Robert Motherwell , Adolph Gottlieb , Phillip Guston , Lee Krasner , Cy Twombly , Robert Rauschenberg , Jasper Johns , Richard Diebenkorn , Josef Albers , Elmer Bischoff , Agnes Martin , Al Held , Sam Francis , Ellsworth Kelly , Morris Louis , Helen Frankenthaler , Gene Davis , Frank Stella , Kenneth Noland , Joan Mitchell , Friedel Dzubas , and younger artists like Brice Marden , Robert Mangold , Sam Gilliam , John Hoyland , Sean Scully , Elizabeth Murray , Larry Poons , Walter Darby Bannard , Larry Zox , Ronnie Landfield , Ronald Davis , Dan Christensen , Joan Snyder , Ross Bleckner , Archie Rand , Susan Crile , Mino Argento [ 30 ] and dozens of others continued to produce vital and influential paintings.

Minimalism and post-minimalism [ edit ] Main articles: Minimalism and Postminimalism Frank Stella , Großbild , 1967 By the early 1960s minimalism emerged as an abstract movement in art (with roots in geometric abstraction via Malevich , the Bauhaus and Mondrian ). Important artists who emerged as pioneers of minimalism include Frank Stella , Larry Bell , Ad Reinhardt , Agnes Martin , Barnett Newman , Donald Judd , Tony Smith , Carl Andre , Robert Smithson , Sol LeWitt , Dan Flavin , Robert Mangold , Robert Morris , and Ronald Bladen among others. These artists also frequently employed shaped canvases , as in the example Richard Tuttle .

Minimal art rejected the idea of relational, and subjective painting, the complexity of abstract expressionist surfaces, and the emotional zeitgeist and polemics present in the arena of action painting .

Minimalism argued that extreme simplicity could capture all of the sublime representation needed in art. Associated with painters such as Frank Stella , minimalism in painting and sculpture, as opposed to other areas, is a late modernist movement and depending on the context can be construed as a precursor to the post modern movement.

Hal Foster , in his essay The Crux of Minimalism , examines the extent to which Donald Judd and Robert Morris both acknowledge and exceed Greenbergian modernism in their published definitions of minimalism.

[ 31 ] He argues that minimalism is not a "dead end" of modernism, but a "paradigm shift toward postmodern practices that continue to be elaborated today." [ 32 ] In the late 1960s the term Post-minimalism was coined by Robert Pincus-Witten to describe minimalist derived art which had content and contextual overtones which minimalism rejected, and was applied to the work of Eva Hesse , Keith Sonnier , Richard Serra and new work by former minimalists Robert Smithson , Robert Morris , Sol LeWitt , and Barry Le Va, and others.

[ 33 ] Rosalind Krauss argues that by 1968 artists such as Morris, LeWitt, Smithson and Serra had "entered a situation the logical conditions of which can no longer be described as modernist." [ 34 ] The expansion of the category of sculpture to include land art and architecture , "brought about the shift into postmodernism." [ 35 ] Minimalists like Donald Judd , Dan Flavin , Carl Andre , Agnes Martin , John McCracken and others continued to produce their late modernist paintings and sculpture for the remainder of their careers.

Process art [ edit ] Main article: Process art By the late 1960s however, process art emerged as a revolutionary concept and movement that encompassed painting and sculpture, via lyrical abstraction and the postminimalist movement, and in early Conceptual Art .

Eva Hesse , Robert Smithson , Walter De Maria , Keith Sonnier , Richard Serra , Nancy Graves , Jannis Kounellis , Bruce Nauman , Richard Tuttle , Mel Bochner , Hannah Wilke , Lynda Benglis , Robert Morris , Sol LeWitt , Barry Le Va , Michael Heizer , Lawrence Weiner , Joseph Kosuth , and Alan Saret , were some of the process artists that emerged during the 1960s. Process art as inspired by Pollock enabled artists to experiment with and make use of a diverse encyclopedia of style, content, material, placement, sense of time, scale, size, and plastic and real space.

[ 36 ] Pop art [ edit ] Main articles: Pop art and Western painting The term "pop art" was used by Lawrence Alloway to describe paintings that celebrated consumerism of the post World War II era.

[ 37 ] This movement rejected abstract expressionism and its focus on the hermeneutic and psychological interior, in favor of art which depicted, and often celebrated material consumer culture, advertising, and iconography of the mass production age. The early works of David Hockney and the works of Richard Hamilton , John McHale , and Eduardo Paolozzi were considered seminal examples in the movement. While later American examples include the bulk of the careers of Andy Warhol and Roy Lichtenstein and his use of Benday dots , a technique used in commercial reproduction. There is a clear connection between the radical works of Duchamp , the rebellious Dadaist — with a sense of humor; and pop artists like Claes Oldenburg , Andy Warhol , Roy Lichtenstein and the others.

In general pop art and minimalism began as modernist movements, a shift in the paradigm and a philosophical split between formalism and anti-formalism in the early 1970s caused those movements to be viewed by some as precursors, or transitioning to postmodern art. Other modern movements cited as influential to postmodern art are Conceptual art , Dada and Surrealism and the use of techniques such as assemblage , montage , collage , bricolage and art forms which used recording or reproduction as the basis for artworks.

There are differing opinions as to whether pop art is a late modernist movement or is Postmodern .

Thomas McEvilly , agreeing with Dave Hickey , says that postmodernism in the visual arts began with the first exhibitions of pop art in 1962, "though it took about twenty years before postmodernism became a dominant attitude in the visual arts." [ 38 ] Frederic Jameson , too, considers pop art to be postmodern.

[ 39 ] One way that Pop art is postmodern is that it breaks down what Andreas Huyssen calls the "Great Divide" between high art and popular culture.

[ 40 ] Postmodernism emerges from a "generational refusal of the categorical certainties of high modernism." [ 41 ] Although to presuppose that modernism stands for "high art" only, and is in any way certain as to what constitutes "high" art is to profoundly and basically misunderstand modernism.

Performance art and happenings [ edit ] Main articles: Performance art , List of performance artists , and Happenings Carolee Schneemann performing her piece Interior Scroll, 1975.

Schneemann, Yves Klein , Yayoi Kusama , Charlotte Moorman and Yoko Ono were pioneers of performance based works of art, that often entailed nudity.

[ 42 ] During the late 1950s and 1960s artists with a wide range of interests began to push the boundaries of contemporary art .

Yves Klein in France, and Carolee Schneemann , Yayoi Kusama , Charlotte Moorman , and Yoko Ono in New York City were pioneers of performance based works of art. Groups like The Living Theater with Julian Beck and Judith Malina collaborated with sculptors and painters creating environments; radically changing the relationship between audience and performer especially in their piece Paradise Now . The Judson Dance Theater located at the Judson Memorial Church , New York City , and the Judson dancers, notably Yvonne Rainer , Trisha Brown , Elaine Summers , Sally Gross, Simonne Forti, Deborah Hay , Lucinda Childs , Steve Paxton and others collaborated with artists Robert Morris , Robert Whitman , John Cage , Robert Rauschenberg , and engineers like Billy Klüver . These performances were often designed to be the creation of a new art form, combining sculpture, dance, and music or sound, often with audience participation. The works were characterized by the reductive philosophies of minimalism , and the spontaneous improvisation, and expressivity of abstract expressionism .

During the same period — the late 1950s through the mid-1960s various avant-garde artists created Happenings . Happenings were mysterious and often spontaneous and unscripted gatherings of artists and their friends and relatives in varied specified locations. Often incorporating exercises in absurdity, physical exercise, costumes, spontaneous nudity , and various random and seemingly disconnected acts.

Allan Kaprow , Claes Oldenburg , Jim Dine , Red Grooms , and Robert Whitman among others were notable creators of Happenings.

Fluxus [ edit ] Main article: Fluxus Fluxus was named and loosely organized in 1962 by George Maciunas (1931–78), a Lithuanian-born American artist. Fluxus traces its beginnings to John Cage 's 1957 to 1959 Experimental Composition classes at the New School for Social Research in New York City. Many of his students were artists working in other media with little or no background in music. Cage's students included Fluxus founding members Jackson Mac Low , Al Hansen , George Brecht and Dick Higgins .

Fluxus encouraged a do it yourself aesthetic, and valued simplicity over complexity. Like Dada before it, Fluxus included a strong current of anti-commercialism and an anti-art sensibility, disparaging the conventional market-driven art world in favor of an artist-centered creative practice. Fluxus artists preferred to work with whatever materials were at hand, and either created their own work or collaborated in the creation process with their colleagues.

Andreas Huyssen criticises attempts to claim Fluxus for postmodernism as, "either the master-code of postmodernism or the ultimately unrepresentable art movement – as it were, postmodernism's sublime." [ 43 ] Instead he sees Fluxus as a major Neo-Dadaist phenomena within the avant-garde tradition. It did not represent a major advance in the development of artistic strategies, though it did express a rebellion against, "the administered culture of the 1950s, in which a moderate, domesticated modernism served as ideological prop to the Cold War ." [ 44 ] High and low [ edit ] As a kind of response to Clement Greenberg 's Avant-Garde and Kitsch [ 45 ] in 1990 Kirk Varnedoe and Adam Gopnik curated High and Low: Modern Art and Popular Culture , at New York's Museum of Modern Art . The exhibition attempted to elucidate the extent that artists and high culture drew on and from popular culture. Although universally panned at the time as the only event that could bring Douglas Crimp and Hilton Kramer together in a chorus of scorn.

[ 46 ] The exhibition is remembered today as a benchmark of the conflict between late modernism and postmodernism.

Movements associated with Postmodern art [ edit ] Conceptual art [ edit ] Main article: Conceptual art Conceptual art became an important development in contemporary art in the late 1960s, it delivered an influential critique on the status quo. Late modernism expanded and contracted during the late 1960s and for some, conceptual art made a complete break with modernism. Sometimes it is labelled as postmodern because it is expressly involved in deconstruction of what makes a work of art, "art". Conceptual art, because it is often designed to confront, offend or attack notions held by many of the people who view it, is regarded with particular controversy. Duchamp can be seen as a precursor to conceptual art. Thus, because Fountain was exhibited, it was a sculpture.

Marcel Duchamp famously gave up "art" in favor of chess .

[ 47 ] Avant-garde composer David Tudor created a piece, Reunion (1968), written jointly with Lowell Cross that features a chess game, where each move triggers a lighting effect or projection. At the premiere, the game was played between John Cage and Marcel Duchamp .

[ 48 ] Some other famous examples being John Cage 's 4' 33" which is four minutes and thirty three seconds of silence and Rauschenberg's Erased De Kooning Drawing .  Many conceptual works take the position that art is created by the viewer viewing an object or act as art, not from the intrinsic qualities of the work itself.

Installation art [ edit ] Main article: Installation art An important series of movements in art which have consistently been described as postmodern involved installation art and creation of artifacts that are conceptual in nature.  One example being the signs of Jenny Holtzer which use the devices of art to convey specific messages, such as "Protect Me From What I Want".  Installation Art has been important in determining the spaces selected for museums of contemporary art in order to be able to hold the large works which are composed of vast collages of manufactured and found objects. These installations and collages are often electrified, with moving parts and lights.

They are often designed to create environmental effects, as Christo and Jeanne-Claude 's Iron Curtain which was a row of barrels intended to create a traffic jam .

Intermedia and multi-media [ edit ] Main article: Intermedia Another trend in art which has been associated with the term postmodern is the use of a number of different media together.

Intermedia , a term coined by Dick Higgins and meant to convey new artforms along the lines of Fluxus , Concrete Poetry , Found objects , Performance art , and Computer art . Higgins was the publisher of the Something Else Press , a Concrete poet , married to artist Alison Knowles and an admirer of Marcel Duchamp .

Ihab Hassan includes, "Intermedia, the fusion of forms, the confusion of realms", in his list of the characteristics of postmodern art.

[ 49 ] One of the most common forms of "multi-media art" is the use of video-tape and CRT monitors, termed Video art . While the theory of combining multiple arts into one art is quite old, and has been revived periodically, the postmodern manifestation is often in combination with performance art , where the dramatic subtext is removed, and what is left is the specific statements of the artist in question or the conceptual statement of their action.

Appropriation art and neo-conceptual art [ edit ] Main articles: Appropriation art and neo-conceptual art In his 1980 essay The Allegorical Impulse: Toward a Theory of Postmodernism , Craig Owens identifies the re-emergence of an allegorical impulse as characteristic of postmodern art. This impulse can be seen in the appropriation art of artists such as Sherrie Levine and Robert Longo because, "Allegorical imagery is appropriated imagery." [ 50 ] Appropriation art debunks modernist notions of artistic genius and originality and is more ambivalent and contradictory than modern art, simultaneously installing and subverting ideologies, "being both critical and complicit." [ 51 ] Neo-expressionism [ edit ] Main article: Neo-expressionism The return to the traditional art forms of sculpture and painting in the late 1970s and early 1980s seen in the work of neo-expressionist artists such as Georg Baselitz and Julian Schnabel has been described as a postmodern tendency, [ 52 ] and one of the first coherent movements to emerge in the postmodern era.

[ 53 ] Its strong links with the commercial art market has raised questions, however, both about its status as a postmodern movement and the definition of postmodernism itself. Hal Foster states that neo-expressionism was complicit with the conservative cultural politics of the Reagan-Bush era in the U.S.

[ 32 ] Félix Guattari disregards the "large promotional operations dubbed 'neo-expressionism' in Germany", (an example of a "fad that maintains itself by means of publicity") as a too easy way for him "to demonstrate that postmodernism is nothing but the last gasp of modernism." These critiques of neo-expressionism reveal that money and public relations really sustained contemporary art world credibility in America during the same period that conceptual and feminist art practices were systematically reevaluating modern art.

[ 54 ] Institutional Critique [ edit ] Main article: Institutional Critique Critiques on the institutions of art (principally museums and galleries) are made in the work of Marcel Broodthaers , Daniel Buren and Hans Haacke .

Late modernist painting and sculpture in the 21st century [ edit ] Main articles: Contemporary art , History of painting , and Sculpture Anthony Caro , 1996 Ronnie Landfield , 1999 Ryan McCourt , 2002 Richard Serra , 2006 John Baeder , 2007 Anish Kapoor , 2008 At the beginning of the 21st century contemporary painting, contemporary sculpture and contemporary art in general continues in several contiguous modes, characterized by the idea of pluralism . The "crisis" in painting, sculpture and current art and current art criticism today is brought about by pluralism . There is no consensus, nor need there be, as to a representative style of the age. There is an anything goes attitude that prevails; an "everything going on", and consequently "nothing going on" syndrome; this creates an aesthetic traffic jam with no firm and clear direction and with every lane on the artistic superhighway filled to capacity. Consequently, magnificent and important works of art continue to be made albeit in a wide variety of styles and aesthetic temperaments, the marketplace being left to judge merit. Frank Stella's La scienza della pigrizia ( The Science of Laziness ), from 1984, is an example of Stella's transition from two-dimensionality to three-dimensionality and an excellent example of Late Modernism.

Hard-edge painting , geometric abstraction , appropriation , hyperrealism , photorealism , expressionism , minimalism , lyrical abstraction , pop art , op art , abstract expressionism , color field painting , monochrome painting , neo-expressionism , collage , intermedia painting, assemblage painting, digital painting , postmodern painting, Neo-Dada painting, shaped canvas painting, environmental mural painting , traditional figure painting , landscape painting , portrait painting , are a few continuing and current directions in painting at the beginning of the 21st century. The New European Painting of the 1990s and the beginning of the 21st century, with painters like Gerhard Richter , Bracha Ettinger and Luc Tuymans , has opened a complex and interesting dialogue with the legacy of American color field and lyrical abstraction on the one hand and figurality on the other hand.

See also [ edit ] High-tech architecture History of painting Western painting Late modernity Modernist project Remodernism Postmodern art Classificatory disputes about art 20th-century Western painting Notes and references [ edit ] ^ a b c The Citadel of Modernism Falls to Deconstructionists , 1992 critical essay, The Triumph of Modernism , 2006, Hilton Kramer , pp. 218–221.

^ Man of his words: Pepe Karmel on Kirk Varnedoe – Passages , critical essay, Artforum , Nov. 2003 by Pepe Karmel ^ Clement Greenberg: Modernism and Postmodernism Archived 2020-11-27 at the Wayback Machine , seventh paragraph of the essay. URL accessed on June 15, 2006 ^ Genter, Robert (January 13, 2011).

Late Modernism: Art, Culture, and Politics in Cold War America . University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 9780812200072 – via Project MUSE.

^ Cheryl Hindrichs, "Late Modernism, 1928–1945: Criticism and Theory" Literature Compass , Volume 8, Issue 11, pages 840–855, November 2011;  J. H. Dettmar "Modernism". David Scott Kastan. Oxford University Press 2005.

^ Morris Dickstein, "An Outsider to His Own Life", Books, The New York Times , August 3, 1997.

^ Late modernist poetics: From Pound to Prynne by Anthony Mellors; see also Prynne's publisher, Bloodaxe Books.

^ Late modernist poetics: From Pound to Prynne by Anthony Mellors.

^ The Originality of the Avant Garde and Other Modernist Myths Rosalind E. Krauss , Publisher: The MIT Press; Reprint edition (July 9, 1986), Part I, Modernist Myths , pp.8–171 ^ The Originality of the Avant Garde and Other Modernist Myths Rosalind E. Krauss , Publisher: The MIT Press; Reprint edition (July 9, 1986), Part I,'Modernist Myths , pp.8–171, Part II, Toward Post-Modernism , pp. 196–291.

^ The Shock of the New Robert Hughes , Publisher: Knopf; Revised edition (August 13, 1991), ^ Hughes, Robert (August 13, 1991), "The Future That Was", The Shock of the New (Revised ed.), Knopf ^ William R. Everdell, The First Moderns: Profiles in the Origins of Twentieth-century Thought , University of Chicago Press, 1997, p. 4.

ISBN 0-226-22480-5 ^ Quoted in Oliver Bennett, Cultural Pessimism: Narratives of Decline in the Postmodern World , Edinburgh University Press, 2001, p. 131.

ISBN 0-7486-0936-9 ^ Frederic Jameson, Foreword to Jean-François Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition , Manchester University Press, 1997, pxvi.

ISBN 0-7190-1450-6 ^ Simon Malpas, The Postmodern , Routledge, 2005. p. 17.

ISBN 0-415-28064-8 ^ Mark A. Pegrum, Challenging Modernity: Dada Between Modern and Postmodern , Berghahn Books, 2000, pp. 2–3.

ISBN 1-57181-130-3 ^ Russell T. Clement.

Four French Symbolists . Greenwood Press, 1996. Page 114.

^ Avant-Garde and Kitsch Archived 2007-10-13 at the Wayback Machine ^ Clement Greenberg: Modernism and Postmodernism Archived 2020-11-27 at the Wayback Machine , URL accessed on June 15, 2006 ^ Douglas Crimp in Hal Foster (ed), Postmodern Culture , Pluto Press, 1985 (first published as The Anti-Aesthetic , 1983). p. 44.

ISBN 0-7453-0003-0 ^ Craig Owens, Beyond Recognition: Representation, Power, and Culture , London and Berkeley: University of California Press (1992), pp. 74–75.

^ Steven Best, Douglas Kellner, The Postmodern Turn , Guilford Press, 1997, p. 174.

ISBN 1-57230-221-6 ^ Ratcliff, Carter. The New Informalists, Art News, v. 68, n. 8, December 1969, p.72.

^ Barbara Rose .

American Painting. Part Two: The Twentieth Century . Published by Skira – Rizzoli, New York, 1969 ^ Walter Darby Bannard . "Notes on American Painting of the Sixties." Artforum , January 1970, vol. 8, no. 5, pp.40–45.

^ Barbara Rose, American painting, the twentieth century (New York : Skira/Rizzoli, 1986.) ISBN 2-605-00308-6 .

^ Michael Fried. "Ronald Davis: Surface and Illusion." Artforum, vol. 5, no. 8. April, 1967. pp. 37–41, Cover Illus.: Six-Ninths Blue, 1966 ^ Aldrich, Larry. Young Lyrical Painters, Art in America, v. 57, n. 6, November–December 1969, pp. 104–113.

^ "Shade acrylic canvases in which geometric shapes are juxtaposed".

Betty Parsons Gallery. The New Yorker. Oct. 3, 1977 p.8 ^ Hal Foster, The Return of the Real: The Avant-garde at the End of the Century , MIT Press, 1996, pp. 44–53.

ISBN 0-262-56107-7 ^ a b Hal Foster, The Return of the Real: The Avant-garde at the End of the Century , MIT Press, 1996, p. 36.

ISBN 0-262-56107-7 ^ Movers and Shakers, New York , "Leaving C&M", by Sarah Douglas, Art+Auction , March 2007, V.XXXNo7.

^ The Originality of the Avant Garde and Other Modernist Myths Rosalind E. Krauss , Publisher: The MIT Press; Reprint edition (July 9, 1986), Sculpture in the Expanded Field pp.287 ^ The Originality of the Avant Garde and Other Modernist Myths Rosalind E. Krauss , Publisher: The MIT Press; Reprint edition (July 9, 1986), Sculpture in the Expanded Field (1979). pp.290 ^ Source: "Guggenheim Collection – Glossary – Process art" . Archived from the original on 2007-09-27 . Retrieved 2007-07-28 .

(accessed: March 15, 2007) ^ Topics in American Art since 1945 , pp. 119–122, by Lawrence Alloway , 1975 by W.W. Norton and Company, NYC ISBN 0-393-04401-7 ^ Thomas McEvilly in Richard Roth, Jean Dubuffet, Susan King, Beauty Is Nowhere: Ethical Issues in Art and Design , Routledge, 1998. p. 29.

ISBN 90-5701-311-8 ^ Frederick Jameson in Hal Foster, Postmodern Culture , Pluto Press, 1985 (first published as The Anti-Aesthetic , 1983). p. 111.

ISBN 0-7453-0003-0 ^ Simon Malpas, The Postmodern , Routledge, 2005. p. 20.

ISBN 0-415-28064-8 ^ Stuart Sim, The Routledge Companion to Postmodernism , Routledge, 2001. p. 148.

ISBN 0-415-24307-6 ^ "Carolee Schneemann Foundation" .

www.schneemannfoundation.org .

^ Andreas Huyssen, Twilight Memories: Marking Time in a Culture of Amnesia , Routledge, 1995. p. 192.

ISBN 0-415-90934-1 ^ Andreas Huyssen, Twilight Memories: Marking Time in a Culture of Amnesia , Routledge, 1995. p. 196.

ISBN 0-415-90934-1 ^ Clement Greenberg , Art and Culture , Beacon Press, 1961 ^ Kirk Varnedoe, 1946–2003 – Front Page – Obituary – Art in America ,  Oct, 2003 by Marcia E. Vetrocq ^ Marcel Duchamp ^ David Tudor ^ Ihab Hassan in Lawrence E. Cahoone, From Modernism to Postmodernism: An Anthology , Blackwell Publishing, 2003. p. 13.

ISBN 0-631-23213-3 ^ Craig Owens, Beyond Recognition: Representation, Power, and Culture , London and Berkeley: University of California Press (1992), p. 54 ^ Steven Best and Douglas Kellner, The Postmodern Turn , Guilford Press, 1997. p. 186.

ISBN 1-57230-221-6 ^ Tim Woods, Beginning Postmodernism , Manchester University Press, 1999. p. 125.

ISBN 0-7190-5211-4 ^ Fred S. Kleiner, Christin J. Mamiya, Gardner's Art Through the Ages: The Western Perspective , Thomson Wadsworth, 2006, p. 842.

ISBN 0-495-00480-4 ^ Erika Doss , Twentieth-Century American Art , Oxford University Press, 2002, p. 210.

ISBN 0-19-284239-0 Sources [ edit ] The Triumph of Modernism : The Art World, 1985–2005, Hilton Kramer , 2006, ISBN 0-15-666370-8 Pictures of Nothing: Abstract Art since Pollock (A.W. Mellon Lectures in the Fine Arts), Kirk Varnedoe , 2003 Art of the Postmodern Era : From the Late 1960s to the Early 1990s, Irving Sandler Postmodernism (Movements in Modern Art) Eleanor Heartney Sculpture in the Age of Doubt Thomas McEvilley 1999 The Originality of the Avant-Garde and Other Modernist Myths , 1988, Rosalind Krauss Art and Culture , Beacon Press, 1961, Clement Greenberg ISBN 0-8070-6681-8 External links [ edit ] History of Painting History of Art: From Paleolithic Age to Contemporary Art Robert Hughes from Artchive Concerning the Spiritual in Art Wassily Kandinsky Malady of Writing. Modernism you can dance to An online radio show that presents a humorous version of modernism v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category v t e Modernism Movements Acmeism Art Deco Art Nouveau Ashcan School Constructivism Cubism Dada Expressionism Der Blaue Reiter Die Brücke Music Fauvism Functionalism Bauhaus Futurism Imagism Lettrism Neoplasticism De Stijl Orphism Surrealism Symbolism Synchromism Tonalism Literary arts Literature Apollinaire Barnes Beckett Bely Breton Broch Bulgakov Chekhov Conrad Döblin Forster Faulkner Flaubert Ford Gide Hamsun Hašek Hemingway Hesse Joyce Kafka Koestler Lawrence Mann Mansfield Marinetti Musil Dos Passos Platonov Porter Proust Stein Svevo Unamuno Woolf Poetry Akhmatova Aldington Auden Cendrars Crane H.D.

Desnos Eliot Éluard Elytis George Jacob Lorca Lowell (Amy) Lowell (Robert) Mallarmé Moore Owen Pessoa Pound Rilke Seferis Stevens Thomas Tzara Valéry Williams Yeats Works In Search of Lost Time (1913–1927) The Metamorphosis (1915) Ulysses (1922) The Waste Land (1922) The Magic Mountain (1924) Mrs Dalloway (1925) The Sun Also Rises (1926) The Master and Margarita (1928–1940) The Sound and the Fury (1929) Visual arts Painting Albers Arp Balthus Bellows Boccioni Bonnard Brâncuși Braque Calder Cassatt Cézanne Chagall Chirico Claudel Dalí Degas Delaunay Delaunay Demuth Dix Doesburg Duchamp Dufy Ensor Ernst Gauguin Giacometti Goncharova Gris Grosz Höch Hopper Kahlo Kandinsky Kirchner Klee Kokoschka Kooning Lawrence Léger Magritte Malevich Manet Marc Matisse Metzinger Miró Modigliani Mondrian Monet Moore Munch Nolde O'Keeffe Picabia Picasso Pissarro Ray Redon Renoir Rodin Rousseau Schiele Seurat Signac Sisley Soutine Steichen Stieglitz Toulouse-Lautrec Van Gogh Vuillard Wood Film Akerman Aldrich Antonioni Avery Bergman Bresson Buñuel Carné Cassavetes Chaplin Clair Cocteau Dassin Deren Dovzhenko Dreyer Edwards Eisenstein Epstein Fassbinder Fellini Flaherty Ford Fuller Gance Godard Hitchcock Hubley Jones Keaton Kubrick Kuleshov Kurosawa Lang Losey Lupino Lye Marker Minnelli Murnau Ozu Pabst Pudovkin Ray (Nicholas) Ray (Satyajit) Resnais Renoir Richardson Rossellini Sirk Sjöström Sternberg Tarkovsky Tati Trnka Truffaut Varda Vertov Vigo Welles Wiene Wood Architecture Breuer Bunshaft Gaudí Gropius Guimard Horta Hundertwasser Johnson Kahn Le Corbusier Loos Melnikov Mendelsohn Mies Nervi Neutra Niemeyer Rietveld Saarinen Steiner Sullivan Tatlin Wright Works A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte (1886) Mont Sainte-Victoir (1887) The Starry Night (1889) Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907) The Dance (1909–1910) Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 (1912) Black Square (1915) The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1920) Ballet Mécanique (1923) Battleship Potemkin (1925) Metropolis (1927) Un Chien Andalou (1929) Villa Savoye (1931) Fallingwater (1936) Citizen Kane (1941) Meshes of the Afternoon (1943) Performing arts Music Antheil Bartók Berg Berio Boulanger Boulez Copland Debussy Dutilleux Falla Feldman Górecki Hindemith Honegger Ives Janáček Ligeti Lutosławski Milhaud Nono Partch Russolo Satie Schaeffer Schoenberg Scriabin Stockhausen Strauss Stravinsky Szymanowski Varèse Villa-Lobos Webern Weill Theatre Anderson Anouilh Artaud Beckett Brecht Chekhov Ibsen Jarry Kaiser Maeterlinck Mayakovsky O'Casey O'Neill Osborne Pirandello Piscator Strindberg Toller Wedekind Wilder Witkiewicz Dance Balanchine Cunningham Diaghilev Duncan Fokine Fuller Graham Holm Laban Massine Nijinsky Shawn Sokolow St. Denis Tamiris Wiesenthal Wigman Works Don Juan (1888) Ubu Roi (1896) Verklärte Nacht (1899) Pelléas et Mélisande (1902) Salome (1905) The Firebird (1910) Afternoon of a Faun (1912) The Rite of Spring (1913) Fountain (1917) Six Characters in Search of an Author (1921) The Threepenny Opera (1928) Waiting for Godot (1953) Related American modernism Armory Show Avant-garde Ballets Russes Bloomsbury Group Buddhist modernism Classical Hollywood cinema Degenerate art Ecomodernism Experimental film Film noir Fin de siècle Fourth dimension in art Fourth dimension in literature Grosvenor School of Modern Art Hanshinkan Modernism High modernism Hippie modernism Impressionism Music Literature Post- Incoherents International Style Late modernism Late modernity List of art movements List of avant-garde artists List of modernist poets Maximalism Metamodernism Modernity Neo-primitivism Neo-romanticism New Hollywood New Objectivity Poetic realism Pop Art Pulp noir Reactionary modernism Remodernism Second Viennese School Structural film Underground film Vulgar modernism ← Romanticism Postmodernism → Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐zkq52
Cached time: 20250814225856
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.811 seconds
Real time usage: 0.993 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4209/1000000
Revision size: 47635/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 252013/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4245/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 31/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 121548/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.389/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18378823/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  650.987      1 -total
 48.97%  318.778      8 Template:Navbox
 29.58%  192.582      1 Template:Reflist
 26.66%  173.543      1 Template:Modernism
 16.79%  109.275      8 Template:Lang
 16.01%  104.228      1 Template:Cite_book
 14.32%   93.192      1 Template:Westernart
 10.91%   71.034      1 Template:Short_description
  6.22%   40.523     37 Template:Small
  6.19%   40.309      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12487988:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814225856 and revision id 1303849244. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Late_modernism&oldid=1303849244 " Categories : Modern art Contemporary art movements Aftermath of World War II Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 11:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Late modernism 4 languages Add topic

