Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work 2 Work 3 Eponymous terms 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Josef Stefan 50 languages العربية Asturianu تۆرکجه Башҡортса Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Kreyòl ayisyen Latviešu Magyar Македонски Malagasy मराठी مصرى မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Jožef Stefan ) Carinthian Slovene physicist, mathematician and poet (1835–1893) Josef Stefan Born Jožef Štefan ( 1835-03-24 ) 24 March 1835 St. Peter (today in Klagenfurt ), Austrian Empire Died 7 January 1893 (1893-01-07) (aged 57) Vienna , Austria-Hungary Alma mater University of Vienna Known for Stefan–Boltzmann law Stefan–Boltzmann constant Stefan problem Stefan's equation Stefan's formula Stefan flow Stefan number Maxwell–Stefan diffusion Squeeze flow Awards Lieben Prize (1865) Scientific career Fields Physicist Institutions University of Vienna Academic advisors Andreas von Ettingshausen Doctoral students Ludwig Boltzmann Marian Smoluchowski Johann Josef Loschmidt Josef Stefan ( Slovene : Jožef Štefan ; 24 March 1835 – 7 January 1893) [ 1 ] was a Carinthian Slovene physicist , mathematician, and poet of the Austrian Empire .

Life and work [ edit ] Stefan was born in the village of St. Peter (Slovene: Sveti Peter ) on the outskirts of Klagenfurt ) to Aleš (Aleksander) Stefan (1805-1872) and Marija Startinik (1815-1863). His parents, both ethnic Slovenes, did not marry until Josef was eleven. The Stefans were of modest means; his father was a milling assistant and his mother served as a maidservant. Josef was their only child.

[ 2 ] Stefan attended elementary school in Klagenfurt, where he showed talent, and was recommended for enrollment at the Klagenfurt Lyceum [ de ] in 1845. At thirteen, he experienced the revolutionary year of 1848 , which inspired him to show sympathy toward the Slovene literary and national movement.

After having graduated top of his class in high school, he briefly considered joining the Benedictine Order , but his great interest in physics prevailed. He left for Vienna in 1853 to study mathematics and physics . His professor of physics in the gymnasium was Karel Robida , who wrote the first Slovene physics textbook. Stefan then earned his habilitation in mathematical physics at the University of Vienna in 1858. During his student years, he also wrote and published a number of poems in Slovene.

Stefan taught physics at the University of Vienna, was Director of the Physical Institute from 1866, Vice-President of the Vienna Academy of Sciences , and member of several scientific institutions in Europe. He died in Vienna , Austria-Hungary. His life and work were extensively documented by the physicist Janez Strnad .

Work [ edit ] Stefan published nearly 80 scientific articles, mostly in the Bulletins of the Vienna Academy of Sciences.

[ 3 ] He is best known for originating Stefan's law in 1879, a physical power law stating that the total radiation from a black body is proportional to the fourth power of its thermodynamic temperature T : j ⋆ ⋆ = σ σ T 4 {\displaystyle j^{\star }=\sigma T^{4}} He derived this law from the measurements of the French physicists Dulong and Petit . As both incident radiation and blackbody emission are always equal, this equation applies equally to the temperature of any ideal body subject to incident radiation across its surface. In 1884, the law was extended to apply to grey-body emissions by Stefan's student Ludwig Boltzmann and hence is known as Stefan–Boltzmann law . Boltzmann treated a heat engine with light as a working matter. This law is the only physical law of nature named after a Slovene physicist. Today, the law is derived from Planck's law of black-body radiation: j ⋆ ⋆ = ∫ ∫ 0 ∞ ∞ ( d j ⋆ ⋆ d λ λ ) d λ λ {\displaystyle j^{\star }=\int _{0}^{\infty }\left({dj^{\star } \over d\lambda }\right)d\lambda } With his law, Stefan determined the temperature of the Sun's surface , which he calculated to be 5,430 °C (9,810 °F). This was the first sensible value for the temperature of the Sun.

Stefan provided the first measurements of the thermal conductivity of gases, treated evaporation , and among others studied diffusion , heat conduction in fluids . For his treatise on optics , the University of Vienna bestowed the Lieben Prize on him. Because of his early work in calculating evaporation and diffusion rates, flow from a droplet or particle that is induced by evaporation or sublimation at the surface is now called the Stefan flow .

Very important are also his electromagnetic equations, defined in vector notation, and works in the kinetic theory of heat. Stefan was among the first physicists in Europe who fully understood Maxwell's electromagnetic theory and one of the few outside England who expanded on it. He calculated inductivity of a coil with a quadratic cross-section, and he corrected Maxwell's miscalculation. He also researched a phenomenon called the skin effect , where high-frequency electric current is greater on the surface of a conductor than in its interior.

In mathematics, the Stefan problems or Stefan's tasks with movable boundary are well known. The problem was first studied by Lamé and Clapeyron in 1831. Stefan solved the problem when he was calculating how quickly a layer of ice on water grows ( Stefan's equation [ 4 ] ).

Eponymous terms [ edit ] Several concepts in physics and mathematics are named after Joseph Stefan: Stefan–Boltzmann law Stefan–Boltzmann constant σ Stefan adhesion Stefan problem Stefan's equation Stefan's formula Stefan flow Stefan number Stefan tube Maxwell–Stefan diffusion The Jožef Stefan Institute , Slovenia 's premier scientific establishment, is also named after him, and also: Stefan (crater) on the Moon References [ edit ] ^ "Josef Stefan | Biography & Facts | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 11 December 2021 .

^ Čermelj, L., Uršič, M.

"Jožef Stefan" .

lexicon of slovenian biographies .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Sitzungsberichte der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien in WikiSource" . e.g. Bd. 027, 1857.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Shumon Koga, Miroslav Krstic (2020).

"Phase Change Model: Stefan Problem" .

Materials Phase Change PDE Control & Estimation . Systems & Control: Foundations & Applications. Springer. pp.

1– 13.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-58490-0_1 .

ISBN 978-3-030-58490-0 .

S2CID 229250452 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Josef Stefan .

"Josef Stefan: His life and legacy in the thermal sciences," Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science , Volume 31, Issue 7, July 2007, 795–803, by John C. Crepeau O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Josef Stefan" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Extended biography of Josef Stefan , by John C. Crepeau v t e Scientists whose names are used in physical constants Physical constants Isaac Newton ( Newtonian constant of gravitation ) Amedeo Avogadro ( Avogadro constant ) Michael Faraday ( Faraday constant ) Johann Josef Loschmidt ( Loschmidt constant ) Johann Jakob Balmer Josef Stefan ( Stefan–Boltzmann constant ) Ludwig Boltzmann ( Boltzmann constant , Stefan–Boltzmann constant ) Johannes Rydberg ( Rydberg constant ) J. J. Thomson Max Planck ( Planck constant ) Wilhelm Wien Otto Sackur Niels Bohr ( Bohr radius ) Edwin Hubble ( Hubble constant ) Hugo Tetrode Douglas Hartree Brian Josephson ( Josephson constant ) Klaus von Klitzing ( von Klitzing constant ) List of scientists whose names are used as SI units and non SI units Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Netherlands Greece Israel Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Josef_Stefan&oldid=1275170984 " Categories : 1835 births 1893 deaths Slovenian physicists Physicists from Austria-Hungary Poets from Austria-Hungary Slovenian poets Slovenian male poets Carinthian Slovenes Fluid dynamicists Scientists from Klagenfurt Slovene Austro-Hungarians Mathematicians from Austria-Hungary 19th-century male writers Rectors of universities in Austria-Hungary Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 errors: missing periodical CS1: long volume value CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2020 Articles with hCards Articles containing Slovene-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 February 2025, at 13:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Josef Stefan 50 languages Add topic

