Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Prebend 3 Notes 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Prebendary 5 languages Gaeilge Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Prebend ) Member of clergy Look up prebendary in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Prebendal stalls in the Choir of Salisbury Cathedral [ 1 ] A prebendary is a member of the Catholic or Anglican clergy , a form of canon with a role in the administration of a cathedral or collegiate church .  When attending services, prebendaries sit in particular seats, usually at the back of the choir stalls, known as prebendal stalls .

History [ edit ] At the time of the Domesday Book in 1086, the canons and dignitaries of the cathedrals of England were supported by the produce and other profits from the cathedral estates.

[ 2 ] In the early 12th century, the endowed prebend was developed as an institution, in possession of which a cathedral official had a fixed and independent income. This made the cathedral canons independent of the bishop, and created posts that attracted the younger sons of the nobility.

[ 3 ] Part of the endowment was retained in a common fund, known in Latin as communia , [ 4 ] which was used to provide bread and money to a canon in residence in addition to the income from his prebend.

[ 2 ] Most prebends disappeared in 1547, when nearly all collegiate churches in England and Wales were dissolved by the Act for the Dissolution of Collegiate Churches and Chantries of that year, as part of the Reformation . The church of St Endellion , Cornwall, is one of the few still extant .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The office of prebendary is retained by certain Church of England dioceses (those of Lichfield , Lincoln , and London being significant examples) as an honorary title for senior parish priests, usually awarded in recognition of long and dedicated service to the diocese. These priests are entitled to be called "Prebendary" (usually shortened to Preb.) and have a role in the administration of the relevant cathedral.

[ 7 ] Prebendaries have a prebendal stall in certain cathedrals and collegiate churches.

[ 8 ] The greater chapter of a cathedral includes both the residentiary canons (full-time senior cathedral clergy) and the prebendaries (and, in London, the Minor Canons). In the Church of England, when a diocesan bishop retires, moves to another diocese or dies, the monarch will summon the greater chapter to elect a successor. This election is ceremonial, as the monarch (following the advice of the prime minister) tells the members of the greater chapter whom they are to elect.

[ citation needed ] Wells Cathedral and Saint Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin still call their canons "prebendaries". They form the chapter of the cathedral and sit in their prebendal stalls when in residence in the cathedral.

Prebend [ edit ] The prebend is the form of benefice held by a prebendary; historically, the stipend attached to it was usually drawn from specific sources in the income of a cathedral's estates. In the 21st century, many remaining prebendaries hold an honorary position which does not carry an income with it.

Notes [ edit ] ^ See list of holders in 'Canons residentiary of Salisbury', in Fasti Ecclesiae Anglicanae 1541-1857 : Volume 6, Salisbury Diocese, ed. Joyce M. Horn (London, 1986), pp. 93-105 ^ a b Greenaway, Diane E, "The Medieval Cathedral", in Hobbs, Mary (ed.), Chichester Cathedral: An Historical Survey , Phillimore & Co, p. 14 .

^ Cantor, Norman F (1993), The Civilization of the Middle Ages , p. 381 .

^ Walcott, M.E.C. (1865).

Cathedralia: a constitutional history of Cathedrals of the Western Church. Being an account of the various dignities, offices, and ministries of their members, etc . London: Joseph Masters. p. 120 . Retrieved 20 April 2022 .

^ The Reliquary and Illustrated Archaeologist,: A Quarterly Journal and Review Devoted to the Study of Early Pagan and Christian Antiquities of Great Britain . J. R. Smith. 1893. pp.

194 .

^ Betjeman, John; Guest, John (1978).

The best of Betjeman . p. 150.

ISBN 978-0-7195-3555-0 .

The Rector of St Endellion is also a Prebendary. This church is run by a college of priests like St George's Chapel, Windsor.

^ Cutts, E. L. (1895) A Dictionary of the Church of England ; 3rd ed. London: SPCK, p. 476.

^ "Prebendary, Church of England", Debretts Archived 2015-03-16 at the Wayback Machine External links [ edit ] Lists of prebendaries in England and Wales since 1066: "1066–1300" , Fasti Ecclesiae Anglicanae (series), British History Online ; 1300–1541 and 1541–1857 Prebendaries of Aylesbury - The prebend of Aylesbury was attached to the See of Lincoln as early as 1092 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Prebendary&oldid=1220161406#Prebend " Categories : Anglican ecclesiastical offices Local Christian church officials Ecclesiastical titles Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 This page was last edited on 22 April 2024, at 04:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Prebendary 5 languages Add topic

