Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Collection of geometrical propositions 2 See also 3 References 4 Sources Toggle the table of contents Na'im ibn Musa 4 languages العربية Hausa Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча کوردی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Na‘īm ibn Mūsā ( Arabic : نعيم بن موسى ) was a mathematician of the Islamic Golden Age and a pupil of Thabit Ibn Qurra . Na'im was from Baghdad and lived in the second half of the 9th century. He was the son of Muḥammad ibn Mūsā ibn Shākir, the oldest of the three brothers Banu Musa .

[ 1 ] Collection of geometrical propositions [ edit ] Marco Panza, a historian of his works, states that "he was probably not a major mathematician".

[ 1 ] His treatise Collection of geometrical propositions was "one of the first examples of a particular kind of mathematical treatises that became quite usual during the 10th century, and it reflects quite well 'the mathematical culture' of a 9th-century Baghdadi mathematician educated at Thabit ibn Qurra’s school". Only one copy of this work is known, preserved at the University Library of Istanbul. The treatise was edited and translated to French by Roshdi Rashed and Christian Houzel.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Banu Musa , his father and two uncles References [ edit ] ^ a b c Panza, Marco (2008). "The Role of Algebraic Inferences in Na'īm Ibn Mūsā's Collection of Geometrical Propositions".

Arabic Sciences and Philosophy .

18 (2): 165– 191.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.491.4854 .

doi : 10.1017/S0957423908000532 .

S2CID 73620948 .

Sources [ edit ] Rashed, Roshdi; Houzel, Christian (2004).

Recherche et enseignement des mathématiques au IXe siècle : le recueil de propositions géométriques de Na"īm ibn Mūsā (in French). Louvain: Peeters.

ISBN 978-90-429-1496-4 .

v t e Mathematics in the medieval Islamic world Mathematicians 9th century 'Abd al-Hamīd ibn Turk Sanad ibn Ali al-Jawharī Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Kindi Qusta ibn Luqa Al-Mahani al-Dinawari Banū Mūsā brothers Hunayn ibn Ishaq Al-Khwarizmi Yusuf al-Khuri Ishaq ibn Hunayn Na'im ibn Musa Thābit ibn Qurra al-Marwazi Abu Said Gorgani 10th century Abu al-Wafa al-Khazin Al-Qabisi Abu Kamil Ahmad ibn Yusuf Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Sinān ibn al-Fatḥ al-Khojandi Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Brethren of Purity Ibn Sahl Ibn Yunus al-Uqlidisi Al-Battani Sinan ibn Thabit Ibrahim ibn Sinan Al-Isfahani Nazif ibn Yumn al-Qūhī Abu al-Jud Al-Sijzi Al-Karaji al-Majriti al-Jabali 11th century Abu Nasr Mansur Alhazen Kushyar Gilani Al-Biruni Ibn al-Samh Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi Avicenna al-Jayyānī al-Nasawī al-Zarqālī ibn Hud Al-Isfizari Omar Khayyam Muhammad al-Baghdadi 12th century Jabir ibn Aflah Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi al-Hassar Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi Ibn al-Yasamin 13th century Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Ahmad al-Buni Ibn Munim Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Ibn Adlan al-Urdi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi al-Abhari Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Ibn al-Banna' Kamāl al-Dīn al-Fārisī 14th century Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri Ibn al-Shatir Ibn al-Durayhim Al-Khalili al-Umawi 15th century Ibn al-Majdi al-Rūmī al-Kāshī Ulugh Beg Ali Qushji al-Wafa'i al-Qalaṣādī Sibt al-Maridini Ibn Ghazi al-Miknasi 16th century Al-Birjandi Muhammad Baqir Yazdi Taqi ad-Din Ibn Hamza al-Maghribi Mathematical works The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing De Gradibus Principles of Hindu Reckoning Book of Optics The Book of Healing Book on the Measurement of Plane and Spherical Figures Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Toledan Tables Tabula Rogeriana Zij Concepts Alhazen's problem Islamic geometric patterns Centers Al-Azhar University Al-Mustansiriya University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom Constantinople observatory of Taqi ad-Din Madrasa Maragheh observatory University of al-Qarawiyyin Influences Babylonian mathematics Greek mathematics Indian mathematics Influenced Byzantine mathematics European mathematics Indian mathematics Related Hindu–Arabic numeral system Arabic numerals ( Eastern Arabic numerals , Western Arabic numerals ) Trigonometric functions History of trigonometry History of algebra Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Academics zbMATH MathSciNet Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Na%27im_ibn_Musa&oldid=1253822847 " Categories : 9th-century mathematicians Mathematicians from the Abbasid Caliphate People from Baghdad 9th-century people from the Abbasid Caliphate Hidden categories: Articles containing Arabic-language text CS1 French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 28 October 2024, at 02:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Na'im ibn Musa 4 languages Add topic

