Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Methods of establishment 2 Record colonies 3 Examples 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Clonal colony 18 languages Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano Latviešu Nederlands Polski Português Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genetically identical, single site plants, fungi, or bacteria "Ramet" redirects here. For the commune in Alba County , Romania , see Râmeţ .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Clonal colony" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A clonal colony of Iris germanica -note the rhizomatous stems by which the plant reproduces.

A clonal colony or genet is a group of genetically identical individuals, such as plants , fungi , or bacteria , that have grown in a given location, all originating vegetatively , not sexually , from a single ancestor. In plants, an individual in such a population is referred to as a ramet . In fungi , "individuals" typically refers to the visible fruiting bodies or mushrooms that develop from a common mycelium which, although spread over a large area, is otherwise hidden in the soil . Clonal colonies are common in many plant species . Although many plants reproduce sexually through the production of seed , reproduction occurs by underground stolons or rhizomes in some plants. Above ground, these plants most often appear to be distinct individuals, but underground they remain interconnected and are all clones of the same plant. However, it is not always easy to recognize a clonal colony especially if it spreads underground and is also sexually reproducing.

Methods of establishment [ edit ] With most woody plants , clonal colonies arise by wide-ranging roots that at intervals send up new shoots , termed suckers .

Trees and shrubs with branches that may tend to bend and rest on the ground, or which possess the ability to form aerial roots can form colonies via layering , or aerial rooting, e.g.

willow , blackberry , fig , and banyan . Some vines naturally form adventitious roots on their stems that take root in the soil when the stems contact the ground, e.g.

ivy and trumpet vine . With other vines, rooting of the stem where nodes come into contact with soil may establish a clonal colony, e.g.

Wisteria .

Ferns and many herbaceous flowering plants often form clonal colonies via horizontal underground stems termed rhizomes , e.g. ostrich fern Matteuccia struthiopteris and goldenrod . A number of herbaceous flowering plants form clonal colonies via horizontal surface stems termed stolons , or runners; e.g.

strawberry and many grasses . Non-woody plants with underground storage organs such as bulbs and corms can also form colonies, e.g.

Narcissus and Crocus .  A few plant species can form colonies via adventitious plantlets that form on leaves, e.g.

Kalanchoe daigremontiana and Tolmiea menziesii . A few plant species can form colonies via asexual seeds, termed apomixis , e.g.

dandelion .

[ citation needed ] Record colonies [ edit ] The only known natural example of King's Lomatia ( Lomatia tasmanica ) found growing in the wild is a clonal colony in Tasmania estimated to be 43,600 years old.

[ 1 ] A group of 47,000 Quaking Aspen ( Populus tremuloides ) trees (nicknamed " Pando ") in the Wasatch Mountains , Utah , United States, has been shown to be a single clone connected by the root system. It is sometimes considered the world's largest organism by mass , covering 106 acres (43 ha), and also as among the world's oldest living organisms, at an estimated 14,000 years old.

[ 2 ] Another possible candidate for oldest organism on earth is an underwater meadow of the marine plant Posidonia oceanica in the Mediterranean Sea , which could be up to 100,000 years of age.

[ 3 ] Examples [ edit ] When woody plants form clonal colonies, they often remain connected through the root system, sharing roots, water and mineral nutrients . A few non-vining, woody plants that form clonal colonies are Bigelow oak ( Quercus sinuata var.

breviloba ), [ 4 ] quaking aspen ( Populus tremuloides ), bayberry ( Myrica pensylvanica ), black locust ( Robinia pseudoacacia ), creosote bush ( Larrea tridentata ), bladdernut , blueberry ( Vaccinium ), devil's club ( Oplopanax horridus ), forsythia , hazelnut ( Corylus ), honey locust ( Gleditsia triacanthos ), Kentucky coffeetree ( Gymnocladus dioicus ), kerria ( Kerria japonica ), pawpaw ( Asimina triloba ), poplars ( Populus ), sassafras ( Sassafras albidum ), sumac ( Rhus ), sweetgum ( Liquidambar styraciflua ), and sweetshrub ( Calycanthus floridus ).

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] King Clone Tumour heterogeneity References [ edit ] ^ "Tasmanian bush could be oldest living organism" .

Discovery Channel . Archived from the original on 2006-07-23 . Retrieved 2008-05-07 .

^ Mock, K. E.; Rowe, C. A.; Hooten, M. B.; Dewoody, J.; Hipkins, V. D. (November 2008). "Clonal dynamics in western North American aspen ( Populus tremuloides )".

Molecular Ecology .

17 (22): 4827– 4844.

Bibcode : 2008MolEc..17.4827M .

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2008.03963.x .

PMID 19140975 .

S2CID 1425039 .

^ "Ibiza's Monster Marine Plant" . Ibiza Spotlight . Retrieved 2008-05-07 .

^ Lance, Ron (2004).

Woody Plants of the Southeastern United States: A Winter Guide . University of Georgia Press.

ISBN 978-0-8203-2524-8 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Clonal colony .

Cook, R. E. (1983). "Clonal plant populations".

American Scientist .

71 (3): 244– 253.

Bibcode : 1983AmSci..71..244C .

Kricher, J. C., & Morrison, G. (1988).

A Field Guide to Eastern Forests , pp. 19–20. Peterson Field Guide Series.

ISBN 0-395-35346-7 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Clonal_colony&oldid=1302868040 " Categories : Plant reproduction Plant morphology Mycology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 21:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Clonal colony 18 languages Add topic

