Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Presidents 2 Campus 3 Academics 4 Student life 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Labouré College Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°15′38.8″N 71°3′29.2″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.260778°N 71.058111°W ﻿ / 42.260778; -71.058111 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Private college in Milton, Massachusetts, U.S.

Labouré College of Healthcare Former names Carney Hospital Training School for Nurses (1892–1949) Catherine Labouré School of Nursing (1949–1971) Catherine Labouré Junior College (1971–1984) Catherine Labouré College (1984–1993) Labouré College (1993–2005) Caritas Labouré College (2005–2009) Motto "In Thy Sight We Serve" Type Private college Established 1892 Endowment $13 million [ 1 ] President Lily S. Hsu Students 985 Location Milton , Massachusetts , United States 42°15′38.8″N 71°3′29.2″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.260778°N 71.058111°W ﻿ / 42.260778; -71.058111 Campus Urban Colors Royal Blue and White Website www.laboure.edu Labouré College of Healthcare is a private college specializing in nursing and healthcare education and located in Milton, Massachusetts . Founded in 1892, by the Daughters of Charity, it is the longest-running nursing education program in the Boston area. The college offers online and on-campus certificate, associate, and bachelor's degree programs. In 2013, the campus moved from Dorchester to Milton, Massachusetts.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] History [ edit ] Labouré was founded in 1892 as the Carney Hospital Training School for Nurses in South Boston . In 1949, the school merged with two other nursing schools run by the Daughters of Charity of St. Vincent de Paul : the St. John's School of Nursing in Lowell, Massachusetts and the St. Margaret's School of Nursing in Dorchester . They formed the Catherine Labouré School of Nursing, named for St.

Catherine Labouré , in 1950. The new school opened in 1951 and moved to the site of the new Carney Hospital in Dorchester in 1954. In 1971, it was authorized to award degrees in Massachusetts and changed its name to the Catherine Labouré Junior College. Its name changed again in 1984 and in 1993, to Catherine Labouré College and then to simply Labouré College. In 1997, the college became part of the Caritas Christi Health Care system and its name was officially changed to Caritas Labouré College in 2005, [ 4 ] then officially changed back to Labouré College in 2009.

Until 1997, the school was sponsored by the Daughters of Charity of St. Vincent de Paul .

[ 5 ] It was subsequently affiliated with Steward Health Care System , [ 6 ] until 2013 when it disaffiliated.

[ 7 ] Presidents [ edit ] Debra Townsley , 2018–2019 Lily Hsu , 2019–present Campus [ edit ] In 2013, Labouré College relocated from Dorchester to its new campus at 303 Adams Street in Milton, Massachusetts, the former campus of Aquinas College adjacent to Fontbonne Academy .

[ 3 ] Academics [ edit ] Labouré offers the Bachelor of Science degree in nursing (BSN) and the Associate of Science degree in nursing and in allied health programs.

[ 8 ] It was first accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges (NEASC) in 1975 and gained accreditation under the NEASC Commission on Institutions of Higher Education (CIHE) in 2005.

[ 9 ] Student life [ edit ] Labouré is a commuter college, [ 10 ] not a residential college . Most of its students are part-time. The average age is 31.

References [ edit ] ^ As of January, 2019.

"U.S. and Canadian Institutions Listed by Fiscal Year (FY) 2014 Endowment Market Value and Change* in Endowment Market Value from FY2013 to FY2014" (PDF) . National Association of College and Business Officers (NACUBO). p. 22. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 29, 2015 . Retrieved January 29, 2015 .

^ Sweeney, Emily, "Laboure College Is Leaving Dorchester for Milton" .

The Boston Globe , August 25, 2012.

^ a b "Laboure College Buys, Renovates Milton Campus with $9 Million MassDevelopment Bond" . Labouré College press release. August 10, 2013.

^ Massachusetts Board of Higher Education: Request for Committee and Board Action, April 2008 ^ Labouré College Catalogue [ permanent dead link ] ^ CaritLabouré College featured by the Association of Independent Colleges and Universities in Massachusetts (AICUM) Archived 2007-07-05 at the Wayback Machine ^ "History of Labouré College" , Labouré website ^ Laboure College: Degree programs ^ NEASC roster: Laboure College [ permanent dead link ] ^ Laboure College: About External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Colleges and universities in metropolitan Boston Current Babson College Benjamin Franklin Institute of Technology Bentley University Berklee College of Music Boston Architectural College Boston Baptist College Boston College Boston Conservatory Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis Boston University Brandeis University Bunker Hill Community College Cambridge College Curry College Eastern Nazarene College Emerson College Emmanuel College Fisher College Harvard University Hebrew College Hellenic College Hult International Business School Labouré College Lasell University Lesley University Longy School of Music Massachusetts Bay Community College Massachusetts College of Art and Design Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences Massachusetts Institute of Technology MGH Institute New England College of Optometry New England Conservatory of Music New England School of Law Northeastern University North Shore Community College Quincy College Roxbury Community College St. John's Seminary Simmons University Suffolk University Tufts University University of Massachusetts Boston Urban College of Boston Wellesley College Wentworth Institute of Technology William James College Former Episcopal Divinity School v t e Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Boston Ordinaries Bishops Jean-Louis Lefebvre de Cheverus Benedict Joseph Fenwick John Bernard Fitzpatrick Archbishops John Joseph Williams William Henry O'Connell Richard Cushing Humberto Sousa Medeiros Bernard Francis Law Seán Patrick O'Malley Richard Henning Auxiliary bishops Cristiano Borro Barbosa Robert Francis Hennessey Mark William O'Connell Robert Philip Reed Peter J. Uglietto Emeriti bishops John Anthony Dooher Arthur L. Kennedy Deceased Joseph Gaudentius Anderson Thomas Francis Markham Emilio S. Allué Francis Xavier Irwin Walter James Edyvean Churches List List of churches in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Boston Cathedral Cathedral of the Holy Cross Basilicas and shrines Basilica and Shrine of Our Lady of Perpetual Help, Boston St. Anthony Shrine, Boston St. Clement Eucharistic Shrine, Boston Our Lady of Good Voyage, the Seaport Shrine Parishes Holy Name, West Roxbury Holy Trinity, Lowell Our Lady of Czestochowa, Boston Our Lady of Good Voyage, Gloucester Our Lady Help of Christians, Newton Sacred Heart, Cambridge St. Albert the Great, Weymouth St. Charles Borromeo, Waltham St. John the Baptist, Salem St. John the Evangelist, Cambridge St. Joseph, Boston St. Leonard, Boston St. Mary, Dedham ( History ) St. Mary, Milton St. Mary, Newton St. Mary, Waltham St. Mary, Winchester St. Mary - St. Catherine of Siena, Charlestown St. Paul, Cambridge St. Stanislaus Bishop & Martyr, Chelsea St. Susanna, Dedham Former parishes Holy Cross, Boston Our Lady of Mount Carmel, East Boston St. Aidan, Brookline St. Catherine of Sienna, Charlestown St. Joseph, Roxbury St. Mary, Charlestown St. Stephen, Boston Education Seminaries Pope St. John XXIII National Seminary St. John's Seminary Colleges Boston College Emmanuel College Labouré College Merrimack College Regis College St. John's Seminary Closed Marian Court College High schools Academy of Notre Dame , Tyngsboro Arlington Catholic High School , Arlington Austin Preparatory School , Reading Bishop Fenwick High School , Peabody Boston College High School , Dorchester Cathedral High School , Boston Catholic Memorial School , West Roxbury Central Catholic High School , Lawrence Cristo Rey Boston High School , Dorchester Fontbonne Academy , Milton Lowell Catholic High School , Lowell Malden Catholic High School , Malden Newton Country Day School , Newton Notre Dame Academy , Hingham Notre Dame High School , Lawrence St. John's Preparatory School , Danvers St. Mary's High School , Lynn Saint Sebastian's School , Needham Ursuline Academy , Dedham Xaverian Brothers High School , Westwood Closed Cambridge Matignon School , Cambridge Don Bosco Technical High School , Boston Elizabeth Seton Academy , Boston Hudson Catholic High School , Hudson Marian High School , Framingham Mount Alvernia High School , Newton Nazareth Academy , Wakefield Our Lady of Nazareth Academy , Wakefield Pope John XXIII High School , Everett Presentation of Mary Academy , Methuen Sacred Heart High School , Kingston Saint Clement High School , Medford Saint Joseph Preparatory High School , Boston St. Dominic Savio Preparatory High School , Boston Trinity Catholic High School , Newton Former Archbishop Williams High School , Braintree Cardinal Spellman High School , Brockton Priests John P. Brennan Charles A. Finn Gerald Fitzgerald John Geoghan George Kerr Philip King Mimie Pitaro Patrick O'Beirne Dennis J. O'Donovan Paul Fitzpatrick Russell Paul Shanley Henry A. Walsh Other The Pilot (archdiocese newspaper) CatholicTV Regina Cleri Catholic Archdiocese of Boston sex abuse scandal United States portal Catholicism portal Authority control databases ISNI Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Labouré_College&oldid=1298352543 " Categories : 1892 establishments in Massachusetts Catholic universities and colleges in Massachusetts Universities and colleges established in 1892 Universities and colleges in Boston Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from January 2025 Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 00:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Labouré College Add languages Add topic

