Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Development Toggle Development subsection 1.1 Historical use 2 Revisions of the Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale Toggle Revisions of the Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale subsection 2.1 Timeline 3 Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale: Fifth Edition Toggle Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale: Fifth Edition subsection 3.1 Reliability 3.2 Validity 3.3 Score classification 4 Subtests and factors 5 Recent use 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scales 14 languages Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français हिन्दी Magyar 日本語 Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Intelligence test This article needs more complete citations for verification .

Please help add missing citation information so that sources are clearly identifiable.

( January 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Medical diagnostic score Stanford–Binet Intelligence scales ICD-9-CM 94.01 The Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scales (or more commonly the Stanford–Binet ) is an individually administered intelligence test that was revised from the original Binet–Simon Scale by Alfred Binet and Théodore Simon . It is in its fifth edition (SB5), which was released in 2003.

It is a cognitive-ability and intelligence test that is used to diagnose developmental or intellectual deficiencies in young children , in contrast to the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS). The test measures five weighted factors and consists of both verbal and nonverbal subtests. The five factors being tested are knowledge, quantitative reasoning, visual-spatial processing, working memory , and fluid reasoning.

The development of the Stanford–Binet initiated the modern field of intelligence testing and was one of the first examples of an adaptive test . The test originated in France , then was revised in the United States . It was initially created by the French psychologist Alfred Binet and the French psychiatrist Théodore Simon, who, following the introduction of a law mandating universal education by the French government , began developing a method of identifying "slow" children, so that they could be placed in special education programs, instead of labelled sick and sent to the asylum .

[ 1 ] As Binet and Simon indicated, case studies might be more detailed and helpful, but the time required to test many people would be excessive. In 1916, at Stanford University , the psychologist Lewis Terman released a revised examination that became known as the Stanford–Binet test .

Development [ edit ] As discussed by Fancher & Rutherford in 2012, the Stanford–Binet is a modified version of the Binet–Simon Intelligence scale . The Binet–Simon scale was created by the French psychologist Alfred Binet and the French psychiatrist Theodore Simon . Due to the introduction of compulsory education at that time, questions were raised about children unfit for regular education, and a proposal was made to build boarding schools in asylums for them. Binet and Simon were part of a learned society that opposed the proposal and advocated the creation of remedial tracks in regular schools. They created the first intelligence test to objectively measure the intellectual functioning of primary school children. Binet and Simon believed that intelligence is malleable and that intelligence tests would help target children in need of extra attention to advance their intelligence.

[ 2 ] To create their test, Binet and Simon first created a baseline of intelligence . A wide range of children were tested on a broad spectrum of measures in an effort to discover a clear indicator of intelligence. Failing to find a single identifier of intelligence, Binet and Simon instead compared children in each category by age. The children's highest levels of achievement were sorted by age and common levels of achievement considered the normal level for that age. Because this testing method merely compares a person's ability to the common ability level of others their age, the general practices of the test can easily be transferred to test different populations, even if the measures used are changed.

Reproduction of an item from the 1908 Binet–Simon intelligence scale, that shows three pairs of pictures, and asks the tested child, "Which of these two faces is the prettier ?" Reproduced from the article "A Practical Guide for Administering the Binet–Simon Scale for Measuring Intelligence" by J. W. Wallace Wallin in the December 1911 issue of the journal The Psychological Clinic (volume 5 number 7), public domain [ 3 ] [ unreliable source ] One of the first intelligence tests, the Binet–Simon test quickly gained support in the psychological community, many of whom further spread it to the public.

Lewis M. Terman , a psychologist at Stanford University , was one of the first to create a version of the test for people in the United States, naming the first localized version the Stanford revision of the Binet-Simon Intelligence Scale (1916) and the second version the Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale (1937).

[ 4 ] Terman used the test not only to help identify children with learning difficulties but also to find children and adults who had above average levels of intelligence. In creating his version, Terman also tested additional methods for his Stanford revision, publishing his first official version as The Measurement of Intelligence: An Explanation of and a Complete Guide for the Use of the Stanford Revision and Extension of the Binet–Simon Intelligence Scale (Fancher & Rutherford, 2012) (Becker, 2003).

The original tests in the 1905 form include: "Le Regard" Prehension Provoked by a Tactile Stimulus Prehension Provoked by a Visual Perception Recognition of Food Quest of Food Complicated by a Slight Mechanical Difficulty Execution of Simple Commands and Imitation of Simple Gestures Verbal Knowledge of Objects Verbal Knowledge of Pictures Naming of Designated Objects Immediate Comparison of Two Lines of Unequal Lengths Repetition of Three Figures Comparison of Two Weights Suggestibility Verbal Definition of Known Objects Repetition of Sentences of Fifteen Words Comparison of Known Objects from Memory Exercise of Memory on Pictures Drawing a Design from Memory Immediate Repetition of Figures Resemblances of Several Known Objects Given from Memory Comparison of Lengths Five Weights to be Placed in Order Gap in Weights Exercise upon Rhymes Verbal Gaps to be Filled Synthesis of Three Words in One Sentence Reply to an Abstract Question Reversal of the Hands of a Clock Paper Cutting Definitions of Abstract Terms Historical use [ edit ] One hindrance to widespread understanding of the test is its use of a variety of different measures. In an effort to simplify the information gained from the Binet–Simon test into a more comprehensible and easier to understand form, German psychologist William Stern created the well known Intelligence Quotient (IQ). By comparing the mental age a child scored at to their biological age, a ratio is created to show the rate of their mental progress as IQ. Terman quickly grasped the idea for his Stanford revision with the adjustment of multiplying the ratios by 100 to make them easier to read.

As also discussed by Leslie, in 2000, Terman was another of the main forces in spreading intelligence testing in the United States (Becker, 2003). Terman quickly promoted the use of the Stanford–Binet for schools across the United States where it saw a high rate of acceptance. Terman's work also had the attention of the U.S. government , who recruited him to apply the ideas from his Stanford–Binet test for military recruitment near the start of World War I . With over 1.7 million military recruits taking a version of the test and the acceptance of the test by the government, the Stanford–Binet saw an increase in awareness and acceptance (Fancher & Rutherford, 2012).

Given the perceived importance of intelligence and with new ways to measure intelligence, many influential individuals, including Terman, began promoting controversial ideas to increase the nation's overall intelligence. These ideas included things such as discouraging individuals with low IQ from having children and granting important positions based on high IQ scores. While there was significant opposition, many institutions proceeded to adjust students' education based on their IQ scores, often with a heavy influence on future career possibilities (Leslie, 2000).

Revisions of the Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale [ edit ] Maud Merrill Since the first publication in 1916, there have been four additional revised editions of the Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scales, the first of which was developed by Lewis Terman. Over twenty years later, Maud Merrill was accepted into Stanford's education program shortly before Terman became the head of the psychology department. She completed both her master's degree and Ph.D. under Terman and quickly became a colleague of his as they started the revisions of the second edition together. There were 3,200 examinees, aged one and a half to eighteen years, ranging in different geographic regions as well as socioeconomic levels in attempts to comprise a broader normative sample (Roid & Barram, 2004). This edition incorporated more objectified scoring methods, while placing less emphasis on recall memory and including a greater range of nonverbal abilities (Roid & Barram, 2004) compared to the 1916 edition.

When Terman died in 1956, the revisions for the third edition were well underway, and Merrill was able to publish the final revision in 1960 (Roid & Barram, 2004). The use of deviation IQ made its first appearance in third edition, however the use of the mental age scale and ratio IQ were not eliminated. Terman and Merrill attempted to calculate IQs with a uniform standard deviation while still maintaining the use of the mental age scale by including a formula in the manual to convert the ratio IQs with means varying between age ranges and nonuniform standard deviations to IQs with a mean of 100 and a uniform standard deviation of 16.  However, it was later demonstrated that very high scores occurred with much greater frequency than what would be predicted by the normal curve with a standard deviation of 16, and scores in the gifted range were much higher than those yielded by essentially every other major test, so it was deemed that the ratio IQs modified to have a uniform mean and standard deviation, referred to as "deviation IQs" in the manual of the third edition of the Stanford–Binet (Terman & Merrill, 1960), could not be directly compared to scores on "true" deviation IQ tests, such as the Wechsler Intelligence Scales, and the later versions of the Stanford–Binet, as those tests compare the performance of examinees to their own age group on a normal distribution (Ruf, 2003). While new features were added, there were no newly created items included in this revision. Instead, any items from the 1937 form that showed no substantial change in difficulty from the 1930s to the 1950s were either eliminated or adjusted (Roid & Barram, 2004).

Robert Thorndike was asked to take over after Merrill's retirement. With the help of Elizabeth Hagen and Jerome Sattler , Thorndike produced the fourth edition of the Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale in 1986. This edition covers the ages two through twenty-three and has some considerable changes compared to its predecessors (Graham & Naglieri, 2003). This edition was the first to use the fifteen subtests with point scales in place of using the previous age scale format. In an attempt to broaden cognitive ability, the subtests were grouped and resulted in four area scores, which improved flexibility for administration and interpretation (Youngstrom, Glutting, & Watkins, 2003). The fourth edition is known for assessing children that may be referred for gifted programs. This edition includes a broad range of abilities, which provides more challenging items for those in their early adolescent years, whereas other intelligence tests of the time did not provide difficult enough items for the older children (Laurent, Swerdlik, & Ryburn, 1992).

Gale Roid published the most recent edition of the Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale. Roid attended Harvard University where he was a research assistant to David McClelland. McClelland is well known for his studies on the need for achievement. While the fifth edition incorporates some of the classical traditions of these scales, there were several significant changes made.

Timeline [ edit ] April 1905: Development of Binet–Simon Test announced at a conference in Rome June 1905: Binet–Simon Intelligence Test introduced 1908 and 1911: New Versions of Binet–Simon Intelligence Test 1916: Stanford–Binet First Edition by Terman 1937: Second Edition by Terman and Merrill 1960: Third Edition by Merrill (form L-M) 1973: Third Edition by Merrill (1937 norms were re-normed) 1986: Fourth Edition by Thorndike, Hagen, and Sattler 2003: Fifth Edition by Roid Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale: Fifth Edition [ edit ] Just as it was used when Binet first developed the IQ test, the Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale: Fifth Edition (SB5) is based in the schooling process to assess intelligence. It continuously and efficiently assesses all levels of ability in individuals with a broader range in age. It is also capable of measuring multiple dimensions of abilities (Ruf, 2003).

The SB5 can be administered to individuals as early as two years of age. There are ten subsets included in this revision including both verbal and nonverbal domains. Five factors are also incorporated in this scale, which are directly related to Cattell-Horn-Carroll (CHC) hierarchical model of cognitive abilities. These factors include fluid reasoning, knowledge, quantitative reasoning, visual-spatial processing, and working memory (Bain & Allin, 2005). Many of the familiar picture absurdities, vocabulary, memory for sentences, and verbal absurdities still remain from the previous editions (Janzen, Obrzut, & Marusiak, 2003), however with more modern artwork and item content for the revised fifth edition.

For every verbal subtest that is used, there is a nonverbal counterpart across all factors. These nonverbal tasks consist of making movement responses such as pointing or assembling manipulatives (Bain & Allin, 2005). These counterparts have been included to address language-reduced assessments in multicultural societies. Depending on age and ability, administration can range from fifteen minutes to an hour and fifteen minutes.

The fifth edition incorporated a new scoring system, which can provide a wide range of information such as four intelligence score composites, five factor indices, and ten subtest scores. Additional scoring information includes percentile ranks, age equivalents, and a change-sensitive score (Janzen, Obrzut, & Marusiak, 2003). Extended IQ scores and gifted composite scores are available with the SB5 in order to optimize the assessment for gifted programs (Ruf, 2003). To reduce errors and increase diagnostic precision, scores are obtained electronically through the use of computers now.

The standardization sample for the SB5 included 4,800 participants varying in age, sex, race/ethnicity, geographic region, and socioeconomic level (Bain & Allin, 2005).

Reliability [ edit ] Several reliability tests have been performed on the SB5 including split-half reliability, standard error of measurement, plotting of test information curves, test-retest stability, and inter-scorer agreement. On average, IQ scores for this scale have been found quite stable across time (Janzen, Obrzut, & Marusiak, 2003). Internal consistency was tested by split-half reliability and was reported to be substantial and comparable to other cognitive batteries (Bain & Allin, 2005). The median interscorer correlation was  .90 on average (Janzen, Obrzut, & Marusiak, 2003). The SB5 has also been found to have great precision at advanced levels of performance meaning that the test is especially useful in testing children for giftedness (Bain & Allin, 2005). There have only been a small amount of practice effects and familiarity of testing procedures with retest reliability; however, these have proven to be insignificant. Readministration of the SB5 can occur in a six-month interval rather than one year due to the small mean differences in reliability (Bain & Allin, 2005).

Validity [ edit ] Content validity has been found based on the professional judgments Roid received concerning fairness of items and item content as well as items concerning the assessment of giftedness (Bain & Allin, 2005). With an examination of age trends, construct validity was supported along with empirical justification of a more substantial g loading for the SB5 compared to previous editions. The potential for a variety of comparisons, especially for within or across factors and verbal/nonverbal domains, has been appreciated with the scores received from the SB5 (Bain & Allin, 2005).

Score classification [ edit ] Main article: IQ classification The test publisher includes suggested score classifications in the test manual.

Stanford–Binet Fifth Edition (SB5) classification [ 5 ] IQ Range ("deviation IQ") IQ Classification 145–160 Very gifted or highly advanced 130–144 Gifted or very advanced 120–129 Superior 110–119 High average 90–109 Average 80–89 Low average 70–79 Borderline impaired or delayed 55–69 Mildly impaired or delayed 40–54 Moderately impaired or delayed The classifications of scores used in the Fifth Edition differ from those used in earlier versions of the test.

Subtests and factors [ edit ] Fluid reasoning Knowledge Quantitative reasoning Visual-spatial processing Working memory Early reasoning Vocabulary Non-verbal quantitative reasoning (non-verbal) Form board and form patterns (non-verbal) Delayed response (non-verbal) Verbal absurdities Procedural knowledge (non-verbal) Verbal quantitative reasoning Position and direction Block span (non-verbal) Verbal analogies Picture absurdities (non-verbal) Memory for sentences Object series matrices (non-verbal) Last word Source: [ 6 ] Recent use [ edit ] Since its inception, the Stanford–Binet has been revised several times. The test is in its fifth edition, called the Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scales, Fifth Edition , or SB5. According to the publisher's website, "The SB5 was normed on a stratified random sample of 4,800 individuals that matches the 2000 U.S. Census ". By administering the Stanford–Binet test to large numbers of individuals selected at random from different parts of the United States, it has been found that the scores approximate a normal distribution . The revised edition of the Stanford–Binet over time has devised substantial changes in the way the tests are presented. The test has improved when looking at the introduction of a more parallel form and more demonstrative standards. For one, a non-verbal IQ component is included in the tests whereas in the past, there was only a verbal component. It evolved to have equally balanced verbal and non-verbal content. It is also more animated than the other tests, providing the test-takers with more colourful artwork, toys and manipulatives. This allows the test to have a higher range in the age of the test takers. This test is purportedly useful in assessing the intellectual capabilities of people ranging from young children all the way to young adults. However, the test has come under criticism for not being able to compare people of different age categories, since each category gets a different set of tests. Furthermore, very young children tend to do poorly on the test because they lack the ability to concentrate long enough to finish it.

Uses for the test include clinical and neuropsychological assessment [ citation needed ] , educational placement, compensation evaluations, career assessment, adult neuropsychological treatment, forensics, and research on aptitude. Various high-IQ societies also accept this test for admission into their ranks; for example, the Triple Nine Society accepts a minimum qualifying score of 151 for Form L or M, 149 for Form L-M if taken in 1986 or earlier, 149 for SB-IV, and 146 for SB-V; in all cases the applicant must have been at least 16 years old at the date of the test.

Intertel accepts a score of 135 on SB5 and 137 on Form L-M.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Science portal Cattell Infant Intelligence Scale The Flynn effect Military psychology Intelligence quotient IQ classification References [ edit ] ^ Nicolas, Serge; Andrieu, Bernard; Croizet, Jean-Claude; Sanitioso, Rasyid B.; Burman, Jeremy Trevelyan (2013).

"Sick? Or slow? On the origins of intelligence as a psychological object" .

Intelligence .

41 (5): 699– 711.

doi : 10.1016/j.intell.2013.08.006 .

^ "Is Intelligence Fixed or Malleable? | Poet; Don't Know It" .

^ "Psychol Clin Volume 5(7); 1911 Dec 15" .

www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov . Retrieved 2020-07-03 .

^ Brysbaert, Marc; Nicolas, Serge (2024).

"Two Persistent Myths About Binet and the Beginnings of Intelligence Tests in Psychology Textbooks" .

Collabra:Psychology .

doi : 10.1525/collabra.117600 .

hdl : 1854/LU-01JD038W08SM3PBC0DVPAAYCB6 .

^ Kaufman, Alan S.

(2009).

IQ Testing 101 . New York: Springer Publishing. p.

112 .

ISBN 978-0-8261-0629-2 .

Sattler, Jerome M. (2008).

Assessment of Children: Cognitive Foundations . La Mesa, CA: Jerome M. Sattler, Publisher. inside back cover.

ISBN 978-0-9702671-4-6 .

^ Chase, Danielle (2005).

"Underlying Factor Structures of the Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scales – Fifth Edition" . Drexel University.

^ "Intertel - Join us" .

www.intertel-iq.org . Retrieved 2021-03-15 .

Bain, S. K., & Allin, J. D. (2005). Book review: Stanford–Binet intelligence scales, fifth edition. Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment, 23, 87–95.

Becker, K. A. (2003).

History of the Stanford–Binet intelligence scales: Content and psychometrics .

Fancher, Raymond E., & Rutherford, Alexandra. (2012). Pioneers of psychology. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.

Graham, J. & Naglieri, J. (2003). Handbook of Psychology. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Janzen, H., Obrzut, J., & Marusiak, C. (2004). Test review: Roid, G. H. (2003). Stanford–binet intelligence scales, fifth edition (sb:v). Canadian Journal of School Psychology, 19, 235–244.

Laurent, J., Swerdlik, M., & Ryburn, M. (1992). Review of validity research on the stanford–Binet intelligence scale: Fourth edition. Psychological Assessment, 4, 102–112.

Leslie, M. (2000).

The vexing legacy of Lewis Terman.

Retrieved from http://alumni.stanford.edu/get/page/magazine/article/?article_id=40678 Roid, G. (n.d.). Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scales, Fifth Edition Roid, G. & Barram, R. (2004). Essentials of Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scales (SB5) Assessment. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Roid, Kamphaus, Randy W., Martha D. Petoskey, and ANNA WALTERS Morgan. "A history of intelligence test interpretation." Contemporary intellectual assessment: Theories, tests, and issues (1997): 3–16.

Ruf, D. L. (2003). Use of the SB5 in the Assessment of High Abilities. Itasca, IL: Riverside Publishing Company.

Stanovich, K. E. (2009).

What intelligence tests miss: The psychology of rational thought . Yale University Press.

Terman, Lewis Madison, & Merrill, Maude A. (1960). Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale: Manual for the third revision, Form L-M. Boston (MA): Houghton Mifflin.

Youngstrom, E., Glutting, J., & Watkins, M. (2003). Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale: Fourth edition (SB4): Evaluating the Empirical Bases for Interpretations. Handbook of Psychological and Educational Assessment: Intelligence, Aptitude, and Achievement, 2, 217–242.

Further reading [ edit ] Becker, K.A (2003). "History of the Stanford–Binet Intelligence scales: Content and psychometrics".

Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scales, Fifth Edition Assessment Service Bulletin No. 1 .

Binet, Alfred ; Simon, Th. (1916).

The development of intelligence in children: The Binet–Simon Scale . Publications of the Training School at Vineland New Jersey Department of Research No. 11. E. S. Kite (Trans.). Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.

ISBN 9780598668028 . Retrieved 18 July 2010 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Brown, A. L.; French, L. A. (1979). "The Zone of Potential Development: Implications for Intelligence Testing in the Year 2000".

Intelligence .

3 (3): 255– 273.

doi : 10.1016/0160-2896(79)90021-7 .

Fancher, Raymond E. (1985).

The Intelligence Men: Makers of the IQ Controversy . New York (NY): W. W. Norton.

ISBN 978-0-393-95525-5 .

Freides, D. (1972). "Review of Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale, Third Revision". In Oscar Buros (ed.).

Seventh Mental Measurements Yearbook . Highland Park, NJ: Gryphon Press. pp.

772 –773.

Gould, Stephen Jay (1981).

The Mismeasure of Man . New York: W. W. Norton.

ISBN 978-0-393-31425-0 .

Christopher Lehmann-Haupt (October 21, 1981).

"Books Of The Times: The Mismeasure of Man" .

The New York Times (Review).

McNemar, Quinn (1942).

The revision of the Stanford–Binet Scale . Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Pinneau, Samuel R. (1961).

Changes in Intelligence Quotient Infancy to Maturity: New Insights from the Berkeley Growth Study with Implications for the Stanford–Binet Scales and Applications to Professional Practice . Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Terman, Lewis Madison ; Merrill, Maude A. (1937).

Measuring intelligence: A guide to the administration of the new revised Stanford–Binet tests of intelligence . Riverside textbooks in education. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Terman, Lewis Madison ; Merrill, Maude A. (1960).

Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale: Manual for the Third Revision Form L–M with Revised IQ Tables by Samuel R. Pinneau . Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Richardson, Nancy (1992).

"Stanford–Binet IV, of Course!: Time Marches On! (originally published as Which Stanford–Binet for the Brightest?)" .

Roeper Review .

15 (1): 32– 34.

doi : 10.1080/02783199209553453 .

Waddell, Deborah D. (1980).

"The Stanford–Binet: An Evaluation of the Technical Data Available since the 1972 Restandardization" .

Journal of School Psychology .

18 (3): 203– 209.

doi : 10.1016/0022-4405(80)90060-6 . Retrieved 29 June 2010 .

v t e Psychological and psychiatric evaluation and testing Intelligence tests Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scales Woodcock–Johnson Tests of Cognitive Abilities Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children Cognitive Assessment System Differential Ability Scales Ammons Quick Test Raven's Progressive Matrices Binet–Simon Intelligence Test Personality tests Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory 16PF Questionnaire Revised NEO Personality Inventory Projective tests Thematic apperception test Ink blot test ( Rorschach test , Holtzman inkblot test ) Szondi test Animal Metaphor Test Sentence completion tests Neuropsychological test Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery Rey–Osterrieth Complex Figure Delis–Kaplan Executive Function System (D-KEFS) Other tests Mental status examination Wechsler Memory Scale Benton Visual Retention Test Vineland Social Maturity Scale Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stanford–Binet_Intelligence_Scales&oldid=1303632602 " Category : Intelligence tests Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with incomplete citations from January 2021 All articles with incomplete citations All pages needing cleanup All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from November 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 04:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scales 14 languages Add topic

