Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Within the United Kingdom Toggle Within the United Kingdom subsection 1.1 Scotland 1.2 Wales 1.3 Northern Ireland 2 Outside the United Kingdom Toggle Outside the United Kingdom subsection 2.1 Australia and New Zealand 2.2 France 2.3 Ireland 2.4 Russia 2.5 Spain 2.6 United States 2.6.1 Anglophobia in the Irish-American community 2.7 Argentina 2.8 India 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 5.1 France 5.2 Germany 5.3 United States 5.4 Anglophobic publications Toggle the table of contents Anti-English sentiment 13 languages العربية Български Brezhoneg Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Հայերեն Italiano Nederlands Русский Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Opposition to or fear of England and/or English people For prejudice against British people as a whole, see Anti-British sentiment . For hostility towards the British state, see Foreign relations of the United Kingdom .

"Anglophobe" redirects here; not to be confused with Anglophone .

Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e " Gott strafe England " ("May God punish England") on a World War I –era cup Anti-English sentiment , also known as Anglophobia (from Latin Anglus "English" and Greek φόβος, phobos , "fear"), refers to opposition, dislike, fear, hatred, oppression, persecution, and discrimination of English people and/or England .

[ 1 ] It can be observed in various contexts within the United Kingdom and in countries outside of it. In the UK, Benjamin Disraeli and George Orwell highlighted anti-English sentiments among Welsh , Irish , and Scottish nationalisms . In Scotland, Anglophobia is influenced by Scottish identity . Football matches and tournaments often see manifestations of anti-English sentiment, including assaults and attacks on English individuals. In Wales , historical factors such as English language imposition and cultural suppression have contributed to anti-English sentiment. In Northern Ireland , anti-English sentiment, arising from complex historical and political dynamics, was exemplified in the IRA 's targeting of England during the Troubles .

Outside the UK, anti-English sentiment exists in countries like Australia , New Zealand , France , Ireland , Russia , India , the United States , and Argentina . In Australia and New Zealand, stereotypes of English immigrants as complainers have fueled such sentiment. France has historical conflicts with England, like the Hundred Years' War , contributing to animosity. In Ireland and, to a lesser extent, the United States , anti-English sentiment is rooted in Irish nationalism and hostility towards the Anglo-Irish community. Russia has seen waves of Anglophobia due to historical events and suspicions of British meddling. Argentina's anti-British sentiment is linked to the Falklands War and perceptions of British imperialism .

Generally, the term is sometimes used more loosely as a synonym for anti-British sentiment .

[ 1 ] Its opposite is Anglophilia .

Within the United Kingdom [ edit ] British statesman and Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli said that the proud English were sprung from "a horde of Baltic pirates who were never heard of in the greater annals of the world." [ 2 ] In his essay " Notes on Nationalism ", written in May 1945 and published in the first issue of the intellectual magazine Polemic (October 1945), George Orwell wrote that "Welsh, Irish and Scottish nationalism have points of difference but are alike in their anti-English orientation".

[ 3 ] Scotland [ edit ] See also: Scottish national identity and Category:England–Scotland relations In 1998, 19 year-old apprentice mechanic Mark Ayton was punched to the ground and kicked to death by three youths. Ayton's father explicitly cited his English accent as a factor contributing to the attack.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Court proceedings recorded that immediately before the attack, the attackers were singing Flower of Scotland , which includes the lines "And sent them homeward, Tae think again": an allusion to ridding Scotland of the English.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] In 1999, an inspector and race relations officer with Lothian and Borders Police said that a correlation had been noticed between the establishment of the Scottish Parliament and anti-English incidents.

[ 8 ] A 2005 study by Hussain and Millar of the Department of Politics at the University of Glasgow examined the prevalence of Anglophobia in relation to Islamophobia in Scotland. One finding of the report suggested that national "phobias" have common roots, independent of the nations towards whom they are directed. The study states that: Scottish identity comes close to rivalling low levels of education as an influence towards Anglophobia. Beyond that, having an English friend reduces Anglophobia by about as much as having a Muslim friend reduces Islamophobia. And lack of knowledge about Islam probably indicates a broader rejection of the 'other', for it has as much impact on Anglophobia as on Islamophobia.

[ 9 ] The study goes on to say (of the English living in Scotland): "Few of the English (only 16 per cent) see the conflict between Scots and English as even 'fairly serious'." The study found that Anglophobia was slightly less prevalent than Islamophobia but that, unlike Islamophobia, Anglophobia correlated with a strong sense of Scottish identity.

Hussain and Millar's research suggested that Anglophobia had fallen slightly since the introduction of devolution .

[ 10 ] In 2009, a woman originally from England was assaulted in an allegedly anti-English racially motivated attack.

[ 11 ] Similar cases have been connected with football matches and tournaments, particularly international tournaments, in which the English and Scottish football teams often compete with each other.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] There was a spate of anti-English attacks in 2006 during the FIFA World Cup .

[ 15 ] In one incident a 7-year-old boy wearing an England shirt was punched in the head in an Edinburgh park.

[ 16 ] In 2017 Kevin McKenna, former Scottish Journalist of the Year, penned an article in The National labelling English people living in Scotland as "colonising wankers".

[ 17 ] In 2020, groups of Scottish nationalists picketed the English border, airports and railway stations sporting hazmat suits and dogs, intent on stopping English people from crossing the England-Scotland border.

[ 18 ] The Scottish Secretary Alistair Jack accused Scotland's First Minister Nicola Sturgeon of having incited the incident by inaccurately using COVID statistics to stoke anti-English sentiment [ 19 ] Wales [ edit ] See also: Cultural relationship between the Welsh and the English The Laws in Wales Acts 1535 and 1542 , also known as the "Acts of Union", passed by the Parliament of England , annexed Wales to the Kingdom of England and replaced the Welsh language and Welsh law with the English language and English law .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Section 20 of the 1535 Act made English the only language of the law courts and stated that those who used Welsh would not be appointed to any public office in Wales.

[ 20 ] The Welsh language was supplanted in many public spheres. Much later, the Welsh Not was used in some schools to suppress the use of the Welsh language. This was never government policy, and was later described as a symbol of English cultural oppression.

[ 22 ] Since the Glyndŵr Rising of the early 15th century, Welsh nationalism has been primarily non-violent.

[ 23 ] The Welsh militant group Meibion Glyndŵr (English: Sons of [Owain] Glyndŵr ) were responsible for arson attacks on English-owned second homes in Wales from 1979 to 1994, motivated by cultural anti-English sentiment.

[ 23 ] Meibion Glyndŵr also attempted arson against several estate agents in Wales and England and against the offices of the Conservative Party in London.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] In 2000, the Chairman of Swansea Bay Race Equality Council said that "Devolution has brought a definite increase in anti-English behaviour", citing three women who believed that they were being discriminated against in their careers because they could not speak Welsh.

[ 26 ] In 2001 Dafydd Elis-Thomas , a former leader of Plaid Cymru , said that there was an anti-English strand to Welsh nationalism.

[ 27 ] On 21 April 2023, it was reported that Plaid Cymru councillor, Terry Davies had been suspended for a rant of discriminatory xenophobia. Davies referred to two colleagues as "outsiders" after telling them that "Wales is for  Welsh people." [ 28 ] On 11 January 2024, It was reported that a note had been sent to an address in Aberystwyth , in Ceredigion , with racial slurs about English people from Birmingham . The note called for Brummies to "go back home to Brummyland". It also called the West Midlands accent "vomit-inducing", and urged the occupant to "take a few thousand other people back with them".

Dyfed-Powys Police treated the note as a hate crime . It read: "Iorwerth Ave was once a nice, quiet, pleasant residential area until a load of [people] from the Midlands hit", and "Low-life like you should be forced to live in fenced in sites, preferably back where you came from." [ 29 ] Northern Ireland [ edit ] During the Troubles , the Irish Republican Army (IRA) mainly attacked targets in Northern Ireland and England, not Scotland or Wales, although the IRA planted a bomb at Sullom Voe Terminal in Shetland during a visit by the Queen in May 1981.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] The ancestry of most people in the Loyalist and Unionist communities is Scottish rather than English.

[ citation needed ] In the Protestant community, the English are identified with British politicians and are sometimes resented for their perceived abandonment of loyalist communities.

[ 32 ] Outside the United Kingdom [ edit ] In his 1859 essay A Few Words on Non-Intervention , John Stuart Mill notes that England "finds itself, in respect of its foreign policy, held up to obloquy as the type of egoism and selfishness; as a nation which thinks of nothing but of out-witting and out-generalling its neighbours" and urges his fellow countrymen against "the mania of professing to act from meaner motives than those by which we are really actuated".

[ 33 ] Australia and New Zealand [ edit ] Further information: Australia–United Kingdom relations and New Zealand–United Kingdom relations " Pommy " or "Pom" (acronym for 'Prisoner of [his] Majesty) is a common Australasian and South African slang word for the English, often combined with "whing[e]ing" (complaining) to make the expression "whingeing Pom" – an English immigrant who stereotypically complains about everything.

[ 34 ] Although the term is sometimes applied to British immigrants generally, it is usually applied specifically to the English, by both Australians and New Zealanders .

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] From the 19th century, there were feelings among established Australians that many immigrants from England were poorly skilled, unwanted by their home country and unappreciative of the benefits of their new country.

[ 37 ] In recent years, complaints about two newspaper articles blaming English tourists for littering a local beach and calling the English "Filthy Poms" in the headlines and "Poms fill the summer of our discontent", were accepted as complaints and settled through conciliation by the Australian Human Rights Commission when the newspapers published apologies. Letters and articles which referred to English people as "Poms" or "Pommies" did not meet the threshold for racial hatred.

[ 38 ] In 2007 a complaint to Australia's Advertising Standards Bureau about a television commercial using the term "Pom" was upheld and the commercial was withdrawn.

[ 39 ] France [ edit ] Further information: France–United Kingdom relations " Roastbeef " (or " rosbif ") is a long-standing Anglophobe French slang term to designate the English or British people. Its origins lies in William Hogarth 's francophobic painting The Gate of Calais or O! The Roast Beef of Old England , in which the "roastbeef" allegory is used as a mockery. Its popular use includes films, television shows and sketch comedies.

After the Norman Conquest of 1066, Anglo-Norman French replaced Old English as the official language of England. In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, the Plantagenet kings of England lost most of their possessions in France , began to consider England to be their primary domain and turned to the English language. King Edward I , when issuing writs for summoning parliament in 1295, claimed that the King of France planned to invade England and extinguish the English language, "a truly detestable plan which may God avert".

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] In 1346, Edward III exhibited in Parliament a forged ordinance , in which Philip VI of France would have called for the destruction of the English nation and country. The Hundred Years' War (1337–1453) between England and France changed societies on both sides of the Channel .

The English and French were engaged in numerous wars in the following centuries. England's conflict with Scotland provided France with an opportunity to destabilise England and there was a firm friendship (known as the Auld Alliance ) between France and Scotland from the late-thirteenth century to the mid-sixteenth century. The alliance eventually foundered because of growing Protestantism in Scotland. Opposition to Protestantism became a major feature of later French Anglophobia (and conversely, fear of Catholicism was a hallmark of Francophobia ).

Antipathy and intermittent hostilities between France and Britain, as distinct from England, continued during later centuries.

Ireland [ edit ] Further information: Ireland–United Kingdom relations There is a long tradition of Anglophobia within Irish nationalism . Much of this was grounded in the hostility felt by the largely Catholic Irish for the Anglo-Irish people, which was mainly Anglican . In Ireland before the Great Famine , anti-English hostility was deep-seated and was manifested in increased anti-English hostility organised by United Irishmen .

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] In post-famine Ireland, anti-English hostility was adopted into the philosophy and foundation of the Irish nationalist movement. At the turn of the 20th century, the Celtic Revival movement associated the search for a cultural and national identity with an increasing anti-colonial and anti-English sentiment.

[ 45 ] Anti-English themes manifested in national organisations seen as promoting native Irish values, with the emergence of groups like Sinn Féin .

[ citation needed ] One popular nationalist slogan was " England's difficulty is Ireland's opportunity " and the well-known anti-World-War-I song " Who is Ireland's Enemy?

" used past events to conclude that it was England, and furthermore that Irish people ought to "pay those devils back".

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] The Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA) was founded in 1884 as a counter-measure against the Anglo-Irish Athletic Association, which promoted and supervised British sports such as English football in Ireland. The GAA was founded in the anti-English ideas of Thomas Croke , Archbishop of Cashel and Emly .

[ 48 ] From 1886 to 1971 the GAA focused national pride into distinctly non-English activities.

[ 49 ] Members were forbidden to belong to organisations that played "English" games and the organisation countered the Anglicisation in Irish society.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] With the development in Ireland of Irish games and the arts, the Celtic revivalists and nationalists identified characteristics of what they defined as the "Irish Race". A nationalistic identity developed, as the opposite of the Anglo-Saxons and untainted by the Anglo-Irish .

[ 53 ] A sense of national identity and Irish distinctiveness as well as an anti-English assertiveness was reinforced to Catholics by teachers in hedge schools .

[ 54 ] A feeling of anti-English sentiment intensified within Irish nationalism during the Boer Wars , leading to xenophobia underlined by Anglophobia.

[ 55 ] Two units of Irish commandos fought with the Boer against British forces during the Second Boer War (1899–1902). J. Donnolly, a member of the brigade, wrote to the editor of the Irish News in 1901: It was not for the love of the Boer we were fighting; it was for the hatred of the English. (J. Donnolly letter to the Irish News , 1901) [ 56 ] The pro-Boer movement gained widespread support in Ireland, and over 20,000 supporters demonstrated in Dublin in 1899 where Irish nationalism, anti-English and pro-Boer attitudes were one and the same. There was a pro-Boer movement in England as well but the English pro-Boer movement was not based on anti-English sentiments. These opposing views and animosity led the English and Irish pro-Boer groups to maintain a distance from one another.

[ 57 ] Despite this, far more Irishmen joined various Irish Regiments of the British Army during this time, more so than pro-Boer commandos.

The W. B. Yeats play The Countess Cathleen , written in 1892, has anti-English overtones comparing the English gentry to demons who come for Irish souls.

[ 58 ] Films set during the Irish War of Independence , such as The Informer (1935) and the Plough and the Stars (1936), were criticised by the BBFC for the director John Ford 's anti-English content and in recent years, Michael Collins and The Wind That Shakes the Barley (despite being a joint British-Irish production) have led to accusations of Anglophobia in the British press. In 2006, Antony Booth , the father-in-law of Tony Blair , claimed he was the victim of anti-English vandalism and discrimination while living in County Cavan , Ireland, with his wife.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] In August 2008 an English pipe fitter based in Dublin was awarded €20,000 for the racial abuse and discrimination he received at his workplace.

[ 64 ] In 2011, tensions and anti-English or anti-British feelings flared in relation to the proposed visit of Queen Elizabeth II , the first British monarch to visit Ireland in 100 years. The invitation by the President of Ireland , Mary McAleese , and the Irish government , was hailed by the Irish press as a historic visit but was criticised by Sinn Féin President Gerry Adams .

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] An anti-Queen demonstration was held at the GPO Dublin by a small group of Irish Republicans on 26 February 2011, [ citation needed ] and a mock trial and decapitation of an effigy of Queen Elizabeth II were carried out by socialist republican group Éirígí .

[ 67 ] Other protests included one Dublin publican (the father of Celtic player Anthony Stokes ) hanging a banner declaring "the Queen will never be welcome in this country".

[ 68 ] In 2018, the Irish author and journalist Megan Nolan wrote an opinion piece for The New York Times that detailed how she had come to hate England and English people .

[ 69 ] Russia [ edit ] Further information: Russia–United Kingdom relations and Anglo-Saxons (slur) After the Anglo-Russian War , during which Britain plundered Russian shipping and raided the coast, the alliance against Napoleon was renewed. Despite this, the Great Game gave rise to a wave of widespread Anglophobia in Russia, accompanied by fear of English interference and intervention. Which is what happened later . During the Russo-Japanese War , there was a sentiment in Russia that England was behind Japan's militarism against Russia in the Far East, leading to a strained relationship between Britain and Russia.

[ 70 ] The UK and Russia were allies in World War I until the Bolshevik Revolution of 1918, after which the British again attacked Russian soil and the capitalist West became the target of the new Communist International ("Comintern"). In 1924, these tensions were briefly cooled when the Labour government of Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald formally recognized the Soviet Union and established diplomatic relations between the two countries. The two were allies again starting in 1941.  During the Cold War , Britain firmly sided with the West against the Soviet Union and the relationship between the two continues to remain dubious even today.

[ 71 ] Before 2018 FIFA World Cup , there had been controversies regarding Anglophobia in Russia.

[ 72 ] Spain [ edit ] Further information: Spain–United Kingdom relations Relations between England and Spain were not significantly hostile until the Age of Discovery and the rise of European colonialism in the 16th century, in which both countries' interests came into conflict following the European discovery of the Americas. Spain was the first European power to secure control over vast areas of the New World, and an outright rivalry soon developed with England as the latter pursued its own colonial enterprises in the Americas once the economic benefits became apparent. Additional factors such as the English Reformation and the Catholic Counter-Reformation heightened tensions substantially, and contributed in prompting both countires to seek leadership of opposing sides during major geopolitical conflicts in Europe and the Americas which led to multiple wars between England and Spain until the 19th century.

In the Americas, one of the main driving forces behind the Golden Age of Piracy was a deliberate attempt by England to undermine Spain's control over its possesions in the Caribbean, as well as to sabotage lucrative Spanish trade routes passing through the region. Spain intervened in favour of the United States during the American Revolutionary War , while Britain provided varying degrees of financial and logistical support to insurgents in the Spanish American wars of independence .

Historians have employed the term " Black legend " to describe an anti-Spanish, anti-Catholic historiographical tendency advanced by past enemies of Spain, such as England.

Despite a warming in relations from the 20th century onwards, issues such as disputes over the status of Gibraltar (which was annexed by Britain after the War of the Spanish Succession ) still cause tensions between the two countires. A 2013 poll revealed that, regardless of the dispute over Gibraltar, 25% of Spanish responents rated the relations between Spain and the UK as "bad", with 3,4% rating them as "very bad".

[ 73 ] In recent times, anti-English and anti-tourist sentiments have overlapped to some degree in places within Spain's mediterranean coast .

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] United States [ edit ] Further information: United Kingdom–United States relations Slum children in New York City drilling under anti-English placards, "Yellow kid" cartoon by Richard F. Outcault from Joseph Pulitzer 's Democratic newspaper New York World, 15 March 1896.

In the early years of the Republic, Anglophobia was particularly associated with the Jeffersonian Republicans in the 1790s, who warned that close ties with Great Britain were especially dangerous because that nation was an enemy of American Republicanism. By contrast, the opposing Federalist Party warned that the Jeffersonians were too sympathetic to the radicalism of the French Revolution. The Origins of the War of 1812 involved claimed violations against American neutrality by the United Kingdom during the Napoleonic Wars.  The Treaty of Ghent , ratified in 1815 and ending the War of 1812, established peaceful relations for the two countries that has lasted more than two centuries, though this was stressed at times in the years following the treaty by events such as the Trent Affair of 1861 and the Fenian Raids in 1866–1871.

[ 76 ] In the final days of the 1888 presidential campaign, a Republican operative claiming to be a British immigrant in America named Charles F. Murchison tricked the British ambassador Lord Sackville-West into indicating Britain's support for the Democratic candidate Grover Cleveland. The deliberatly fabricated act forced Sackville-west to return to Britain.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] The Great Rapprochement was the convergence of social and political objectives between the United Kingdom and the United States from 1895 until World War I began in 1914. The most notable sign of improving relations during the Great Rapprochement was Britain's actions during the Spanish–American War (started 1898). Initially Britain supported the Spanish Empire and its colonial rule over Cuba , since the perceived threat of American occupation and a territorial acquisition of Cuba by the United States might harm British trade and commercial interests within its own imperial possessions in the West Indies . However, after the United States made genuine assurances that it would grant Cuba's independence (which eventually occurred in 1902 under the terms dictated in the Platt Amendment ), the British abandoned this policy and ultimately sided with the United States, unlike most other European powers who supported Spain. In return the US government supported Britain during the Boer War , although many Americans favoured the Boers.

[ 79 ] This 1898 depiction of the Great Rapprochement shows Uncle Sam embracing John Bull , while Columbia and Britannia sit together and hold hands.

In 2002, academic John Moser said that, although Anglophobia is now "almost completely absent" from American society, this was not always the case. He stated that "there were strains of Anglophobia present in virtually every populist movement of the late 19th and early 20th centuries," with the Populist Party , for example, "referring to England as a 'monster' that had 'seized upon the fresh energy of America and is steadily fixing its fangs into our social life.'" Reasons suggested for the faltering of Anglophobia included the impact of the Second World War , and reduced political support for Irish nationalist movements compared with that in earlier periods. Moser also said: [ 80 ] In an age when the wealthiest and most influential Americans tended to be associated with things British—the vast majority were of Anglo-Saxon descent, wore English-tailored suits, drove British-made automobiles, and even spoke with affected British accents—it was quite natural for Great Britain to fall within the sights of disaffected populists. In more recent years, however, this has changed. When one thinks of wealth and influence in contemporary America, particularly when one considers those who have made their fortunes in the past thirty years, English culture does not immediately spring to mind.

The film industry is widely perceived to give a British nationality to a disproportionate number of villains.

[ 81 ] Anglophobia in the Irish-American community [ edit ] The Irish-American community in the United States has historically shown antipathy towards Britain for its role in controlling Ireland. The large Irish Catholic element provided a major base for demands for Irish independence, and occasioned anti-British rhetoric, especially at election time.

[ 82 ] Anglophobia thus has been a defining feature of the Irish-American experience. Bolstered by their support of Irish nationalism, Irish-American communities have been staunchly anti-English since the 1850s, and this sentiment is fostered within the Irish-American identity.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] Irish immigrants arrived poor and within a generation or two prospered. Many subscribed cash from their weekly wage to keep up the anti-English agitation.

[ 85 ] Anglophobia was a common theme in Democratic Party politics.

[ 86 ] Irish-American newspapers, like the pro-Catholic Truth Teller which was founded in 1825 by an anti-English priest, were influential in the identity of the community.

[ 87 ] Anti-English feelings among Irish-Americans spread to American culture through Irish-American performers in popular blackface minstrel shows . These imparted both elements of the Irish-American performers' own national bias, and the popular stereotypical image that the English people were bourgeois, aloof, or upper class.

[ 88 ] Sentiments quickly turned into direct and violent action when in the 1860s the Fenian Brotherhood Society invaded Canada to provoke a United States-British war in hope it would lead to Irish independence.

[ 89 ] Violence is said to have included direct action by Fenian sympathisers, with the assassination of Thomas D'Arcy McGee , himself an Irish Canadian and Irish nationalist who was against the invasion, although he was very critical of the Orange Order , and it has long been suspected they were his true killers.

[ 90 ] Goldwin Smith , professor at Cornell University , wrote in the North American Review that "hatred of England" was used as a tool to win the Irish-American vote.

[ 91 ] A similar observation was made in 1900 by U.S. Secretary of State John Hay , who criticised the Prairie Populist and his own Democratic party 's political pandering to attract the support of the Irish diaspora: State conventions put on an anti-English plank in their platforms to curry favor with the Irish (whom they want to keep) and the Germans whom they want to seduce. It is too disgusting to have to deal with such sordid lies.

[ 89 ] Well into the early 20th century anti-English sentiment was increasing with famine memorials in the Irish-American communities, which "served as a wellspring for their obsessive and often corrosive antipathy," as noted in the British Parliament in 1915: There is no part of the world where anti-English influences worked so powerfully than in the United States. Almost every Irishman there is the son or grandson of an evicted tenant – evicted in all the horrors of the black 40s. And most of them have heard stories of them from their mother's knee.

[ 92 ] Some newspapers, including the San Francisco Leader and the New York Irish World , first published in 1823, were renowned for their anti-English articles.

[ 93 ] The Irish World blamed the mainland United Kingdom for the depopulation and desolate state of Ireland's industries.

[ 94 ] One newspaper, the Gaelic American , called a student performance of the British national anthem by some girls of Irish heritage from a convent school an act of disloyalty, where they were taught to reverence the traditions of the hereditary enemy of their race and religion.

[ 94 ] A commemorative stamp by philanthropist Andrew Carnegie on a century of peace between America and Great Britain was criticised by the Irish-American press.

[ 94 ] In recent years American political commentators, such as Pat Buchanan , have highlighted the anti-English stance of the Irish Diaspora in the United States of America.

[ 89 ] Argentina [ edit ] Further information: Argentina–United Kingdom relations Sign in Ushuaia , Argentina: "Mooring by English pirates' ships is prohibited".

In 1982 the two countries fought a small short conflict in the Falklands War , decisively won by the UK. Relations have become friendly since then.

[ 95 ] Anglophobia in Argentina has been studied by the historian Ema Cibotti in "Dear Enemies. From Beresford to Maradona, the true story of relations between the English and Argentines". In its prologue, entitled "Against the English it is better", the social historian states The anti-British sentiment is perhaps one of the most widespread and rooted in our idiosyncrasy, to the point that it has become flesh in football, our most popular sport. “Against the English it is better”, and “He who does not jump is English”, are slogans shouted by millions. Each success of the blue and white team is usually a reason for collective joy, but a victory against the English is much more; it vibrates the national spirit, no matter how dejected it may be at the time. The playing field becomes the stage where society claims the almost two hundred years of usurpation of the Malvinas Islands.

That feeling has not been constant or unanimous. Characters such as Manuel Belgrano , who had faced the English invasions of Buenos Aires in 1806 and 1807 or Mariano Moreno, among the independence leaders, supported policies similar to those of the British and the dispute over the Falkland Islands did not sour relations. The 1929 crisis and the coup that overthrew Hipólito Yrigoyen in 1930 , with the fall in export prices, will be the determining factors in the appearance of an Anglophobic sentiment linked to the rejection of neo-colonialism or British imperialism. This is what the Spanish pedagogue Lorenzo Luzuriaga observed upon arriving in Argentina in 1940, who in a letter to Américo Castro analysed the different attitudes towards the outbreak of the World War People here are very confused. On the one hand, there is economic Anglophobia about alleged British imperialism and exploitation; on the other, the Russophile extremists who have raised the banner of neutrality and indifference to the conflict; on the other, the Francophiles (Victoria Ocampo's group) who do not know what to do with the defection from France, and finally a small Anglophile minority, ready to help in the fight by all means.

Philosopher Mario Bunge , in an interview granted to Jorge Fontevecchia on May 4, 2008, collected in Reportajes 2, alluded to the spread of Anglophobic sentiment in the years of the conflict, explainable "because many of the companies had been owned by the English" and attributed to this feeling the approach to Nazism of Carlos Astrada , introducer of existentialist philosophy in Argentina. But it will be with the Falklands War in 1982 when Anglophobic sentiment spread to a good part of society.

India [ edit ] Further information: India–United Kingdom relations Anglophobic sentiment in India is rooted in the colonial legacy of British rule, starting with the rule of the British East India Company and continuing under the British Raj .

[ 96 ] Oppressive and exploitative practices, the imposition of British culture, language, and education, along with economic policies that favoured British interests at the expense of Indian welfare, fuelled a sense of injustice and subjugation among Indians. Key events such as the Indian Rebellion of 1857 , the Jallianwala Bagh massacre of 1919, and the economic hardships imposed by British policies during events like the Bengal famine of 1943 intensified this animosity.

[ 97 ] Post-independence, Anglophobia has persisted in various forms, often manifesting as resistance to Western cultural dominance and the lingering impact of colonial attitudes in modern Indian society.

[ 98 ] This historical context has fostered a complex relationship with the English language and British cultural elements, where they are both integrated into Indian society and simultaneously viewed with suspicion or disdain by some. The legacy of colonial exploitation has left a deep imprint on India's collective memory, contributing to a continued wariness of British influence in both political and cultural spheres.

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] See also [ edit ] England portal Anglophile Racism Anti-Canadian sentiment § Quebec - where anti- Anglophone sentiment is often described as Anglophobia List of phobias Perfidious Albion Views of Lyndon LaRouche and the LaRouche movement Stereotypes of British people References [ edit ] ^ a b Oxford Dictionary of English , Oxford University Press , 2005 ^ "Israel: The Anglo-Jewish origins of the nation" .

Marginalia: LA Review of Books . Archived from the original on 24 October 2021 . Retrieved 16 June 2021 .

^ "George Orwell - Notes on Nationalism - Essay (see: Positive Nationalism (ii) Celtic Nationalism)" .

George Orwell - the complete works website . George-Orwell.org. 2003. Archived from the original on 7 August 2013 . Retrieved 22 May 2009 .

^ "Gang kicked boy to death 'because he had an English accent' " .

Independent.co.uk . 7 May 1998.

^ "A VERY SCOTTISH DEATH » 30 May 1998 » the Spectator Archive" .

^ "THE LORD ADVOCATE v. IAN ADAM WHELSON GRAHAM, JOHN PURVES AND ROSS GRAVESTOCK" .

^ "BBC News | SCOTLAND | Killers freed on death anniversary" .

^ Goodwin, Stephen (17 February 1999).

"Anti-English taunts drive family over the border" .

The Independent . London. Archived from the original on 2 November 2012 . Retrieved 21 May 2009 .

^ Hussain, Asifa; Miller, William (March 2005).

"Towards a Multicultural Nationalism? Anglophobia and Islamophobia in Scotland" (PDF) .

Devolution Briefings: Briefing No. 24 . Economic & Social Research Council. p. 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 June 2013 . Retrieved 20 July 2008 .

^ Hussain, Asifa; Miller, William (March 2005).

"Towards a Multicultural Nationalism? Anglophobia and Islamophobia in Scotland" (PDF) .

Devolution Briefings: Briefing No. 24 . Economic & Social Research Council. p. 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 June 2013 . Retrieved 20 July 2008 .

^ " 'Anti-English' punch hurts woman" .

BBC News . 13 January 2009. Archived from the original on 15 February 2009 . Retrieved 21 May 2009 .

^ Urquhart, Frank.

"Aberdeen leaders condemn anti-English attacks in city - Scotsman.com Sport" . Sport.scotsman.com . Retrieved 21 May 2009 .

^ Horne, Marc.

"Moderator says anti-English bigotry is 'like sectarianism' " .

Scotlandonsunday.scotsman.com . Archived from the original on 28 July 2011 . Retrieved 21 May 2009 .

^ "England fan assaulted in Aberdeen" .

BBC News . 3 July 2006. Archived from the original on 21 January 2009 . Retrieved 21 May 2009 .

^ Reid, Melanie (14 January 2009).

"Woman attacked in Scotland 'because she sounded English' " .

The Times . London.

Archived from the original on 20 September 2011 . Retrieved 16 April 2011 .

^ "Park disgrace as boy, 7, in England top punched by yob" .

The Scotsman . 21 June 2006 . Retrieved 4 August 2019 .

^ "Kevin McKenna: We're colonised by w*****rs ... Time for Scotland to show self-respect" .

The National . 25 January 2017.

^ Health. Coronavirus ^ "Minister accuses Nicola Sturgeon of inflaming tensions at English-Scottish border" . 17 September 2020.

^ a b "Laws in Wales Act 1535 (repealed 21.12.1993) (c.26)" .

UK Statute Law Database website .

Office of Public Sector Information . 2010. Archived from the original on 2 January 2008 . Retrieved 11 November 2010 .

^ "Laws in Wales Act 1542 (repealed) (c.26)" .

The UK Statute Law Database website .

Office of Public Sector Information . 2010. Archived from the original on 23 December 2012 . Retrieved 11 November 2010 .

^ "The Welsh language in 19th century education" .

BBC Cymru Wales history website .

BBC Cymru Wales . 2010. Archived from the original on 28 April 2014 . Retrieved 11 November 2010 .

^ a b Kivisto, P. (2002). Multiculturalism in a global society. Oxford. p.129 ^ Ward, David (1 March 2002).

"Wales swamped by tide of English settlers" .

The Guardian . London. Archived from the original on 23 September 2004 . Retrieved 21 May 2009 .

^ Kivisto, Peter (2002).

Multiculturalism in a global society . Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0-631-22194-4 . Retrieved 21 May 2009 .

^ Milmo, Cahal (4 August 2000).

"English the victims of racism in Wales - This Britain, UK" .

The Independent . London. Archived from the original on 12 March 2014 . Retrieved 21 May 2009 .

^ "Attack on '19th century' nationalism" .

BBC News . 18 December 2001. Archived from the original on 21 October 2007 . Retrieved 30 March 2010 .

^ "Councillor suspended for 'Wales is for Welsh people' rant" .

BBC News, BBC . 21 April 2023 . Retrieved 22 April 2023 .

^ Pigott, Paul (11 January 2024).

"Aberystwyth: 'Go back to Brummyland' note a hate crime - police" .

BBC News, BBC Wales . Retrieved 11 January 2023 .

^ "The IRA campaigns in England" .

BBC News . 4 March 2001. Archived from the original on 29 January 2009.

^ "MI5 blamed BP for security lapse before IRA bomb attack on Queen at Sullom Voe" . 27 October 2009.

^ Bruce, S. (1994).

The Edge of the Union: The Ulster Loyalist Political Vision.

Oxford, Oxford Univ. Press.

^ "The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, Volume XXI - Essays on Equality, Law, and Education (Subjection of Women) - Online Library of Liberty" .

oll.libertyfund.org . Archived from the original on 29 October 2013.

^ "World Wide Words: Pom" .

World Wide Words . Archived from the original on 6 April 2001.

^ Partridge, Eric (25 November 2002).

A Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional English: Colloquialisms and Catch Phrases, Fossilised Jokes and Puns, General Nicknames, Vulgarisms and Such Americanisms as Have Been Naturalised . Routledge.

ISBN 9780415291897 – via Google Books.

^ Malone, Barbara.

"Emigrate New Zealand" The Ping Pong Poms :: Immigrate New Zealand :: New Zealand Immigration" . Archived from the original on 15 August 2013.

^ Jupp, James (11 May 2004).

The English in Australia . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521542951 – via Google Books.

^ "Guide to the Racial Hatred Act | Australian Human Rights Commission" .

www.humanrights.gov.au . Archived from the original on 14 October 2012.

^ Lagan, Bernard (26 January 2007).

"Poms Whinge so Hard that Beer Ad is Pulled" .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on 1 June 2010 . Retrieved 20 July 2008 .

^ Adrian Hastings, The Construction of Nationhood. Ethnicity, Religion and Nationalism ( Cambridge University Press , 1997), p. 45.

^ "[Rex Franciae] linguam anglicam, si conceptae iniquitatis proposito detestabili potestas correspondeat, quod Deus avertat, omnino de terra delere proponit ." William Stubbs, Select Charters (Oxford: Clarendon Press , 1946), p. 480.

^ Jackson, Alvin (1999).

Ireland 1798-1998: War, Peace and Beyond . Oxford: Blackwell. p. 85.

^ White, Robert William (2006).

Ruairí Ó Brádaigh: The Life and Politics of an Irish Revolutionary . Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. p. 1.

^ Biagini, Eugenio R. (2007).

British Democracy and Irish Nationalism, 1876–1906 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 31.

^ Seán Farrell Moran, Patrick Pearse and the Politics of Redemption: The Mind of the Easter Rising, 1916 , p.54 ^ Ramón, Marta (2007).

A Provisional Dictator: James Stephens and the Fenian Movement . Dublin: University College Dublin Press. p. 103.

ISBN 9781904558644 .

^ Kennedy, Christopher M. (2010).

Genesis of the Rising, 1912-1916: A Transformation of Nationalist Opinion . New York: Peter Lang. p. 99.

ISBN 9781433105005 .

^ Lyons, F.S.L (1971).

Ireland Since the Famine: An Incomparable Survey of Modern Irish History . London: Fontana Press. pp.

226– 227.

^ Tanner, Marcus (2004).

The Last of the Celts . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. p. 104.

^ Joseph V. O'Brien, Dear, Dirty Dublin: A City in Distress, 1899-1916 , p.244 ^ Seán Farrell Moran, Patrick Pearse and the Politics of Redemption: The Mind of the Easter Rising, 1916 , p.55 ^ The G.A.A.: A History of the Gaelic Athletic Association , pp.65-66. Dublin: Cumann Luthchleas Geal, 1980 ^ Moran, Seán Farrell (1994).

Patrick Pearse and the Politics of Redemption: The Mind of the Easter Rising, 1916 . Washington, DC: The Catholic University of America Press. pp.

58– 59.

^ Boyce, D. George ; O'Day, Alan (2001).

Defenders of the Union: A Survey of British and Irish Unionism Since 1801 . London: Routledge. p. 61.

^ McCracken, Donal P. (2003).

Forgotten Protest: Ireland and the Anglo-Boer War . Belfast: Ulster Historical Foundation. p. 16.

^ McCracken, Donal P. (2003).

Forgotten Protest: Ireland and the Anglo-Boer War . Belfast: Ulster Historical Foundation. p. 19.

^ McCracken, Donal P. (2003).

Forgotten Protest: Ireland and the Anglo-Boer War . Belfast: Ulster Historical Foundation. p. 20.

^ Delmer, Frederick Sefton (1911).

English Literature from "Beowulf" to Bernard Shaw . Berlin: Weldmann. p. 13.

^ Robertson, James C. (2016).

The British Board of Film Censors: Film Censorship in Britain, 1896–1950 . London: Routledge. p. 88.

^ "Michael Collins Films Stirs Controversy" . Archived from the original on 23 October 2012.

^ Roberts, Andrew (14 June 2000).

"Hollywood's racist lies about Britain and the British" .

The Daily Express . Archived from the original on 23 October 2012 . Retrieved 18 September 2022 .

^ Luckhurst, Tim (31 May 2006).

"Director in a class of his own" .

The Times . Retrieved 18 September 2022 .

^ Peterkin, Tom (18 August 2006).

" 'Anti-English bias' ends Booth's Irish idyll" .

The Telegraph . Archived from the original on 16 February 2014 . Retrieved 18 September 2022 .

^ "Englishman wins Irish race case" .

BBC News . 12 August 2008.

Archived from the original on 10 October 2008 . Retrieved 12 December 2008 .

^ McDonald, Henry (23 June 2010).

"Queen to visit Irish Republic by end of next year" .

The Guardian . London. Archived from the original on 26 June 2010 . Retrieved 18 September 2022 .

^ "Sinn Fein's Gerry Adams slams Queen Elizabeth's upcoming visit to Ireland" .

IrishCentral.com . 5 March 2011. Archived from the original on 17 December 2013.

^ Debets, Michael (16 April 2011).

"Queen Elizabeth effigy beheaded in mock trial" .

DemotiX . Archived from the original on 28 December 2013 . Retrieved 18 September 2022 .

^ Bloxham, Andy (20 May 2011).

"The Queen in Ireland: standing ovation in Dublin" .

The Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 22 January 2014 . Retrieved 18 September 2022 .

^ Nolan, Megan (18 October 2018).

"I Didn't Hate the English — Until Now" .

nytimes.com . Retrieved 7 February 2024 .

^ "Anglophobia in Russia. Among all classes" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . 27 February 1904. p. 11.

^ Bullough, Oliver (13 November 2019).

"The toxic relationship between Britain and Russia has to be exposed" .

The Guardian .

^ Beswick, Emma (8 June 2018).

"Foreign office warns football fans of 'anti-British sentiment' in Russia" .

Euronews .

^ Noya, Javier (1 September 2013).

"Gibraltar and public opinion in the UK and Spain" .

Elcano Royal Institute . Madrid . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ Joe Cawly (19 February 2025).

"The real reason Spain is fed up with British tourists" .

The Telegraph . London . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ O'Donoghue, Deborah (22 August 2023).

"Spanish activists use anti-English sentiment in overtourism campaign" .

Travel Tomorrow . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ H. C. Allen, Great Britain and the United States: A History of Anglo-American Relations, 1783–1952 (1954) online ^ Charles S.  Campbell, "The Dismissal of Lord Sackville." Mississippi Valley Historical Review 44.4 (1958): 635-648 online .

^ George Brooks,  "Anglophobia in the United States: Some Light on the Presidential Election." Westminster Review 130.1 (1888): 736-756 online .

^ Dumbrell, John (2009).

America's Special Relationships: Allies and Clients . Taylor & Francis. p. 31.

ISBN 9780415483766 .

^ Moser, John.

"John Moser, The Decline of American Anglophobia" . Personal.ashland.edu. Archived from the original on 21 June 2013 . Retrieved 21 May 2009 .

^ Fenton, Ben (19 June 2001).

" 'Brenglish' in a snit over Hollywood's history lessons" .

The Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 15 February 2014 . Retrieved 21 May 2009 .

^ William C. Reuter, "The Anatomy of Political Anglophobia in the United States, 1865–1900," Mid America (1979) 61#2 pp. 117-132.

^ Simon James Potter, Newspapers and Empire in Ireland and Britain: Reporting the British Empire, c.1857-1921 . (Four Courts Press, 2004), p.216 ^ Arthur Gribben, The Great Famine and the Irish Diaspora in America .

University of Massachusetts Press (1999), p.220 ^ The Century: Volume 26, 1883.

https://books.google.com/books?id=x1aQWbz_eYAC&q=irish+anti+english ^ * Davies, Gareth, and Julian E. Zelizer, eds.

America at the Ballot Box: Elections and Political History (2015) pp. 98-117.

^ Ronald H. Bayor and Timothy J. Meagher, The New York Irish .

Johns Hopkins University Press (1997), p.74 ^ Robert Nowatzki, Representing African Americans in Transatlantic Abolitionism and Blackface Minstrelsy , p.181.

LSU Press (2010) ^ a b c Patrick J. Buchanan, A Republic, Not an Empire: Reclaiming America's Destiny , p.334.

Regnery Publishing (2002) ^ Robert Nowatzki, LSU Press, 2010 - Social Science p.181 ^ Kim C. Sturgess, Shakespeare and the American Nation . Cambridge University Press (2004), p.46 ^ Arthur Gribben, The Great Famine and the Irish Diaspora in America ^ Clark, Dennis.

The Irish in Philadelphia: Ten Generations of Urban experience .

Temple University Press (1982), p.110 ^ a b c Arthur Gribben, The Great Famine and the Irish Diaspora in America.

University of Massachusetts Press (1999), p.228 ^ Martin Robson, "The UK and Argentina: Economic Interdependence, Informal Empire, or Just Good Friends?." Navies and Maritime Policies in the South Atlantic (2019): 97-124.

^ "Buddhists: Understanding Buddhism Through the Lives of Practitioners" .

Wiley.com . Retrieved 6 June 2024 .

^ "Poverty and Famines - Amartya Sen - Oxford University Press" .

global.oup.com . Retrieved 6 June 2024 .

^ "The Nation and Its Fragments" .

press.princeton.edu . 7 November 1993 . Retrieved 6 June 2024 .

^ "Inglorious Empire" .

Hurst . Retrieved 6 June 2024 .

^ "Provincializing Europe" .

press.princeton.edu . Princeton University Press. 18 November 2007 . Retrieved 6 June 2024 .

Further reading [ edit ] France [ edit ] Acomb, Frances Dorothy .

Anglophobia in France, 1763–1789: an essay in the history of constitutionalism and nationalism (Duke University Press, 1950) Bell, Philip J.

France and Britain, 1900–1940. Entente and Estrangement (Longman, 1996) Berthon, Simon.

Allies at War: The Bitter Rivalry among Churchill, Roosevelt, and de Gaulle (2001). 356 pp.

Black, Jeremy.

Natural and Necessary Enemies: Anglo-French Relations in the Eighteenth Century (1986) Brunschwig, Henri.

Anglophobia and French African Policy (Yale University Press, 1971).

Gibson, Robert.

The Best of Enemies: Anglo-French Relations Since the Norman Conquest (2nd ed. 2011) major scholarly study excerpt and text search Horne, Alistair, Friend or Foe: An Anglo-Saxon History of France (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2005).

Johnson, Douglas, et al.

Britain and France: Ten Centuries (1980) table of contents Newman, Gerald. "Anti-French Propaganda and British Liberal Nationalism in the Early Nineteenth Century: Suggestions Toward a General Interpretation." Victorian Studies (1975): 385–418.

in JSTOR Otte, T. G. "From "War-in-Sight" to Nearly War: Anglo–French Relations in the Age of High Imperialism, 1875–1898." Diplomacy and Statecraft (2006) 17#4 pp: 693–714.

Pickles, Dorothy.

The Uneasy Entente. French Foreign Policy and Franco-British Misunderstandings (1966) Schmidt, H. D. "The Idea and Slogan of 'Perfidious Albion'" Journal of the History of Ideas (1953) pp: 604–616.

in JSTOR ; on French distrust of "Albion" (i.e. England) Tombs, R. P. and I. Tombs, That Sweet Enemy: Britain and France, the History of a Love-Hate Relationship (Pimlico, 2007) Germany [ edit ] Frederick, Suzanne Y. "The Anglo-German Rivalry, 1890–1914," pp. 306–336 in William R. Thompson, ed.

Great power rivalries (1999) online Geppert, Dominik, and Robert Gerwarth, eds.

Wilhelmine Germany and Edwardian Britain: Essays on Cultural Affinity (2009) Görtemaker, Manfred.

Britain and Germany in the Twentieth Century (2005) Hoerber, Thomas. "Prevail or perish: Anglo-German naval competition at the beginning of the twentieth century," European Security (2011) 20#1, pp. 65–79.

Kennedy, Paul M. "Idealists and realists: British views of Germany, 1864–1939," Transactions of the Royal Historical Society 25 (1975) pp: 137–56; compares the views of idealists (pro-German) and realists (anti-German) Kennedy, Paul.

The Rise of the Anglo-German Antagonism 1860–1914 (London, 1980) excerpt and text search ; influential synthesis Major, Patrick. "Britain and Germany: A Love-Hate Relationship?" German History, October 2008, Vol. 26 Issue 4, pp. 457–468.

Milton, Richard.

Best of Enemies: Britain and Germany: 100 Years of Truth and Lies (2004), popular history covers 1845–1945 focusing on public opinion and propaganda; 368pp excerpt and text search Ramsden, John.

Don’t Mention the War: The British and the Germans since 1890 (London, 2006).

Rüger, Jan. "Revisiting the Anglo-German Antagonism," Journal of Modern History (2011) 83#3, pp. 579–617 in JSTOR Scully, Richard.

British Images of Germany: Admiration, Antagonism, and Ambivalence, 1860–1914 (Palgrave Macmillan, 2012) 375pp United States [ edit ] Cook, James G.

Anglophobia: An Analysis of Anti-British Prejudice in the United States (1919) online Crapol, Edward P.

America for Americans: Economic Nationalism and Anglophobia in the Late Nineteenth Century (Greenwood, 1973) Frost, Jennifer. "Dissent and Consent in the" Good War": Hedda Hopper, Hollywood Gossip, and World War II Isolationism." Film History: An International Journal 22#2 (2010): 170–181.

Ellis, Sylvia.

Historical Dictionary of Anglo-American Relations (2009) and text search Foreman, Amanda.

A World on Fire: Britain’s Crucial Role in the American Civil War (Random House, 2011), 958 pp.

Geoffrey Wheatcroft, "How the British Nearly Supported the Confederacy," New York Times Sunday Book Review June 30, 2011 online Gleason, Mark C.

From Associates to Antagonists: The United States, Great Britain, the First World War, and the Origins of War Plan Red, 1914–1919 (PhD. Dissertation University of North Texas, 2012); Online ; "War Plan Red" was the American Army's plan for war against Great Britain.

Haynes, Sam W.

Unfinished Revolution: The Early American Republic in a British World (2010) Louis, William Roger; Imperialism at Bay: The United States and the Decolonization of the British Empire, 1941–1945 (1978) Moser, John E.

Twisting the Lion's Tail: American Anglophobia between the World Wars (New York University Press, 1999) Perkins, Bradford.

Prologue to war: England and the United States, 1805–1812 (1961) full text online Peskin, Lawrence A. "Conspiratorial Anglophobia and the War of 1812." Journal of American History 98#3 (2011): 647–669.

online Tuffnell, Stephen. ""Uncle Sam is to be Sacrificed": Anglophobia in Late Nineteenth-Century Politics and Culture." American Nineteenth Century History 12#1 (2011): 77–99.

Anglophobic publications [ edit ] Gelli, Frank Julian.

The Dark Side of England , (London, 2014, ASIN B00QJ19TXI ) v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-English_sentiment&oldid=1306242257 " Categories : Anti-British sentiment Anti-English sentiment Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from December 2011 Use dmy dates from June 2020 Articles with excerpts Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2013 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 18:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-English sentiment 13 languages Add topic

