Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Modern history 2 Equipment 3 Methods of hunting 4 Legal and cultural considerations Toggle Legal and cultural considerations subsection 4.1 Europe 4.2 United States and Canada 4.3 New Zealand 4.4 Australia 4.5 Zimbabwe 5 Opposition Toggle Opposition subsection 5.1 Wounding rates 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Bowhunting 12 languages Afrikaans العربية Dansk Deutsch فارسی Français Italiano Lietuvių Magyar Norsk bokmål Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Bowhunter ) Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 5 May 2025 .

Hunting by archery Bowhunter in Utah Bowhunting (or bow hunting ) is the practice of hunting game animals by archery . Many indigenous peoples have employed the technique as their primary hunting method for thousands of years, and it has survived into contemporary use for sport and hunting.

Modern history [ edit ] Picture of Pope taken while grizzly hunting at Yellowstone The last of the Yahi tribe, an indigenous man known as Ishi , came out of hiding in California in 1911.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] His doctor, Saxton Pope , learned many of Ishi's traditional archery skills, and popularized them.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The Pope and Young Club , founded in 1961 and named in honor of Pope and his friend, Arthur Young, became one of North America's leading bowhunting and conservation organizations. Founded as a nonprofit scientific organization, the club was patterned after the Boone and Crockett Club and advocated responsible bowhunting by promoting quality, fair chase hunting, and sound conservation practices. Modern game archery owes much of its success to Fred Bear , an American bow hunter and bow manufacturer.

[ 5 ] Equipment [ edit ] Arrows , bows and sights are commonly of the more modern varieties. However, all effective variations, including crossbows and wooden bows launching wooden arrows with stone points, are used.

Arrowheads are chosen to ensure lethality. Broadheads feature blades that jut out from the shaft at an angle to cause more damage to the target; some models have retractable blades that only deploy once they hit the target.

Hunting crossbow Big game hunting requires a draw weight of more than 35 pounds-force (16 kilograms-force ). For larger game such as elk or moose, more than 50 lbf (23 kgf) is suggested. Most male American archers can draw a bow rated at 50–60 lbf (23–27 kgf), most women 30–40 lbf (14–18 kgf).

[ 6 ] Lighter arrows, all else equal, will give a higher speed and a flatter trajectory.

[ 7 ] Arrows with greater mass carry more momentum , and penetrate better in large animals; a minimum mass of 650 grains (40 grams ) is recommended for animals such as deer, pigs, etc. and 900 gr (60 g) for the largest game.

[ 8 ] Methods of hunting [ edit ] In contrast to a rifle hunter, who may shoot effectively from ranges in excess of 200 yards (180 m); archers usually restrict shots to 2.3 to 42 yards (2 to 38 m).

[ 9 ] The distance depends upon individual ability, the target animal, the bow strength, terrain, arrow and weather. The bow hunter may walk along the ground slowly, looking for game and stalking it carefully in the final approach. This type of slow, methodical stalking, is called "spot and stalk." Hunters often wear camouflage clothing and walk upwind (with the wind in their face) so that game ahead of them cannot smell them.

In "stand hunting," the hunter waits for game to come to them, usually near food, water, or known trails. Brush and other natural materials may be placed for cover, or a "ground blind" that looks like a camouflage tent may be used.

[ 10 ] They usually "pop" up and can be set up from folded in a few minutes. The hunter may wait on a wooden or metal stand elevated in a tree, from three to six meters (3.5 to 6.5 yd).

Bowhunting for fish is called bowfishing . Bowfishing equipment usually adds a line attached to a spool or a reel as well as a specially designed, heavier, barbed arrow. Most bow-fishers do not use sights, but if they do have sights they are different from standard ones to allow for refraction .

[ 11 ] Legal and cultural considerations [ edit ] Bowhunting often has different seasons and restrictions from firearm hunting, and they differ significantly between areas. Legal and cultural approaches specific to the area must be taken into consideration by the hunter.

Europe [ edit ] Legal status of bowhunting in Europe with countries allowing bowhunting in green Nations including Denmark, France, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Hungary, Finland and Bulgaria use bow and arrow hunting as a hunting tool in modern game management. Some European countries, including the United Kingdom, prohibit bowhunting.

[ 12 ] Bowhunting, like target archery, was revived in the UK during the Victorian era, [ 13 ] but has been banned since 1965.

[ 14 ] Recently a law was passed in Estonia that would allow bowhunting of small game .

[ 15 ] United States and Canada [ edit ] In the United States and Canada, as with other styles of hunting, bowhunting is regulated by individual provinces and states. Regulations often address issues such as which area to hunt in, what time of year (season), and which sex and species of game may be taken. In many cases, a special archery season is set aside, to minimize interference from rifle hunters. While bowhunting can run into rifle hunting seasons, hunter orange is typically required to be worn during the cross over seasons. In addition, in an effort to maximize game recovery and shot lethality, there are often technical regulations, such as a minimum draw weight, minimum width of head, and lack of barbs.

[ 16 ] In general most bow hunting for big game begins in late August or early September in northern states and Canadian provinces, and slightly later in southern states.

New Zealand [ edit ] Organized bow hunting began in New Zealand in 1945. The New Zealand government regulates bowhunting.

[ 17 ] An annual 3 day field shoot tournament is held every Queen's Birthday Weekend at various locations throughout New Zealand. Bowhunters must have permission to hunt on private land, and they cannot hunt in DOC lands, national parks, or any other reserves without a permit. All native species are protected; only introduced species are legal quarry.

There are no special seasons for bowhunters or for hunting with a firearm.

[ 18 ] There is an active bow hunters' society.

[ 19 ] Australia [ edit ] Bowhunting is practiced in Australia and is not specifically subject to regulation by law. Only non-native species are recognized as game by the Australian Bowhunters Association. However, native species may be killed during government-authorized culls.

[ 20 ] The states of Victoria and New South Wales both regulate bowhunting. In Victoria hunting is regulated through the Department of Sustainability and Environment (DSE).

[ 21 ] In New South Wales this is done through the Department of Primary Industry.

[ 22 ] At the current time there are no specific hunting regulations in other states and territories.

[ 23 ] In July 2013 the New South Wales Government disbanded the Game Council, and temporarily suspended licensed hunting in NSW State forests.

[ 24 ] While both Victoria and New South Wales place licensing requirements on would-be bowhunters, the sport is self-regulated. The Australian Bowhunters Association and local clubs assess hunters through the Bowhunter Proficiency Certificate (BPC) which is designed to ensure that animals are killed according to humane principles.

[ 25 ] Zimbabwe [ edit ] Zimbabwe has legally permitted hunting with compound bows since 1989 as an exception, and since 1999 under formal legislation. Minimum arrow weights and bow draws are mandated. Bowhunting is only allowed on private or tribal lands, but not in national parks. Bowhunters must be accompanied by licensed guides or professional hunters.

[ 26 ] Bowhunting of elephants is mostly conducted in Zimbabwe.

[ 27 ] Following international outrage over the illegal hunt for Cecil , the lion, in 2015 the Parks and Wildlife Management Authority banned all bowhunting unless specifically authorized, as well as other hunting restrictions.

[ 28 ] Opposition [ edit ] Duck in Newport Beach, California injured by arrow Duck injured by crossbow arrows in Colorado Springs Some are deeply opposed to bow hunting in particular, on the grounds of cruelty. The organization People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals states that "quick kills are rare, and many animals suffer prolonged, painful deaths when hunters severely injure but fail to kill them." [ 29 ] Wounding rates [ edit ] A study conducted by the Oklahoma Fish and Wildlife Agencies found that approximately 50% of deer that were shot were never recovered, noting that this rate was similar to data from other studies. Some deer survived for up to 5–7 days before succumbing to their wounds. "71% to 82% of all shots taken" miss the target [ 30 ] and "shot placement is, for all practical purposes, random".

[ 31 ] In another study from Maryland , archers who had passed a pre-season accuracy test claimed that 82% of deer hit were recovered within 24 hours.

[ 32 ] Danish licensed bowhunters are required to complete a report every time that they kill a roe deer . (To become a licensed bowhunter in Denmark it is necessary to pass a very demanding proficiency test, including a test of accuracy in which five of six arrows must hit within the vital area of game targets ranging from roe deer to pheasant in size at unknown distances up to 25 meters (27 yd). Only 2% of Danish bowhunters use traditional equipment.) For 1999–2004, these reports showed that 576 arrows were released at roe deer. 92.5% of these shots resulted in a dead roe deer being collected by the hunter, and 2.6% are documented as misses. In 5% of reports the deer was hit and wounded (as indicated by bodily fluids on the ground or on the arrow), but not recovered by the hunter. The European Bowhunters Association states that "this percentage compares favorably with other means of harvesting roe deer in Europe." [ 33 ] See also [ edit ] Bowfishing Broadhead References [ edit ] ^ Allely, Steve; et al. (2008), The Traditional Bowyer's Bible, Volume 4 , The Lyons Press, ISBN 978-0-9645741-6-8 ^ Kroeber, Theodora (2004), Ishi in Two Worlds: a biography of the last wild Indian in North America , Berkeley: University of California Press , ISBN 978-0-520-24037-7 ^ Pope, Saxton (1925), Hunting with the Bow and Arrow , New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons ^ Pope, Saxton (1926), Adventurous Bowmen: field notes on African archery , New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons ^ Bertalan, Dan (2007).

Traditional Bowyers Encyclopedia: The Bowhunting and Bowmaking World of the Nation's Top Crafters of Longbows and Recurves .

Skyhorse Pub.

p. 73.

ISBN 9781602390461 . Retrieved 1 June 2018 .

^ "Bow Sizing Guide" .

Keystone-sports.com . Retrieved 2 April 2017 .

^ "Carbon Arrow University – Speed & Kinetic Energy" . Archived from the original on 24 September 2013 . Retrieved 26 September 2013 .

^ Dr. Ed Ashby.

"ARROW LETHALITY Part IV: The Physics of Arrow Penetration" .

Tradgang.com . Retrieved 2 April 2017 .

^ "Dr. Ashby Reports 1996 Dr. W.E (Ed) Ashby" (JPG) .

Tradgang.com . Retrieved 2 April 2017 .

^ Woodrow, Ross (September 2013).

"Ground blinds are worth considering" .

TR Tribune . Archived from the original on 28 September 2013 . Retrieved 1 June 2018 .

^ Jon.

"Bowfishing equipment tips" .

HuntHD.com . Archived from the original on 28 September 2013 . Retrieved 1 June 2018 .

^ "Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c. 69)" . Retrieved 6 May 2009 .

if any person… uses for the purpose of killing or taking any wild animal ... any bow or cross-bow ... he shall be guilty of an offence.

^ Archer's Craft. Adrian E Hodgkin. Llanerch Press; Facsimile of 1951 edition (31 May 1996).

ISBN 1-897853-80-7 .

ISBN 978-1-897853-80-1 ^ "Bowhunting, The Alternative Calibre – About" .

Britishbowhunterassociation.co.uk . Retrieved 2 April 2017 .

^ "Jahiseadus sai riigikogus napi heakskiidu – Eesti uudised" .

Postimees.ee . 17 April 2014 . Retrieved 2 April 2017 .

^ "Deer and Bear Hunting Regulations – NYS Dept. of Environmental Conservation" .

Dec.ny.gov . 7 November 2014 . Retrieved 2 April 2017 .

^ "DOC Hunting Guide" (PDF) . p. 5 . Retrieved 6 May 2009 .

^ New Zealand Department of Conservation.

"Activity Finder – Hunting" . Retrieved 6 May 2009 .

^ "New Zealand Bowhunters Society" . Archived from the original on 19 January 2008 . Retrieved 6 May 2009 .

^ "More Bowhunting Information" . Australian Bowhunters Association. 13 June 2009. Archived from the original on 17 February 2011 . Retrieved 1 June 2018 .

^ Victorian Department of Sustainability and Environment.

"Game Hunting in Victoria" . Archived from the original on 30 May 2009 . Retrieved 6 May 2009 .

^ "New South Wales Game Council" . Archived from the original on 19 May 2009 . Retrieved 6 May 2009 .

^ Australian Bowhunters Association.

"More Bowhunting Information" . Archived from the original on 5 January 2009 . Retrieved 6 May 2009 .

^ "Government abolishes Game Council NSW" . Archived from the original on 25 July 2013 . Retrieved 30 July 2013 .

^ Australian Bowhunters Association.

"Bowhunting in Australia" . Archived from the original on 5 January 2009 . Retrieved 6 May 2009 .

^ "Bowhunting in Zimbabwe" .

Gothunts.com . Retrieved 2 April 2017 .

^ "Bowhunting in Zimbabwe" .

Bowhuntingsafari.com . Retrieved 2 April 2017 .

^ Merritt Clifton (2 August 2015).

"Death of Cecil: Zimbabwe Parks & Wildlife responds – Animals 24-7" .

Animals24-7.org . Retrieved 2 April 2017 .

^ Stephen S. Ditchkoff; et al. (1998).

"Wounding Rates of White-Tailed Deer With Traditional Archery Equipment" .

Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Southeastern Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies . People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals . Retrieved 29 January 2014 .

A member of the Maine Bow Hunters Alliance estimates that 50 percent of animals who are shot with crossbows are wounded but not killed. A study of 80 radio-collared white-tailed deer found that of the 22 deer who had been shot with "traditional archery equipment," 11 were wounded but not recovered by hunters.

^ "ARROW LETHALITY. Part I: Introduction – The Need for Knowledge" (PDF) .

Tuffhead.com . 1996. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 September 2013 . Retrieved 22 August 2012 .

"Researchers in Wisconsin". As quoted in Dr Ed Ashby, ^ Horace Gore – Whitetail Project Director, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (1996).

"ARROW LETHALITY. Part I: Introduction – The Need for Knowledge" (PDF) .

Tuffhead.com . Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 September 2013 . Retrieved 22 August 2012 .

As quoted in Dr Ed Ashby ^ "2008 Proc. Annu. Conf. SEAFWA Wounding Rates of White-tailed Deer with Modern Archery Equipment" (PDF) . Quality Deer Management Association staff. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 September 2013 . Retrieved 26 September 2013 .

^ Anders Gejer; Richard Cadwalader (May 2005).

"Evaluation of the Danish Bowhunting Association, the Danish National Forest and Nature Agency's Statistics on Roedeer (Capreolus Capreolus) shot with bow and arrow in Denmark between 1 October 1999 – 15 January 2004" (PDF) . European Bowhunters Association . Retrieved 29 January 2014 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Bowhunting at Wikimedia Commons v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming v t e Archery History Chinese Japanese Turkish History of crossbows Modern competitive archery World Archery Federation World Archery Rankings Topics Archer's paradox Mounted archery Ballista elephant Yabusame Run archery Bows ( yumi ) Bow shape Arbalest Austroasiatic crossbow Cable-backed bow Composite bow Compound bow Crossbow English longbow Flatbow Gakgung Holmegaard bow Laminated bow Longbow Mongol bow Recurve bow Self bow Takedown bow Welsh bow Equipment Arrow Ya Arrowhead Bowstring Bracer Cresting machine Finger tab Fletching Flu-flu arrow Release aid Quarrel Quiver Target Thumb ring Activities Bowfishing Bowhunting Bowyer Clout archery Field archery Popinjay Target archery Competitions Olympics Youth World Championships Youth Para World Cup Paralympics Universiade World University Archery Championships Military World Games Continental Africa Americas Asia Europe Naadam Category Glossary Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bowhunting&oldid=1288874292 " Categories : Archery Hunting Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Use dmy dates from December 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 May 2025, at 04:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bowhunting 12 languages Add topic

