Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Ratifications 2 Governing Structure of CITES Toggle Governing Structure of CITES subsection 2.1 Timeline of CITES Secretary-General Offices 3 Regulation of trade Toggle Regulation of trade subsection 3.1 Appendices 3.1.1 Appendix I 3.1.2 Appendix II 3.1.3 Appendix III 3.2 Exemptions and special procedures 3.2.1 Pre-Convention specimens 3.2.2 Personal and household effects 3.2.3 Captive bred or artificially propagated specimens 3.2.4 Scientific exchange 4 Amendments and reservations 5 Shortcomings and concerns Toggle Shortcomings and concerns subsection 5.1 Implementation 5.2 Approach to biodiversity conservation 5.3 Drafting 5.4 Animal sourced pathogens 5.5 Reform suggestions 5.6 TRAFFIC Data 6 Meetings 7 See also 8 Footnotes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents CITES 59 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Ikinyarwanda Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Papiamentu Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Taqbaylit ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Multilateral treaty dedicated to flora and fauna This article is about the international treaty. For reference to a source, see Citation . For other uses, see CITE .

"Washington Convention" redirects here. For international arbitration institution, see International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes .

CITES Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora Signed 3 March 1973 ( 1973-03-03 ) Location Geneva , Switzerland Effective 1 July 1975 Condition 10 ratifications Parties 185 Depositary Government of the Swiss Confederation Language English French Spanish Full text Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora at Wikisource CITES (shorter acronym for the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora , also known as the Washington Convention ) is a multilateral treaty to protect endangered plants and animals from the threats of international trade. It was drafted as a result of a resolution adopted in 1963 at a meeting of members of the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). The convention was opened for signature in 1973 and CITES entered into force on 1 July 1975.

Its aim is to ensure that international trade (import/export) in specimens of animals and plants included under CITES does not threaten the survival of the species in the wild. This is achieved via a system of permits and certificates. CITES affords varying degrees of protection to more than 40,900 species .

[ 1 ] As of December 2024 [update] , the Secretary-General of CITES is Ivonne Higuero .

[ 2 ] Background [ edit ] CITES is one of the largest and oldest conservation and sustainable use agreements in existence. There are three working languages of the convention (English, French and Spanish) in which all documents are made available.

[ 3 ] Participation is voluntary and countries that have agreed to be bound by the convention are known as Parties. Although CITES is legally binding on the Parties, it does not take the place of national laws. Rather it provides a framework respected by each Party, which must adopt their own domestic legislation to implement CITES at the national level.

Originally, CITES addressed depletion resulting from demand for luxury goods such as furs in Western countries, but with the rising wealth of Asia, particularly in China, the focus changed to products demanded there, particularly those used for luxury goods such as elephant ivory or rhinoceros horn. As of 2022, CITES has expanded to include thousands of species previously considered unremarkable and in no danger of extinction such as manta rays .

[ 4 ] Ratifications [ edit ] Parties to the treaty.

Greenland is covered by CITES regulations through Denmark .

[ 5 ] The text of the convention was finalized at a meeting of representatives of 80 countries in Washington, D.C.

, United States, on 3 March 1973. It was then open for signature until 31 December 1974. It entered into force after the 10th ratification by a signatory country, on 1 July 1975. Countries that signed the Convention become Parties by ratifying, accepting or approving it. By the end of 2003, all signatory countries had become Parties. States that were not signatories may become Parties by acceding to the convention. As of June 2025 [update] , the convention has 185 parties, including 184 states and the European Union.

[ 6 ] The CITES Convention includes provisions and rules for trade with non-Parties. All member states of the United Nations are party to the treaty, with the exception of North Korea , Federated States of Micronesia , Haiti , Kiribati , Marshall Islands , Nauru , South Sudan , East Timor , and Tuvalu . UN observer the Holy See is also not a member. The Faroe Islands , an autonomous region in the Kingdom of Denmark , is also treated as a non-Party to CITES (both the Danish mainland and Greenland are part of CITES).

[ 5 ] [ 7 ] An amendment to the text of the convention, known as the Gaborone Amendment [ 8 ] allows regional economic integration organizations (REIO), such as the European Union , to have the status of a member state and to be a Party to the convention.  The REIO can vote at CITES meetings with the number of votes representing the number of members in the REIO, but it does not have an additional vote.

In accordance with Article XVII, paragraph 3, of the CITES Convention, the Gaborone Amendment entered into force on 29 November 2013, 60 days after 54 (two-thirds) of the 80 States that were party to CITES on 30 April 1983 deposited their instrument of acceptance of the amendment. At that time it entered into force only for those States that had accepted the amendment. The amended text of the convention will apply automatically to any State that becomes a Party after 29 November 2013. For States that became party to the convention before that date and have not accepted the amendment, it will enter into force 60 days after they accept it.

[ 8 ] Governing Structure of CITES [ edit ] CITES operates to support the member Parties. This support consists of the input from three Committees (Standing, Animal and Plant) who are overseen by the Secretary-General.

[ 9 ] The secretariat position has been held by a variety of people from different nations.

Timeline of CITES Secretary-General Offices [ edit ] 1978-1981: Peter H. Sand [ 10 ] He was born in Bavaria, Germany and was educated in international law in Germany, France and Canada. He became a professor and an author, focusing on environmental law, holding other positions such as the Director-General of the IUCN and legal advisor for environmental affairs to the World Bank.

[ 11 ] 1982-1990: Eugene Lapointe [ 10 ] A Canadian native, Lapointe served in the military for many years and acted as a diplomat before governing the CITES. He is currently an author and holds the position of President of the IWMC World Conservation Trust, a non-profit organization that promotes wildlife conservation with an emphasis on a human-centered approach to natural-resources.

[ 12 ] 1991 - 1998: Izgrev Topkov [ 10 ] Born and raised in Bulgaria, Topkov was a diplomat before managing CITES, and was removed from that position following the misuse of permits that violated CITES guidelines.

[ 13 ] 1999 - 2010: Willem Wijnstekers [ 10 ] A native of the Netherlands and graduate from the University of Amsterdam, Wijnsteker held the position of Secretary-General for the longest period of time and is now an author.

2010 - 2018: John E. Scanlon [ 10 ] An Australian who studied environmental law, Scanlon was active in combating illegal animal trade and currently works in the effort to protect Elephants in Africa as CEO of the Elephant Protection Initiative Foundation (EPIF).

[ 14 ] 2018- Current: Ivonne Higuero [ 10 ] The first woman to hold this position, Higuero was educated in environmental economics and is from Panama.

Regulation of trade [ edit ] CITES works by subjecting international trade in specimens of listed taxa to controls as they move across international borders.

[ 15 ] CITES specimens can include a wide range of items including the whole animal/plant (whether alive or dead), or a product that contains a part or derivative of the listed taxa such as cosmetics or traditional medicines .

[ 16 ] Four types of trade are recognized by CITES - import , export , re-export (export of any specimen that has previously been imported) and introduction from the sea (transportation into a state of specimens of any species which were taken in the marine environment not under the jurisdiction of any state). The CITES definition of "trade" does not require a financial transaction to be occurring. All trade in specimens of species covered by CITES must be authorized through a system of permits and certificates prior to the trade taking place. CITES permits and certificates are issued by one or more Management Authorities in charge of administering the CITES system in each country. Management Authorities are advised by one or more Scientific Authorities on the effects of trade of the specimen on the status of CITES-listed species. CITES permits and certificates must be presented to relevant border authorities in each country in order to authorize the trade.

Each party must enact their own domestic legislation to bring the provisions of CITES into effect in their territories. Parties may choose to take stricter domestic measures than CITES provides (for example by requiring permits/certificates in cases where they would not normally be needed or by prohibiting trade in some specimens).

[ 17 ] Illegally traded wildlife items seized by HM Revenue and Customs in the United Kingdom Appendices [ edit ] Over 40,900 species, subspecies and populations are protected under CITES.

[ 18 ] Each protected taxa or population is included in one of three lists called Appendices.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] The Appendix that lists a taxon or population reflects the level of the threat posed by international trade and the CITES controls that apply.

Taxa may be split-listed meaning that some populations of a species are on one Appendix, while some are on another. The African bush elephant ( Loxodonta africana ) is currently split-listed, with all populations except those of Botswana, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe listed in Appendix I.  Those of Botswana, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe are listed in Appendix II.  There are also species that have only some populations listed in an Appendix. One example is the pronghorn ( Antilocapra americana ), a ruminant native to North America. Its Mexican population is listed in Appendix I, but its U.S. and Canadian populations are not listed (though certain U.S. populations in Arizona are nonetheless protected under other domestic legislation, in this case the Endangered Species Act ).

Taxa are proposed for inclusion, amendment or deletion in Appendices I and II at meetings of the Conference of the Parties (CoP), which are held approximately once every three years.

[ 21 ] Amendments to listing in Appendix III may be made unilaterally by individual parties.

[ 22 ] Appendix I [ edit ] Appendix I taxa are those that are threatened with extinction and to which the highest level of CITES protection is afforded. Commercial trade in wild-sourced specimens of these taxa is not permitted and non-commercial trade is strictly controlled by requiring an import permit and export permit to be granted by the relevant Management Authorities in each country before the trade occurs.

Notable taxa listed in Appendix I include the red panda ( Ailurus fulgens ), western gorilla ( Gorilla gorilla ), the chimpanzee species ( Pan spp.

), tigers ( Panthera tigris sp.), Asian elephant ( Elephas maximus ), snow leopard ( Panthera uncia ), red-shanked douc ( Pygathrix nemaeus ), some populations of African bush elephant ( Loxodonta africana ), [ a ] and the monkey puzzle tree ( Araucaria araucana ).

[ 23 ] Appendix II [ edit ] Appendix II taxa are those that are not necessarily threatened with extinction, but trade must be controlled in order to avoid utilization incompatible with their survival. Appendix II taxa may also include species similar in appearance to species already listed in the Appendices. The vast majority of taxa listed under CITES are listed in Appendix II.

[ 24 ] Any trade in Appendix II taxa standardly requires a CITES export permit or re-export certificate to be granted by the Management Authority of the exporting country before the trade occurs.

Examples of taxa listed on Appendix II are the great white shark ( Carcharodon carcharias ), the American black bear ( Ursus americanus ), Hartmann's mountain zebra ( Equus zebra hartmannae ), green iguana ( Iguana iguana ), queen conch ( Strombus gigas ), emperor scorpion ( Pandinus imperator ), Mertens' water monitor ( Varanus mertensi ), bigleaf mahogany ( Swietenia macrophylla ), lignum vitae ( Guaiacum officinale ), the chambered nautilus ( Nautilus pompilius ), all stony corals ( Scleractinia spp.), Jungle cat ( Felis chaus ) and American ginseng ( Panax quinquefolius ).

Appendix III [ edit ] Appendix III species are those that are protected in at least one country, and that country has asked other CITES Parties for assistance in controlling the trade.
Any trade in Appendix III species standardly requires a CITES export permit (if sourced from the country that listed the species) or a certificate of origin (from any other country) to be granted before the trade occurs.

Examples of species listed on Appendix III and the countries that listed them are the Hoffmann's two-toed sloth ( Choloepus hoffmanni ) by Costa Rica, sitatunga ( Tragelaphus spekii ) by Ghana and African civet ( Civettictis civetta ) by Botswana.

Exemptions and special procedures [ edit ] Under Article VII, the Convention allows for certain exceptions to the general trade requirements described above.

Pre-Convention specimens [ edit ] CITES provides for a special process for specimens that were acquired before the provisions of the Convention applied to that specimen. These are known as "pre-Convention" specimens and must be granted a CITES pre-Convention certificate before the trade occurs. Only specimens legally acquired before the date on which the species concerned was first included in the Appendices qualify for this exemption.

[ 25 ] Personal and household effects [ edit ] CITES provides that the standard permit/certificate requirements for trade in CITES specimens do not generally apply if a specimen is a personal or household effect.

[ 26 ] However, there are a number of situations where permits/certificates for personal or household effects are required and some countries choose to take stricter domestic measures by requiring permits/certificates for some or all personal or household effects.

[ 17 ] Captive bred or artificially propagated specimens [ edit ] CITES allows trade in specimens to follow special procedures if Management Authorities are satisfied that they are sourced from captive bred animals or artificially propagated plants.

[ 27 ] In the case of commercial trade of Appendix I taxa, captive bred or artificially propagated specimens may be traded as if they were Appendix II. This reduces the permit requirements from two permits (import/export) to one (export only). 
In the case of non-commercial trade, specimens may be traded with a certificate of captive breeding/artificial propagation issued by the Management Authority of the state of export in lieu of standard permits.

Scientific exchange [ edit ] Standard CITES permit and certificates are not required for the non-commercial loan, donation or exchange between scientific or forensic institutions that have been registered by a Management Authority of their State. Consignments containing the specimens must carry a label issued or approved by that Management Authority (in some cases Customs Declaration labels may be used). Specimens that may be included under this provision include museum, herbarium, diagnostic and forensic research specimens.

[ 28 ] Registered institutions are listed on the CITES website.

[ 29 ] Amendments and reservations [ edit ] Amendments to the Convention must be supported by a two-thirds majority who are "present and voting" and can be made during an extraordinary meeting of the COP if one-third of the Parties are interested in such a meeting.  The Gaborone Amendment (1983) allows regional economic blocs to accede to the treaty.  Trade with non-Party states is allowed, although permits and certificates are recommended to be issued by exporters and sought by importers.

Species in the Appendices may be proposed for addition, change of Appendix, or de-listing (i.e., deletion) by any Party, whether or not it is a range State and changes may be made despite objections by range States if there is sufficient (2/3 majority) support for the listing.  Species listings are made at the Conference of Parties.

Upon acceding to the convention or within 90 days of a species listing being amended, Parties may make reservations. In these cases, the party is treated as being a state that is not a Party to CITES with respect to trade in the species concerned.

[ 30 ] Notable reservations include those by Iceland , Japan , and Norway on various baleen whale species and those on Falconiformes by Saudi Arabia.

Shortcomings and concerns [ edit ] Implementation [ edit ] As of 2002, 50% of Parties lacked one or more of the four major CITES requirements - designation of Management and Scientific Authorities; laws prohibiting the trade in violation of CITES; penalties for such trade and laws providing for the confiscation of specimens.

[ 31 ] Although the Convention itself does not provide for arbitration or dispute in the case of noncompliance, 36 years of CITES in practice has resulted in several strategies to deal with infractions by Parties. The Secretariat, when informed of an infraction by a Party, will notify all other parties. The Secretariat will give the Party time to respond to the allegations and may provide technical assistance to prevent further infractions. Other actions the Convention itself does not provide for but that derive from subsequent COP resolutions may be taken against the offending Party. These include: Mandatory confirmation of all permits by the Secretariat Suspension of cooperation from the Secretariat A formal warning A visit by the Secretariat to verify capacity Recommendations to all Parties to suspend CITES related trade with the offending party [ 32 ] Dictation of corrective measures to be taken by the offending Party before the Secretariat will resume cooperation or recommend resumption of trade Bilateral sanctions have been imposed on the basis of national legislation (e.g. the USA used certification under the Pelly Amendment to get Japan to revoke its reservation to hawksbill turtle products in 1991, thus reducing the volume of its exports).

Infractions may include negligence with respect to permit issuing, excessive trade, lax enforcement, and failing to produce annual reports (the most common).

Approach to biodiversity conservation [ edit ] General limitations about the structure and philosophy of CITES include: by design and intent it focuses on trade at the species level and does not address habitat loss, ecosystem approaches to conservation, or poverty; it seeks to prevent unsustainable use rather than promote sustainable use (which generally conflicts with the Convention on Biological Diversity ), although this has been changing (see Nile crocodile , African elephant , South African white rhino case studies in Hutton and Dickinson 2000). It does not explicitly address market demand.

[ 33 ] In fact, CITES listings have been demonstrated to increase financial speculation in certain markets for high value species.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] Funding does not provide for increased on-the-ground enforcement (it must apply for bilateral aid for most projects of this nature).

There has been increasing willingness within the Parties to allow for trade in products from well-managed populations. For instance, sales of the South African white rhino have generated revenues that helped pay for protection.  Listing the species on Appendix I increased the price of rhino horn (which fueled more poaching ), but the species survived wherever there was adequate on-the-ground protection. Thus field protection may be the primary mechanism that saved the population, but it is likely that field protection would not have been increased without CITES protection.

[ 37 ] In another instance, the United States initially stopped exports of bobcat and lynx hides in 1977 when it first implemented CITES for lack of data to support no detriment findings.

[1] However, in this Federal Register notice, issued by William Yancey Brown , the U.S. Endangered Species Scientific Authority (ESSA) established a framework of no detriment findings for each state and the Navajo nation and indicated that approval would be forthcoming if the states and Navajo nation provided evidence that their furbearer management programs assured the species would be conserved.  Management programs for these species expanded rapidly, including tagging for export, [ 38 ] and are currently recognized in program approvals under regulations of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.

[ 39 ] Drafting [ edit ] By design, CITES regulates and monitors trade in the manner of a " negative list " such that trade in all species is permitted and unregulated unless the species in question appears on the Appendices or looks very much like one of those taxa. Then and only then, trade is regulated or constrained.  Because the remit of the Convention covers millions of species of plants and animals, and tens of thousands of these taxa are potentially of economic value, in practice this negative list approach effectively forces CITES signatories to expend limited resources on just a select few, leaving many species to be traded with neither constraint nor review.  For example, recently several bird classified as threatened with extinction appeared in the legal wild bird trade because the CITES process never considered their status.  If a "positive list" approach were taken, only species evaluated and approved for the positive list would be permitted in trade, thus lightening the review burden for member states and the Secretariat, and also preventing inadvertent legal trade threats to poorly known species.

Specific weaknesses in the text include: it does not stipulate guidelines for the 'non-detriment' finding required of national Scientific Authorities; non-detriment findings require copious amounts of information; the 'household effects' clause is often not rigid enough/specific enough to prevent CITES violations by means of this Article (VII); non-reporting from Parties means Secretariat monitoring is incomplete; and it has no capacity to address domestic trade in listed species.

In order to ensure that the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) was not violated, the Secretariat of GATT was consulted during the drafting process.

[ 40 ] Animal sourced pathogens [ edit ] During the coronavirus pandemic in 2020 CEO Ivonne Higuero noted that illegal wildlife trade not only helps to destroy habitats, but these habitats create a safety barrier for humans that can prevent pathogens from animals passing themselves on to people.

[ 41 ] Reform suggestions [ edit ] Suggestions for improvement in the operation of CITES include: more regular missions by the Secretariat (not reserved just for high-profile species); improvement of national legislation and enforcement; better reporting by Parties (and the consolidation of information from all sources-NGOs, TRAFFIC, the wildlife trade monitoring network and Parties); more emphasis on enforcement-including a technical committee enforcement officer; the development of CITES Action Plans (akin to Biodiversity Action Plans related to the Convention on Biological Diversity ) including: designation of Scientific/Management Authorities and national enforcement strategies; incentives for reporting and timelines for both Action Plans and reporting.  CITES would benefit from access to Global Environment Facility (GEF), funds-although this is difficult given the GEFs more ecosystem approach-or other more regular funds.  Development of a future mechanism similar to that of the Montreal Protocol (developed nations contribute to a fund for developing nations) could allow more funds for non-Secretariat activities.

[ 31 ] TRAFFIC Data [ edit ] From 2005 to 2009 the legal trade corresponded with these numbers: [ citation needed ] 317,000 live birds More than 2 million live reptiles 2.5 million crocodile skins 2.1 million snake skins 73 tons of caviar 1.1 million beaver skins Millions of pieces of coral 20,000 mammalian hunting trophies In the 1990s the annual trade of legal animal products was $160 billion annually. In 2009 the estimated value almost doubled to $300 billion.

[ 42 ] Traffic released a report in December 2024 outlining illegal trade in animal products occurring in Vietnam: [ citation needed ] Additional information about the documented trade can be extracted through queries on the CITES website.

[ 43 ] Meetings [ edit ] The Conference of the Parties (CoP) is held once every three years. The location of the next CoP is chosen at the close of each CoP by a secret ballot vote.

The CITES Committees (Animals Committee, Plants Committee and Standing Committee) hold meetings during each year that does not have a CoP, while the Standing committee meets also in years with a CoP.  The Committee meetings take place in Geneva, Switzerland (where the Secretariat of the CITES Convention is located), unless another country offers to host the meeting. The Secretariat is administered by UNEP . The Animals and Plants Committees have sometimes held joint meetings.  The previous joint meeting was held in March 2012 in Dublin , Ireland , and the latest one was held in Veracruz , Mexico , in May 2014.

Meeting City Country Duration CoP 1 Bern Switzerland 2–6 November 1976 CoP 2 San José Costa Rica 19–30 March 1979 CoP 3 New Delhi India 25 February – 8 March 1981 CoP 4 Gaborone Botswana 19–30 April 1983 CoP 5 Buenos Aires Argentina 22 April – 3 May 1985 CoP 6 Ottawa Canada 12–24 July 1987 CoP 7 Lausanne Switzerland 9–20 October 1989 CoP 8 Kyoto Japan 2–13 March 1992 CoP 9 Fort Lauderdale United States 7–18 November 1994 CoP 10 Harare Zimbabwe 9–20 June 1997 CoP 11 Nairobi Kenya 10–20 April 2000 CoP 12 Santiago de Chile Chile 3–15 November 2002 CoP 13 Bangkok Thailand 2–14 October 2004 CoP 14 The Hague Netherlands 3–15 June 2007 CoP 15 Doha Qatar 13–25 March 2010 CoP 16 Bangkok Thailand 3–14 March 2013 CoP 17 Johannesburg South Africa 24 September – 5 October 2016 CoP 18 Geneva Switzerland 17–28 August 2019 CoP 19 Panama City Panama 14–25 November 2022 CoP 20 Samarkand Uzbekistan 25 November – 6 December 2025 A current list of upcoming meetings appears on the CITES calendar.

[ 44 ] At the seventeenth Conference of the Parties (CoP 17), Namibia and Zimbabwe introduced proposals to amend their listing of elephant populations in Appendix II. Instead, they wished to establish controlled trade in all elephant specimens, including ivory. They argue that revenue from regulated trade could be used for elephant conservation and rural communities' development. However, both proposals were opposed by the US and other countries.

[ 45 ] See also [ edit ] Environmental agreements Illegal logging IUCN Red List Ivory trade Lacey Act List of species protected by CITES Appendix I List of species protected by CITES Appendix II List of species protected by CITES Appendix III Shark finning Wildlife conservation Wildlife Enforcement Monitoring System Wildlife management Wildlife smuggling World Wildlife Day Footnotes [ edit ] ^ CITES treats the African forest elephant as a subspecies of L. africana and thus protected under Appendix I; most authorities now classify the forest elephant as a separate species, L. cyclotis .

References [ edit ] ^ "The CITES species | CITES" .

cites.org . Retrieved 7 December 2024 .

^ "Ivonne Higuero named as new CITES Secretary-General" .

cites.org . CITES . Retrieved 29 May 2019 .

^ "The CITES Secretariat | CITES" .

cites.org . Retrieved 10 April 2022 .

^ Bettina Wassener (12 March 2013).

"No Species Is Safe From Burgeoning Wildlife Trade" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 1 January 2022 . Retrieved 13 March 2013 .

^ a b "Denmark – National authorities" .

CITES . 24 December 2020.

^ "List of Contracting Parties" .

cites.org .

^ "Faroe Islands (Dependent territory of DK) – National authorities" .

CITES . 23 August 2021.

^ a b "Gaborone amendment to the text of the Convention" .

cites.org . CITES . Retrieved 13 February 2012 .

^ "The structure of CITES | CITES" .

cites.org . Retrieved 7 December 2024 .

^ a b c d e f "Ivonne Higuero, Secretary-General | CITES" .

cites.org . Retrieved 7 December 2024 .

^ "Peter H. Sand | Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München - Academia.edu" .

lmu-munich.academia.edu . Retrieved 7 December 2024 .

^ "About IWMC – IWMC – World Conservation Trust" .

www.iwmc.org . Retrieved 7 December 2024 .

^ Masood, Ehsan (1 July 1998).

"CITES chief removed in scandal over trade in banned species" .

Nature .

394 (6689): 112.

Bibcode : 1998Natur.394..112M .

doi : 10.1038/27998 .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

^ EPI.

"The Secretariat" .

EPI . Retrieved 7 December 2024 .

^ "How CITES works" .

CITES.org . Retrieved 11 August 2022 .

^ "CITES Article I" .

CITES.org . Retrieved 11 August 2022 .

^ a b "CITES Article XIV" .

CITES.org . Retrieved 14 August 2022 .

^ "The CITES species" .

CITES.org . Retrieved 7 August 2022 .

^ Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (2013).

"Appendices I, II and III" . Retrieved 13 September 2013 .

^ Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora.

"The CITES Appendices" . Retrieved 13 September 2013 .

^ "CITES Calendar" .

cites.org . CITES . Retrieved 13 February 2012 .

^ "CITES Resolution Conf. 9.25 Implementation of the Convention for species in Appendix III" (PDF) .

CITES.org .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 January 2022.

^ "Appendices I, II and III" .

cites.org . CITES . Retrieved 13 February 2012 .

^ "The CITES species" .

CITES.org . Retrieved 11 August 2022 .

^ "CITES Resolution 13.6" (PDF) .

CITES.org .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 November 2020 . Retrieved 7 August 2022 .

^ "Article VII" .

CITES.org . Retrieved 7 August 2022 .

^ "CITES Article VII" .

CITES.org . Retrieved 14 August 2022 .

^ "CITES Resolution Conf.11.15" (PDF) .

CITES.org .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 August 2021 . Retrieved 18 August 2022 .

^ "Register of scientific institutions" .

CITES.org . Retrieved 18 August 2022 .

^ "Reservations entered by the Parties" .

CITES.org . Retrieved 7 August 2022 .

^ a b Reeve, Policing International Trade in Endangered Species: The CITES Treaty and agreement.  London: Earthscan, 2000.

^ "Countries currently subject to a recommendation to suspend trade" .

cites.org . CITES . Retrieved 13 February 2012 .

^ Hill, 1990, "The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species: Fifteen Years Later," Loyola of Los Angeles International and Comparative Law Journal 13: 231 ^ van Uhm, D.P. (2016).

The Illegal Wildlife Trade: Inside the World of Poachers, Smugglers and Traders (Studies of Organized Crime) . Vol. 15. New York: Springer.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-42129-2 .

ISBN 978-3-319-42128-5 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Zhu, Annah (2020).

"Restricting trade in endangered species can backfire, triggering market booms" .

The Conversation .

^ Zhu, Annah Lake (2 January 2020).

"China's Rosewood Boom: A Cultural Fix to Capital Overaccumulation" .

Annals of the American Association of Geographers .

110 (1): 277– 296.

Bibcode : 2020AAAG..110..277Z .

doi : 10.1080/24694452.2019.1613955 .

^ Hutton and Dickinson, Endangered Species Threatened Convention: The Past, Present and Future of CITES. London: Africa Resources Trust, 2000.

^ "Furbearer Management" .

www.fishwildlife.org .

^ "50 CFR 23.69 -- How can I trade internationally in fur skins and fur skin products of bobcat, river otter, Canada lynx, gray wolf, and brown bear harvested in the United States?" .

^ "What is CITES?" .

cites.org . CITES . Retrieved 13 February 2012 .

^ "Preventing illegal wildlife trade helps avoid zoonotic diseases" .

Balkan Green Energy News . 15 May 2020 . Retrieved 7 June 2020 .

^ Ceballos, G.; Ehrlich, A. H.; Ehrlich, P. R. (2015).

The Annihilation of Nature: Human Extinction of Birds and Mammals . Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 150.

ISBN 1421417189 – via Open Edition.

^ "CITES Trade Database" .

trade.cites.org .

^ "CITES calendar" .

www.cites.org .

^ Laina, Efstathia (3 December 2018).

"Negotiations for Sustainable Oceans: Significant Challenges Ahead" .

Environmental Policy and Law .

48 (5): 262– 268.

doi : 10.3233/epl-180086 .

ISSN 0378-777X .

S2CID 92311195 .

Further reading [ edit ] Oldfield, S. and McGough, N. (Comp.) 2007.

A CITES Manual for Botanic Gardens ( English version , Spanish version , Italian version ). Botanic Gardens Conservation International (BGCI).

External links [ edit ] Wikidata has the property: CITES Species+ ID (P2040) (see uses ) Wikimedia Commons has media related to CITES .

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora Official website CITES Profile on database of market governance mechanisms (archived 13 March 2016) Member countries (Parties) Chronological list of Parties Alphabetical list of Parties at CITES and at the depositary (PDF) National contacts (archived 20 January 2011) Lists of species included in Appendices I, II and III (i.e. species protected by CITES) Explanation of the Appendices Number of species on the Appendices Species lists (Appendices I, II and III) v t e Threatened species Template: Threatened species by region IUCN Red List Categories 1 Extinct Extinct (EX) Extinct in the Wild (EW) Threatened Critically Endangered (CR) Endangered (EN) Vulnerable (VU) Lower risk Near Threatened (NT) Least Concern (LC) Lower Risk (LR) Conservation Dependent (LR/cd) Not fully assessed Data Deficient (DD) Not Evaluated (NE) Species Lists Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient WP categories Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient CITES Appendix I Appendix II Appendix III By taxa Threatened arthropods / Endangered arthropods / spiders / Decline in insect populations Decline in amphibian populations Threatened Banksia / rays / sharks / Fungi / Chromista The World's 25 Most Endangered Primates The world's 100 most threatened species Conservation Biodiversity action plan Biodiversity threats Conservation biology CITES ARKive Bird conservation Conservation status Conservation-reliant species Ecoregion conservation status Habitat destruction Latent extinction risk Rare species Vulnerability and susceptibility 1 Pre-2001 categories and subcategories shown in italics .

Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐h6w4p
Cached time: 20250817043756
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.719 seconds
Real time usage: 0.895 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6270/1000000
Revision size: 48908/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 139143/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9531/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 163793/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.428/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10190069/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  755.297      1 -total
 36.50%  275.696      2 Template:Reflist
 27.26%  205.893     36 Template:Cite_web
 15.62%  118.004      3 Template:Sister_project
 15.41%  116.378      3 Template:Side_box
 13.75%  103.852      4 Template:Navbox
 10.97%   82.857      1 Template:Threatened_species
  7.81%   58.959      1 Template:Wikisource
  7.53%   56.880      1 Template:Wikisource/outer_core
  7.34%   55.459      1 Template:Wikisource/inner_core Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6201:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043756 and revision id 1304350553. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=CITES&oldid=1304350553 " Categories : CITES Endangered species Wildlife smuggling Animal treaties Environmental treaties Treaties entered into by the European Union Treaties extended to Aruba Treaties extended to Bermuda Treaties extended to British Honduras Treaties extended to British Hong Kong Treaties extended to Gibraltar Treaties extended to Greenland Treaties extended to Guernsey Treaties extended to Jersey Treaties extended to Montserrat Treaties extended to Portuguese Macau Treaties extended to Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Treaties extended to the British Indian Ocean Territory Treaties extended to the British Virgin Islands Treaties extended to the Cayman Islands Treaties extended to the Falkland Islands Treaties extended to the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Treaties extended to the Isle of Man Treaties extended to the Netherlands Antilles Treaties extended to the Pitcairn Islands Treaties of Albania Treaties of Algeria Treaties of Angola Treaties of Antigua and Barbuda Treaties of Argentina Treaties of Armenia Treaties of Australia Treaties of Austria Treaties of Azerbaijan Treaties of Bahrain Treaties of Bangladesh Treaties of Barbados Treaties of Belarus Treaties of Belgium Treaties of Belize Treaties of Bhutan Treaties of Bolivia Treaties of Bosnia and Herzegovina Treaties of Botswana Treaties of Brunei Treaties of Bulgaria Treaties of Burkina Faso Treaties of Burundi Treaties of Cambodia Treaties of Cameroon Treaties of Canada Treaties of Cape Verde Treaties of Chad Treaties of Chile Treaties of Colombia Treaties of Costa Rica Treaties of Croatia Treaties of Cuba Treaties of Cyprus Treaties of Czechoslovakia Treaties of Denmark Treaties of Djibouti Treaties of Dominica Treaties of East Germany Treaties of Ecuador Treaties of Egypt Treaties of El Salvador Treaties of Equatorial Guinea Treaties of Eritrea Treaties of Estonia Treaties of Eswatini Treaties of Fiji Treaties of Finland Treaties of France Treaties of Gabon Treaties of Georgia (country) Treaties of Ghana Treaties of Greece Treaties of Grenada Treaties of Guatemala Treaties of Guinea-Bissau Treaties of Guinea Treaties of Guyana Treaties of Honduras Treaties of Iceland Treaties of India Treaties of Indonesia Treaties of Iraq Treaties of Ireland Treaties of Israel Treaties of Italy Treaties of Ivory Coast Treaties of Jamaica Treaties of Japan Treaties of Jordan Treaties of Kazakhstan Treaties of Kenya Treaties of Kuwait Treaties of Kyrgyzstan Treaties of Laos Treaties of Latvia Treaties of Lebanon Treaties of Lesotho Treaties of Liberia Treaties of Liechtenstein Treaties of Lithuania Treaties of Luxembourg Treaties of Madagascar Treaties of Malawi Treaties of Malaysia Treaties of Mali Treaties of Malta Treaties of Mauritania Treaties of Mauritius Treaties of Mexico Treaties of Moldova Treaties of Monaco Treaties of Mongolia Treaties of Montenegro Treaties of Morocco Treaties of Myanmar Treaties of Namibia Treaties of Nepal Treaties of New Zealand Treaties of Nicaragua Treaties of Niger Treaties of Nigeria Treaties of North Macedonia Treaties of Norway Treaties of Oman Treaties of Pahlavi Iran Treaties of Pakistan Treaties of Palau Treaties of Panama Treaties of Papua New Guinea Treaties of Paraguay Treaties of Peru Treaties of Poland Treaties of Portugal Treaties of Qatar Treaties of Romania Treaties of Russia Treaties of Rwanda Treaties of Saint Kitts and Nevis Treaties of Saint Lucia Treaties of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Treaties of Samoa Treaties of San Marino Treaties of São Tomé and Príncipe Treaties of Saudi Arabia Treaties of Senegal Treaties of Serbia and Montenegro Treaties of Seychelles Treaties of Sierra Leone Treaties of Singapore Treaties of Slovakia Treaties of Slovenia Treaties of South Africa Treaties of South Korea Treaties of Spain Treaties of Sri Lanka Treaties of Suriname Treaties of Sweden Treaties of Switzerland Treaties of Syria Treaties of Tajikistan Treaties of Tanzania Treaties of Thailand Treaties of the Bahamas Treaties of the Central African Republic Treaties of the Comoros Treaties of the Czech Republic Treaties of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan Treaties of the Democratic Republic of the Sudan Treaties of the Dominican Republic Treaties of the Gambia Treaties of the Hungarian People's Republic Treaties of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Treaties of the Maldives Treaties of the military dictatorship in Brazil Treaties of the Netherlands Treaties of the People's Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Treaties of the People's Republic of Benin Treaties of the People's Republic of China Treaties of the People's Republic of Mozambique Treaties of the Philippines Treaties of the Republic of the Congo Treaties of the Solomon Islands Treaties of the Somali Democratic Republic Treaties of the United Arab Emirates Treaties of the United Kingdom Treaties of the United States Treaties of Togo Treaties of Tonga Treaties of Trinidad and Tobago Treaties of Tunisia Treaties of Turkey Treaties of Uganda Treaties of Ukraine Treaties of Uruguay Treaties of Uzbekistan Treaties of Vanuatu Treaties of Venezuela Treaties of Vietnam Treaties of West Germany Treaties of Yemen Treaties of Yugoslavia Treaties of Zaire Treaties of Zambia Treaties of Zimbabwe Treaties concluded in 1973 Treaties entered into force in 1975 1975 in the environment Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2020 Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2024 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from June 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 14:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents CITES 59 languages Add topic

