Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Prevalence by country Toggle Prevalence by country subsection 1.1 Canada 1.2 France 1.3 Germany 1.4 Israel 1.5 Lebanon 1.6 United States 2 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 2.1 Digital anti-Palestinianism 2.2 Anti-Palestinianism during Gaza war 3 See also 4 Notes Toggle Notes subsection 4.1 Citations 5 Sources 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Anti-Palestinianism 7 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی Français Italiano Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Discrimination directed at the Palestinian people A request that this article title be changed to Anti-Palestinian sentiment Anti-Palestinian sentiment is under discussion . Please do not move this article until the discussion is closed.

Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Anti-Palestinianism or anti-Palestinian racism [ 1 ] is the prejudice , collective hatred , and discrimination directed at the Palestinian people for any variety of reasons. Since the mid-20th century, the phenomenon has largely overlapped with anti-Arab racism and Islamophobia because the overwhelming majority of Palestinians today are Arabs and Muslims .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Historically, anti-Palestinianism was more closely identified with European antisemitism , as far-right Europeans detested the Jewish people as undesirable foreigners from Palestine .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Modern anti-Palestinianism—that is, xenophobia or racism towards Palestinians—is most common in Israel , [ a ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] the United States , [ 2 ] Lebanon , [ 8 ] and Germany , [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] among other countries.

Anti-Palestinian racism includes "erasing the human rights and equal dignity and worth of Palestinians"; defending acts of violence against Palestinians; and refusing "to acknowledge Palestinians as an Indigenous people with a collective identity".

[ 12 ] Pakistani author and professor Sunaina Maira, [ 13 ] citing American professor of Islamic studies Shahzad Bashir in the context of labelling, states: "...an important aspect of anti-Palestinianism, that is, the moral panic whipped up about the ' radicalization ' of Muslim and Arab American youth is often accompanied by the charge that they are automatically anti-Semites if they are critical of the Israeli state's policies." [ 14 ] According to Moustafa Bayoumi , anti-Palestinianism preceded the modern wave of Islamophobia and influenced the rise of the latter.

[ 15 ] According to a United Nations special committee , [ 16 ] Amnesty International , and other experts and human rights organisations, Israel has committed genocide against the Palestinian people during its ongoing invasion and bombing of the Gaza Strip .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Anti-Palestinian racism may have played a role in this potential genocide.

[ 19 ] Prevalence by country Canada In 2018, author and political activist Yves Engler criticized the New Democratic Party (NDP) for its conduct in respect of the Palestine Resolution that called for support of efforts to ban "settlement products from Canadian markets, and using other forms of diplomatic and economic pressure to end the [Israeli] occupation." [ 20 ] Engler said it "demonstrated the need to directly confront anti-Palestinianism within the party." [ 21 ] [ b ] In 2020, the University of Toronto allegedly blocked the hiring of Valentina Azarova as director of the International Human Rights Program (IHRP) due to her pro-Palestinian activism. Dania Majid, president of the Arab Canadian Lawyers Association (ACLA), described this as an example that "anti-Palestinian racism is alive and well" in Canada.

[ 24 ] In 2023, the principal of Park West School in Halifax, Nova Scotia , apologized after Palestinian students were told they couldn't wear the keffiyeh during the school's culture day. Palestinian and pro-Palestinian activists protested the banning of the keffiyeh as an act of anti-Palestinian racism in front of the Department of Education building in Halifax.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] France In May 2021, the French interior minister Gérald Darmanin requested that the police ban a pro-Palestinian protest in Paris. The Parisian journalist Sihame Assbague described the decision as an expression of "French colonial solidarity with the Israeli occupation forces." [ 27 ] Germany See also: Anti-Palestinianism during the Gaza war § Germany Mati Shemoelof in +972 Magazine said anti-Palestinian sentiment is common in Germany.

[ 28 ] Palestinians in the country have described a "crackdown and criminalisation" of Palestinians which has included police violence at protests, racial profiling, censorship, and violations of their human rights.

[ 29 ] [ 10 ] Majed Abusalama, co-founder of Palestine Speaks in Germany, suggests German anti-Palestinianism is increasing.

[ 30 ] The German left, particularly the Antideutsch movement, has been noted for anti-Palestinian sentiment. Many pro-Israel non-Jewish Zionists on the German left regard being anti-Palestinian as connected to their solidarity with Jews.

[ 31 ] In 2019, the Bundestag declared the BDS movement to be a form of antisemitism . In response, the BDS movement condemned the motion as anti-Palestinian. The Palestinian B.D.S. National Committee issued a statement declaring the motion an "anti-Palestinian...McCarthyite and unconstitutional resolution passed by the German Parliament." [ 32 ] [ 33 ] British musician Brian Eno has argued that pro-Palestinian artists are subjected to "censorship and inquisitorial McCarthyism " due to the actions of the German government and anti-Palestinian groups.

[ 34 ] On 27 April 2023, ahead of the 75th anniversary of Israel's independence , or for Palestinians the 75th anniversary of the Nakba , prominent German politician and president of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen referred to Israel as a "vibrant democracy" in the Middle East that " made the desert bloom " in remarks criticized by the foreign ministry of the Palestinian Authority as a " propagandist discourse" propagating an "anti-Palestinian racist trope" and a " whitewashing " of Israeli occupation .

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] Germany's relationship with Palestine has been described as "complex". At present, Germany's political class exhibits a "zealous identification with Israel" that is "often explained in terms of the country's past". Alternative readings, however, view this trend as a "qualitatively new phenomenon in Germany largely unrelated to moral considerations pertaining to the Nazi era".

[ 38 ] Hannah C. Tzuberi argues that German manifestations of " anti-antisemitism " (which has been described as "a defining marker of post-war German identity") [ 39 ] can go beyond the identification of Germans with Jews, sometimes leading to the identification of German gentiles as Jews, and the identification of Germany as Israel.

[ 40 ] In 2020, scholars and artists began accusing Germany of a "witch hunt" against those who express pro-Palestinian solidarity.

[ 41 ] The European Legal Support Center (ELSC) has also accused Germany of human rights violations for laws which it says amount to suppression of pro-Palestinian activism, which it says particularly affects Jews and Palestinians.

[ 42 ] Artists for Palestine says Germany has censured a number of artists for expressing pro-Palestinian sentiment, include Kamila Shamsie , [ 43 ] Kae Tempest , Young Fathers , Talib Kwelli , Walid Raad and Nirit Sommerfeld.

[ 34 ] [ 44 ] [ 41 ] Israel Further information: Israel and apartheid , Israeli demolition of Palestinian property , and Palestinian enclaves See also: Roof knocking Graffito in Turmus Ayya , left by Israeli settlers : "Take revenge against the goyim ." Palestinians are the target of violence by Israeli settlers and their supporters, predominantly in the West Bank . In November 2021, Israeli Defense Minister Benny Gantz discussed the steep rise in the number of incidents between settlers and Palestinians in the West Bank, many of which result from attacks by residents of illegal settler outposts on Palestinians from neighboring villages.

[ 45 ] Settler violence also includes acts known as price tag attacks that are in response to actions by the Israeli government, usually against Palestinian targets and occasionally against Israeli security forces in the West Bank.

[ 46 ] Palestinian police are forbidden from reacting to acts of violence by Israeli settlers, a fact which diminishes their credibility among Palestinians.

[ 47 ] Between January and November 2008, 515 criminal suits were opened by Israel against settlers for violence against Arabs or Israeli security forces; 502 of these involved "right wing radicals" while 13 involved "left wing anarchists".

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] In 2008, the senior Israeli commander in the West Bank said that a hard core of a few hundred activists were involved in violence against the Palestinians and Israeli soldiers.

[ 50 ] Some prominent Jewish religious figures living in the occupied territories, as well as Israeli government officials, have condemned and expressed outrage over such behavior, [ 51 ] while religious justifications for settler killings have also been given.

[ 52 ] Israeli media said the defense establishment began taking a harder line against unruly settlers starting in 2008.

[ 53 ] In 2011 the BBC reported that "vast majority of settlers are non-violent but some within the Israeli government acknowledge a growing problem with extremists." [ 46 ] UN figures from 2011 showed that 90% of complaints filed against settlers by Palestinians with the Israeli police never led to indictment.

[ 46 ] In the 21st century, there has been a steady increase in violence and terror perpetrated by Israeli settlers against Palestinians.

[ 53 ] In 2012, an EU heads of mission report found that settler violence had more than tripled in the three years up to 2011.

[ 54 ] United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) figures state that the annual rate of settler attacks (2,100 attacks in 8 years) has almost quadrupled between 2006 and 2014.

[ 55 ] In 2021, there was yet another wave of settler violence which erupted after a 16-year-old settler died in a car chase with Israeli police after having hurled rocks at Palestinians. So far it has resulted in 44 incidents in the span of a few weeks, injuring two Palestinian children.

[ 56 ] In the latter parts of 2021, there has been a marked increase in settler violence toward Palestinians, condemned at the United Nations Security Council.

This violence increased further following the election of a far-right government in 2022 which proposed to expand Israeli settlements in Palestinian territories, as well as the Hamas attack on Israel on 7 October 2023.

This section is an excerpt from Racism in Israel § Incidents .

[ edit ] In 1994, a Jewish settler in the West Bank and follower of the Kach party, Baruch Goldstein , massacred 29 Palestinian Muslim worshipers at the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron .

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] During his funeral, a rabbi declared that even one million Arabs are "not worth a Jewish fingernail".

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] [ 61 ] Goldstein was denounced by most religious streams including the mainstream Orthodox", [ 62 ] and many in Israel classified Goldstein as insane.

[ 63 ] The Israeli government condemned the massacre and made Kach illegal.

[ 64 ] The Israeli army killed a further nine Palestinians during riots following the massacre, [ 65 ] and the Israeli government severely restricted Palestinian freedom of movement in Hebron, [ 66 ] while letting settlers roam free.

[ 67 ] Although Israel also forbade a very small number (18) of Israeli settlers from entering Palestinian towns and demanded that those settlers turn in their army-issued rifles, it denied the PLO's request that all settlers be disarmed and that an international force be established to protect Palestinians from Israeli aggressors.

[ 68 ] Goldstein's grave has become a pilgrimage site for Jewish extremists.

[ 69 ] Current Israeli Minister of National Security Itamar Ben-Gvir is known to have had a portrait of Goldstein hanging in his living room as homage.

[ 70 ] This section is an excerpt from Textbooks in Israel § Teaching the Arab–Israeli conflict .

[ edit ] In general, the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories is hardly mentioned by Israeli textbooks or by high school matriculation examinations , according to a study by Professor Avner Ben-Amos of Tel Aviv University. The lives and perspectives of Palestinians are rarely mentioned, an approach he terms “interpretive denial.” In most Israeli textbooks, “the Jewish control and the Palestinians’ inferior status appear as a natural, self-evident situation that one doesn’t have to think about." [ 71 ] According to the Ben-Amos study, one of the main civics textbooks used in Israeli high schools fails to address at all the limited rights of the millions of Palestinians living in the West Bank under Israeli military occupation. The more general issue of the occupation was addressed in a previous edition of this textbook but the Israeli debate regarding the occupation was shrunk to a few sentences in the most recent edition under right-wing education ministers. Another Israeli civics textbook completely omits discussion of the dispute over the occupied territories. In civics high school matriculation tests over the past 20 years, no question appeared on the limiting of the Palestinians’ rights. The geography matriculation exams ignore the Green Line and the Palestinians.

[ 72 ] Lebanon Palestinian refugees in Lebanon are treated as second-class residents.

[ 8 ] Palestinians in Lebanon are denied citizenship, restricted from certain jobs, excluded from formal education, and forced to live in refugee camps.

[ 73 ] Anti-Palestinianism was a common sentiment in a number of Lebanese factions during the Lebanese Civil War ; it was particularly prominent among Lebanese Christians fighting for the right-wing Lebanese Front against the Palestine Liberation Organization and various left-wing factions. Instances attesting this phenomenon include the Sabra and Shatila massacre , in which the Lebanese Forces massacred hundreds or thousands of Palestinians (along with Lebanese Shia Muslims ) with support from the Israel Defense Forces in the city of Beirut .

[ citation needed ] United States American public opinion has tended in favor of Israel and against Palestinians for a number of years, although pro-Palestinian sentiment has increased in the United States during the 21st century.

[ 74 ] In 2021, according to Gallup , only 25% of Americans sympathized more with Palestinians than with Israelis, with 58% sympathizing with Israel, and only 34% of Americans believed that the United States should place more pressure on Israel in regards to the Israel-Palestine conflict. However, 52% of Americans supported an independent Palestinian state. Democrats were more likely than Republicans to have pro-Palestinian sentiments.

[ 74 ] In her 1990 essay "Israel: Whose Country Is It Anyway?", the Jewish-American writer Andrea Dworkin wrote that American Jews are raised with anti-Palestinian sentiment, which she describes as "a deep and real prejudice against Palestinians that amounts to race-hate." [ 75 ] In May 2021, the Tayba Islamic Center in the Sheepshead Bay neighborhood of Brooklyn was vandalized with anti-Palestinian graffiti reading "Death 2 Palestine". The incident was investigated by the NYPD as a hate crime.

[ 76 ] Student leaders at the University of Michigan issued a statement denouncing the anti-Palestinian sentiment they alleged had been allowed to "run rampant" on campus, stating that Palestinian students had been "profoundly marginalized through censorship and threats." [ 77 ] In November 2021, Palestine Legal filed a complaint with Washington, D.C.'s Office for Human Rights against George Washington University , alleging that the university had discriminated against Palestinians in its offering of trauma services.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] On 9 November 2023, a former leader of the University of Connecticut's pro-Palestine campus group, who had graduated in 2022, spoke out about threatening voicemails she had received, as her number was still publicly listed on the group's website. One particular voicemail she received was from a number in Oklahoma and contained racial slurs , called her a terrorist, and said "I can't wait to see you dead". The school's Muslim Student Association received an email mocking dead Palestinians, and the messages were reported to the FBI , campus and state police.

[ 80 ] In the first presidential debate between Joe Biden and Donald Trump in June 2024, the latter reportedly used the word "Palestinian" as a slur.

[ 81 ] Examples Opponents of anti-Palestinianism sometimes allege that it is as serious a moral failing as antisemitism, but believe that anti-Palestinianism goes unrecognized or underrecognized within Western societies.

[ 82 ] After fashion retailer Zara condemned anti-Palestinian comments made by one of its senior designers in June 2021, the East Jerusalem born and raised model Qaher Harhash said the fashion industry should stand up against anti-Palestinian sentiment: [ 83 ] We usually see brands standing against anti-Semitism, but it's also time we see brands standing against anti-Palestinianism.

[ 84 ] In 2015, Spanish BDS activists accused the Jewish-American rapper Matisyahu of being anti-Palestinian and temporarily succeeded in having his appearance at the Rototom Sunsplash festival cancelled.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] Digital anti-Palestinianism The censorship of Palestinian and pro-Palestinian voices on the internet, particularly on social media, has been referred to as "digital apartheid" [ 87 ] [ 88 ] or "digital occupation".

[ 89 ] Facebook and Instagram has been accused of anti-Palestinian bias by digital rights activists.

[ 90 ] Other websites accused of anti-Palestinian bias include Reddit , [ 91 ] YouTube , Twitter , and PayPal .

[ 92 ] Anti-Palestinianism during Gaza war This section is an excerpt from Anti-Palestinianism during the Gaza war .

[ edit ] Following the October 7 attacks , and the outbreak of the Gaza war , there has been a surge of anti-Palestinianism, anti-Arab racism , and Islamophobia . Palestinians have expressed concerns over increased anti-Palestinianism in mass media and anti-Palestinian hate crimes.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] Human rights groups have noted an increase in anti-Palestinian hate speech and incitement to violence against Palestinians.

[ 95 ] See also Anti-BDS laws Anti-Israel sentiment Anti-Palestinianism during the Gaza war Antisemitism Anti-Zionism Death to Arabs List of people who oppose the BDS movement Palestinians as animals in Israeli discourse Palestine Exception Palestinianism Progressive except Palestine Racism in Jewish communities Weaponization of antisemitism Zionism as settler colonialism Notes ^ "For much of the 20th century, mainstream American and Israeli public discourse did not even tolerate the word 'Palestinian.' In The Question of Palestine, published in 1979, Edward Said observed that, 'merely to mention the Palestinians or Palestine in Israel, or to a convinced Zionist , is to name the unnameable.' " ( Beinart 2021 ) ^ The 2021 NDP convention passed a resolution which made it official NDP policy to require "An end to Canada's support for illegal settlements" and "Suspending the flow of weapons to and from Israel until Palestinians are free" [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Citations ^ a b Abu-Laban & Bakan 2021 , pp. 143–149.

^ a b Beinart 2021 .

^ Kant, Immanuel (1974): Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View.

Translated by Mary J. Gregor. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, cited in Chad Alan Goldberg, Politicide Revisited . University of Wisconsin-Madison ^ Gelbin, Cathy S.; Gilman, Sander L. (2017).

Cosmopolitanisms and the Jews . University of Michigan Press: University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 978-0-4721-3041-2 .

^ Riemer, Nick.

Boycott Theory and the Struggle for Palestine: Universities, Intellectualism and Liberation . Rowman & Littlefield, 2022. p. 76.

^ Gendzier, Irene L. (1 January 1999).

"Minority Alliances" .

Journal of Palestine Studies .

28 (2): 97– 99.

doi : 10.2307/2537939 .

ISSN 0377-919X .

^ Biddle, Alice Speri, Sam (27 March 2023).

"Anti-Palestinian Hate on Social Media Is Growing, Says a Facebook Partner" .

The Intercept . Retrieved 6 November 2024 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Moor 2010 .

^ Fekete, Liz (2024).

"Anti-Palestinian racism and the criminalisation of international solidarity in Europe" .

Race & Class .

66 (1): 99– 120.

doi : 10.1177/03063968241253708 .

ISSN 0306-3968 .

^ a b Jegić, Denijal.

"Why is Germany so viciously anti-Palestinian?" .

Al Jazeera . Retrieved 6 November 2024 .

^ "Geopolitics as anti-Palestinianism" .

Mondoweiss . 22 August 2022 . Retrieved 6 November 2024 .

^ Sirleaf, Matiangai V. S. (2024).

"Palestine as a Litmus Test for Transitional Justice" .

The International Journal of Transitional Justice .

18 : 162– 188.

doi : 10.1093/ijtj/ijae012 .

^ "Canary Mission" .

canarymission.org . Retrieved 17 April 2022 .

^ Maira 2016 , p. 150.

^ Moustafa Bayoumi , Decades of spying and repression: the anti-Palestinian origins of American Islamophobia The Guardian 23 May 2024 ^ "A genocide is unfolding before our eyes: History will not forgive our inaction, UN Special Committee warns General Assembly 4th Committee report" .

Question of Palestine . Archived from the original on 10 April 2025 . Retrieved 9 April 2025 .

Our report leaves no room for ambiguity. A genocide is unfolding before our eyes. Failing to act now—failing to put an end to this atrocity crime — will tear apart the very foundation of the international rule of law we have collectively built to protect peace, security, and the well-being of all. Our inaction today is setting a perilous precedent for tomorrow. Think about it.

^ Dumper, Michael; Badran, Amneh (2024). "Introduction". In Dumper, Michael; Badran, Amneh (eds.).

Routledge Handbook on Palestine (1st ed.). Routledge. p. 2.

doi : 10.4324/9781003031994 .

ISBN 9781003031994 .

In this context we should not overlook the latest turning point in the history of Palestine – the attack by Hamas on 7th October 2023 on Israeli settlements adjacent to Gaza and the subsequent genocidal war that the state of Israel has carried out in the Gaza strip Speri, Alice (20 December 2024).

"Defining genocide: how a rift over Gaza sparked a crisis among scholars" .

Guardian . Retrieved 23 December 2024 .

Narea, Nicole (25 October 2024).

"Is Israel committing genocide? Reexamining the question, a year later" .

Vox . Archived from the original on 27 October 2024 . Retrieved 28 October 2024 .

Albanese, Francesca (25 March 2024).

Anatomy of a Genocide: Report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, Francesca Albanese (PDF) (Report).

United Nations Special Rapporteur on the occupied Palestinian territories . p. 1.

By analysing the patterns of violence and Israeli policies in its onslaught on Gaza, the present report concludes that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the threshold indicating that Israel has committed genocide has been met Amnesty International (2024).

'You Feel Like You Are Subhuman': Israel's Genocide Against Palestinians In Gaza (PDF) (Report). p. 13.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 December 2024.

This report focuses on the Israeli authorities' policies and actions in Gaza as part of the military offensive they launched in the wake of the Hamas-led attacks on 7 October 2023 while situating them within the broader context of Israel's unlawful occupation, and system of apartheid against Palestinians in Gaza, the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and Israel. It assesses allegations of violations and crimes under international law by Israel in Gaza within the framework of genocide under international law, concluding that there is sufficient evidence to believe that Israel's conduct in Gaza following 7 October 2023 amounts to genocide.

Traverso, Enzo (2024).

Gaza Faces History . Other Press. p. 8.

ISBN 978-1-63542-555-0 .

The only normative definition we have, codified at the United Nations Genocide Convention of 1948, accurately describes the current situation in Palestine ... describes exactly what is happening in Gaza today "One year of denouncing the genocide of Palestinians in Gaza" .

International Federation for Human Rights . 12 December 2024 . Retrieved 4 June 2025 .

One year ago, the FIDH International Board, its governing body elected by all its member organisations, recognised, after extensive debate and examination, that Israel was carrying out genocide against the Palestinian people in Gaza B'Tselem (July 2025).

Our Genocide (PDF) (Report). p. 86.

The review presented in this report leaves no room for doubt: since October 2023, the Israeli regime has been responsible for carrying out genocide against the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip. Killing tens of thousands of people; causing bodily or mental harm to hundreds of thousands more; destroying homes and civilian infrastructure on a massive scale; starvation, displacement, and denying humanitarian aid — all this is being perpetrated systematically, as part of a coordinated attack aimed at annihilating all facets of life in the Gaza Strip.

^ Mohyeldin, Ayman; Hamdan, Basel (10 December 2024).

"Why Amnesty International and other experts say Israel is committing genocide in Gaza" .

MSNBC . Archived from the original on 3 July 2025.

De Vogli, Roberto; Montomoli, Jonathan; Abu-Sittah, Ghassan; Pappé, Ilan (2025). "Break the selective silence on the genocide in Gaza".

The Lancet .

Supplementary appendix pp. 3–4 .

doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(25)01541-7 .

van Laarhoven, Kasper; Peek, Eva; Walters, Derk (14 May 2025).

"Zeven gerenommeerde wetenschappers vrijwel eensgezind: Israël pleegt in Gaza genocide" .

NRC (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 15 May 2025 . Retrieved 27 May 2025 .

Tharoor, Ishaan (30 July 2025).

"Leading genocide scholars see a genocide happening in Gaza" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 2 August 2025 .

^ Bakan, Abigail B.; Abu-Laban, Yasmeen (2024). "Anti-Palestinian racism, antisemitism, and solidarity: Considerations towards an analytic of praxis".

Studies in Political Economy .

105 : 107– 122.

doi : 10.1080/07078552.2024.2325300 .

These examples indicate how the dehumanizing logic of anti-Palestinian racism—replete with denial of atrocity, masking of inequities, and victim blaming—has intensified in the context of Israel's war on Gaza. Indeed, in Israel/Palestine, racism has contributed to genocide.

^ O'Keefe 2018 .

^ Engler 2018 .

^ Aivalis 2021 .

^ NDP Palestine Res 2021 .

^ Gadzo 2020 .

^ "Apology following dispute during school's culture day falls short, say protesters" .

Canadian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 4 May 2023 .

^ "Palestinian scarves controversy at Nova Scotia school prompts calls for public apology" .

Global News . Retrieved 4 May 2023 .

^ AJE: French ban 2021 .

^ Konrad, Edo (21 July 2021).

"The Israelis challenging the German left's anti-Palestinian politics" .

+972 Magazine . Retrieved 6 November 2024 .

^ Sharma, Gouri.

" 'Complete censorship': Germany's Palestinian diaspora fights crackdown" .

Al Jazeera . Retrieved 6 November 2024 .

^ Abusalama, Majed.

"Germany's anti-Palestinianism is escalating" .

Al Jazeera . Retrieved 6 November 2024 .

^ Shemoelof 2021 .

^ Nasr & Alkousaa 2019 .

^ Bennhold 2019 .

^ a b Eno 2021 .

^ "EU's 'Israeli independence' message rebuked in Palestine" .

Al Jazeera . 27 April 2023.

^ Knell, Yolande (27 April 2023).

"Palestinians condemn EU's von der Leyen for 'racist trope' " .

BBC .

^ Lynch, Suzanne (27 April 2023).

"Von der Leyen's Israel comments provoke Palestinian ire" .

Politico .

^ Fischer, L. (2019). "Deciphering Germany's Pro-Israel Consensus".

Journal of Palestine Studies .

48 (2): 26– 42.

doi : 10.1525/jps.2019.48.2.26 .

S2CID 159195502 .

^ Judith Gruber (2021).

"At the Intersection of Racial and Religious Othering: Theologies of Interreligious Dialogue as a Performance of White Christian Innocence?" .

Answerable for our Beliefs . Peeters.

ISBN 978-9-0429-4742-9 .

^ Tzuberi, Hannah C. (2020). " "The Sun Does Not Shine, It Radiates": On National(ist) Mergings in German Philosemitic Imagery of Tel Aviv". In Reuveni, Gideon; Franklin, Diana (eds.).

The Future of the German-Jewish Past: Memory and the Question of Antisemitism . Purdue University Press.

hdl : 20.500.12657/49467 .

^ a b Mashiach, Itay (10 December 2020).

"In Germany, a Witch Hunt Is Raging Against Critics of Israel. Cultural Leaders Have Had Enough" .

Haaretz . Retrieved 6 November 2024 .

^ "BREAKING-New Report Reveals Human Rights Violations Resulting from IHRA Definition of Antisemitism" .

European Legal Support Center . 6 June 2023 . Retrieved 6 November 2024 .

^ Flood, Alison (23 September 2019).

"Hundreds of authors protest after Kamila Shamsie's book award is revoked" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 6 November 2024 .

^ "Brian Eno: Artists must call out Germany's anti-Palestinian witch-hunt" .

Artists for Palestine UK . 8 February 2021 . Retrieved 6 November 2024 .

^ Harel, Amos (19 November 2021).

"Settler Attacks on Palestinian Spike, Reflecting Israel's Systemic Failure" .

Haaretz . Retrieved 21 November 2023 .

^ a b c Donnison, Jon (17 November 2011).

"Concerns over rising settler violence in the West Bank" . BBC . Retrieved 25 March 2012 .

^ Daniel Byman, A High Price: The Triumphs and Failures of Israeli Counterterrorism, Oxford University Press/Saban Center, Brookings Institution, 2011 p. 292: 'Palestinian police are barred from responding to settler violence. This policy reduces friction between settlers and Palestinian authorities, but it decreases the overall credibility of the PA, which cannot defend its people from settler harassment and violence.' ^ "Violence by Extremists in the Jewish Settler Movement: A Rising Challenge" . The Washington Institute for Near East Policy. 25 November 2008 . Retrieved 26 March 2012 .

^ Constance B. Hilliard , Does Israel have a future?: the case for a post-Zionist state , Potomac Books, Inc., 2009 p. 59.

^ " 'Hundreds join' settler violence" .

BBC . 2 October 2008 . Retrieved 27 February 2024 .

^ Weiss, Efrat (20 June 1995).

"Rabbi slams Jewish 'hooligans' - Israel News, Ynetnews" .

Ynetnews . Ynetnews.com . Retrieved 14 September 2012 .

^ Amitai Etzioni, Security First: For a Muscular, Moral Foreign Policy, Yale University Press, 2008 p. 119.:'Others have justified violence against Arabs by citing the rule from the Talmud: "If a man comes to kill you, rise early, and kill him first." ^ a b Anshel Pfeffer, Top IDF officer warns: Settlers' radical fringe growing , Haaretz 20 October 2009.

^ Hider, James (21 March 2012).

"Israel 'turning blind eye' to West Bank settlers' attacks on Palestinians" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 23 March 2012 .

^ Chaim Levinson, Gili Cohen and Jack Khoury , 'Palestinian mosque set on fire in suspected hate crime,' at Haaretz, 15 January 2014. 'The annual totals are up from 115 in 2006 to 399 in 2013..' ^ Times of Israel Staff. "5-Year-Old Palestinian Boy Hurt by Rock Thrown at Car in Reported Settler Attack." The Times of Israel, January 22, 2021.

Times of Israel ^ Gurvitz, Yossi (8 April 2012).

"Jewish soldiers refuse to share Seder table with Druze comrades" .

972mag . Retrieved 10 September 2012 .

^ Israel Shahak.

"The Real Significant of Baruch Goldstein" .

The Unjust Media . Archived from the original on 26 March 2015.

^ Kraft, Scott (28 February 1994). "Extremists Pay Tribute to Killer of 48 at Funeral".

Los Angeles Times . p. A1.

^ Brownfeld, Allan C. (March 1999).

"Growing Intolerance Threatens the Humane Jewish Tradition" .

Washington Report on Middle East Affairs : 84– 89 . Retrieved 11 April 2011 .

^ Emran Qureshi; Michael Anthony Sells (2003).

The new crusades: constructing the Muslim enemy .

Columbia University Press . p. 129.

ISBN 978-0-231-12667-0 .

^ The ethics of war in Asian civilizations: a comparative perspective By Torkel Brekke, Routledge, 2006, p.44 ^ Wilson, Rodney (2007).

"Review Article: Islam and Terrorism" .

British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies .

34 (2): 203– 213.

doi : 10.1080/13530190701427933 .

S2CID 144867169 .

^ Haberman, Clyde (14 March 1994).

"Israel votes ban on Jewish groups linked to Kahane" .

The New York Times .

^ Surkes, Sue (28 February 2014).

"The Goldstein massacre and the danger of escalation" . The Times of Israel . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

^ AYELET WALDMAN (2014).

"The Shame of Shuhada Street" . The Atlantic.

^ Aditi, Bhaduri (21 May 2006).

"Fabled town, divided and bruised" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 29 October 2007 . Retrieved 19 October 2009 .

Still fresh in the memory of almost all the inhabitants was the Goldstein case of 1994, when a two-week curfew was imposed on the 1,20,000  [ sic ] Palestinian residents of the city, but not on the 400 Jewish settlers of H2.

^ Haberman, Clyde (3 March 1994).

"West Bank Massacre; Israel Eases Curfew in Territories; Ensuing Riots Deepen Pessimism" .

The New York Times . p. A1 . Retrieved 23 November 2015 .

Faced with rage in the territories and its own revulsion over the Hebron massacre, the P.L.O. has dug in on its demands that all settlers be disarmed and that an international force be created to protect Palestinians. Mr. Rabin has said no to both demands. But he [Rabin] has imposed tougher measures against a relatively small number of the most militant settlers, which, while far from what the Palestinians want, represents a significant shift for the Government. Several days after ordering the arrest of five people faithful to the anti-Arab preaching of the late Rabbi Meir Kahane, the army began today to carry out other measures, telling 18 settlers to stay out of Arab towns and to turn in their army-issued rifles.

^ "Graveside party celebrates Hebron massacre" .

BBC News . 21 March 2000 . Retrieved 19 October 2009 .

^ "Israel's far-right leader Ben-Gvir wins adoring young fans" .

France24.com . 27 October 2022 . Retrieved 2 November 2022 .

^ Haaretz, 21 June 2020 In Israeli Textbooks, the Palestinians Are All but Invisible: A Study by Avner Ben-Amos of Tel Aviv University Shows that the Occupation is Rarely Mentioned in History, Civics or Geography Textbooks ^ Haaretz, 21 June 2020 In Israeli Textbooks, the Palestinians Are All but Invisible: A Study by Avner Ben-Amos of Tel Aviv University Shows that the Occupation is Rarely Mentioned in History, Civics or Geography Textbooks ^ Khoury 2017 .

^ a b Saad 2021 .

^ "Israel: Whose Country Is It Anyway?" . No Status Quo . Retrieved 22 April 2022 .

^ Elassar 2021 .

^ Pilkington 2021 .

^ Kennedy & Trivedi 2021 .

^ Kane 2021 .

^ Wendling, Mike (9 November 2023).

"Muslim students at University of Connecticut received threats over Israel-Gaza war" .

BBC News . Retrieved 9 November 2023 .

^ Ben Samuels, Biden's Presidential Debate Bomb Overshadowed Trump's Use of 'Palestinian' as a Slur Haaretz 28 June 2024.

^ Haber 2016 .

^ Abdelkader 2021 .

^ Alz & Ayoub 2021 .

^ Ontiveros 2015 .

^ LeVine 2015 .

^ Zahzah 2021 .

^ "Israel's digital apartheid is silencing Palestinians" .

openDemocracy . 20 May 2021.

^ Brooking & Campbell 2021 .

^ El-Haroun 2021 .

^ Richard Silverstein (7 March 2022).

"OPT: Reddit allegedly censors pro-Palestine news and threads by users violating its own online democracy slogan" .

United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights .

^ Tahhan 2021 .

^ "Palestinian Americans decry negative media portrayals, fear hate crimes" .

Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 20 October 2023 . Retrieved 22 October 2023 .

^ "Battle against hate: Violence, bigotry toward Palestinian Americans spiking across US" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on 19 October 2023 . Retrieved 22 October 2023 .

^ "Rights group monitors rise in anti-Palestinian hate speech on social media" .

The Jordan Times . 24 October 2023.

Archived from the original on 25 October 2023 . Retrieved 25 October 2023 .

Sources "2021 NDP National Policy Convention: Ensuring Peace & Justice for Palestine" .

Palestine Resolution 2021 . Archived from the original on 9 December 2021 . Retrieved 9 December 2021 .

Abdelkader, Rima (17 June 2021).

"Fashion retailer Zara condemns anti-Palestinian comments made by designer" .

NBC News .

Abu-Laban, Yasmeen; Bakan, Abigail B. (September 2021). "Anti-Palestinian Racism: Analyzing the Unnamed and Suppressed Reality". In Aidi, Hisham; Lynch, Marc; Mampilly, Zachariah (eds.).

Racial Formations in Africa and the Middle East: A Transregional Approach (PDF) . Vol. 44.

Pomeps Studies . pp.

143– 149.

Aivalis, Christo (10 April 2021).

"2021 NDP convention day two: Party takes historic step on Palestine" .

Canadian Dimension .

Alz, Natalie; Ayoub, Malak (24 June 2021).

"The Palestinian Model Who Took on Zara: 'We Must Stop Being Afraid' " .

Haaretz .

Beinart, Peter (16 July 2021).

"It's Time to Name Anti-Palestinian Bigotry: Anti-Palestinianism is as ubiquitous as it is invisible" .

Jewish Currents .

Bennhold, Katrin (17 May 2019).

"German Parliament Deems B.D.S. Movement Anti-Semitic" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 11 December 2021 .

Brooking, Emerson T.; Campbell, Eliza (3 December 2021).

"How to End Israel's Digital Occupation" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved 11 December 2021 .

El-Haroun, Zainah (3 November 2021).

"Digital rights activists accuse Facebook of anti-Palestinian bias" .

Reuters . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

Elassar, Alaa (14 May 2021).

"A NYC mosque was vandalized with anti-Palestinian graffiti" .

CNN . Retrieved 11 December 2021 .

Engler, Yves (15 May 2018).

"It is long past time to confront anti-Palestinianism in NDP" .

Yves Engler.com .

Eno, Brian (4 February 2021).

"Artists like me are being censored in Germany – because we support Palestinian rights" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

"France asks police to ban pro-Palestinian protest in Paris" .

Al Jazeera English . 13 May 2021 . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

Gadzo, Mersiha (20 September 2020).

" 'Anti-Palestinian racism': Appointment row at Toronto university" .

Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 4 December 2021 .

Haber, Jeremiah (16 April 2016).

"Fight anti-Palestinianism as we would anti-Semitism" .

+972 Magazine . Retrieved 11 December 2021 .

Kane, Alex (16 November 2021).

"George Washington University Employees Offered Support to Palestinian Students. Now They Say They're Paying the Price" .

Jewish Currents . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

Kennedy, Abby; Trivedi, Isha (18 November 2021).

"Complaint alleges University discriminated against Palestinian students" .

The GW Hatchet . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

Khoury, Lisa (16 December 2017).

"Palestinians in Lebanon: 'It's like living in a prison' " .

Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 4 December 2021 .

LeVine, Mark (23 August 2015).

"Should Matisyahu play at a peace festival?" .

Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 11 December 2021 .

Maira, Sunaina (2016).

The 9/11 Generation: Youth, Rights, and Solidarity in the War on Terror .

NYU Press .

ISBN 978-1-4798-8051-5 .

Moor, Ahmed (24 June 2010).

"Why Palestinians are second-class citizens in Lebanon" .

The Guardian .

Nasr, Joseph; Alkousaa, Riham (17 May 2019).

"Germany designates BDS Israel boycott movement as anti-Semitic" .

Reuters . Retrieved 11 December 2021 .

O'Keefe, Derrick (16 February 2018).

"Palestine resolution narrowly stopped from hitting NDP convention floor" .

Ricochet Media .

Ontiveros, Roberto (18 August 2015).

"Matisyahu Tour News: 'One Day' Singer Cut From Spanish Concert Over Palestinian Issue" .

Latin Post . Retrieved 11 December 2021 .

Pilkington, Ed (21 May 2021).

"US campuses become a growing front in Israeli-Palestinian conflict" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 11 December 2021 .

Saad, Lydia (19 March 2021).

"Americans Still Favor Israel While Warming to Palestinians" . Gallup . Retrieved 4 December 2021 .

Shemoelof, Mati (21 July 2021).

"The Israelis challenging the German left's anti-Palestinian politics" .

+972 Magazine . Retrieved 4 December 2021 .

Tahhan, Zena Al (7 October 2021).

"Rights groups to PayPal: End discrimination against Palestinians" .

Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

Zahzah, Omar (13 May 2021).

"Digital apartheid: Palestinians being silenced on social media" .

Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

Further reading Abu-Laban, Yasmeen; Bakan, Abigail B. (2022).

"Anti-Palestinian Racism and Racial Gaslighting" .

The Political Quarterly .

93 (3): 508– 516.

doi : 10.1111/1467-923X.13166 .

S2CID 250507449 .

Maynard, Judy (8 December 2021).

"The "Sydney Statement on anti-Palestinianism": An Analysis" .

AIJAC . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

"Statement on Palestinian Activism" .

CUNY School of Law . 30 June 2021.

Tatour, Lana; Lentin, Ronit, eds. (2025).

Race and the Question of Palestine . Stanford University Press.

doi : 10.1515/9781503642980 .

ISBN 978-1-5036-4298-0 .

"The Sydney Statement on Anti-Palestinianism" (PDF) . Arab Australian Federation. September 2021 . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

External links Amazon, Israel, and the Occupation of Palestine , International Solidarity Movement Arab Canadian Lawyers Association Report: Anti-Palestinian Racism: Naming, Framing and Manifestations v t e Palestine articles History Early history Canaanites Philistines Roman Empire Islamic Rule Crusaders Ayyubid dynasty Mamluk Dynasty Ottoman Empire Modern history History of the Palestinians Slavery in Palestine Palestinian nationalism British Mandate Nakba Naksa Palestinian Declaration of Independence Years in Palestine Conflict Israeli–Palestinian Timeline 1948 Palestine war 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight Palestinian insurgency in South Lebanon First Lebanon War First Intifada Second Intifada Gaza War (2008–2009) Gaza war (2023-) Black September Dawson's Field hijackings Fatah–Hamas conflict Battle of Gaza 2009 Hamas political violence in Gaza Hamas–Salafist conflict Hamas-Jund Ansar Allah clash Geography Gaza Strip West Bank Enclaves Northern West Bank Southern West Bank Borders Cities Governorates Landforms Depopulated villages World Heritage Sites Politics State of Palestine ( International recognition ) Political parties DFLP Fatah Hamas FIDA Palestinian National Initiative PPP PFLP Third Way PPSF Palestinian right of return Palestinian political violence Elections Legal status of Palestine Anti-Palestinianism Government West Bank (SOP-controlled) Prime Minister President Palestinian National Council Palestinian Legislative Council Judicial system Gaza Strip (Hamas-controlled) Prime Minister President Committee for the Propagation of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice Security Palestinian National Security Forces Palestinian Preventive Security United States security assistance to the Palestinian National Authority Foreign affairs Palestine and the United Nations Foreign Affairs Minister of the Palestinian National Authority Diplomatic missions of Palestine Diplomatic missions in Palestine International aid to Palestinians Economy Companies Agriculture Communications Stock Exchange Taxes Tourism Transport Water supply and sanitation Palestine Monetary Authority Culture and society Palestinians Palestinian Christians Diaspora Refugee camps Palestinian citizens of Israel Archaeology Architecture Art watermelon Cinema Costume and embroidery keffiyeh Cuisine ( wine ) Dance Demographics Education ( universities and colleges ) Flag of Palestine Handicrafts Health care Mental healthcare Human rights LGBT rights Language Literature Music Personalities Postage stamps and history Prostitution Public holidays Racism Religion ( Religious buildings ) Sport Football Media By city Books Journalists Newspapers Photography Radio Television Ma'an News Agency The Palestine Telegraph Palestine–Israel Journal Palestinian Broadcasting Corporation Palestinian Media Watch Wafa Diaspora Australia Brazil Canada Chile Egypt El Salvador Haiti Iraq Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Mexico Nicaragua Pakistan Syria United Kingdom United States Los Angeles Uruguay Ethnic groups Arabs Muslim Arabs Bedouins Afro-Palestinians Christian Arabs Baháʼís Druzers Metawalis Other Jews Kurds Gypsies (Dom/Nawar) Samaritans Bushnaq Outline Category · Portal v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Palestinianism&oldid=1306278683 " Categories : Anti-Palestinian sentiment Anti-Arabism Anti-national sentiment Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Use dmy dates from January 2022 Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 22:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Palestinianism 7 languages Add topic

