Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early media 2 Paper 3 Electronic media 4 References [ 8 ] 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Writing material 7 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Galego Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Writing or drawing surface This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this article. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Writing material" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Handwriting on paper; a writing material A writing material , also called a writing medium , is a surface that can be written on with suitable instruments , or used for symbolic or representational drawings.

Building materials on which writings or drawings are produced are not included. The gross characterization of writing materials is by the material constituting the writing surface (for example, paper ) and the number, size, usage, and storage configuration of multiple surfaces (for example, paper sheets) into a single object.

Early media [ edit ] Rock paintings in Libya Because drawing preceded writing, the first remains of writing materials are the stone walls of the caves on which cave paintings were drawn. Another precursor was tally sticks used to record the count of objects.

Papyrus fragment from the late Middle Kingdom of Egypt Writing seems to have become more widespread with the invention of papyrus in Egypt.

Parchment , using sheepskins left after the wool was removed for cloth, was sometimes cheaper than papyrus, which had to be imported from outside of Egypt. To save money on expensive papyrus, Egyptians would wash off and reuse it.

[ 1 ] With the invention of wood-pulp paper , the cost of writing material began a steady decline.

Cloth probably shared its mode of use with animal skins.

Clay introduces the useful combination of extreme ease of making the inscription with the potential for rendering it fairly permanent. Unglazed pottery can readily accept inscriptions even after firing. The first libraries consisted of archives of the earliest form of writing – the clay tablets in cuneiform script discovered in Ebla in present-day Syria ; and in temple rooms in Sumer , present-day Iraq .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Wax offers another novel combination of advantages: a reusable surface, easily inscribed and erased, and an easy combination with materials like wood that give it durability.

Stone tablets , clay and wooden writing tablets, and wax-covered wooden tablets are some of the first specialized configurations of materials in flat surfaces specifically for writing.

Unglazed pottery shards were used almost as a kind of scratch paper, as ostraka , for tax receipts, and, in Athens, to record the individual nominations of Greek leaders for ostracism .

Papyrus was first used during the 4th millennium BC in Egypt. In the second century BC, it was replaced in parts of the Mediterranean by parchment made from treated animal hides. Parchments used skins from several different animals, and varied significantly in qualities like texture and color. Parchment was ultimately replaced as the result of the increasing availability of paper.

Palm leaf manuscript.

On the Indian subcontinent, principal writing media were bhurjapatra made from birch bark , and palm leaf manuscript . Palm leaf manuscript was also the major source for writing and painting in South and Southeast Asian countries including Nepal, Sri Lanka, Burma, Thailand, Indonesia and Cambodia.

[ 8 ] The use of paper began only after the 10th century.

In China, early writing materials included animal bones, later silk, [ 9 ] bamboo and wooden slips , [ 10 ] until the 2nd century when paper was invented. The invention of paper is attributed to a eunuch of the imperial court called Cai Lun in 105 AD [ 9 ] However, paper was not introduced to Europe for another thousand years following a battle in 751 AD where a few paper-makers were captured, and thus the technology spread from Baghdad westward, only reaching Spain in the 12th century.

[ citation needed ] Paper [ edit ] Cai Lun used old rags, hemp, tree bark, and fishing nets to develop a method of paper-making fundamentally similar to that still used today.

[ 9 ] The Islamic world acquired the art of papermaking in the 8th century, taught by Chinese prisoners who had been taken during eastward expeditions. Eventually, the Muslims brought papermaking to the Indian subcontinent and to Europe.

[ 11 ] An early Greek name for paper was bagdatikos , meaning 'from Baghdad'. The craft of paper-making reached Spain in the twelfth century, and at subsequent hundred-year intervals arrived in Italy, Germany, and England. Yet for centuries after paper became widely available in Europe, vellum and parchment were preferred for documents that had to be long-lasting. The basic ingredients of paper were linen and cotton, soaked in water and beaten into a smooth pulp, or slurry. As the pulp was drained through a wire screen, the slurry's interlocking fibers matted together, ready for the next step. First, a press squeezed out water from the sheet, preparatory to drying; then, the application of a gelatin coating readied the sheet's surface for ink.

[ 12 ] In the late 18th century, paper was still made from cloth gathered by ragpickers.

James Whatman and John Baskerville (1706–1775) invented a method for producing perfectly smooth paper using a fine wire mesh that left no lines from the mould on the page.

[ 13 ] Electronic media [ edit ] Electronic media have utilized the keyboard developed for the typewriter, electrical and electronic circuitry, and storage devices, and the viewing screen developed for reading electronic signals to provide another form of writing material. The Palm Pilot was invented in 1996 and further changed the idea of electronic devices as writing materials. It was the first consumer product that allowed people to write directly on an electronic screen using a stylus, rather than having to input their writing using a keyboard.

[ 14 ] References [ 8 ] [ edit ] ^ Krutzsch, Myriam (2016).

"Reading Papyrus as Writing Material" (PDF) .

The British Museum (23): 57– 69.

^ Casson (2001) , p. 3.

^ Krasner-Khait, Barbara (2001).

"Survivor: The History of the Library" .

History Magazine . Archived from the original on 17 October 2023 . Retrieved 5 March 2012 .

^ Maclay, Kathleen (6 May 2003).

"Clay cuneiform tablets from ancient Mesopotamia to be placed online" .

University of California, Berkeley . Retrieved 5 March 2012 .

^ Crawford, Sidnie White; Wassen, Cecilia (2015-10-14).

The Dead Sea Scrolls at Qumran and the Concept of a Library . BRILL.

ISBN 978-90-04-30506-9 .

^ Viganò, Lorenzo; Pardee, Dennis (1984).

"Literary Sources for the History of Palestine and Syria: The Ebla Tablets" .

The Biblical Archaeologist .

47 (1): 6– 16.

doi : 10.2307/3209872 .

ISSN 0006-0895 .

JSTOR 3209872 .

^ Wellisch, Hans H. (1981).

"Ebla: The World's Oldest Library" .

The Journal of Library History .

16 (3): 488– 500.

ISSN 0275-3650 .

^ a b Kumar, D. Udaya; Sreekumar, G.V.; Athvankar, U.A. (July 2009).

"Traditional writing system in Southern India — Palm leaf manuscripts" (PDF) .

Design Thoughts : 1– 7.

^ a b c Lyons, Martyn (2011).

Books: A Living History . Los Angeles: Getty. p. 18.

ISBN 978-1-60606-083-4 .

^ Dard, Hunter (1978).

Papermaking: The History and Technique of an Ancient Craft (2nd ed.). New York: Dover Publications. p. 48.

ISBN 0-486-23619-6 .

^ Murray, Stuart (2009).

The Library: An Illustrated History . Skyhorse. p. 51.

ISBN 978-1-60239-706-4 .

^ Murray (2009) , p. 57.

^ Lyons (2011) , pp. 99, 110–111.

^ Andrea, Butter (2002).

Piloting Palm: the inside story of Palm, Handspring, and the birth of the billion-dollar handheld industry . New York: John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 0-471-08965-6 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Writing materials .

Harris, Roy (1985) The Origin of Writing . La Salle, IL: Open Court.

Martin, Henri-Jean (1988) The History and Power of Writing , translated by Lydia G. Cochrane. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.

Casson, Lionel (2001).

Libraries in the ancient world . New Haven: Yale University Press.

ISBN 9780300088090 .

v t e Writing and writing material Enduring Plant-based Amate Trema micrantha Ficus aurea Bamboo and wooden slips Birch bark ( Betula ) Folding-book manuscript Streblus asper Broussonetia papyrifera Ola leaf ( Corypha umbraculifera ) Palm leaf ( Borassus ) Paper Papyrus ( Cyperus papyrus ) Other materials Animal skin Parchment Vellum Ink Metals Intaglio Stamping Oracle bone Photographic film Stone Geoglyph Petroglyph Tablets Clay tablet Slate Wax tablet Textile printing Silk text Impermanent Electronic paper Screen Skywriting Carrier objects Book Codex Notebook Electronic media Hu / Shaku (baton) Inscription Bas-relief Manuscript Palimpsest Microform Scroll Sign Related topics Writing systems History of writing List of writing systems Written language Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Writing_material&oldid=1293050523 " Categories : Writing Writing media Textual scholarship Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2019 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 May 2025, at 11:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Writing material 7 languages Add topic

