Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical background 2 Unit origins and equipment Toggle Unit origins and equipment subsection 2.1 Decima MAS equipment 2.1.1 Siluro lenta corsa (SLC) 2.1.2 Motoscafo trasporto lento (MTL) 2.1.3 Motoscafo turismo (MT/MTM) 2.1.4 MT Siluranti (MTS) 2.2 List of decima MAS equipment 3 Combat record Toggle Combat record subsection 3.1 1940 3.2 1941 3.3 1942 3.4 1943 3.5 Armistice 3.6 Summary of Allied ships sunk or damaged by Decima MAS 4 Successor units Toggle Successor units subsection 4.1 Mariassalto 4.2 Decima MAS (RSI) 4.2.1 Ideology 4.2.2 Hymn 4.2.3 Relations with the RSI 4.2.4 Naval actions 4.2.5 Anti-partisan actions 4.2.6 Defense of Italian national borders 4.2.7 Demobilization 4.2.8 Organization of RSI X a MAS 5 After 1945 6 In popular culture 7 See also 8 Notes 9 Citations 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Decima Flottiglia MAS 18 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Furlan Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian naval commando frogman unit of the Fascist era Decima Flottiglia MAS Teseo Tesei , Italian naval officer who organized the Decima Flottiglia MAS and pioneered the use of underwater raids Active March 1941–September 1943 Country Italy Branch Regia Marina Type Marines Commando frogman Role Human torpedo Raiding Sabotage Nickname(s) Xª MAS Motto(s) "Memento Audere Semper" (Remember to always be bold) [ 1 ] March Inno della Xª MAS Equipment SLC " Maiale " torpedoes MTM " Barchini " motor assault boats Engagements Souda Bay , Gibraltar , Alexandria , Algiers , sank HMS York and 20 merchant ships Decorations Golden Medal of Military Valour Individual decorations: 29 Golden Medals of Military Valor 104 Silver Medals of Military Valor 33 Bronze Medals of Military Valor Commanders Notable commanders Mario Giorgini Vittorio Moccagatta Ernesto Forza Junio Valerio Borghese Military unit v t e Battle of the Mediterranean 1940 Vado Malta Club Run ¹ Espero ¹² Mers-el-Kébir Calabria ¹² Cape Spada Hurry ¹ Cape Passero ¹ MB8 ¹ Taranto Otranto ² White ¹ Cape Spartivento ¹ 1941 Excess ¹ Convoy AN 14 ¹ Genoa Abstention Souda Bay Matapan Tarigo ² Crete ² Substance ¹ Grand Harbour Halberd ¹ Duisburg ² Bon ² 1st Sirte ¹² Alexandria 1942 2nd Sirte ¹ Calendar ¹ Bowery ¹ Albumen Harpoon ¹ Vigorous ¹ Pedestal ¹ Agreement Torch Stoneage ¹ Toulon Portcullis ¹ Skerki ² Olterra ¹ Algiers ¹ 1943 Zuwarah Cigno ² Campobasso ² Pantelleria Sicily Gela Scylla ² Messina convoy ² Bastia Strait of Bonifacio Dodecanese Rhodes Leros Kos Cape Bougaroun ¹ 1944 Ist Santorini Symi Port Cros La Ciotat 1945 Ligurian Sea ¹ Allied convoys Malta convoys U-boat Campaign ¹ — Involved an Allied convoy or delivery mission ² — Involved an Axis convoy or delivery mission The Decima Flottiglia MAS ( Decima Flottiglia Motoscafi Armati Siluranti , also known as La Decima or Xª MAS ) ( Italian for "10th Torpedo-Armed Motorboat Flotilla") was an Italian flotilla , with marines and commando frogman unit, of the Regia Marina (Royal Italian Navy).  The acronym MAS also refers to various light torpedo boats used by the Regia Marina during World War I and World War II .

[ 2 ] Decima MAS was active during the Battle of the Mediterranean and took part in a number of daring raids on Allied shipping. These operations involved surface speedboats (such as the raid on Souda Bay ), human torpedoes (the raid on Alexandria ) and Gamma frogmen (against Gibraltar ). During the campaign, Decima MAS took part in more than a dozen operations which sank or damaged five warships (totalling 78,000 tons) and 20 merchant ships (totalling 130,000 GRT).

In 1943, after the Italian dictator Benito Mussolini was ousted , Italy left the Tripartite Pact .  Some of the Xª MAS men who were stationed in German-occupied northern and central Italy enlisted to fight for Mussolini's newly formed Italian Social Republic ( Repubblica Sociale Italiana or RSI) and retained the unit title, but were primarily employed as an anti- partisan force operating on land. Other Xª MAS men in southern Italy or other Allied-occupied areas joined the Italian Co-Belligerent Navy as part of the Mariassalto (Naval Assault) unit.

Historical background [ edit ] In World War I , on 1 November 1918, Raffaele Paolucci and Raffaele Rossetti of the Regia Marina rode a human torpedo (nicknamed Mignatta or "leech") into the harbour of Pula , where they sank the battleship Jugoslavija , of the navy of the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs , formerly the Austro-Hungarian battleship SMS Viribus Unitis , and the freighter Wien using limpet mines .

[ 3 ] They had no underwater breathing sets , and thus had to keep their heads above water to breathe.  They were discovered and taken prisoner as they attempted to leave the harbour.

[ 4 ] In the 1920s, sport spearfishing without breathing apparatus became popular on the Mediterranean coast of France and Italy. This spurred the development of modern swimfins , diving masks and snorkels .

[ citation needed ] In the 1930s Italian sport spearfishermen began using industrial or submarine-escape oxygen rebreathers , starting scuba diving in Italy.

[ citation needed ] Unit origins and equipment [ edit ] This new type of diving came to the attention of the Regia Marina which founded the first special forces underwater frogman unit, later copied by the Royal Navy and United States Navy .

Capitano di Fregata (Commander) Paolo Aloisi was the first commander of the 1ª Flottiglia Mezzi d'Assalto ("First Assault Vehicle Flotilla"), formed in 1939 as a result of the research and development efforts of Majors Teseo Tesei and Elios Toschi of the naval combat engineers . The two resurrected Paolucci's and Rossetti's concept of human torpedoes.

In 1941, Commander Vittorio Moccagatta re-organised the First Flotilla into the Decima Flottiglia MAS , and divided the unit into two parts – a surface group operating fast explosive motor boats, and a sub-surface weapons group using human torpedoes called SLC ( siluri a lenta corsa or "slow-running torpedoes", but nicknamed Maiale or "Pig" by their crews), as well as "Gamma" assault swimmers ( nuotatori ) using limpet mines.  Moccagatta also created the frogman training school at the San Leopoldo base of the Italian Naval Academy in Livorno .

Decima MAS equipment [ edit ] Siluro lenta corsa (SLC) [ edit ] A SLC ( Maiale at the Museo Sacrario delle Bandiere [ it ] delle Forze Armate , Rome.

The Siluro Lenta Corsa (SLC, slow speed torpedo), known as Maiale (pig), was designed by Tesei and Toschi during 1935 and 1936. By late 1939 about eleven were ready and in  July 1940 the production version, Series 100, began to arrive. In 1941 the improved Series 200 became ready for use. The standard 533 mm (21.0 in) torpedo with double propellers was changed to one larger propeller in a cowling; seats for a two-man crew were installed, with shields housing the controls. The SLC weighed 1.3–1.4 long tons (1.3–1.4 t) and was 22–24 ft (6.7–7.3 m) long. The 1.6 hp (1.2 kW) electric motor moved the maiale at 2–3 nmi (3.7–5.6 km; 2.3–3.5 mi) at a maximum depth of 50 ft (15 m). At the target the crew detached a 6 ft (1.8 m)-long warhead with 510 to 570 lb (230 to 260 kg) of explosive, detonated by a timer. The maiale crews the Gamma frogmen wore Belloni rubberised suits with a closed-circuit re-breathing apparatus to avoid bubbles. The Gamma frogmen carried explosive charges, five 9.9 lb (4.5 kg) cimici (bedbugs) or two 26 lb (12 kg) bauletti , (little trunks) and attached them to a ship's hull, with a timed detonation.

[ 5 ] [ a ] Motoscafo trasporto lento (MTL) [ edit ] Container for a maiale to be attached to the deck of a submarine Maiali and SLCs needed transport close to the target because the re-breather lasted no more than six hours and maiali had a range of only 4 nmi (7.4 km; 4.6 mi) at full speed and a maximum of 15 nmi (28 km; 17 mi) at cruising speed.

[ 5 ] The modified destroyers Francesco Crispi and Quintino Sella , had carried the MTM used in the successful Raid on Souda Bay (25/26 March 1941). The Motoscafo trasporto lento (MTL, slow transport motorboat) was a wooden-hulled boat 28 ft (8.5 m) long by 9 ft 6 in (2.9 m) wide, to carry maiali close to the target. The MTL had a range of only 60 nmi (110 km; 69 mi) cruising at 5 kn (9.3 km/h; 5.8 mph), few were built and they were rarely used. Surface transport gave way to submarines; early in 1940 the Italian submarine Ametista began tests as a maiale transport. The maximum depth of submersion was only 98 ft (30 m); Italian submarine Iride was converted in July 1940 but was sunk on 21 August. Italian submarine Gondar was sunk on 30 September, even though the three maiali cylinders could be flooded, allowing the boat to reach a depth of 295 ft (90 m).

[ 7 ] Motoscafo turismo (MT/MTM) [ edit ] MTM of Decima MAS The first Motoscafo turismo (MT) became known as barchini (little boats) were built in late 1938, six MT being delivered in early 1939. An improved version MT Modificato (MTM) tested in November 1940, was 20 ft (6.1 m) long. Both types carried an explosive charge of 660–730 lb (300–330 kg) in the bows at up to 31 kn (57 km/h; 36 mph). The MTM was fitted with a seat back/life raft behind the pilot for him to float on after dropping off the MTM, while waiting to be rescued. Twelve MTs were built and about forty MTMs. Early in 1941, a smaller MT Ridotto was built with a height of 3 ft 9 in (1.14 m) to fit inside the deck cylinders of submarines with the same explosive charge but they were never used in this manner.

[ 8 ] MT Siluranti (MTS) [ edit ] Motoscafo armato silurante The MT Siluranti (MTS, torpedo motorboat), was a small boat carrying one or two modified 450 mm (18 in) torpedoes, the MTS being more manoeuvrable than the usual Motoscafo armato silurante . The first MTS, of early 1941, could reach 28 kn (52 km/h; 32 mph) with a range of 85 nmi (158 km). The Decima MAS was assisted by Regia Marina MAS boats, which by June 1940, had fifty Class 500 MAS and another 25 in 1941 in four versions. The Class 500 was 61 ft (18.7 m) long by 15 ft (4.7 m) wide at the beam, with a  displacement of 21.7–28.9 long tons; 24.3–32.4 short tons (22–29.4 t). The MAS had a crew of 9 to 13 men and had two 18 in (450 mm) torpedoes, 6–10 depth charges and a 13.2 mm (0.52 in) heavy machine-gun (replaced in 1941 with a Breda 20 mm cannon). The MAS could move at 44 kn (81 km/h; 51 mph) and had a range of 348–864 nmi (645–1,600 km).

List of decima MAS equipment [ edit ] Decima MAS equipment [ 9 ] Name Acronym English translation Notes Uomini Gamma — Gamma Men Frogmen sabotage specialists Motoscafo armato silurante MAS Armed torpedo motorboat Similar to a British Motor torpedo boat (MTB) Motoscafo turismo MT Leisure motorboat Explosive assault boat, 12 built Motoscafo trasporto lento MTL Slow transport motorboat Known as Barchini (little boats) Motoscafo turismo modificato MTM Improved explosive assault motorboat Forty built Motoscafo turismo ridotto MTR Small assault motorboat Motoscafo turismo silurante MTS Torpedo motorboat MTS modificato MTSM Improved torpedo motorboat Siluro lenta corsa SLC Slow human torpedo Combat record [ edit ] The Decima MAS saw action starting on 10 June 1940, when Fascist Italy entered World War II. In more than three years of war, the unit destroyed some 72,190 tons of Allied warships and 130,572 tons of Allied merchant ships.  Personnel from the unit sank the World War I-era Royal Navy battleships HMS Valiant and HMS Queen Elizabeth (both of which, after months of work, were refloated and returned to action), wrecked the heavy cruiser HMS York and the destroyer HMS Eridge , damaged the destroyer HMS Jervis and sank or damaged 20 merchant ships , including supply ships and tankers. During the course of the war, the Decima MAS was awarded the Golden Medal of Military Valour and individual members were awarded a total of 29 Golden Medals of Military Valour , [ b ] 104 Silver Medals of Military Valour and 33 Bronze Medals of Military Valour .

1940 [ edit ] Italian Maiale human torpedo " Siluro San Bartolomeo " displayed at the Royal Navy Submarine Museum , Gosport , UK.

10 June 1940: Benito Mussolini declared war on United Kingdom .

22 August 1940: While preparing for an attack on the British naval base at Alexandria , Egypt , the Italian submarine Iride (carrying four Maiale and five two-man crews) and the support ship Monte Gargano were attacked and sunk in the Gulf of Bomba off Tobruk , Libya , by British land-based Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers .  Teseo Tesei survived the attack, but casualties among the submarine crew were heavy.

[ 10 ] 21 September 1940: The Italian submarine Gondar departed La Spezia for Alexandria, carrying three Maiale and four two-man crews. The Gondar reached Alexandria on the evening of 30 September, but was spotted by British and Australian destroyers, which attacked. Severely damaged, it was forced to the surface and scuttled by the crew. They were captured, along with the Decima MAS crewmen (including Elios Toschi).

24 September 1940: The Italian submarine Sciré , commanded by Commander Junio Valerio Borghese , departed La Spezia carrying three human torpedoes and four crews, for a planned attack on the British naval base at Gibraltar .  The operation was cancelled when the British fleet left harbour before the submarine arrived.

21 October 1940: Sciré departed La Spezia and sailed again to Gibraltar carrying three human torpedoes and four crews. The Decima MAS frogmen entered the harbour, but were unable to attack any ships due to technical problems with the torpedoes and breathing equipment. Only one human torpedo managed to get close to a target, the battleship Barham . The charge exploded but did not cause significant damage. The two crewmen, Gino Birindelli and Damos Paccagnini, were captured by the British. The other four (including Teseo Tesei) manage to reach Spain and returned to Italy.  Valuable experience was gained in this operation by the Decima.

Gino Birindelli received the Medaglia d'Oro al Valor Militare (MOVM), his second, Damos Paccagnini received the Medaglia d'Argento al Valore Militare (MAVM).

1941 [ edit ] Wreck of HMS York inspected by the crew of the Italian torpedo boat Sirio , moored alongside 25 March 1941: The Italian destroyers Francesco Crispi and Quintino Sella departed Leros island in the Aegean at night, each carrying 3 small (2-ton) Motoscafo da Turismo motor assault boats of the Decima MAS.  Each MT (nicknamed barchini or "little boats") carried a 300 kg (660 lb) explosive charge in its bow . The one-pilot craft were launched by the destroyers 10 miles off Suda Bay , Crete , where several British Royal Navy warships and auxiliary ships were at anchor. The MTs were specially equipped to make their way through obstacles such as torpedo nets ; the pilot steered the assault craft in a collision course at his target ship, and jumped from his boat before impact and warhead detonation.  Once inside the bay, the six boats located their targets: the heavy cruiser HMS York , a large tanker (the Norwegian Pericles of 8,300 tons), another tanker, and a cargo ship. Two MTMs hit York amidships, flooding her aft boilers and magazines.

Pericles was severely damaged and settled on the bottom, while the other tanker and the cargo ship were sunk. The other barchini apparently missed their intended targets, and one of them was stranded on the beach. All six of the Italian sailors were captured. The disabled York was later scuttled in shallow waters with demolition charges by her crew before the German capture of Crete , while Pericles sank in April 1941 en route to Alexandria.

25 May 1941: The Sciré departed La Spezia carrying three human torpedoes. At Cadiz , Spain it secretly embarked eight Decima MAS crewmen. At Gibraltar, they found no warships because Renown , Ark Royal , and Sheffield had been ordered to the Atlantic to hunt the German battleship Bismarck . The torpedoes once again experienced technical problems as they unsuccessfully attempted to attack a freighter. The crew returned to Italy via Spain.

26 June 1941: An attack on Malta similar to the 26 July 1941 operation (see below) was planned but was canceled due to bad weather.

[ 11 ] The remains of St. Elmo Bridge in Valletta , which was destroyed in the attack of 26 July 1941 26 July 1941: Two Maiale and ten MAS boats (including six barchini ) unsuccessfully attacked the port of Valletta , Malta . The force was detected early on by a British radar installation, but the British coastal batteries held their fire until the Italians approached to close range. Fifteen Decima MAS crewmen were killed (including Commander Moccagatta), and 18 were captured.  Teseo Tesei and Petty Officer Alcide Pedretti [ it ] on one torpedo died by Fort St. Elmo as they attempted to destroy the outer defenses of the harbour.

Lieutenant Franco Costa and sergeant Luigi Barla on the other torpedo became lost, scuttled their craft, and swam ashore at St. George's Bay two miles NW of Valletta. Their Maiale was recovered by the British, becoming the first example they had been able to examine.

[ 11 ] All 6 MTMs, both SLCs and two MAS (MAS 451 and MAS 452 [ 12 ] ) boats were lost, one of them being found adrift in open seas by the British and towed to port by a seaplane. This disaster forced the unit to make a huge reassessment of its operations. Commander Ernesto Forza was named as commander of the Decima MAS, [ 13 ] and Borghese became leader of the sub-surface weapons group.

[ 14 ] 10 September 1941: The Sciré departed La Spezia carrying three human torpedoes. At Cadiz, Spain, it secretly embarked eight crewmen for them. At Gibraltar, the torpedoes sank three ships: the tankers Denbydale and Fiona Shell , and the cargo ship Durham . All six crewmen swam to Spain and returned safely to Italy, where they were decorated, as were the crew of Sciré .

3 December 1941: Sciré departed La Spezia carrying three human torpedoes to conduct what became the Raid on Alexandria (1941) . At the island of Leros in the Aegean Sea , six Decima MAS crewmen came aboard, including Lieutenant Luigi Durand de la Penne . On 18 December Sciré released the torpedoes 1.3 miles from Alexandria commercial harbour, and they entered the harbour when the British opened the boom defence to let three of their destroyers pass. After many difficulties, de la Penne and his crewmate Emilio Bianchi successfully attached a limpet mine under HMS Valiant , but had to surface as they attempted to leave, and were captured. They refused to answer when questioned and were detained in a compartment aboard Valiant .  Fifteen minutes before the explosion, de la Penne asked to speak to the Valiant ' s captain and informed him of the imminent explosion but refused to give other information. He was returned to the compartment and neither he nor Bianchi were injured by the detonation of the mine. The other four torpedo-riders were also captured, but their mines sank Valiant , the battleship Queen Elizabeth , and the Norwegian tanker Sagona , and badly damaged the destroyer HMS Jervis . The two battleships sank in only a few feet of water and were subsequently re-floated and repaired, being out of action for over a year.

1942 [ edit ] 29 April 1942: The Italian submarine Ambra departed La Spezia carrying three human torpedoes. At Leros six crewmen were secretly loaded for them. On 14 May Ambra reached Alexandria and sank a British floating dock.  The Ambra was spotted and could not sink anything. All six torpedo-riders were captured.

July 1942: Italian frogmen set up a secret base in the Italian tanker Olterra which was interned in Algeciras near Gibraltar. All materials had to be moved secretly through Spain and this limited operations.

13 July 1942: Twelve Italian frogmen swam from the Algeciras coast into Gibraltar harbour and set explosives, and then returned safely. Four ships were sunk.

10 August 1942: The Italian submarine Scirè was sunk by HMS Islay while attempting to attack the port of Haifa in British Palestine . She had 11 frogmen on board.

[ 15 ] 29 August 1942: Off El Daba , Egypt. The Hunt-class destroyer HMS Eridge was torpedoed at close range by an MTSM , a torpedo-carrying version of the MTM . Six of her crew were lost.

HMS Eridge was towed to Alexandria, but soon after was declared a "constructive total loss", and was scrapped in 1946.

[ 16 ] 4 December 1942: The Ambra left La Spezia to attack Algiers , carrying frogmen and two human torpedoes. Ten frogmen carrying limpet mines swam with the human torpedoes, but because of the distance, they did not reach the harbour, but attacked ships outside it, sank two and damaged two others.

17 December 1942: Six Italians on three torpedoes left the Olterra to attack the three British warships Nelson , Formidable , and Furious in Gibraltar. A British patrol boat killed one torpedo's crew (Lt. Visintini and Petty Officer Magro) with a depth charge . Their bodies were recovered, and their swimfins were taken and used by two of Gibraltar's British guard divers. Another British patrol boat spotted another torpedo, and chased and shot at it and captured its two crewmen. The remaining torpedo returned to the Olterra without its rear rider.

1943 [ edit ] 8 May 1943: Three Italian human torpedoes left the Olterra to attack Gibraltar in bad weather and sank two British freighters and an American Liberty ship . All returned safely to the Olterra .

This drawing shows the Norwegian tanker Thorshøvdi , broken in two by human torpedoes launched from the Italian base-ship Olterra , August 1943 May 1943: Borghese becomes unit commander when Forza returned to sea [ 17 ] 25 July 1943: Italian dictator Benito Mussolini was replaced by Field Marshal Pietro Badoglio as the head of the Italian Government.

9 July 1943: Xª MAS single frogman sank or crippled the ship Kaituna (4,917 tons) at Mersin in Turkey .

[ 18 ] 3 August 1943: In the evening, three Italian human torpedoes left the Olterra to attack Gibraltar. They sank three cargo ships, one of them an American Liberty and returned to the Olterra . One of the Italian divers was captured.

1 August 1943: Xª MAS single frogman sank or crippled the Norwegian cargo ship Fernplant (7,000 tons) at İskenderun in Turkey .

[ 18 ] Armistice [ edit ] 8 September 1943:  The new Badoglio government of Italy signed an armistice with the Allies.  The Olterra was towed into Gibraltar, and the British found what had happened in it. Further attacks on Gibraltar using the new and larger replacement for the SLC (the Siluro San Bartolomeo type), and a planned raid on New York City were called off due to the Italian surrender.

Summary of Allied ships sunk or damaged by Decima MAS [ edit ] Date Place Notes 26 March 1941 Suda Bay Cruiser HMS York (8,250 t standard displacement ) [ c ] Tanker Pericles (8,234 t) [ d ] 19 September 1941 Gibraltar Tanker Denby Dale (8,145 t) [ e ] Tanker Fiona Shell (2,445 t) [ f ] Motorship Durham (10,900 t) [ g ] 19 December 1941 Alexandria Battleship HMS Queen Elizabeth (30,600 t) [ h ] Battleship HMS Valiant (30,600 t) [ i ] Tanker Sagona (7,554 t) [ j ] Destroyer HMS Jervis (1,690 t) [ k ] 13 June 1942 Sebastopol Military transport (USSR) [ l ] 14 July 1942 Gibraltar Steamship Meta (1,575 t) [ m ] SS Empire Snipe (2,497 t) [ n ] Steamship Shuma (1,494 t) Steamship Baron Douglas (3,899 t) 29 August 1942 El Daba Destroyer HMS Eridge (1,050 t) [ o ] 15 September 1942 Gibraltar Steamship Raven's Point (1,787 t) [ p ] 12 December 1942 Algiers Steamship Ocean Vanquisher (7,174 t) [ q ] Steamship Berta (1,493 t) [ r ] Steamship Armattan (6,587 t) [ 19 ] Tanker Empire Centaur (7,041 t) (repaired) [ 19 ] USN Military Transport N.59 [ 19 ] 8 May 1943 Gibraltar Steamship Pat Harrison (U.S.) (7,191 t) [ s ] Steamship Mahsud (7,540 t) Steamship Camerata (4875 t) 30 June 1943 İskenderun Motorship Orion (Greek) (7,000 t) [ t ] 9 July 1943 Mersin Motorship Kaituna (4914 t) [ t ] 1 August 1943 İskenderun Motorship Fernplant (Norwegian) (7000 t) [ t ] 4 August 1943 Gibraltar Steamship Harrison Gray Otis (U.S.) (7,176 t) [ u ] Steamship Stanridge (5,975 t) [ v ] Tanker Thorshøvdi (Norwegian) (9,944 t) [ w ] Successor units [ edit ] Guardiamarina ( Ensign ) of the Barbarigo Battalion standing in viale Carso near piazza Bainsizza, in Rome, during a review parade by General der Luftwaffe Kurt Mälzer before being sent to face the Allied beachhead at Anzio-Nettuno , March 1944.

Following the armistice of Italy on 8 September 1943, the Xª MAS was disbanded.
The Badoglio government in the south of Italy under Allied occupation declared war on Germany and became a co-belligerent .
Some Decima MAS sailors joined the Allied cause to fight against Nazi Germany and what remained of the Axis as part of the Italian Co-Belligerent Navy .
A new unit was formed, led by Forza and joined by some of the pioneers such as de la Penne newly released from British POW camps .
The new unit was named Mariassalto , but continued to be an elite naval force mounting special operations at sea.

In the German-occupied north of Italy. Mussolini set up the Italian Social Republic ( Repubblica Sociale Italiana , or RSI) to continue the war as part of the Axis. Led by Borghese, Decima Flottiglia was revived, as part of the National Republican Navy ( Marina Nazionale Repubblicana ) of the RSI with its headquarters in Caserma del Muggiano , La Spezia . By the end of the war, it had over 18,000 members, and although Borghese conceived it as a purely naval unit, it gained a reputation as a savage pro-fascist, anti-communist, anti-resistance force in land campaigns alongside the German forces, under the command of SS General Karl Wolff .

Mariassalto [ edit ] Mariassalto Active October 1943–26 April 1945 Country Kingdom of Italy Branch Italian Co-Belligerent Navy Type Naval commandos Role Human torpedo Raiding Sabotage Equipment Chariot Engagements Raid on Genoa Raid on La Spezia Commanders Notable commanders Ernesto Forza Military unit The Mariassalto was set up at Taranto alongside the British frogman force in the Mediterranean. Forza was pleased to demonstrate Italian expertise in this area to the British, [ 20 ] and the group was also keen to be in action, though if they were caught they would almost certainly have been shot.

[ 21 ] In June 1944 came an opportunity to take action, in Operation QWZ, a joint mission against targets in La Spezia harbour.
The attack was against the Italian cruisers Bolzano and Gorizia , which had been taken by the Germans after the Italian surrender. This was to thwart a German plan to sink them where they would block the harbour entrance. The mission also aimed to attack German U-boats in the harbour. British chariots would attack the cruisers whilst Mariassalto's Gamma Frogmen would attack U-boats penned in the harbour.
On 2 June 1944 the Italian destroyer Grecale sailed from Bastia in Corsica to La Spezia carrying three speedboats, and Italian frogmen including Luigi Durand De La Penne , and two British chariots.
One chariot broke down and was abandoned, though the other successfully sank Bolzano . However, the Gamma men were unsuccessful in their attack on the U-boat pens. All the participants escaped, linking with partisan groups on land.

[ 21 ] In April 1945 a final mission, Operation Toast, was planned.

[ 22 ] This was aimed at sinking the newly converted shipping liner now the aircraft carrier Aquila , just completed in Genoa.
For this Mariassalto men would make use of two British chariots, as they had none of their own SLCs available.
On 18 April 1945 the destroyer Legionario , carrying two high-speed motorboats equipped with chariots sailed from Venice for Genoa led by Captain Chavasse SOE and Forza. Both chariots were deployed and succeeded in penetrating the defences but found the hull of Aquila so encrusted with barnacles and seaweed the limpet mines could not be attached to it. The frogmen had to lay the charges on the seafloor of the outer harbour mole and when the charge exploded as planned the ship remained afloat in spite of the attack. All of the frogmen escaped safely. The German commander never put his extensive demolition plans for Genoa into action and thus Aquila was never sunk as a blockade to the harbour.

Decima MAS (RSI) [ edit ] Decima Flottiglia MAS Active September 1943–26 April 1945 Country Italian Social Republic Branch Navy Type Marines Naval commandos Role Amphibious warfare Anti-partisan Close-quarters combat Counter-insurgency Counterintelligence Direct action Raiding Reconnaissance Sabotage Nickname(s) Xª MAS Motto(s) Memento Audere Semper (Remember to dare always) Commanders Notable commanders Junio Valerio Borghese Military unit Junio Valerio Borghese (right) and Umberto Bardelli of the Decima MAS.

Some Xª MAS men who were in German-occupied Italy remained part of the Axis forces, joining the Italian Social Republic under the command of Captain Borghese. His reputation and that of the Xª MAS enabled him to negotiate an agreement with the German forces that gave the Xª MAS significant autonomy, allowed them to fight under an Italian flag (under the command of the Germans), and not to be employed against other Italians. Borghese was recognized as the leader of the corps.

[ 23 ] Ideology [ edit ] The main themes in the Xª MAS's ideology became " honour " in defending Italy from the " betrayal " of the armistice with the Allies and a call to defend the territorial integrity of Italy against the Allies.
The corps had its own weekly magazine, L'orizzonte ("The Horizon"), in which authors such as Giovanni Preziosi wrote vehemently anti-Semitic articles about Jewish conspiracies . The magazine had problems in its distribution, as it was thought that Borghese's popularity among the Fascist hardliners might reduce Mussolini's influence.

[ 24 ] Hymn [ edit ] Quando pareva vinta Roma antica, sorse l'invitta decima legione; vinse sul campo il barbaro nemico, Roma riebbe pace con onore; quando l'ignobil 8 di settembre, abbandonò la patria il traditore, sorse dal mar la decima flottiglia, che prese l'armi al grido "per l'onore!".

Decima flottiglia nostra, che beffasti l'inghilterra, vittoriosa ad Alessandria, Malta, Suda e Gibilterra; vittoriosa già sul mare, ora pure sulla terra, vincerai!

Navi d'Italia che ci foste tolte, non in battaglia, ma col tradimento, nostri fratelli prigionieri o morti, noi vi facciamo questo giuramento: noi vi giuriamo che ritorneremo, là dove Dio volle il tricolore; noi vi giuriamo che combatteremo, fin quando avremo pace con onore.

Decima flottiglia nostra, che beffasti l'inghilterra, vittoriosa ad Alessandria, Malta, Algeri e Gibilterra; vittoriosa già sul mare, ora pure sulla terra, vincerai!

When ancient Rome seemed defeated, arose the invincible Tenth Legion ; On the field she defeated the barbarous enemy, Rome regained peace with honor; when, [in] the ignoble September Eight, the traitor abandoned the Fatherland, arose from the sea the Tenth Flotilla who took up arms with the cry "for the honor".

Our [glorious] Tenth Fleet, that humiliated England, victorious at Alexandria , Malta , Souda and Gibraltar ; already victorious over the sea, now as well on earth, you will win!

[For] Ships of Italy that were wiped away, not in battle but by treachery, our fellows prisoners or dead, we make this pledge for you: We swear that we will return later where God wanted the Tricolour; We swear that we will fight, till we'll have peace with honor.

Our [glorious] tenth Flotilla, that humiliated England, victorious at Alexandria, Malta, Algiers and Gibraltar; already victorious over the sea, now as well on earth, you will win!

Relations with the RSI [ edit ] Marines of the Decima , in 1944 Relationships with the Italian Social Republic were not easy. On 14 January 1944 Benito Mussolini arrested Borghese while receiving him in Gargnano , in order to gain direct control of the Xª MAS. Word of the arrest reached the officers of the Decima , who considered marching on Mussolini's capital at Salò . However, the German command used their influence to have Borghese released, as they needed the equipment, expertise and manpower of the Xª MAS as an anti-partisan force.

[ 25 ] Naval actions [ edit ] The Xª MAS (RSI) took little part in the war at sea. Its equipment had been abandoned in the south, and its naval activities were frustrated by Allied action.

[ 20 ] In November 1944 four frogmen (Malacarne, Sorgetti, Bertoncin, Pavone), who had stayed under German command, were delivered by fast motorboat and swam into Livorno harbor to set up a secret sabotage base, but were captured.

[ 26 ] Anti-partisan actions [ edit ] Ferruccio Nazionale, Italian partisan hanged by the Xª MAS in Ivrea . The sign says: "He attempted to shoot the Decima " The Decima was mostly employed in anti-partisan actions on land, rather than against the Allies at sea. Their actions were mostly reprisals following the massacre of soldiers of "Decima" by partisans– see Bardelli's homicide. Their anti-partisan actions usually took place in small villages, where the partisans were stronger.

Forno 68 persons, civilians and some partisans, were killed by SS men and Xª MAS forces.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Guadine Random violence to terrorize a population believed to be supporting the rebels, almost complete destruction of the village by fire.

[ 29 ] Borgo Ticino Together with the SS, murdered 12 civilians, pillage and destruction of the village by fire because three German soldiers had been wounded by partisans.

[ 30 ] Castelletto Ticino To give a demonstration of firmness against crime, an Xª MAS officer had five petty criminals publicly shot, in front of a large crowd.

[ 31 ] Crocetta del Montello : Episodes of torture with whips and gasoline and summary executions of partisans.

[ 32 ] Defense of Italian national borders [ edit ] However, the Xª MAS units also earned a good combat reputation fighting on the frontline against the Allies at Anzio and on the Gothic Line . In the last months of the war Xª MAS units were dispatched to the eastern Italian border against Josip Broz Tito 's partisans who marched into Istria and Venezia Giulia .

Demobilization [ edit ] On 26 April 1945, in what is now the Piazza della Repubblica in Milan , Borghese finally ordered the Xª MAS to disband. He was soon arrested by partisans, but rescued by OSS officer James Angleton , who dressed him in an American uniform and drove him to Rome for interrogation by the Allies. Borghese was tried and convicted of war crimes, and sentenced to 12 years imprisonment, but was released from jail by the Italian Supreme Court in 1949. The Americans were keenly interested in infiltrating the Italian Communist groups, something which Borghese had done, and he was enlisted to help create counterintelligence units for the Americans.

Organization of RSI X a MAS [ edit ] Naval units Combat swimmers and frogmen 1st Combat Group 'Barbarigo', 'Lupo' battalions 'Nuotatori Paracadutisti ' Parachute battalion 'Colleoni' artillery battalion 'Freccia' Engineer battalion – 1st company only 2nd Combat Group 'Valanga' Assault Engineer battalion 'Sagittario', 'Freccia', and 'Fulmine' battalions 'Castagnacci' recruitment and replacement battalion 'Da Giussano' artillery battalion 'Freccia' engineer battalion – 2nd and 3rd companies 8 independent infantry battalions 5 independent infantry companies Women's Auxiliary Service After 1945 [ edit ] Further information: Italian commando frogmen In 2006 the admiralty of the Italian republic recognized the Xth M.A.S. RSI veterans as combatants of WWII and gave the association the battle flag.

Counter-operations against Italian frogmen by British frogmen in Gibraltar was the subject of a 1958 British film The Silent Enemy based on the exploits of the team of Lionel Crabb .

Today the Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei is the frogman corp currently serving the Italian Republic .

In popular culture [ edit ] The Decima MAS' Gibraltar operations are depicted in the 1952 Italian film I sette dell'Orsa maggiore and the 1958 British film The Silent Enemy .

The Uniforms of the Decima Flottiglia MAS are used by the collaborationists in the film Salò o le 120 giornate di Sodoma .

The Raid on Alexandria in 1941 is depicted in the 1962 British film The Valiant .

In the Italian film My Brother is an Only Child , set in the 1960s, a young Communist refers to the Decima Mas, and their "dungeon" on Via Tasso .

Prince Valerio Borghese escaped capital punishment after the war (thanks to James Jesus Angleton of the CIA) in the cold war context and remained an active neo-fascist activist: He attempted a failed fascist coup in the early 1970s (the infamous golpe Borghese ).
The Golpe Borghese and its leader are spoofed in a film by Mario Monicelli called Vogliamo i Colonelli ( We want the Colonels ) where Borghese part is played by Italian actor Ugo Tognazzi impersonating an ultra right-wing parliament representative called Tritoni (Triton or Newt). One of the best scenes features a boisterous and crazy assault diver and parachute Commando frogman called Barbacane (Giuseppe Maffioli).

See also [ edit ] Underwater diving portal Italian auxiliary ship Olterra – Undercover Italian auxiliary ship from World War II Brandenburgers – Members of the German Brandenburg special forces unit during WWII Fukuryu – Japanese divers intended to manually detonate mines on invading ships Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei – Italian special forces diving unit, the COMSUBIN MAS (motorboat) – Boat used by the Italian Royal Navy Military history of Gibraltar during World War II Notes [ edit ] ^ Students at the Gamma training school, which began in September 1940, had a stringent ten-month course; about fifty graduates undertook operations during the war.

[ 6 ] ^ The highest number awarded to personnel serving in any single unit of the Italian armed forces.

^ Disabled by two MT explosive speedboats piloted by Lt.(jg) Angelo Cabrini and SCPO Tullio Tedeschi. Abandoned and never repaired.

^ Sunk by an MT explosive speedboat piloted by PO2 Lino Beccati.

^ Sunk by an explosive charge positioned by the human torpedo piloted by Lt.(jg) Licio Visintini and PO1 Giovanni Magro.

^ Disabled by an explosive charge positioned by the human torpedo piloted by Lt.(jg) Amedeo Vesco and PO1 Antonio Zozzoli. Later repaired and returned to service.

^ Damaged by an explosive charge positioned by the human torpedo piloted by Lt.(jg) Decio Catalano and PO1 Giuseppe Giannoni. Later repaired and returned to service.

^ Sunk in shallow water by an explosive charge positioned by the human torpedo piloted by Lt.(jg) Antonio Marceglia and PO1 Spartaco Schergat. Later raised from the bottom and repaired.

^ Sunk in shallow water by an explosive charge positioned by the human torpedo piloted by Lt.(jg) Luigi Durand De La Penne and MCPO Emilio Bianchi. Later raised from the bottom and repaired.

^ Damaged by an explosive charge positioned by the human torpedo piloted by Lt.(jg) Vittorio Martellotta and PO1 Mario Marino. Later repaired and returned to service.

^ Damaged by an explosive charge positioned by the human torpedo piloted by Lt.(jg) Vittorio Martellotta and PO1 Mario Marino. Repaired and returned to service.

^ Damaged by MTSM 210 torpedo speedboat piloted by Lt.(jg) Aldo Massarini and PO1 Eliodoro Grillo. Later sunk by German aircraft while being towed back to port.

^ All damaged by limpet mines positioned by assault frogmen (Lt.(jg) Agostino Straulino and Giorgio Baucier, SCPO Alfredo Schiavoni, PO1 Alessandro Bianchini, E4 Giovanni Lucchetti, Carlo Del Valle, Giuseppe Ferodi, Vago Giari and Evideo Boscolo, E3 Bruno Di Lorenzo, Rodolfo Lugano and Carlo Bucovaz).

^ Repaired and returned to service in October 1942.

^ Disabled by MTSM 210 torpedo speedboat piloted by Lt.(jg) Piero Carminati and E4 Cesare Sani, never repaired.

^ Sunk by limpet mines positioned by assault frogman E3 Bruno Di Lorenzo.

^ Sunk during a combined raid of human torpedoes (Lt.(jg) Giulio Arena and E4 Ferdinando Cocchi; Ens. Giorgio Reggioli and E4 Colombo Pamolli) and assault frogmen (Lt.(jg) Agostino Morello, PO1 Oreste Botti, E4 Giuseppe Ferodi and Evideo Boscolo, Sgt. (Army) Luigi Rolfini and Alberto Evangelisti).

^ Sunk ^ All disabled by explosive charges positioned by three human torpedoes (Lt.Ernesto Notari and E4 Ario Lazzari; Lt.(jg) Camillo Tadini and E4 Salvatore Mattera; Lt.(jg) Vittorio Cella and E4 Eusebio Montalenti.

^ a b c Sunk by limpet mines positioned by assault frogman Lt. ( Blackshirts ) Luigi Ferraro.

^ Sunk by an explosive charge positioned by the human torpedo piloted by Lt. Ernesto Notari and E4 Andrea Gianoli.

^ Sunk by an explosive charge positioned by the human torpedo piloted by Lt.(jg) Camillo Tadini and E4 Salvatore Matera.

^ Sunk by an explosive charge positioned by the human torpedo piloted by Lt.(jg) Vittorio Cella and E4 Eusebio Montalenti.

Citations [ edit ] ^ [1] Archived 25 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ [2] Archived 19 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ Quick, D. (1970).

"A History Of Closed Circuit Oxygen Underwater Breathing Apparatus" .

Royal Australian Navy, School of Underwater Medicine .

RANSUM -1-70. Archived from the original on 9 May 2008 . Retrieved 20 March 2009 .

^ "Trenches on the Web – Special Feature: Assault on the Viribus Unitis" . Worldwar1.com . Retrieved 18 August 2015 .

^ a b Crociani & Battistelli 2013 , pp. 12–13.

^ Crociani & Battistelli 2013 , p. 12.

^ Crociani & Battistelli 2013 , pp. 13–14.

^ Crociani & Battistelli 2013 , p. 15.

^ Crociani & Battistelli 2013 , Endpaper.

^ "Principal Operations of the 10th Light Flotilla" .

www.regiamarina.net . Archived from the original on 17 April 2009.

^ a b pp. 6–11, issue 39, Historical Diving Times ^ Our Name Wasn't Written – a Malta Memoir , Caroline Vernon , Canberra, 1992, p. 36 ISBN 0-646-07198-X ^ "Ernesto FORZA – Capitano di Fregata" . Archived from the original on 21 June 2007 . Retrieved 17 September 2009 .

^ Kemp p. 51 ^ "Scire' 2008 : Archaeological Survey" (PDF) . Iantdexpeditions.com . Retrieved 18 August 2015 .

^ "HMS Eridge, escort destroyer" . Naval-history.net . Retrieved 18 August 2015 .

^ Kemp p. 57 ^ a b Jørgensen 2005, p. 93.

^ a b c Damaged ^ a b Kemp p. 61 ^ a b Kemp p. 63 ^ [3] [ dead link ] ^ "Il Mito della difesa del fronte orientale" . Digilander.libero.it . Retrieved 18 August 2015 .

^ "Junio Valerio Borghese" . Digilander.libero.it . Retrieved 18 August 2015 .

^ "Junio Valerio Borghese" . Digilander.libero.it . Retrieved 18 August 2015 .

^ pp. 16–20, issue 41, The Historical Diving Times , ISSN 1368-0390 ^ "static.repubblica.it – Documento Tribunale Militare di La Spezia" (PDF) (in Italian) . Retrieved 1 September 2012 .

^ "Junio Valerio Borghese" . Digilander.libero.it . Retrieved 18 August 2015 .

^ "Stragi Guadine" . Digilander.libero.it . Retrieved 18 August 2015 .

^ "Stragi eccidio di borgo ticino" . Digilander.libero.it . Retrieved 18 August 2015 .

^ "Stragi Castelletto Ticino" . Digilander.libero.it . Retrieved 18 August 2015 .

^ "L'eccidio di Crocetta del Montello (TV)" . Digilander.libero.it . Retrieved 18 August 2015 .

References [ edit ] Caruana, J. (1991). "Decima Flotilla Decimated".

Warship International .

XXVIII (2): 178– 186.

ISSN 0043-0374 .

Crociani, P.; Battistelli, P. P. (2013).

Italian Navy & Air Force Elite Units & Special Forces1940–45 . Elite (No. 191) (ePub ed.). Oxford: Osprey.

ISBN 978-1-78096-372-3 .

Jørgensen, Sven Erik.

"The First Frogmen 2: Naval Operations with the SLC" (PDF) .

X-Ray Mag: International Dive Magazine .

8 . Copenhagen: AquaScope Media ApS: 85– 93.

ISSN 1901-9238 .

Further reading [ edit ] " Frogmen First Battles " by retired U.S Captain William Schofield's book ( ISBN 0-8283-2088-8 ) " The Black Prince and the Sea Devils: The Story of Valerio Borghese and the Elite Units of the Decima Mas ", by Jack Greene and Alessandro Massignani, Cambridge, Mass.: Da Capo Press , 2004 284 pages, hardcover ( ISBN 0-306-81311-4 ) " Sea Devils " by J. Valerio Borghese, translated into English by James Cleugh, with introduction by the United States Naval Institute ( ISBN 1-55750-072-X ) Paul Kemp : Underwater Warriors (1997) ISBN 1-85409-455-6 External links [ edit ] The origin of the Xa Flottiglia MAS La Decima MAS (in Italian) [4] Image of Italian wartime frogman with rebreather whose breathing tube and fullface mask resemble an old type of gasmask , but with the mask's blowoff valve blanked off.

v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6bf6f698f4‐z7tzc
Cached time: 20250818163530
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.207 seconds
Real time usage: 1.464 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10731/1000000
Revision size: 57030/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 596363/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19945/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 116535/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.594/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20331482/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  991.569      1 -total
 17.16%  170.155      2 Template:Reflist
 12.58%  124.751      3 Template:Infobox_military_unit
 11.01%  109.135     40 Template:Lang
 10.18%  100.978      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  9.70%   96.210      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  9.11%   90.371     35 Template:Navbox
  9.09%   90.173      4 Template:Short_description
  7.93%   78.663      3 Template:Infobox
  6.85%   67.914      3 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1589875:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818163530 and revision id 1284041695. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Decima_Flottiglia_MAS&oldid=1284041695 " Categories : Military units and formations of Italy in World War II Italian special forces of World War II MAS fleet Military units and formations established in 1941 Military units and formations disestablished in 1943 Military units and formations established in 1943 Military units and formations disestablished in 1945 Gibraltar in World War II Frogman operations 1941 establishments in Italy 1943 disestablishments in Italy 1943 establishments in Italy 1945 disestablishments in Italy Naval special forces units and formations Disbanded marine forces Italian Marines Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value CS1: unfit URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2015 CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2024 Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 Articles containing Italian-language text Articles with Italian-language sources (it) This page was last edited on 5 April 2025, at 05:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Decima Flottiglia MAS 18 languages Add topic

