Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical overview Toggle Historical overview subsection 1.1 Early manufacturing process 1.2 Unionization efforts 2 References and footnotes 3 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Shingle weaver Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Person involved in making roofing shingles View of shingle weaver Floyd W. Williams clipping shingles - Lester Shingle Mill, Sweet Home, Linn County, Oregon.

A shingle weaver "weaving" shingles into bundles.

A shingle weaver (US) or shingler [ 1 ] (UK) is an employee of a wood products mill who engages in the creation of wooden roofing shingles or the closely related product known as " shakes ." [ 2 ] In the Pacific Northwest region of the United States, historically the leading producer of this product, such shingles are generally made of Western Red Cedar , an aromatic and disease-resistant wood indigenous to the area. The use of the term "weaver" for a shingle maker related to the way in which the workers fitted the shingles together in bundles but the meaning has extended to anyone who works in a shingle mill.

[ 3 ] Historical overview [ edit ] Early manufacturing process [ edit ] During the late 19th and early 20th Century, the production of wooden roofing shingles was an extremely dangerous process in which the shingle weaver hand-fed pieces of raw wood onto an automated saw . Despite the danger of the profession, the industry was a large one throughout Washington and Oregon , and by 1893 Washington state alone had 150 mills which converted Western Red Cedar into shingles and shakes for the roofing and siding of American homes.

The craft of shingle making demanded a high skill level and considerable manual dexterity.

[ 4 ] An alternate origin for the name "weaver" is that it was this nimble motion of the hands of the sawyers around the spinning blades of their saws that provided the origin of the term for the maker of shingles — the woodworkers being likened to skilled operators of looms .

Sunset magazine described the job of the shingle weavers for its readers: "The saw on his left sets the pace. If the singing blade rips 50 rough shingles off the block every minute, the sawyer must reach over to its teeth 50 times in 60 seconds; if the automatic carriage feeds the odorous wood 60 times into the hungry teeth, 60 times he must reach over, turn the shingle, trim its edge on the gleaming saw in front of him, cut the narrow strip containing the knot hole with two quick movements of his right hand, and toss the completed board down the chute to the packers, meanwhile keeping eyes and ears open for the sound that asks him to feed a new block into the untiring teeth. Hour after hour the shingle weaver's hands and arms, plain, unarmored flesh and blood, are staked against the screeching steel that cares not what it severs. Hour after hour the steel sings its crescendo note as it bites into the wood, the sawdust cloud thickens, the wet sponge under the sawyer's nose fills with fine particles.

"If 'cedar asthma,' the shingle weaver's occupational disease , does not get him, the steel will. Sooner or later he reaches over a little too far, the whirling blade tosses drops of deep red into the air, and a finger, a hand, or part of an arm comes sliding down the slick chute." [ 5 ] Unionization efforts [ edit ] The first attempt to unionize shingle weavers came in Michigan in 1886. This union lasted only a few years, due in large measure to the industry moving westward to the new state of Washington, which entered the United States as the 42nd state in November 1889.

[ 6 ] In the Pacific Northwest, shingle weavers began to unionize as early as 1890, when the shingle weavers of the Puget Sound area of Western Washington banded together to establish the West Coast Shingle Weavers’ Union.

[ 6 ] In short order, locals of the union were established in Ballard , Tacoma , Snohomish , Arlington , Chehalis , and Sedro-Woolley .

[ 6 ] This first foray into craft unionism proved to be short-lived, however, as an ill-timed strike crushed by an economic downturn in 1893 effectively put an end to the organizing effort.

[ 6 ] In 1901 a more successful attempt at unionization of the shingle makers' trade was made with the establishment of the International Shingle Weavers of America .

In January 1903 a newspaper called The Shingle Weaver was established in Ballard as the official journal of the new union. The paper later moved to Everett, Washington and finally to Seattle during the course of its decade of publication before changing its name to The Timber Worker in February 1913.

[ 7 ] In 1915, a wage cut for shingle weavers in the mills of Everett, Washington began a process of events which led to a strike the following year by the union the Industrial Workers of the World and its suppression by force and violence. On November 5, 1916, events culminated in a pitched gun battle known to history as the " Everett massacre ," in which 5 strikers and 2 so-called "citizen deputies" were killed and approximately 45 others wounded.

References and footnotes [ edit ] ^ Waters, Colin (2002).

A Dictionary of Old Trades, Titles and Occupations , Newbury: Countryside Books, p. 257.

ISBN 978-1-85306-794-5 . The Oxford English Dictionary supports this usage and adds the meaning of one who applies shingles to houses.

^ In general, shingles are thinner pieces of wood which have been sawed on both sides, while shake is thicker material that is rough split on one side and sawed on the other. Shake may also be rough split on both sides of the board, in which case it would not have been made by a "shingle weaver." See: Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau, "Frequently Asked Questions." Archived 2010-02-09 at the Wayback Machine ^ George Milton Janes, "The Shingle Weavers", The Quarterly Journal of the University of North Dakota , Vol. 11, no. 2. January 1921. 135. Print ^ Harvey O'Connor, Revolution in Seattle: A Memoir.

New York: Monthly Review Press, 1964; pg. 30.

^ Sunset magazine, quoted in O'Connor, Revolution in Seattle, page 30.

^ a b c d Philip C. Emerson, "The International Shingle Weavers of America: An Historical Essay" , Seattle General Strike Project , University of Washington, 1999.

^ A few surviving copies of The Shingle Weaver (1903-1913) are available on microfilm from the University of Washington in Seattle and the University of Illinois in Urbana . For a bibliographic record, see http://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn90099723/holdings/ Further reading [ edit ] Elwood R. Maunder, Western Red Cedar: The Shingle Weaver's Story: An Interview with Harold M. Stilson, Sr.

Santa Cruz, CA: Forest History Society, 1975.

v t e Woodworking Overviews History Glossary Wood ( lumber ) Occupations Boat building Bow and arrow Bush carpentry Cabinetry Caning Carpentry Certosina Chainsaw carving Chip carving Ébéniste Fretwork Intarsia Japanese carpentry Khatam Kohlrosing Log building Luthier Marquetry Millwork Pallet crafting Parquetry Pyrography Relief carving Root carving Segmented turning Shingle weaving Shipbuilding Spindle turning Timber framing Treen Whittling Wood carving Woodturning Woods Soft Cedar ( Calocedrus , Cedrus ) Cypress Douglas fir Fir Juniper Larch Kauri Pine Rimu Spruce Yew Hard Afromosia Alder Andiroba Anigre Ash Apple Aspen Avodire Balsa Beech Bilinga Birch African Blackwood Australian Blackwood Boxwood Bubinga Camphor Cedrela Cherry Chestnut Cocobolo Cumaru Ebony Elm Eucalyptus Hazel Hickory Hornbeam Idigbo Imbuia Ipê Iroko Jarrah Jelutong Lignum vitae Linden (lime, basswood) Lovoa Merbau Mahogany ( American , African ) Maple Meranti Oak Padauk Pear Plum Poplar Purpleheart Ovankol Ramin Red Quebracho Rosewood Rubberwood Sapele Teak Totara Utile Walnut Wenge Willow Zebrano Engineered Cross-laminated Glue laminated Hardboard MDF OSB Particle board Plywood Wood-plastic composite Tools Abrasives Axe Adze Burnisher Chisel Drawknife Drill Fence Float Gimlet Gauge Impact driver Janka hardness test Jointer Mallet Milling machine Mitre box Rasp Router Shaper Sandpaper Square ( Carpenters , Combination , Miter , Speed , Try ) Thickness planer Timber-framing Veneer hammer Vise Warrington hammer Winding sticks Wood scribe Workbench Clamps Band clamp C-clamp F-clamp Flooring clamp Gripe Holdfast Mitre clamp Pipe clamp Sawbuck Saws Backsaw Bandsaw Bow Bucksaw Chainsaw Circular Compass Coping Crosscut Frame Fretsaw Hand saw Jigsaw Keyhole Miter Ripsaw Scroll Table Veneer Whipsaw Planes Bedrock plane Block plane Chamfer plane Compass plane Finger plane Fore plane Grooving plane Jack plane Japanese plane Jointer plane Moulding plane Razee plane Rebate plane Router plane Scrub plane Shoulder plane Smoothing plane Spokeshave Surform Geometry Joints Birdsmouth Biscuit Box Bridle Butt Butterfly Coping Crown of thorns Dado Dovetail Finger Groove Halved Hammer-headed tenon Knee Lap Mason's mitre Miter Mortise and tenon Rabbet/Rebate Scarf Splice Tongue and groove Profiles Bead Bevel Chamfer Ogee Ogive Ovolo Surface piecing Binding Edge banding Intarsia Marquetry Oystering Parquetry Purfling Treatments Adhesive French polish Heat bending Lacquer Oil Paint Paint stripper Steam bending Thermal Varnish Wax Wood drying Wood preservation Wood stain Wood finishing Organizations American Association of Woodturners Architectural Woodwork Institute British Woodworking Federation Building and Wood Workers' International Caricature Carvers of America International Federation of Building and Wood Workers National Wood Carvers Association Society of Wood Engravers Timber Framers Guild Conversion Chainsaw mill Hewing Sawmill Whipsaw Wood splitting Flat sawing Quarter sawing Rift sawing Techniques Frame and panel Frameless construction Green woodworking Category WikiProject Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shingle_weaver&oldid=1281157759 " Categories : Woodworking Sawmill technology Timber preparation Forestry occupations Shingle weavers Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 March 2025, at 17:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shingle weaver Add languages Add topic

