Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Establishment 2 Philosophy 3 Activities 4 Influence 5 Sources 6 Publications by the group 7 References Toggle the table of contents Yoru no Kai Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art research and discussion group in Japan Yoru no Kai (夜の会, "Night Society," est. 1947/1948) was a short-lived but highly influential art research and discussion group founded in early postwar Japan by two major theorists, Kiyoteru Hanada and Tarō Okamoto . While Hanada was a literary critic steeped in Marxist theory, Okamoto was an avant-garde artist well versed in Surrealism and ethnography in the mold of Bataille 's College of Sociology . The group's tenet centers on its staunch rejection of "old familiar art" and earnest "exploration of a new art," as their manifesto radically called for: "We must destroy everything and create everything." [ 1 ] Yoru no Kai offered an early important venue to discuss possible new directions in art and culture through public debates, member meetings, and publications. Although the group members were primarily those in literature, it embraced an interdisciplinary goal, collaborating with the artists collective Seiki no Kai (Century Society) and later recasting itself as Abangyarudo Geijutsu Kenkyūkai (Avant-garde Art Study Group). In doing so, they exerted a significant influence that would be felt into the 1950s, as seen in the emergence of Reportage painters and the formation of Jikken Kōbō .

Establishment [ edit ] Okamoto and Hanada decided to form Yoru no Kai following the 1947 publication of Hanada's volume, Sakuran no ronri (錯乱の論理 "The Logic of Chaos"), which resonated with Okamoto's own viewpoints. A group assembled by Okamoto and Hanada met for the first time in May 1947 in the basement of a burned out building in Tokyo . They switched meeting locations for the first few sessions, meeting at Hanada's home and at Okamoto's studio in Kaminoge on the outskirts of Tokyo.

[ 2 ] The name of the group came from a 1947 painting by Okamoto titled Yoru ("Night") that hung on the wall of his studio at the time.

The group was formally inaugurated in January, 1948.

[ 3 ] In February, they began holding their formal meetings twice a month on Monday nights, at the French restaurant Mon Ami in Nakano, Tokyo , designed by Frank Lloyd Wright .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Early participants were personally selected by Hanada, and at the first meeting they included Hiroshi Noma , Rinzō Shiina , Yutaka Haniya , Haruo Umezaki , Kiichi Sasaki, Hideto Nakano, and Tōzaburō Ono . Later on, Kōbō Abe and Hiroshi Sekine would also join, and many artists and critics would participate.

[ 4 ] However, besides Okamoto, all of the founding members of Yoru no Kai were figures affiliated with the literary world.

[ 4 ] Many of them were prominent writers who would become known as the Daiichijisengo-ha Sakka (第一次戦後派作家 " The First Generation of Postwar Writers "). Many of them were also contributing writers for the publication Sōgō Bunka ("Syncretic Culture") that had launched in 1947 and was published by the group Sōgō Bunka Kyōkai ("Association of Syncretic Culture").

[ 6 ] Hanada himself had been part of Sōgō Bunka Kyōkai prior to forming Yoru no Kai.

[ 7 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Yoru no Kai edited and published one volume, released in 1949, titled Atarashii Geijutsu no Tankyū (新しい芸術の探究, "Exploration of a New Art").

[ 8 ] The volume is a collection of essays and debates by Yoru no Kai members, and reveals the group's goals and philosophy. The introduction is considered by some scholars to act as their manifesto . In it, the group asserts their desire to search for a new artistic paradigm that made sense in the new, postwar climate in Japan – a goal that involved breaking with the past completely.

[ 1 ] They wrote: "At this place of creation, we will not be taken in by the exaltation of old familiar art in the name of enlightening the masses or permit the imitation of new art in advanced nations under the pretense of formal investigation. We must destroy everything and create everything." [ 1 ] Yoru no Kai's discussions were often framed by Marxist and Surrealist theory.

[ 7 ] In addition to investigating new frameworks for postwar art and culture, Hanada brought to Yoru no Kai ideas of the importance of Marxist collective production that he had introduced earlier, to Sōgō Bunka Kyōkai. The idea was that the art world of the postwar period would remain fluid, flexible, and collective, rather than static and medium-specific, as art production had been during the wartime years.

[ 7 ] Part of this fluidity and flexibility was embodied by Hanada and Okamoto's overlapping and complementary philosophies about the necessity for dialectical opposition in the arts. Okamoto's theory of Taikyokushugi ("Theory of Polar Opposites") encouraged preserving tensions between abstraction and representation; Hanada believed inner and outer reality existed in dialectical tension.

[ 6 ] These beliefs likely contributed to the format of debate and discussion at Yoru no Kai meetings. As Hanada argued, "revolutionary art is born out of vigorous art movements that are advanced by merciless confrontations between avant-garde artists." [ 9 ] He thus advocated for collectivism and opposition within the meetings themselves, and reinforced that verbal debates were necessary for new art.

Activities [ edit ] Yoru no Kai's primary activities involved hosting serialized public debates at Mon Ami with discussion open to attendees.

[ 6 ] Topics of debate at first included groundbreaking artistic and cultural theories posited by Hanada and Okamoto, such as Okamoto's Taikyokushugi ("Theory of Polar Opposites").

[ 6 ] The group also debated and discussed broad issues related to arts and culture, such as Socialist realism , theology , fiction , and humanity.

[ 10 ] Although early on Yoru no Kai members found common ground in their shared interest in Communism , by May 1949, Yoru no Kai had largely dissolved due to internal arguments surrounding Communist politics.

[ 11 ] [ 7 ] However, many of the members, including Hanada and Okamoto, remained active in a loosely affiliated group with which Yoru no Kai had collaborated, known as Seiki no Kai (active until May 1951).

[ 12 ] The volume Atarashii Geijutsu no Tankyū (1949) remains one of the best records of the Yoru no Kai's activities, as it records some of their most significant debates and discussions.

Influence [ edit ] Within the early postwar period in Japan, which was characterized by an abundance of small artistic groups, Yoru no Kai has become well known as a representative avant-garde group and its influence on postwar art has been acknowledged.

[ 13 ] Although Yoru no Kai was only active for a brief period of time, it facilitated key exchanges between artists and writers and introduced young creators to avant-garde ideas. According to art critic Shin'ichi Segi, who participated in Yoru no Kai meetings, "the atmosphere of the group was salon-like, it was a place where members exchanged opinions with each other, but from the public format, the result was that it served the role of spreading enlightenment." [ 11 ] Yoru no Kai was especially influential for the other avant-garde groups that it catalyzed.

[ 6 ] In 1949, after Yoru no Kai had dissolved, Hanada and Okamoto went on to create the Abangyarudo Geijutsu Kenkyūkai (Avant-garde Art Study Group), which was designed to mentor young artists and critics.

[ 7 ] Among other activities, the group held a critique of artworks at Kifukuji in Tokyo .

[ 6 ] The following year, the group merged with another group known as Seiki no Kai ("Century Society") that had been established in 1948 by Kōbō Abe and some younger artists who also participated in Yoru no Kai.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Many young artists who would become prominent in the postwar art world attended or participated in Yoru no Kai, Abangyarudo Geijutsu Kenkyūkai, and Seiki no Kai , including Tatsuo Ikeda , and Jikken Kōbō members Shōzō Kitadai , Hideko Fukushima , and Katsuhiro Yamaguchi .

[ 6 ] With its emphasis on artistic exchange as a means of forging new paths in art, Yoru no Kai could also be seen as an early example of – or early attempt at – the "activity-based collectivism" that would grow over the course of the 1950s with the activities of groups such as Jikken Kōbō and Gutai , and that would come to dominate Japanese avant-garde art during the 1960s.

[ 16 ] Sources [ edit ] 桂川寬　『廃墟の前衛 : 回想の戦後美術』東京: 一葉社、 2004 瀬木 慎一　『戦後空白期の美術』東京: 思潮社、 1996 鳥羽耕史「〈世紀の会〉と安部公房を語る：桂川寬氏インタビュー」『言語文化研究』11 (2004) 鳥羽耕史　「〈夜の会〉〈世紀の会〉〈 綜合文化協会〉活動年表」『徳島大学国語国文学』17 (2004) 成相肇「夜の会」『artscape』 https://artscape.jp/artword/index.php/%E5%A4%9C%E3%81%AE%E4%BC%9A Yoshida, K.

Avant-garde art and nondominant thought in postwar Japan: image, matter, separation.

New York: Routledge, 2021.

Yoshida, Ken. "In Focus: Artists' Groups and Collectives in Postwar Japan." From Postwar to Postmodern: Art in Japan 1945-1989 , edited by Doryun Chong, Michio Hayashi, Kenji Kajiya, and Fumihiko Sumitomo, 39-40. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 2012.

「Art Wiki: 夜の会」『美術手帖』 https://bijutsutecho.com/artwiki/28 Publications by the group [ edit ] 夜の会編『新しい藝術の探求』東京：月曜書房、1949 References [ edit ] ^ a b c K. Yoshida, Avant-garde art and nondominant thought in postwar Japan: image, matter, separation (New York: Routledge, 2021), 25.

^ 鳥羽耕史　「〈夜の会〉〈世紀の会〉〈 綜合文化協会〉活動年表」『徳島大学国語国文学』17 (2004), p. 16.

^ 鳥羽耕史　「〈夜の会〉〈世紀の会〉〈 綜合文化協会〉活動年表」, p. 18 ^ a b c 成相肇「夜の会」『artscape』 https://artscape.jp/artword/index.php/%E5%A4%9C%E3%81%AE%E4%BC%9A ^ 鳥羽耕史　「〈夜の会〉〈世紀の会〉〈 綜合文化協会〉活動年表」, p. 15, p. 19 ^ a b c d e f g "夜の会" .

美術手帖 (in Japanese) . Retrieved 2021-10-01 .

^ a b c d e Ken Yoshida, "In Focus: Artists' Groups and Collectives in Postwar Japan," in From Postwar to Postmodern: Art in Japan 1945-1989 , ed. Doryun Chong et al. (New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 2012), 39.

^ 鳥羽耕史　「〈夜の会〉〈世紀の会〉〈 綜合文化協会〉活動年表」,  p. 24 ^ 桂川寬　『廃墟の前衛 : 回想の戦後美術』東京 : 一葉社、 2004, p. 20 ^ 鳥羽耕史　「〈夜の会〉〈世紀の会〉〈 綜合文化協会〉活動年表」, p. 20 ^ a b 桂川寬　『廃墟の前衛 : 回想の戦後美術』, p. 21 ^ 鳥羽耕史　「〈夜の会〉〈世紀の会〉〈 綜合文化協会〉活動年表」, p. 33 ^ 鳥羽耕史「〈世紀の会〉と安部公房を語る：桂川寬氏インタビュー」『言語文化研究』11 (2004), p. 115 ^ "Modern Art in Post World War II Japan | Princeton University Library" .

library.princeton.edu . Retrieved 2021-10-01 .

^ 瀬木 慎一　『戦後空白期の美術』東京 : 思潮社、 1996, p. 91 ^ Reiko Tomii, "Introduction: Collectivism in Twentieth-Century Japanese Art with a Focus on Operational Aspects of Dantai " in positions 21:2 (Spring 2013), 234.

v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Yoru_no_Kai&oldid=1286094080 " Categories : 1947 establishments in Japan Arts organizations established in 1947 Japanese contemporary art Aftermath of World War II in Japan Marxist organizations Surrealist groups Hidden categories: CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 April 2025, at 18:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Yoru no Kai Add languages Add topic

