Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work 3 See also 4 Notes 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ahmad ibn Yusuf 17 languages العربية বাংলা Català Deutsch فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kurdî მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Русский کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Arab mathematician Abu Ja'far Ahmad ibn Yusuf ibn Ibrahim ibn Tammam al-Siddiq Al-Baghdadi ( Arabic : أبو جعفر أحمد بن يوسف بن ابراهيم بن تمام الصديق البغدادي ; 835–912), known in the West by his Latinized name Hametus , was a Muslim Arab mathematician , like his father Yusuf ibn Ibrahim ( Arabic : يوسف بن ابراهيم الصدَيق البغدادي ).

Life [ edit ] Ahmad ibn Yusuf was born in Baghdad and moved with his father to Damascus in 839. He later moved to Cairo , but the exact date is unknown: since he was also known as al-Misri , which means the Egyptian , this probably happened at an early age. Eventually, he also died in Cairo. He probably grew up in a strongly intellectual environment: his father worked on Mathematics , Astronomy and Medicine , produced astronomical tables and was a member of a group of scholars. He achieved an important role in Egypt , which was caused by Egypt's relative independence from the Abbasid Caliph .

Work [ edit ] In some of the works attributed to Ahmad, it is not clear if the text came from him, his father, or whether they wrote together. It is clear, however, that he worked on a book on ratio and proportion . This was translated to Latin by Gherard of Cremona and was a commentary of Euclid 's Elements . This book influenced early European mathematicians such as Fibonacci . Further, in On similar arcs , he commented on Ptolemy 's Karpos (or Centiloquium ); many scholars believe that ibn Yusuf was in fact the true author of that work.

[ 1 ] He also wrote a book on the astrolabe . He invented methods to solve tax problems that were later presented in Fibonacci's Liber Abaci . He was also quoted by mathematicians such as Thomas Bradwardine , Jordanus de Nemore and Luca Pacioli .

See also [ edit ] List of Arab scientists and scholars Notes [ edit ] ^ Richard Lemay, Origin and success of the Kitab Thamara of Abu Ja'far Ahmad ibn Yusuf, in Proceedings of the 1st International Symposium for the History of Arabic Science, University of Aleppo (1976) , Aleppo 1978 Schrader, Dorothy (1970). "Aḥmad Ibn Yūsef".

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Vol. 1. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons . pp.

82– 83.

ISBN 0-684-10114-9 .

H. L. L. Busard and P. S. van Koningsveld, Der "Liber de arcubus similibus" des Ahmad ibn Jusuf , Annals of science 30 (1973), 381–406.

M Steinschneider, Yusuf ben Ibrahim und Ahmad ibn Yusuf, Bibliotheca mathematic (1888), 49–117.

External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Ahmad ibn Yusuf" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Schrader, Dorothy V. (2008) [1970–80].

"Aḥmad Ibn Yūsuf" .

Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography .

Encyclopedia.com .

v t e Mathematics in the medieval Islamic world Mathematicians 9th century 'Abd al-Hamīd ibn Turk Sanad ibn Ali al-Jawharī Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Kindi Qusta ibn Luqa Al-Mahani al-Dinawari Banū Mūsā brothers Hunayn ibn Ishaq Al-Khwarizmi Yusuf al-Khuri Ishaq ibn Hunayn Na'im ibn Musa Thābit ibn Qurra al-Marwazi Abu Said Gorgani 10th century Abu al-Wafa al-Khazin Al-Qabisi Abu Kamil Ahmad ibn Yusuf Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Sinān ibn al-Fatḥ al-Khojandi Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Brethren of Purity Ibn Sahl Ibn Yunus al-Uqlidisi Al-Battani Sinan ibn Thabit Ibrahim ibn Sinan Al-Isfahani Nazif ibn Yumn al-Qūhī Abu al-Jud Al-Sijzi Al-Karaji al-Majriti al-Jabali 11th century Abu Nasr Mansur Alhazen Kushyar Gilani Al-Biruni Ibn al-Samh Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi Avicenna al-Jayyānī al-Nasawī al-Zarqālī ibn Hud Al-Isfizari Omar Khayyam Muhammad al-Baghdadi 12th century Jabir ibn Aflah Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi al-Hassar Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi Ibn al-Yasamin 13th century Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Ahmad al-Buni Ibn Munim Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Ibn Adlan al-Urdi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi al-Abhari Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Ibn al-Banna' Kamāl al-Dīn al-Fārisī 14th century Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri Ibn al-Shatir Ibn al-Durayhim Al-Khalili al-Umawi 15th century Ibn al-Majdi al-Rūmī al-Kāshī Ulugh Beg Ali Qushji al-Wafa'i al-Qalaṣādī Sibt al-Maridini Ibn Ghazi al-Miknasi 16th century Al-Birjandi Muhammad Baqir Yazdi Taqi ad-Din Ibn Hamza al-Maghribi Mathematical works The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing De Gradibus Principles of Hindu Reckoning Book of Optics The Book of Healing Book on the Measurement of Plane and Spherical Figures Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Toledan Tables Tabula Rogeriana Zij Concepts Alhazen's problem Islamic geometric patterns Centers Al-Azhar University Al-Mustansiriya University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom Constantinople observatory of Taqi ad-Din Madrasa Maragheh observatory University of al-Qarawiyyin Influences Babylonian mathematics Greek mathematics Indian mathematics Influenced Byzantine mathematics European mathematics Indian mathematics Related Hindu–Arabic numeral system Arabic numerals ( Eastern Arabic numerals , Western Arabic numerals ) Trigonometric functions History of trigonometry History of algebra Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Netherlands Vatican Academics zbMATH Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ahmad_ibn_Yusuf&oldid=1259444967 " Categories : Astronomers from the Abbasid Caliphate People from Baghdad 9th-century mathematicians 10th-century mathematicians 835 births 912 deaths 9th-century Arab people 10th-century Arab people Mathematicians from the Abbasid Caliphate 10th-century astronomers 10th-century people from the Abbasid Caliphate Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 25 November 2024, at 05:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ahmad ibn Yusuf 17 languages Add topic

