Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Layout 2 Orchards by region Toggle Orchards by region subsection 2.1 Central Europe 3 Historical orchards 4 Modern orchards 5 Orchard conservation in the UK 6 Notable people 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Orchard 62 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu Banjar Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deitsch Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gàidhlig 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Latina Lëtzebuergesch Limburgs Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย ತುಳು Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Apple orchard lanes with apples fallen off the trees Intentionally planted trees or shrubs that are maintained for food production This article is about the planting of trees in agriculture. For other uses, see Orchard (disambiguation) .

Meadow orchard (Streuobstwiese) with view to the Lochenhörnle [ de ] An orchard is an intentional plantation of trees or shrubs that is maintained for food production. Orchards comprise fruit - or nut -producing trees that are generally grown for commercial production. Orchards are also sometimes a feature of large gardens , where they serve an aesthetic as well as a productive purpose.

[ 1 ] A fruit garden is generally synonymous with an orchard, although it is set on a smaller, non-commercial scale and may emphasize berry shrubs in preference to fruit trees . Most temperate -zone orchards are laid out in a regular grid, with a grazed or mown grass or bare soil base that makes maintenance and fruit gathering easy.

Most modern commercial orchards are planted for a single variety of fruit. While the importance of introducing biodiversity is recognized in forest plantations, introducing genetic diversity in orchard plantations by interspersing other trees might offer benefits. Genetic diversity in an orchard would provide resilience to pests and diseases, just as in forests.

[ 2 ] Orchards are sometimes concentrated near bodies of water where climatic extremes are moderated and blossom time is retarded until frost danger is past.

Layout [ edit ] An orchard's layout is the technique of planting the crops in a proper system.
There are different methods of planting and thus different layouts. Some of these layout types are: [ citation needed ] Square method Rectangular method Quincunx method Triangular method Hexagonal method Contour or terrace method For different varieties, these systems may vary to some extent.

Orchards by region [ edit ] A peach orchard in bloom [ca. 1950] The most extensive orchards in the United States are apple and orange orchards, although citrus orchards are more commonly called groves . The most extensive apple orchard area is in eastern Washington state, with a lesser but significant apple orchard area in most of Upstate New York . Extensive orange orchards are found in Florida and southern California . In eastern North America , many orchards are along the shores of Lake Michigan (such as the Fruit Ridge Region ), Lake Erie , and Lake Ontario .

[ citation needed ] In Canada , apple and other fruit orchards are widespread on the Niagara Peninsula , south of Lake Ontario. This region is known as Canada Fruitbelt and, in addition to large-scale commercial fruit marketing, it encourages "pick-your-own" activities in the harvest season.

[ citation needed ] In Spain , Murcia is a major orchard area (or la huerta) in Europe, with citrus crops. New Zealand, China, Argentina, and Chile also have extensive apple orchards.

[ citation needed ] Tenbury Wells in Worcestershire has been called The Town in the Orchard , since the 19th century, because it was surrounded by extensive orchards. Today, this heritage is celebrated through an annual Applefest .

[ 3 ] Central Europe [ edit ] Streuobstwiese (pl.

Streuobstwiesen ) is a German word that means a meadow with scattered fruit trees or fruit trees that are planted in a field.

[ 4 ] Streuobstwiese , or a meadow orchard, [ 5 ] is a traditional landscape in the temperate, maritime climate of continental Western Europe. In the 19th and early 20th centuries, Streuobstwiesen were a kind of a rural community orchard that were intended for the productive cultivation of stone fruit . In recent years, ecologists have successfully lobbied for state subsidies to valuable habitats , biodiversity and natural landscapes , which are also used to preserve old meadow orchards. Both conventional and meadow orchards provide a suitable habitat for many animal species that live in a cultured landscape. A notable example is the hoopoe that nests in tree hollows of old fruit trees and, in the absence of alternative nesting sites, is threatened in many parts of Europe because of the destruction of old orchards.

[ 6 ] Orchards in various regions A lemon orchard in the Upper Galilee in Israel A community apple orchard originally planted for productive use during the 1920s, in Westcliff on Sea ( Essex , England) Streuobstwiese , a rural community orchard, traditionally for productive use. Today endorsed for its quality of habitat and biodiversity.

Apple orchards in Azwell, Washington , surrounding a community of pickers' cabins Sour cherry orchard on Lake Erie shoreline ( Leamington, Ontario ) Old growth apple orchard in Ottawa, Canada Historical orchards [ edit ] Orchard House in Concord, Massachusetts , was the residence of American celebrated writer Louisa May Alcott .

Fruita, Utah , part of Capitol Reef National Park has Mormon pioneer orchards maintained by the US National Park Service .

Modern orchards [ edit ] Historical orchards have large, mature trees spaced for heavy equipment. Modern commercial apple orchards, by contrast and as one example, are often "high-density" (tree density above 370/ha or 150/acre), and in extreme cases have up to 22,000/ha (9,000/acre). These plants are no longer trees in the traditional sense, but instead resemble vines on dwarf stock and require trellises to support them.

[ 7 ] Pear orchard in Sirkovo, North Macedonia Cherry orchard in Sirkovo, North Macedonia Peach orchard in Sirkovo, North Macedonia Now new "Smart Orchards" are being set up throughout the world.

[ 8 ] The first examples of such orchards are the Smart Orchard at Washington , United States of America by Innov8 and Washington State University [ 9 ] and Samriti Bagh orchard created in Maraog, India by Tejasvi Dogra [ 10 ] that incorporates the use of various sensors for orchard management.

[ 11 ] Orchard conservation in the UK [ edit ] Natural England , through its Countryside Stewardship Scheme , Environmental Stewardship and Environmentally Sensitive Areas Scheme, gives grant aid and advice for the maintenance, enhancement or re-creation of historical orchards.

[ 12 ] The Orchard Link organisation provides advice on how to manage and restore the county of Devon 's orchards, as well as enabling the local community to use the local orchard produce.

[ 13 ] An organisation called Orchards Live carries out similar work in North Devon.

[ 14 ] People's Trust for Endangered Species (PTES) has mapped every traditional orchard within England and Wales and manages the national inventory for this habitat.

[ 15 ] The UK Biodiversity Partnership lists traditional orchards and a priority UK Biodiversity Action Plan habitat.

[ 16 ] The Wiltshire Traditional Orchards Project maps, conserves and restores traditional orchards within Wiltshire, England.

[ citation needed ] An interim report from the National Trust showed that orchards had reduced in scale from approximately 95,000 hectares in the period 1892–1914, to 41,000 hectares overall in 2022.

[ 17 ] The campaign # BlossomWatch is part of a wider programme of work by the Trust to plant 68 new orchards by 2025, [ 18 ] and four million trees with blossom by 2030.

[ 19 ] Notable people [ edit ] Belle van Dorn Harbert (born 1860), fruit farmer, founder of International Congress of Farm Women [ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Trees portal Climate-friendly gardening Fruit tree forms Fruit tree pollination Fruit tree propagation Fruit tree pruning Wood industry References [ edit ] ^ Luther Burbank.

Practical Orchard Plans and Methods: How to Begin and Carry on the Work . The Minerva Group.

ISBN 1-4147-0141-1 .

^ Konnert, M., Fady, B., Gömöry, D., A'Hara, S., Wolter, F., Ducci, F., Koskela, J., Bozzano, M., Maaten, T. and Kowalczyk, J. (2015).

"Use and transfer of forest reproductive material in Europe in the context of climate change" (PDF) .

European Forest Genetic Resources Programme, Bioversity International, Rome, Italy.

: xvi and 75 p.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-08-04.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "The Teme Valley Times supports the Tenbury Applefest" .

applefest.org.uk . Archived from the original on 2017-06-26 . Retrieved 2020-04-26 .

^ "dict.cc dictionary :: Streuobstwiese :: German-English translation" .

dict.cc .

^ Streuobstwiese : meadow orchard in German-English Collins Dictionary ^ Berhens M.

Why hoopoes won't trade . A Pro Natura Publication on the Global Economy and Nature. Pro Natura, Switzerland, pp. 8–9.

Archived March 27, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ Parker, Michael; et al.

"High Density Apple Orchard Management" .

North Carolina State University . Retrieved 26 July 2017 .

^ Sciforce (2023-01-25).

"Smart Farming: The Future of Agriculture" .

IoT For All . Retrieved 2023-07-13 .

^ "SMART ORCHARD" .

Innov8 Ag . Retrieved 2023-07-13 .

^ Nitnaware, Himanshu (November 9, 2020).

"Shimla Lawyer Controls Irrigation of Apple Orchard Sitting 100 Km Away. Here's How" .

The Better India .

^ zenger.news (2020-11-22).

"Apple Orchards Get Love and Care from Miles Away" .

The Tennessee Tribune . Retrieved 2020-11-24 .

^ Entry Level Stewardship Handbook . Natural England. 2008. p. 29.

ISBN 978-1-84754-080-5 .

^ "Welcome to orchardlink.org.uk" .

orchardlink.org.uk .

^ "Orchards Live - About Us" .

orchardslive.org.uk .

^ PTES Traditional Orchard Survey ^ "Working as a Biologist & Safety At Work Accidents UKBAP" . January 25, 2017.

^ Dommett, Tom (2022).

Blossom over Time: Interim Report (PDF) . National Trust. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2022-03-25 . Retrieved 2022-08-01 .

^ "National Trust to create 68 orchards by 2025 to boost wildlife" .

the Guardian . 2019-04-27 . Retrieved 2022-07-19 .

^ "Orchards vanishing from the landscape, says National Trust" .

BBC News . 2022-03-24 . Retrieved 2022-07-19 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Streuobstwiese .

Home Orchard Society Pennsylvania tree fruit production guide; a guide on how to set up an orchard in practice Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Orchard" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

v t e Agriculture Outline History Index Occupations Agriculturist Agricultural Engineer Farmer Farm worker Herder General Agribusiness Agricultural cooperative Agricultural supplies Agricultural science Agricultural engineering Agricultural technology Precision Biotechnology Agroforestry Agronomy Animal husbandry Animal-free agriculture Cash crop Cellular agriculture Cultural methods Contract farming Extensive farming Farm Farmhouse Feed ratio Free range Horticulture Intensive farming animals pigs crops Mechanised agriculture Organic farming Paludiculture Permaculture Plantation Polyculture Rice-duck farming Rice-fish system Sustainable agriculture Sustainable food system Universities and colleges Urban agriculture History West Asia Ancient Egypt Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Austronesia Agricultural science Agricultural History Review Arab Agricultural Revolution Argentina Canada China Chile Columbian exchange Green Revolution Indian subcontinent Mesoamerica Middle Ages Neolithic Revolution Organic farming Palestine Peru United Kingdom British Agricultural Revolution Cheshire Scotland United States African-American California Farming Types Agrivoltaic Aquaculture Cattle Cannabis cultivation Dairy farming Desert farming Dryland farming Fur farming Goat farming Grazing Convertible husbandry Rotational grazing Transhumance Hydroponics Insect farming Livestock Pasture Mixed Monoculture Paddy field Pastoral Bocage Pig farming Poultry farming Ranch Rainfed agriculture Orchards Subsistence agriculture Sheep farming Terrace Wildlife farming Environmental impact Agricultural expansion Agricultural pollution Agricultural wastewater Overgrazing Environmental impact of irrigation Overdrafting Climate change and agriculture Multiple breadbasket failure Categories Agricultural machinery Agriculture by country Agriculture companies Biotechnology Cannabis cultivation History of agriculture Livestock Meat industry Poultry farming Agriculture and the environment Lists Agriculturist profession Agricultural machinery Food origins Government ministries Universities and colleges Category Portal Commons Wikiproject Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Orchard&oldid=1305213103 " Categories : Orchards Agricultural establishments Horticulture Trees Fruit trees Farms by type Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 Articles containing German-language text Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Commons link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 18:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Orchard 62 languages Add topic

