Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 Notes and references 4 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Minute 142 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Aymar aru Azərbaycanca Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingála Lombard Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qırımtatarca Ripoarisch Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Scots Seeltersk Sesotho sa Leboa Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Taqbaylit తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Tiếng Việt Walon Winaray Wolof 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Betawi Руски Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 10 August 2025 .

Unit of time equal to 60 seconds This article is about the unit of time. For angle, see Minute of arc . For the written record of a meeting, see Minutes . For other uses, see Minute (disambiguation) .

minute An analogue clock showing one minute after twelve General information Unit system Non-SI units accepted for use with the SI Unit of time Symbol min Conversions 1 min in ...

... is equal to ...

SI units 60 s Non-SI units ⁠ 1 / 60 ⁠ h A minute is a unit of time defined as equal to 60 seconds .

[ 1 ] It is not a unit in the International System of Units (SI), but is accepted for use with SI .

[ 1 ] The SI symbol for minutes is min (without a dot). The prime symbol ′ is also sometimes used informally to denote minutes.

[ 2 ] In the UTC time standard , a minute on rare occasions has 61 seconds, a consequence of leap seconds ; there is also a provision to insert a negative leap second, which would result in a 59-second minute, but this has never happened in more than 40 years under this system.

History Al-Biruni first subdivided the hour sexagesimally into minutes, seconds , thirds and fourths in 1000 CE while discussing Jewish months.

[ 3 ] Historically, the word "minute" comes from the Latin pars minuta prima , meaning "first small part".  This division of the hour can be further refined with a "second small part" (Latin: pars minuta secunda ), and this is where the word "second" comes from.  For even further refinement, the term "third" ( 1 ⁄ 60 of a second) remains in some languages, for example Polish ( tercja ) and Turkish ( salise ), although most modern usage subdivides seconds by using decimals.  The symbol notation of the prime for minutes and double prime for seconds can be seen as indicating the first and second cut of the hour (similar to how the foot is the first cut of the yard or perhaps chain , with inches as the second cut).  In 1267, the medieval scientist Roger Bacon , writing in Latin, defined the division of time between full moons as a number of hours, minutes, seconds, thirds, and fourths ( horae , minuta , secunda , tertia , and quarta ) after noon on specified calendar dates.

[ 4 ] Jost Bürgi was the first clock maker to include a minute hand on clock for astronomer Tycho Brahe in 1577.

[ 5 ] The introduction of the minute hand into watches was possible only after the invention of the hairspring by Thomas Tompion , an English watchmaker, in 1675.

[ 6 ] See also Clock face International System of Units Latitude and longitude Orders of magnitude (time) Notes and references ^ a b "Non-SI units accepted for use with the SI, and units based on fundamental constants" (PDF) .

Bureau International de Poids et Mesures . pp.

145– 146. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 March 2020.

^ Nelson, D. (2008). "Prime symbol (accent)".

The Penguin Dictionary of Mathematics (4th ed.). Penguin UK.

ISBN 978-0141920870 .

^ Al-Biruni (1879) [1000].

The Chronology of Ancient Nations . Translated by Sachau, C. Edward. pp.

147– 149.

^ R Bacon (2000) [1928].

The Opus Majus of Roger Bacon . BR Belle.

University of Pennsylvania Press . table facing page 231.

ISBN 978-1855068568 .

^ Pi, Chia-Yi Tony (January 2000).

"Canadians telling time: A study in Dialect Topography" .

Toronto Working Papers in Linguistics .

18 .

^ Mitman, Carl (1926). "The Story of Timekeeping".

The Scientific Monthly .

22 (5): 424– 427.

Bibcode : 1926SciMo..22..424M .

JSTOR 7652 .

Bibliography Henry Campbell Black, Black's Law Dictionary , 6th Edition, entry on Minute. West Publishing Company, St. Paul, Minnesota, 1991.

[ ISBN missing ] Eric W. Weisstein.

"Arc Minute." From MathWorld – A Wolfram v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons v t e Time measurement and standards Chronometry Orders of magnitude Metrology International standards Coordinated Universal Time offset UT ΔT DUT1 International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service ISO 31-1 ISO 8601 International Atomic Time 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Barycentric Coordinate Time Barycentric Dynamical Time Civil time Daylight saving time Geocentric Coordinate Time International Date Line IERS Reference Meridian Leap second Solar time Terrestrial Time Time zone 180th meridian Obsolete standards Ephemeris time Greenwich Mean Time Prime meridian Time in physics Absolute space and time Spacetime Chronon Continuous signal Coordinate time Cosmological decade Discrete time and continuous time Proper time Theory of relativity Time dilation Gravitational time dilation Time domain Time-translation symmetry T-symmetry Horology Clock Astrarium Atomic clock Complication History of timekeeping devices Hourglass Marine chronometer Marine sandglass Radio clock Watch stopwatch Water clock Sundial Dialing scales Equation of time History of sundials Sundial markup schema Calendar Gregorian Hebrew Hindu Holocene Islamic (lunar Hijri) Julian Solar Hijri Astronomical Dominical letter Epact Equinox Intercalation Julian day Leap year Lunar Lunisolar Solar Solstice Tropical year Weekday determination Weekday names Archaeology and geology Chronological dating Geologic time scale International Commission on Stratigraphy Astronomical chronology Galactic year Nuclear timescale Precession Sidereal time Other units of time Instant Flick Shake Jiffy Second Minute Moment Hour Day Week Fortnight Month Year Olympiad Lustrum Decade Century Saeculum Millennium Related topics Chronology Duration music Mental chronometry Decimal time Metric time System time Time metrology Time value of money Timekeeper v t e SI units Base units ampere candela kelvin kilogram metre mole second Derived units with special names becquerel coulomb degree Celsius farad gray henry hertz joule katal lumen lux newton ohm pascal radian siemens sievert steradian tesla volt watt weber Other accepted units astronomical unit dalton day decibel degree of arc electronvolt hectare hour litre minute minute and second of arc neper tonne See also Conversion of units Metric prefixes Historical definitions of the SI base units 2019 revision of the SI System of units of measurement Category Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Minute&oldid=1305249033 " Categories : Orders of magnitude (time) Units of time Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia semi-protected pages Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Pages with missing ISBNs This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 23:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Minute 142 languages Add topic

