Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Criticisms Toggle Criticisms subsection 2.1 Fictionalism 2.2 Frege–Geach problem 3 References Toggle the table of contents Quasi-realism 2 languages فارسی Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Meta-ethical theory Quasi-realism is the meta-ethical view which claims that: Ethical sentences do not express propositions .

Instead, ethical sentences project emotional attitudes as though they were real properties.

This makes quasi-realism a form of non-cognitivism or expressivism .

[ 1 ] Quasi-realism stands in opposition to other forms of non-cognitivism (such as emotivism and universal prescriptivism ), as well as to all forms of cognitivism (including both moral realism and ethical subjectivism ).

Overview [ edit ] Simon Blackburn derived quasi-realism [ 2 ] [ page needed ] from a Humean account of the origin of our moral opinions, adapting Hume's genealogical account in the light of evolutionary game theory . To support his case, Blackburn has issued a challenge, Blackburn's Challenge , [ 3 ] [ page needed ] to anyone who can explain how two situations can demand different ethical responses without referring to a difference in the situations themselves. Because this challenge is effectively unmeetable, Blackburn argues that there must be a realist component in our notions of ethics.

However, argues Blackburn, ethics cannot be entirely realist either, for this would not allow for phenomena such as the gradual development of ethical positions over time.  In his 1998 book, Ruling Passions , Blackburn likens ethics to Neurath's boat , which can be changed plank by plank over time, but cannot be refitted all at once for risk of sinking.  Similarly, Blackburn's theory can explain the existence of rival ethical theories, for example as a result of differing cultural traditions - his theory allows both to be legitimate, despite their mutual contradictions, without dismissing both views through relativism .  Thus, Blackburn's theory of quasi-realism provides a coherent account of ethical pluralism .  It also answers John Mackie 's concerns, presented in his argument from queerness , about the apparently contradictory nature of ethics .

Quasi-realism, a meta-ethical approach, enables ethics based on actions, virtues and consequences to be reconciled. Attempts have been made to derive from it a comprehensive theory of ethics, such as Iain King 's quasi-utilitarianism in his book How to Make Good Decisions and Be Right All the Time (2008).

[ 4 ] Criticisms [ edit ] Despite gaining some of the better qualities of the component theories from which it is derived, quasi-realism also picks up vulnerabilities from these different components.  Thus, it is criticised in some of the ways that moral realism is criticised, for example by Fictionalism (see below); it is also attacked along with expressivism and other non-cognitive theories (indeed it has been regarded by some as a sub-category of expressivism ).

Fictionalism [ edit ] It has been claimed that Blackburn's programme is fictionalist , [ 5 ] which he himself disputes. However, there are certainly continuities between both approaches. Blackburn argues that moral fictionalism is tantamount to us claiming to hold attitudes that we do not really have; that we are in some way insincere. In support of his argument, Blackburn invokes Locke's theory of colour, which defines colours as dispositional (that is, in the eye of the beholder) but in some way reliant upon facts about the world.  Blackburn buttresses these arguments by further examples of quasi-realism in our understanding of the world beyond ethics.

[ 6 ] This means that, though the moral fictionalist is in some ways having cake and eating it, the quasi-realist has a seemingly even more difficult position to defend. They may feel secure in disagreeing with Bentham that talk of natural rights is "nonsense upon stilts" but they would also argue that such rights could not be said to exist in a realist sense. Quasi-realism captures in some important ways the structure of our ethical experience of the world and why we can assert claims such as "It is wrong to be cruel to children" as if they were facts even though they do not share the properties of facts; namely the inference of independent truth-values .

From this position, Blackburn's "way forward" is to re-assert Hume's 'common point of view', or the ethical discourse common to mankind. Blackburn's thought is that though relativists and realists can agree that certain statements are true within a certain discourse, a quasi-realist investigates why such discourses have the structures that they do.

[ 6 ] Frege–Geach problem [ edit ] The coherence of Blackburn's quasi-realism has been challenged most notably by the Frege–Geach problem , which asserts Blackburn's position is self-contradictory. Advocates of Blackburn's view, however, would contend that quasi-realism in fact provides an antidote to the Frege–Geach problem by placing different moral claims in context. There is an important difference, claim the quasi-realists, between saying It is wrong to tell lies , and It is wrong to get your brother to tell lies .

[ 2 ] Indeed, say the quasi-realists, the Frege–Geach argument exposes the insensitivity of some moral realist discourse to the complexity of ethical statements.

References [ edit ] ^ Moral Anti-Realism > Projectivism and quasi-realism (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) ^ a b Blackburn, Simon (1998).

Ruling Passions . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-824785-2 .

^ Blackburn, Simon (1993).

Essays in Quasi-realism: a defence of quasi-realism as applied to ethics . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-508224-1 .

^ King, Iain (2008).

How to Make Good Decisions and Be Right All the Time: Solving the Riddle of Right and Wrong . Continuum, p. 187.

^ For example, by David Lewis, as cited in a 2006 edition of Analysis , accessible here ^ a b Blackburn, Simon (2005) Truth: A Guide . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-516824-0 .

v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Quasi-realism&oldid=1225161754 " Categories : Metaethics Moral realism Philosophical realism Ethical theories Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2023 This page was last edited on 22 May 2024, at 18:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Quasi-realism 2 languages Add topic

