Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The proton capture p-process 2 History 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents p -process 14 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Polski Português Русский සිංහල Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Processes in astrophysics Nuclear physics Nucleus Nucleons p n Nuclear matter Nuclear force Nuclear structure Nuclear reaction Models of the nucleus Liquid drop Nuclear shell model Interacting boson model Ab initio Nuclides ' classification Isotopes – equal Z Isobars – equal A Isotones – equal N Isodiaphers – equal N − Z Isomers – equal all the above Mirror nuclei – Z ↔ N Stable Magic Even/odd Halo Borromean Nuclear stability Binding energy p–n ratio Drip line Island of stability Valley of stability Stable nuclide Radioactive decay Alpha α Beta β 2β 0v β + K/L capture Isomeric Gamma γ Internal conversion Spontaneous fission Cluster decay Neutron emission Proton emission Decay energy Decay chain Decay product Radiogenic nuclide Nuclear fission Spontaneous Products pair breaking Photofission Capturing processes electron 2× neutron s r proton p rp High-energy processes Spallation by cosmic ray Photodisintegration Nucleosynthesis and nuclear astrophysics Nuclear fusion Processes: Stellar Big Bang Supernova Nuclides: Primordial Cosmogenic Artificial High-energy nuclear physics Quark–gluon plasma RHIC LHC Scientists Alvarez Becquerel Bethe A. Bohr N. Bohr Chadwick Cockcroft Ir. Curie Fr. Curie Pi. Curie Skłodowska-Curie Davisson Fermi Hahn Jensen Lawrence Mayer Meitner Oliphant Oppenheimer Proca Purcell Rabi Rutherford Soddy Strassmann Świątecki Szilárd Teller Thomson Walton Wigner Physics portal Category v t e The term p-process ( p for proton ) is used in two ways in the scientific literature concerning the astrophysical origin of the elements ( nucleosynthesis ). Originally it referred to a proton capture process which was proposed to be the source of certain, naturally occurring, neutron-deficient isotopes of the elements from selenium to mercury .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] These nuclides are called p-nuclei and their origin is still not completely understood. Although it was shown that the originally suggested process cannot produce the p-nuclei, later on the term p-process was sometimes used to generally refer to any nucleosynthesis process supposed to be responsible for the p-nuclei.

[ 3 ] Often, the two meanings are confused. Recent scientific literature therefore suggests to use the term p-process only for the actual proton capture process, as it is customary with other nucleosynthesis processes in astrophysics.

[ 4 ] The proton capture p-process [ edit ] Proton-rich nuclides can be produced by sequentially adding one or more protons to an atomic nucleus . Such a nuclear reaction of type (p,γ) is called proton capture reaction . By adding a proton to a nucleus, the element is changed because the chemical element is defined by the proton number of a nucleus. At the same time the ratio of protons to neutrons is changed, resulting in a more neutron-deficient isotope of the next element. This led to the original idea for the production of p-nuclei: free protons (the nuclei of hydrogen atoms are present in stellar plasmas ) should be captured on heavy nuclei ( seed nuclei ) also already present in the stellar plasma (previously produced in the s -process and/or r -process ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Such proton captures on stable nuclides (or nearly stable), however, are not very efficient in producing p-nuclei, especially the heavier ones, because the electric charge increases with each added proton, leading to an increased repulsion of the next proton to be added, according to Coulomb's law . In the context of nuclear reactions this is called a Coulomb barrier . The higher the Coulomb barrier, the more kinetic energy a proton requires to get close to a nucleus and be captured by it. The average energy of the available protons is given by the temperature of the stellar plasma. Even if this temperature could be increased arbitrarily (which is not the case in stellar environments), protons would be removed faster from a nucleus by photodisintegration than they could be captured at high temperature. A possible alternative would be to have a very large number of protons available to increase the effective number of proton captures per second without having to raise the temperature too much. Such conditions, however, are not found in core-collapse supernovae which were supposed to be the site of the p-process.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Proton captures at extremely high proton densities are called rapid proton capture processes . They are distinct from the p-process not only by the required high proton density but also by the fact that very short-lived radionuclides are involved and the reaction path is located close to the proton drip line . Rapid proton capture processes are the rp-process , the νp-process , and the pn-process .

History [ edit ] The term p-process was originally proposed in the famous B 2 FH paper in 1957. The authors assumed that this process was solely responsible for the p-nuclei and proposed that it occurs in the hydrogen-shell (see also stellar evolution ) of a star exploding as a type II supernova .

[ 1 ] It was shown later that the required conditions are not found in such supernovae.

[ 5 ] At the same time as B 2 FH, Alastair Cameron independently realized the necessity to add another nucleosynthesis process to neutron capture nucleosynthesis but simply mentioned proton captures without assigning a special name to the process. He also thought about alternatives, for example photodisintegration (called the γ-process today) or a combination of p-process and photodisintegration.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Astronomy portal Physics portal p-nuclei Nucleosynthesis rp-process r-process s-process References [ edit ] ^ a b c Burbidge, E. M.

; Burbidge, G. R.

; Fowler, W. A.

; Hoyle, F.

(1957).

"Synthesis of the Elements in Stars" .

Reviews of Modern Physics .

29 (4): 547– 650.

Bibcode : 1957RvMP...29..547B .

doi : 10.1103/RevModPhys.29.547 .

^ a b c Cameron, A. G. W.

(1957).

"Nuclear Reactions in Stars and Nucleogenesis" .

Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific .

69 (408): 201– 222.

Bibcode : 1957PASP...69..201C .

doi : 10.1086/127051 .

JSTOR 40676435 .

^ a b Arnould, M.; Goriely, S. (2003). "The p-Process of Stellar Nucleosynthesis: Astrophysics and Nuclear Physics Status".

Physics Reports .

384 ( 1– 2): 1– 84.

Bibcode : 2003PhR...384....1A .

doi : 10.1016/S0370-1573(03)00242-4 .

^ a b Rauscher, T. (2010). "Origin of p-Nuclei in Explosive Nucleosynthesis".

Proceedings of Science . NIC XI (59).

arXiv : 1012.2213 .

Bibcode : 2010arXiv1012.2213R .

^ Audouze, J.; Truran, J. W. (1975). "p-Process Nucleosynthesis in Postshock Supernova Envelope Environments".

The Astrophysical Journal .

202 (1): 204– 213.

Bibcode : 1975ApJ...202..204A .

doi : 10.1086/153965 .

v t e Nuclear processes Radioactive decay Alpha Beta Double Gamma radiation Cluster decay Electron capture Double Internal conversion Isomeric transition Neutron emission Positron emission Proton emission Spontaneous fission Stellar nucleosynthesis Deuterium fusion Li burning Proton–proton chain CNO cycle α process Triple-α C burning Ne burning O burning Si burning r -process s -process p-process rp-process Other processes Photodisintegration Photofission Capture Neutron capture Proton capture Exchange (n-p) reaction v t e Supernovae Classes Type Ia Type Iax Type Ib and Ic Type II (II-P, II-L, IIn, and IIb) Hypernova Superluminous Pair-instability Calcium-rich Common envelope jets supernova Physics of Carbon detonation Foe/Bethe Near-Earth Phillips relationship Nucleosynthesis p-process r-process γ-process Neutrinos Related Failed Fast blue optical transient Fast radio burst Gamma-ray burst Gravitational wave Kilonova Luminous red nova Micronova Nova Pulsar kick Quark-nova Soft gamma repeater Imposter pulsational pair-instability Symbiotic nova Progenitors Hypergiant yellow Red Luminous blue variable Supergiant blue red yellow White dwarf Wolf–Rayet star Super-AGB star Population III star Remnants Supernova remnant Pulsar wind nebula Neutron star pulsar magnetar Stellar black hole Compact star electroweak exotic quark Zombie star Local Bubble Superbubble Orion–Eridanus Discovery Guest star History of supernova observation Timeline of white dwarfs, neutron stars, and supernovae Lists Candidates Notable Massive stars Most distant Remnants In fiction Notable Barnard's Loop Cassiopeia A SN 1054 Crab Nebula iPTF14hls SN 1000+0216 Tycho's Kepler's SN 1885A SN 1987A SN 1994D SN 185 SN 1006 SN 2003fg Remnant G1.9+0.3 SN 2007bi SN 2011fe SN 2014J SN Refsdal Vela Remnant SN 2006gy ASASSN-15lh SN 2016aps SN 2018cow SN 2022jli SN H0pe Research ASAS-SN Calán/Tololo Survey High-Z Supernova Search Team Katzman Automatic Imaging Telescope Monte Agliale Supernovae and Asteroid Survey Nearby Supernova Factory Sloan Supernova Survey Supernova/Acceleration Probe Supernova Cosmology Project SuperNova Early Warning System Supernova Legacy Survey Texas Supernova Search Category:Supernovae Commons:Supernovae Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=P-process&oldid=1273654327 " Categories : Nuclear physics Nucleosynthesis Supernovae Proton Concepts in stellar astronomy Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 February 2025, at 10:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents p -process 14 languages Add topic

