Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Taxonomies 2 Function in flowering plants Toggle Function in flowering plants subsection 2.1 Protection 3 Form 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Rosette (botany) 34 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Botany term for a circular arrangement of leaves A rosette of leaves at the base of a dandelion Rosette growth form of the liverwort Ricciocarpos natans .

In botany , a rosette is a circular arrangement of leaves or of structures resembling leaves.

In flowering plants, rosettes usually sit near the soil, but they can also be at the top of an otherwise leafless branch or trunk. Their structure is an example of a modified stem in which the internode gaps between the leaves do not expand, so that all the leaves remain clustered tightly together and at a similar height. Some insects induce the development of galls that are leafy rosettes.

[ 1 ] In bryophytes and algae , a rosette results from the repeated branching of the thallus as the plant grows, resulting in a circular outline.

Taxonomies [ edit ] Many plant families have varieties with rosette morphology ; they are particularly common in Asteraceae (such as dandelions ), Brassicaceae (such as cabbage ), and Bromeliaceae . The fern Blechnum fluviatile or New Zealand Water Fern ( kiwikiwi ) is a rosette plant.

Function in flowering plants [ edit ] Often, rosettes form in perennial plants whose upper foliage dies back with the remaining vegetation protecting the plant. Another form occurs when internodes along a stem are shortened, bringing the leaves closer together, as in lettuce , dandelion and some succulents .

[ 2 ] (When plants such as lettuce grow too quickly, the stem lengthens instead, a condition known as bolting .) In yet other forms, the rosette persists at the base of the plant (such as the dandelion), and there is a taproot .

Protection [ edit ] Rosette of leaves of Agave americana Part of the protective function of a rosette like the dandelion is that it is hard to pull from the ground; the leaves come away easily while the taproot is left intact.

Another kind of protection is provided by the caulescent rosette , which is part of the growth form of the giant herb genus Espeletia in South America, which has a well-developed stem above the ground.

[ 3 ] In tropical alpine environments, a wide variety of plants in different plant families and different parts of the world have evolved this growth form characterized by evergreen rosettes growing above marcescent leaves. Examples where this arrangement has been confirmed to improve survival, help water balance, or protect the plant from cold injury are Espeletia schultzii and Espeletia timotensis , both from the Andes .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Form [ edit ] The rosette form is the structure, the relationship of the parts, and the variations within it, as shown in the following study from a herbarium : Dryas octopetala (white dryas, Rosaceae ) has a leaf rosette of leaf blades with a short petiole , slim, egg-shaped leaves with cordate bases with clearly and regularly toothed margins, and single flowers on usually long peduncles or stalks, two to four centimetres across. The flowers have seven to nine, often even more, white egg-shaped petals. The sepals are lanceolate .

[ 6 ] Silene nutans (Nottingham catchfly, Caryophyllaceae ) shows ensiform-lanceolate leaves. The slightly rosette-like ground leaves are bigger and of different shape than the sparse, opposite leaves on the stem.

[ 6 ] This is explained in that side shoots with greatly prolonged internodes may spring from rosettes. They have one or more flowers at their tip, like the primrose . Especially in biennial plants, the main shoot can grow with prolonged internodes and even branches. It is not unusual that the leaves of the rosette and those of the shoot differ in shape.

[ 2 ] As form, "rosette" is used to describe plants that perpetually grow as a rosette and the immature stage of plants such as some ferns.

See also [ edit ] Asteraceae Bromeliad Billbergia Fern Bird's nest fern Ostrich fern Wild bird's-nest fern References [ edit ] ^ Netta Dorchin; Jeffrey B. Joy; Lukas K. Hilke; Michael J. Wise; Warren G. Abrahamson (14 May 2015). "Taxonomy and phylogeny of the Asphondylia species (Diptera: Cecidomyiidae) of North American goldenrods: challenging morphology, complex host associations, and cryptic speciation".

Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society .

174 (2): 265– 304.

doi : 10.1111/ZOJ.12234 .

ISSN 1096-3642 .

Wikidata Q99657406 .

^ a b Botany online: Features of Flowering Plants – Leaves ^ shows many images Archived 2008-07-05 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Goldstein, G. and Meinzer, F.1983. Influence of insulating dead leaves and low temperatures on water balance in an Andean giant rosette plant.

Plant, Cell & Environment 6: 649-656" . Archived from the original on 2020-04-14 . Retrieved 2008-04-25 .

^ Smith, Alan P.1979. Function of dead leaves in Espeletia schultzii (Compositae), and Andean caulescent rosette species.

Biotropica 11: 43-47.

^ a b "Botany online: Features of flowering Plants – Rosettes – Whorls" . Archived from the original on 2008-05-15 . Retrieved 2008-04-24 .

v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rosette_(botany)&oldid=1297063894 " Categories : Plant morphology Leaves Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 23:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rosette (botany) 34 languages Add topic

