Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Early activism 1.2 Under the Convention 1.3 Babeuf conspiracy and later life 2 Influence 3 Writings 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Philippe Buonarroti 25 languages Asturianu Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Italiano Қазақша Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська Vèneto 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian utopian socialist (1761–1837) Not to be confused with the Florentine antiquarian Filippo Buonarroti .

Philippe Buonarroti Portrait of Filippo Buonarotti, 1830, Philippe-Auguste Jeanron Born Filippo Giuseppe Maria Ludovico Buonarroti ( 1761-11-11 ) 11 November 1761 Pisa , Grand Duchy of Tuscany Died 16 September 1837 (1837-09-16) (aged 75) Paris , Kingdom of France Resting place Montmartre Cemetery Occupation Writer, philosopher, conspirator Alma mater University of Pisa Notable works History of Babeuf's Conspiracy for Equality Observations on Maximilien Robespierre Signature Filippo Giuseppe Maria Ludovico Buonarroti (11 November 1761 – 16 September 1837), more usually referred to by the French version Philippe Buonarroti , was an Italian-French utopian socialist , writer , agitator, freemason , and conspirator. He was active in Corsica, France, and Geneva. His History of Babeuf’s Conspiracy of Equals (1828) became a quintessential text for revolutionaries, inspiring such socialists as Louis Auguste Blanqui and Karl Marx . He proposed a mutualist strategy that would revolutionize society by stages, starting from monarchy to liberalism, then to radicalism, and finally to communism.

Life [ edit ] Early activism [ edit ] Buonarroti was born in Pisa in the Grand Duchy of Tuscany to a family of local nobility, the same Buonarroti family to which Michelangelo belonged. He studied law at the University of Pisa , where he founded what was seen by the authorities of Grand Duke Peter Leopold as a subversive paper, the Gazetta Universale (1787). During his university years, he acquainted himself with the works of Rousseau , Mably , and Morelly .

[ 1 ] It is thought that he joined a Masonic Lodge sometime in 1786.

[ 2 ] Though under constant surveillance by the authorities, he expressed support for the French Revolution when it broke out. He travelled to Corsica to spread the revolutionary message with the Giornale Patriottico di Corsica , the first Italian-language paper to openly support the French Revolution. In Corsica, Buonarroti joined the Jacobin Club , and became a friend of the Bonapartes .

Under the Convention [ edit ] Buonarroti was expelled from the island in June 1791 and returned to his native Tuscany whereupon he was arrested and imprisoned.

In 1793 he travelled to Paris and became a member of the Society of the Panthéon .

Maximilien Robespierre placed him in charge of organizing the expatriate Italian revolutionaries, which he did from a base in Nice . After denouncing Pasquale Paoli to the National Convention , he was rewarded for his revolutionary activities by a special decree of French citizenship in May 1793.

In April 1794 he was nominated National Commissioner in Oneglia , Imperia 's port, the site of refuge for many pro-French Italians during the French attack on Northern Italy .

Babeuf conspiracy and later life [ edit ] He was recalled to Paris in 1795, after the Thermidorian Reaction , whereupon he was imprisoned in the Plessis prison after his friends in office had been deposed by the Thermidorian Reaction . There he met Gracchus Babeuf , and became one of his most fervent supporters and co-conspirators during the time of their mutual imprisonment from March to October.

Buonarotti was rearrested by the French Directory on 8 May 1796, along with Babeuf and other conspirators.

[ 3 ] Babeuf was guillotined , and Buonarotti formally imprisoned in February 1797, and held on the island of Oléron .

Napoleon Bonaparte allowed him to go free after he had become First Consul in 1799. During the Empire , Buonarroti took part in anti-Bonapartist conspiracies, and was put under police surveillance.

[ 1 ] He exiled himself to Geneva , and moved to Brussels during the Bourbon Restoration . In 1808 Buonarroti formed a Masonic Lodge, Les Sublimes Maîtres Parfaits (The Sublime Perfect Masters), to which only serving freemasons were admitted. Within this lodge, he formed an inner circle which he used to further his political dreams and aspirations. He returned to Paris after the 1830 July Revolution . He was then acquainted with Marc-René de Voyer de Paulmy d'Argenson , Charles Teste, Ulysse Trélat , Hareau, François-Vincent Raspail , Louis Blanc and Auguste Blanqui and contributed a great deal to both the Jacobin revival and the agitations of the 1830s.

[ 4 ] He died suddenly in Paris on 16 September 1837.

Influence [ edit ] Commemorative medal of Buonarroti by David d'Angers Buonarroti's revolutionary principles were to prove important during the 1830s and early 1840s; Auguste Blanqui learned many of his insurrectionary skills and tactics from Buonarroti, and the Conspiration pour l'Égalité dite de Babeuf, suivie du procès auquel elle donna lieu may be seen as an important text in this respect.

Later, the 1848 revolutionaries in France and elsewhere placed much emphasis on this work as a cornerstone.

Mikhail Bakunin praised Buonarroti as "the greatest conspirator of his age", [ 5 ] and was heavily influenced by the revolutionary practice of Buonarroti. The Bakunin scholar Arthur Lehning has written of Buonarroti: “He too built up on an international scale, though over a much longer period, an elaborate underground network, on a freemason pattern, sometimes using Masonic institutions, to work for his egalitarian creed of 1796, for a social revolution and for the republicanisation of Europe. For forty years the principles remained the same: the leadership was secret; [ 6 ] the existence of the higher grades was unknown to the lower; protean in character, this network took advantage of and used other societies.” [ 7 ] Some argue that these principles are clearly evident in Bakunin's writings.

Writings [ edit ] La Riforma dell'Alcorano (1786) Conspiration des égaux (1828) Histoire de la Conspiration pour l'Égalité dite de Babeuf (1828) Riflessi sul governo federativo applicato all'Italia (1831) Del governo d'un popolo in rivolta per conseguire la libertà (1833) Observations sur Maximilien Robespierre (1836) See also [ edit ] Conspiracy of the Equals Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Eisenstein 1968 , p. 202.

^ Elizabeth L. Einsenstein, The First Professional Revolutionist: Filippo Michele Buonarroti (1761–1837) (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1959) ^ Phillips, Walter Alison (1911).

"Babeuf, François Noel" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 3 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

93– 94.

^ Eisenstein 1968 , p. 203.

^ Avrich, Bakunin and Nechaev , 22.

^ Villari, Luigi (1911).

"Confalonieri, Federico, Count" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 898.

^ Arthur Lehning, “Bakunin’s Conceptions of Revolutionary Organisations and Their Role: A Study of His ‘Secret Societies’,” in Essays in Honour of E.H. Carr, ed. C. Abramsky (London: The Macmillan Press, 1974), 58.

References [ edit ] Eisenstein, Elizabeth L.

(1968).

"Buonarroti, Filippo" . In David L. Sills (ed.).

International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences . Vol. 2. New York: Macmillan Company. pp.

202– 3 . Retrieved 9 June 2025 .

Eisenstein, Elizabeth (1959).

The First Professional Revolutionist: Filippo Michele Buonarroti . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-30400-0 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Federici, Libero (2007).

L'egualitarismo di Filippo Buonarroti . Saonara, Padua: Il Prato.

ISBN 978-8889566084 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Philippe Buonarroti .

Menghini, Mario (1930).

"BUONARROTI, Filippo" .

Enciclopedia Italiana . Rome: Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana . Retrieved 12 June 2025 .

Saitta, Armando (1972).

"BUONARROTI, Filippo" .

Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani , Volume 15: Buffoli–Caccianemici (in Italian). Rome: Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana .

ISBN 978-88-12-00032-6 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Netherlands Trove Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philippe_Buonarroti&oldid=1298526856 " Categories : 1761 births 1837 deaths People from Pisa Italian emigrants to France Italian Freemasons 19th-century Italian journalists Italian male journalists Italian memoirists Italian socialists Revolution theorists People involved in the Conspiracy of the Equals 19th-century Italian writers 19th-century Italian male writers Writers from Tuscany University of Pisa alumni Utopian socialists Italian exiles 18th-century Italian journalists Neo-Babouvism Italian deists Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2024 CS1 errors: ISBN date Commons category link is on Wikidata CS1 Italian-language sources (it) This page was last edited on 3 July 2025, at 02:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philippe Buonarroti 25 languages Add topic

