Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Writings 1.2 Martyrdom 1.3 Political symbol 1.4 Controversy 2 Conceptions Toggle Conceptions subsection 2.1 Cuba 2.2 Cuban exiles 2.3 Latin American left 2.4 Critics 3 References 4 External links Toggle External links subsection 4.1 Multimedia Toggle the table of contents Legacy of Che Guevara 2 languages Bahasa Indonesia Slovenščina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Protestors carrying a mosaic of national flags bearing the Guerrillero Heroico likeness of Che Guevara.

The legacy of Argentine Marxist revolutionary Che Guevara (June 14, 1928 – October 9, 1967) is constantly evolving in the collective imagination. As a symbol of counterculture worldwide, Guevara is one of the most recognizable and influential revolutionary figures of the twentieth century. However, during his life, and even more since his death, Che has elicited controversy and wildly divergent opinions on his personal character and actions. He has been both revered and reviled, being characterized as everything from a heroic defender of the poor , to a cold-hearted executioner .

History [ edit ] Writings [ edit ] Main articles: Foco and Guevarism See also: Episodes of the Cuban Revolutionary War , Guerrilla Warfare (book) , and The Motorcycle Diaries (book) Guevara's extensive written legacy includes intellectual writings on radical Marxist politics and social theory , military/ guerrilla warfare strategy and tactics, diplomatic memos, books, speeches, magazine articles, letters, poetry and diaries, as well as official documents preserved in Cuban government archives. Che's practical and theoretical work had a profound political impact around the globe during the second half of the 20th century, especially in the developing world, where revolutionary organizing and anti-colonial struggles were inspired by his thought and example.

[ 1 ] As a consequence, his writings have been translated into hundreds of different languages.

Martyrdom [ edit ] Further information: Che Guevara in popular culture § In religion Statue of Che Guevara near the site of his execution in Bolivia .

In 1967, while pictures of Guevara's dead body were being circulated and the circumstances of his death debated, his legend began to spread. Demonstrations in protest against his execution occurred throughout the world, and articles, tributes, songs and poems were written about his life and death.

[ 2 ] Latin America specialists advising the U.S. State Department immediately recognized the significance in the demise of "the most glamorous and reportedly most successful revolutionary", noting that Guevara would be eulogized by communists and other leftists as a "model revolutionary who met a heroic death." [ 3 ] British politician George Galloway has remarked that "one of the greatest mistakes the US state ever made was to create those pictures of Che's corpse. Its Christ-like poise in death ensured that his appeal would reach way beyond the turbulent university campus and into the hearts of the faithful, flocking to the worldly, fiery sermons of the liberation theologists ." [ 4 ] The Economist magazine has also pointed out how Che's post death photos resemble Andrea Mantegna 's The Lamentation over the Dead Christ . Thus fixing Guevara as a modern saint, the man who risked his life twice in countries that were not his own before giving it in a third, and whose invocation of the "new man", driven by moral rather than material incentives, smacked of Saint Ignatius of Loyola more than Marx .

[ 5 ] This rung true the following year in 1968 when among Italy 's emerging new breed of Catholic militants, named the Jacques Maritain Circle, arranged a memorial Mass in Che's honor and Catholic services were held for him in several other countries. In addition, in Brazil , mythmakers began to circulate thousands of photograph copies of a dead Che captioned "A Saint of Our Time".

[ 6 ] Italian students took up a similar tone and christened Guevara an angela della pace —"angel of peace." [ 6 ] Regardless of Che's non-sanctifying failures and contradictions, the potency of his "messianic image", with its "symbolic" and "religious quality", continues to inspire many throughout the world.

[ 7 ] Political symbol [ edit ] Further information: Guerrillero Heroico See also: Protests of 1968 West German protesters holding up a Che portrait during the 1968 protests.

"Through the image, the complexities of Che's life and thought are reprocessed into an abstraction that can serve any cause. It has been painted as graffiti in Bethlehem, carried in demonstrations from Palestine to Mexico and borrowed by such artists as Pedro Meyer , Vik Muniz , Martin Parr and Annie Leibovitz . It has been used to represent causes as diverse as world trade, anti-Americanism , teenage rebellion and Latin American identity." — Isabel Hilton , New Statesman [ 7 ] Guevara, who has been variously described as "the rock-hero biker revolutionary", "the martyr to idealism", and " James Dean in fatigues"; [ 7 ] became a potent secular symbol of rebellion and revolution during the May 1968 protests in France . In the view of The Guardian ' s Gary Younge , "(Che's) journey from middle-class comfort to working-class champion and his long-haired unkempt look, mirrored the aspirations and self-image of the Woodstock generation as they demonstrated against the Vietnam war." [ 8 ] For her part, the 1960s literary icon Susan Sontag spoke glowingly of the "inspiring beautiful legend" that was Guevara, comparing him Lord Byron , Emiliano Zapata , and José Martí .

[ 9 ] Moreover, the slogan Che lives!

began to appear on walls throughout the West , [ 10 ] while Jean-Paul Sartre , a leading existentialist philosopher who knew Guevara personally, encouraged the adulation by describing him as "the most complete human being of our age." [ 11 ] "That he was shot after capture demonstrates the fear that the Bolivian authorities felt even of an imprisoned Che. They were afraid to bring to him to trial: afraid of the echoes his voice would have aroused from the courtroom: afraid to prove that the man they hated was loved by the world outside. This fear will help to perpetuate his legend, and a legend is impervious to bullets." — Graham Greene , 1960s playwright [ 12 ] In addition, more radical left wing activists responded to Guevara's apparent indifference to rewards and glory, and concurred with Guevara's sanctioning of violence as a necessity to instill socialist ideals.

[ 13 ] Even in the United States, the government which Guevara so vigorously denounced, students began to emulate his style of dress, donning military fatigues, berets , and growing their hair and beards to show that they too were opponents of U.S. foreign policy.

[ 14 ] For instance, the Black Panthers began to style themselves "Che-type" while adopting his trademark black beret , while Arab guerrillas began to name combat operations in his honor.

[ 15 ] Addressing the wide-ranging flexibility of his legacy, Trisha Ziff, director of the 2008 documentary Chevolution , has remarked that "Che Guevara's significance in modern times is less about the man and his specific history, and more about the ideals of creating a better society." [ 16 ] In a similar vein, the Chilean writer Ariel Dorfman has suggested Guevara's enduring appeal might be because "to those who will never follow in his footsteps, submerged as they are in a world of cynicism, self-interest and frantic consumption, nothing could be more vicariously gratifying than Che's disdain for material comfort and everyday desires." [ 17 ] Despite the occasional controversy, Guevara's status as a popular icon has continued throughout the world, leading commentators to speak of a global "cult of Che". Well known Bohemian writers extolled him, while West German playwright Peter Weiss has even compared him to "a Christ taken down from the Cross." [ 15 ] A photograph of Guevara taken by photographer Alberto Korda [ 18 ] has become one of the century's most ubiquitous images, and the portrait, transformed into a monochrome graphic by Irish artist Jim Fitzpatrick , is reproduced endlessly on a vast array of merchandise, such as T-shirts, posters, cigarettes, coffee mugs, and baseball caps. This fact led Argentine business analyst Martin Krauze to postulate that "the admiration for El Che no longer extends to his politics and ideology, it’s a romantic idea of one man going to battle against the windmills, he’s a Quixote ." [ 19 ] On the 40th anniversary of Guevara's execution in Bolivia the compilation Che in Verse brought together a diverse collection of 135 poems and songs in tribute to Che Guevara.

[ 20 ] Celebrated poets such as Pablo Neruda , Allen Ginsberg , Julio Cortázar , Nicolas Guillén , Derek Walcott , Al Purdy , Rafael Alberti , Ko Un , and Yevgeny Yevtushenko devoted the aforementioned works to, as the book states in its introduction, "celebrate the world's icon of rebellion ".

[ 21 ] In September 2007, Guevara was voted " Argentina 's greatest historical and political figure." [ 22 ] "Che Guevara - hero of the Cuban Revolution , left-wing icon and the face that has sold more posters than anyone else in history. Remembered as a romantic freedom fighter , an expert in guerrilla warfare , and a thoughtful philosopher who died young for his cause, Guevara has always been the revolutionaries' revolutionary. Stylish, vehemently anti-American and considerably better looking than Lenin , Trotsky and Stalin , he practically invented the image of the bearded, beret-wearing left-wing radical, as adopted by thousands during the 1960s and 70s." — BBC News , [ 17 ] Controversy [ edit ] Statue of Che Guevara in Utrecht , Netherlands In North America, Western Europe and many regions outside Latin America, the image has been likened to a global brand, long since shedding its ideological or political connotations. Conversely, the obsession with Guevara has also been dismissed by critics as merely "adolescent revolutionary romanticism." [ 10 ] American, Latin American and European writers, Jon Lee Anderson , Régis Debray , Jorge G. Castañeda and others contributed to demystify the image of Guevara via articles and extensive biographies, which detailed his life and legacy in less idealistic terms; and, in the case of Octavio Paz , was accompanied by a critical indictment of the Marxism espoused by many in the Latin American left. Political writer Paul Berman went further, asserting that the "modern-day cult of Che" obscures the work of dissidents and what he believes is a "tremendous social struggle" currently taking place in Cuba.

[ 23 ] Author Christopher Hitchens , who was a socialist and a supporter of the Cuban revolution in the 1960s but later changed his views, summarised Guevara's legacy by surmising that "Che's iconic status was assured because he failed. His story was one of defeat and isolation, and that's why it is so seductive. Had he lived, the myth of Che would have long since died." [ 10 ] Taking the opposing view, Richard Gott a Guardian journalist in Vallegrande , sent a dispatch on the day of Guevara's death stating the following: It was difficult to recall that this man had once been one of the great figures of Latin America. It was not just that he was a great guerrilla leader; he had been a friend of Presidents as well as revolutionaries. His voice had been heard and appreciated in inter-American councils as well as in the jungle. He was a doctor, an amateur economist, once Minister of Industries in revolutionary Cuba, and Castro 's right-hand man. He may well go down in history as the greatest continental figure since Bolivar . Legends will be created around his name.

[ 24 ] British journalist Sean O’Hagan has described Che as "more (John) Lennon than (Vladimir) Lenin ." Taking the opposite hypothesis, Mexican commentator and Che Biographer Jorge Castañeda Gutman has proclaimed that: "Che can be found just where he belongs in the niches reserved for cultural icons, for symbols of social uprisings that filter down deep into the soil of society." [ 25 ] Castañeda has further stated that "Che still possesses an extraordinary relevance as a symbol of a time when people died heroically for what they believed in", adding that in his view "people don't do that anymore." [ 26 ] The saying "Viva la revolucion!" has also become very popular and synonymous with Guevara.

[ 27 ] Conceptions [ edit ] Cuba [ edit ] Monumental image on Cuban Ministry of the Interior, by artist Enrique Ávila based on Alberto Korda 's March 1960 photo . During Guevara's tenure as head of the Ministry of Industries (MININD) from 1961 to 1965, this building was the MININD's headquarters and his office was on the top floor.

Cuba has promoted Che as a "symbol of revolutionary virtues, sacrifice and internationalism" inside and outside the country since his death.

[ 28 ] Guevara remains a "beloved national hero" in Cuba (almost a secular saint , to many on the Caribbean island), [ 29 ] where he is remembered for promoting unpaid voluntary work by working shirtless on building sites or hauling sacks of sugar. To this day, he appears on a Cuban banknote cutting sugar cane with a machete in the fields.

[ 30 ] The Cuban state has continued to cultivate Guevara’s appreciation, constructing numerous statues and artworks in his honor throughout the land; adorning school rooms, workplaces, public buildings, billboards, and money with his image.

[ 31 ] His visage is also on postage stamps and the 3-peso coin beneath the words "Patria o Muerte" (Homeland or Death).

[ 29 ] Moreover, children across the country begin each school day with the chant "Pioneers for Communism, We will be like Che!" [ citation needed ] . The University of Havana also possesses an academic concentration in "Che." [ citation needed ] Guevara's mausoleum in Santa Clara has also become a site of almost religious significance to many Cubans, [ 10 ] while the nation’s burgeoning tourist industry has benefited greatly from the ongoing international interest in Guevara's life. For example, some 205,832 people visited the mausoleum during 2004, of whom 127,597 were foreigners. However, Argentine psychoanalyst Pacho O'Donnell regrets the formal rigidity of Che's state-crafted image, opining that "The Cubans have excluded everything about the younger Che that is not heroic, including that which is most deliciously human about him. Personal doubts, the sexual escapades, the moments when he and (Alberto) Granado were drunk, none of that fits with the immortal warrior they want to project." [ 32 ] Despite the formal adulation, Guevara's legacy is less pronounced on a national policy front. In Cuba, Guevara's death precipitated the abandonment of guerrilla warfare as an instrument of foreign policy, ushering in a rapprochement with the Soviet Union , and the reformation of the government along Soviet lines. When Cuban troops returned to Africa in the 1970s, it was as part of a large-scale military expedition, and support for insurrection movements in Latin America and the Caribbean became logistical and organizational rather than overt. Cuba also abandoned Guevara's plans for economic diversification and rapid industrialization which had ultimately proved to be impracticable in view of the country's incorporation into the COMECON system. As early as 1965, the Yugoslav communist journal Borba observed the many half-completed or empty factories in Cuba, a legacy of Guevara's short tenure as Minister of Industries, "standing like sad memories of the conflict between pretension and reality".

[ 33 ] Cuban exiles [ edit ] Many Cuban exiles have spoken of Guevara in unfavorable terms, and he is remembered by some with the epithet "The Butcher of la Cabaña ", a reference to Guevara’s post-revolutionary role as "supreme prosecutor" over the revolutionary tribunals at the fortress. Similar disapproval has been shared by Cuban-American actor and director Andy García , whose 2005 film, The Lost City , portrays what could be perceived by some, including Che, as the brutality of pre and post revolution Cuba .

[ 34 ] In reference to such polarization, Cuban-American academic Uva de Aragon has hypothesized that "we'll still have to wait many years for history to deliver a definite judgement on Che, when the passions of both sides have passed." [ 35 ] Latin American left [ edit ] In Bogotá , the National University of Colombia gave their "Santander Square" the nickname "Che Square".

In Latin America, the perceived failures of the liberal reforms of the 1990s intensified ideological antagonism towards the United States, [ 36 ] [ 37 ] leading to a resurgence in support for many of Guevara’s political beliefs: including Pan-Americanism , support for popular movements in the region, the nationalization of key industries and centralization of government.

[ 38 ] In nearly every upsurge of revolutionary movements in Latin America over the last forty years, from Argentina to Chile , from Nicaragua to El Salvador , from Guatemala to Mexico and Chiapas , there are traces of "Guevarismo" – sometimes clear, sometimes faint.

[ 39 ] In the view of the indigenous rights activist Rigoberta Menchú , "In these present times, when for many, ethics and other profound moral values are seen to be so easily bought and sold, the example of Che Guevara takes on an even greater dimension." [ 40 ] In Nicaragua, the Sandinistas , a group with ideological roots in Guevarism were re-elected to government after 16 years. Supporters wore Guevara T-shirts during the 2006 victory celebrations.

[ 41 ] Bolivian president Evo Morales has paid many tributes to Guevara including visiting his initial burial site in Bolivia to declare "Che Lives", [ 42 ] and installing a portrait of the Argentine made from local coca leaves in his presidential suite.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] In 2006, Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez who has referred to Guevara as an "infinite revolutionary" [ 42 ] and who has been known to address audiences in a Che Guevara T-shirt, [ 46 ] accompanied Fidel Castro on a tour of Guevara’s boyhood home in Córdoba Argentina , describing the experience as "a real honor." Awaiting crowds of thousands responded with calls of "We feel it! Guevara is right with us!" [ 47 ] Guevara’s daughter Aleida also transcribed an extensive interview with Chávez where he outlined his plans for "The New Latin America", releasing the interview in book form.

[ 48 ] Guevara also remains a key inspirational figure to the Colombian guerrilla movement, the FARC , [ 49 ] and the Mexican Zapatistas led by Subcomandante Marcos .

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] In addition, the various "expressions of the popular will" that Che favored over ballot-box democracy – neighborhood courts and the Committees for the Defense of the Revolution – have found new expression in Venezuela and Bolivia.

[ 7 ] Amongst the youth of Latin America, Guevara's memoir The Motorcycle Diaries has become a cult favorite with college students and young intellectuals.

[ 32 ] This has allowed Guevara to emerge as "a romantic and tragic young adventurer, who has as much in common with Jack Kerouac or James Dean as with Fidel Castro ." [ 32 ] Speaking on this phenomenon, biographer Jon Lee Anderson , has theorized that Che is "a figure who can constantly be examined and re-examined, to the younger, post-cold-war generation of Latin Americans, Che stands up as the perennial Icarus , a self-immolating figure who represents the romantic tragedy of youth. Their Che is not just a potent figure of protest, but the idealistic , questioning kid who exists in every society and every time." [ 32 ] Critics [ edit ] The U.S. State Department was advised that his death would come as a relief to non-leftist Latin Americans, who had feared possible insurgencies in their own countries.

[ 3 ] Subsequent critical analysts have also shed light on aspects of cruelty in Guevara’s methods. Studies addressing problematic characteristics of Guevara's life have cited his unsympathetic treatment of his fellow fighters during various guerrilla campaigns, and his frequent humiliations of those deemed his intellectual inferiors.

[ 52 ] Though much opposition to Guevara's methods has come from the political right , critical evaluation has also come from groups such as anarchists , Trotskyists , and civil libertarians , who consider Guevara an anti-working-class Stalinist , whose legacy was the creation of a more bureaucratic , authoritarian regime.

[ 53 ] Detractors have also theorized that in much of Latin America, Che-inspired revolutions had the practical result of reinforcing brutal militarism for many years.

[ 54 ] References [ edit ] ^ Commandante Ernesto "Che" Guevara (1928–1967) Archived 2022-03-12 at the Wayback Machine by The Mostly Water Collective ^ Carlos Puebla: "Hasta Siempre, Comandante" ^ a b U.S. Department of State : Guevara's Death, The Meaning for Latin America pg 6. October 12, 1967: Thomas Hughes, the Latin America specialist at the State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research providing an interpretive report for Secretary of State Dean Rusk .

^ George Galloway "Should Che be an icon? Yes" , The Independent , October 6, 2007 ^ Che Guevara: Modern Saint and Sinner" by The Economist , Oct 11, 2007 ^ a b The Cult of Che by Time, May 17, 1968 ^ a b c d Still a Messiah?

by Isabel Hilton, New Statesman , October 4, 2007 ^ Che Family Album Presents New Image of Revolutionary by Gary Younge , The Guardian , July 24, 2004 ^ Viva Che!: The Strange Death and Life of Che Guevara , by Andrew Sinclair, 1968, re-released in 2006, Sutton publishing, ISBN 0750943106 , p. 124 ^ a b c d Just a Pretty Face ?

by The Guardian , July 11, 2004 ^ Michael Moynihan, "Neutering Sartre at Dagens Nyheter" ^ Viva Che!: The Strange Death and Life of Che Guevara , by Andrew Sinclair, 1968, re-released in 2006, Sutton publishing, ISBN 0750943106 , p. 82 ^ Trento, Angelo.

Castro and Cuba : From the revolution to the present . p.64. Arris books. 2005.

^ Ernesto "Che" Guevara  (World Leaders Past & Present) , by Douglas Kellner , 1989, Chelsea House Publishers (Library Binding edition), ISBN 1555468357 , p. 101 ^ a b Che: A Myth Embalmed in a Matrix of Ignorance by Time Magazine October 12, 1970 ^ Viva the Chevolution!

by Trisha Ziff, The Huffington Post , April 21, 2008 ^ a b Comrade Che Keeps an Eye on British Workers by Owen Booth, BBC News , October 24, 2002 ^ Che Guevara Photographer Dies by BBC News , May 26, 2001 ^ Che Guevara: An Image that Keeps the Spirit of Revolution Alive Archived 2012-03-22 at the Wayback Machine by the Socialist Worker , Issue 2005, June 17, 2006 ^ A Radiant Face Driven Mad with a Rifle: Che in Verse by The Latin American Review of Books Archived November 8, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ Intro to: Che in Verse, by Gavin O'Toole, Aflame Books, 2007, ISBN 0-9552339-5-X ^ Poems Guevara Lived and Died by , by Javier Espinoza, The Observer , September 9, 2007 ^ The Cult of Che by Paul Berman , Slate magazine , September 2004 ^ The Final Triumph of Saint Che The Guardian , September 23, 2007. Retrieved: 12 October 2011.

^ Che Guevara: An Image that Keeps the Spirit of Revolution Alive Archived 2012-03-22 at the Wayback Machine 2005 Issue of The Socialist Worker ^ Che Guevara: Revolutionary & Icon , by Trisha Ziff, Abrams Image, 2006, pg 76 ^ Discussion about Che Guevara , by CBC Radio One ^ Cuba Honours Comrade Che by BBC News , June 15, 2003 ^ a b "Che Guevara Remains a Hero to Cubans", by People's Weekly World , October 2, 2004 ^ Cuba remembers Che Guevara 40 years after his fall Archived 2008-02-13 at the Wayback Machine by Rosa Tania Valdes, Reuters , October 8, 2007 ^ Cuba's Face , by Stanford University Germanic Collections ^ a b c d Letter from the Americas; Che Today? More Easy Rider Than Revolutionary by Larry Rohter , The New York Times , May 26, 2004 ^ Hugh Thomas. Cuba: The Pursuit of Freedom. p. 1,007.

^ Don’t Let This Movie Get Lost Archived 2009-01-13 at the Wayback Machine by Kathryn Jean Lopez, National Review ^ Sympathizers Mark 40th anniversary of Che Guevara's Death , by the Associated Press , October 8, 2007 ^ How the US 'Lost' Latin America by BBC News ^ Anti-U.S. Protests Flare at Summit by The Washington Post ^ Latin America's Left Turn Archived 2008-03-02 at the Wayback Machine by Foreign Affairs ^ The Spark that does not Die by Michael Löwy , International Viewpoint , July 1997 ^ Latin America: Awakening of a Continent : Synopses & Reviews Archived 2022-05-04 at the Wayback Machine by Powell Books ^ Photograph of Sandinista election victory parade ^ a b Cuba pays tribute to Che Guevara , by BBC News , Oct 9, 2007 ^ Evo Morales 'Padlocked' in Palace by BBC News ^ Capitalism Has Only Hurt Latin America by Der Spiegel ^ President Evo Morales pays tribute to Che Guevara by The Latin American and Caribbean Information Center of the Florida International University ^ Hugo Chavez Superstar by The Guardian ^ Castro, Chavez Tour Che Guevara’s Home by NBC News ^ Chavez: Venezuela and the New Latin America by Aleida Guevara ^ The Impact and Legacy of Che Guevara’s Foco Theory, with Special Reference to Guerrilla Warfare in Colombia [ dead link ] by Leeds University ^ Profile: The Zapatistas' Mysterious Leader by BBC News ^ The Sixth Declaration of the Lacandon Jungle by the Zapatista Army of National Liberation ^ Anderson, Jon Lee.

Che Guevara: A Revolutionary Life , New York: 1997, Grove Press, p. 567.

^ Ernesto "Che" Guevara, 1928–1967 at LibCom ^ Guevara has been heavily idolized by people in the music industry. Particularly rock and hip-hop. Despite this, some see Che as more champion of political and ideological conformity. Cuban jazz legend Paquito D'Rivera stated in interview "Che hated artists, so how is it possible that artists still today support the image of Che Guevara?" The Killing Machine: Che Guevara, from Communist Firebrand to Capitalist Brand by The Independent Institute External links [ edit ] BBC: Che's Spirit Burns on in Latin America by Daniel Schweimler, January 3, 2009 Daily Observer : Che Remembered: on 80th Birthday Archived 2012-02-10 at the Wayback Machine June 12, 2008 Der Spiegel : Photo Gallery – Latin America Commemorates Che Guevara Harpers Magazine : Six Questions for Greg Grandin on Che’s Legacy September 30, 2007 PBS Forum: The Legacy of Che Guevara with biographer Jon Lee Anderson November 20, 1997 Socialist Worker : The Legacy of A Revolutionary – Who was Che?

October 12, 2007 The Observer : The Final Triumph of Saint Che September 23, 2007 TIME 100: Che Guevara June 14, 1999 Wall Street Journal : In Argentina, Che Guevara Finally Gets More Than a Lousy T-Shirt by Michael Casey, June 14, 2008 Multimedia [ edit ] BBC Radio: Witness: Che Guevara October 8, 2010 BBC Video: Che Remembered 40 Years On October 8, 2007 NPR Audio Report: Thirty Years After His Death, Che Guevara Still an Icon Video: Does Che Guevara Still Matter?

interview with biographer Jorge Castañeda v t e Che Guevara Events Guatemalan Coup Cuban Revolution Landing of the Granma Battle of Alegría de Pío Battle of La Plata (1957) Battle of Santa Clara Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution La Coubre explosion Guanahacabibes camp Bay of Pigs Invasion Four Year Plan (Cuba) Cuban Missile Crisis Great Debate (Cuba) Congo Crisis Bolivian Campaign Ideas Foco Guerrillerismo New Man People Alberto Granado Hilda Gadea Aleida March Aleida Guevara Raúl Castro Fidel Castro Camilo Cienfuegos Tamara Bunke Simeon Cuba Sarabia Harry "Pombo" Villegas Régis Debray Félix Rodríguez Orlando Borrego Canek Sánchez Guevara Mario Terán Books The Motorcycle Diaries Guerrilla Warfare Episodes of the Cuban Revolutionary War Films The Motorcycle Diaries Che (Part 1 & Part 2) Che!

The Hands of Che Guevara Che: Rise and Fall Chevolution Theatre Che'r Cycle Iconography Guerrillero Heroico photo Legacy In popular culture In fashion Mausoleum Alberto Korda Jim Fitzpatrick Comics Vida del Che Category v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐b666f4b‐xj4lg
Cached time: 20250815101758
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.673 seconds
Real time usage: 0.810 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7800/1000000
Revision size: 34812/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 334991/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12285/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 49/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 74959/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.279/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6939008/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  577.434      1 -total
 52.77%  304.699     17 Template:Navbox
 32.18%  185.824      1 Template:Historiography
 31.59%  182.425      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 18.91%  109.213     36 Template:Ill
 18.53%  106.984      1 Template:Reflist
 18.38%  106.156      1 Template:Che_Guevara
 10.06%   58.087      4 Template:ISBN
  9.68%   55.873      1 Template:Short_description
  6.84%   39.501     36 Template:Separated_entries Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:16005867:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815101758 and revision id 1306004356. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Legacy_of_Che_Guevara&oldid=1306004356 " Categories : Che Guevara Marxism Marxist theorists Legacies by person Cold War historiography Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2024 Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 10:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Legacy of Che Guevara 2 languages Add topic

