Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and career 2 Philosophical work Toggle Philosophical work subsection 2.1 Seeing and Knowing (1969) 2.2 Knowledge and the Flow of Information (1981) 2.3 Explaining Behavior:  Reasons in a World of Causes (1988) 2.4 Naturalizing the Mind (1995) 2.5 Other philosophical work 3 Selected publications 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Fred Dretske 11 languages Deutsch Español Français Íslenska 日本語 Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American professor of Philosophy at Stanford University Fred Dretske Frederick Irwin " Fred " Dretske ( / ˈ d r ɛ t s k i / ; December 9, 1932 – July 24, 2013) was an American philosopher noted for his contributions to epistemology and the philosophy of mind .

[ 1 ] Life and career [ edit ] Born to Frederick and Hattie Dretske, Dretske first planned to be an engineer, attending Purdue University . He changed his mind after taking the university's only philosophy course, deciding philosophy was the only thing he wanted to do in his life.

[ 2 ] After graduating in 1954 with a degree in electrical engineering and serving in the army, he enrolled in graduate school in philosophy at the University of Minnesota , where he received his PhD in 1960. His dissertation, supervised by May Brodbeck , was on the philosophy of time.

Dretske's first academic appointment was to the University of Wisconsin–Madison in 1960, where he rose to the rank of full Professor. In 1988 he was recruited to Stanford University , where he was the Bella and Eloise Mabury Knapp Professor of Philosophy. He remained at Stanford until his retirement in 1998, after which he was professor emeritus in philosophy at Stanford and senior research scholar in philosophy at Duke University until his death.

[ 2 ] He was awarded the Jean Nicod Prize in 1994.

[ 3 ] He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences in 2003.

[ 4 ] Upon his death, he was survived by his second wife Judith Fortson, by his children Kathleen Dretske and Ray Dretske, and by a stepson, Ryan Fortson.

[ 5 ] Philosophical work [ edit ] Dretske held externalist views about the mind, and thus he tried in various writings to show that by means of mere introspection one actually learns about their own mind less than might be expected. His later work centered on conscious experience and self-knowledge, Seeing and Knowing (1969) [ edit ] Dretske's first book, Seeing and Knowing , deals with the question of what is required to know that something is the case on the basis of what is seen. According to the theory presented in Seeing and Knowing , for a subject S to be able to see that an object b has property P is: (i) for b to be P
(ii) for S to see b
(iii) for the conditions under which S sees b to be such that b would not look the way it now looks to S unless it were P
and (iv) for S, believing that conditions are as described in (iii), to take b to be P.

[ 6 ] For instance, for me to see that the soup is boiling – to know, by seeing, that it is boiling – is for the soup to be boiling, for me to see the soup, for the conditions under which I see the soup to be such that it would not look the way it does were it not boiling, and for me to believe that the soup is boiling on that basis.

Knowledge and the Flow of Information (1981) [ edit ] Dretske's next book returned to the topic of knowledge gained via perception but substantially changes the theory. Dretske had become convinced that information theory was required to make sense of knowledge (and also belief). He signaled this change at the beginning of the new book, opening the Preface with the lines "In the beginning there was information. The word came later." [ 7 ] Information, understood in Dretske's sense, is something that exists as an objective and mind-independent feature of the natural world and can be quantified. Dretske offers the following theory of information: A signal r carries the information that s is F = The conditional probability of s's being F, given r (and k), is 1 (but, given k alone, less than 1).

[ 8 ] Thus, for a red light (r) to carry the information that a goal (s) has been scored (is F) is for the probability that a goal has been scored, given that the light is red (and given my background knowledge of the world, k), to be 1 (but less than 1 given just my background knowledge).

With this theory of information, Dretske then argued that for a knower, K, to know that s is F = K's belief that s is F is caused (or causally sustained) by the information that s is F.

[ 9 ] His theory of knowledge thus replaced conscious appearances with the idea that the visual state of the observer carries information, thereby minimizing appeal to the mysteries of consciousness in explaining knowledge.

Dretske's work on belief begins in the last third of Knowledge and the Flow of Information , [ 10 ] but the theory changed again in the book that followed, Explaining Behavior (1988). There Dretske claims that actions are the causing of movements by mental states, rather than the movements themselves.

[ 11 ] Action is thus a partly mental process itself, not a mere product of a mental process. For the meaning – the content – of a belief to explain an action, on this view, is for the content of the belief to explain why it is that the mental state is part of a process that leads to the movement it does.

[ 12 ] Explaining Behavior:  Reasons in a World of Causes (1988) [ edit ] According to Explaining Behavior , a belief that s is F is a brain state that has been recruited (through operant conditioning) to be part of movement-causing processes because it did, when recruited, carry the information that s is F.

[ 13 ] Being recruited because of carrying information gives a thing (such as a brain state) the function of carrying that information, on Dretske's view, and having the function of carrying information makes that thing a representation.

Beliefs are thus mental representations that contribute to movement production because of their contents (saying P is why the brain state is recruited to cause movement), and so form components of the process known as acting for a reason.

An important feature of Dretske's account of belief is that, although brain states are recruited to control action because they carry information, there is no guarantee that they will continue to do so. Yet, once they have been recruited for carrying information, they have the function of carrying information, and continue to have that function even if they no longer carry information. This is how misrepresentation enters the world.

[ 14 ] Naturalizing the Mind (1995) [ edit ] Dretske's last monograph was on consciousness.  Between the representational theory of belief, desire, and action in Explaining Behavior and the representational theory of consciousness found in Naturalizing the Mind , Dretske aimed to give full support to what he calls the "Representational Thesis". This is the claim that: (1) All mental facts are representational facts, and
(2) All representational facts are facts about informational functions.

[ 15 ] In Naturalizing the Mind Dretske argues that when a brain state acquires, through natural selection, the function of carrying information, then it is a mental representation suited (with certain provisos) to being a state of consciousness. Representations that get their functions through being recruited by operant conditioning, on the other hand, are beliefs, just as he held in Explaining Behavior .

[ 16 ] Other philosophical work [ edit ] In addition to the subjects tackled in Dretske's book-length projects, he was also known as a leading proponent, along with David Armstrong and Michael Tooley , of the view that laws of nature are relations among universals .

In his 1970 article "Epistemic Operators", Fred Dretske discusses epistemic closure and its relationship to philosophical skepticism .  The principle of epistemic closure holds the following to be valid: S knows p.

S knows p entails q.

S knows q.

For example, John knows that he is eating oatmeal.

John knows that eating oatmeal entails that he is not eating scrambled eggs.

John knows that he is not eating scrambled eggs.

Epistemic closure, however, is vulnerable to exploitation by the skeptic.  Eating oatmeal entails not eating scrambled eggs.  It also entails not eating scrambled eggs while being deceived by an evil demon into believing one is eating oatmeal.  Because John does not have evidence to suggest that he is not being deceived by an evil demon, the skeptic argues that John does not know he is eating oatmeal.  To combat this attack by the skeptic, Dretske develops relevant alternatives theory (RAT).

RAT holds that an agent need only be able to rule out all relevant alternatives in order to possess knowledge.

[ 17 ] According to RAT, every knowledge claim is made against a spectrum of relevant alternatives entailed by the original knowledge claim.  Also entailed by a knowledge claim are irrelevant alternatives.  The skeptic's alternatives fall into this irrelevant category.  The following applies RAT to Johns oatmeal: John knows that he is eating oatmeal (as opposed to eating scrambled eggs, eating a bagel, bathing in oatmeal, etc.) John knows that eating oatmeal entails that he is not eating scrambled eggs.

John knows that he is not eating scrambled eggs.

John knows that eating oatmeal entails that he is not eating scrambled eggs while being deceived by an evil demon into believing he is eating oatmeal.

John does not know that he is not eating scrambled eggs while being deceived by an evil demon.  (This alternative is irrelevant; it does not lie within the spectrum of relevant alternatives implied by his initial claim.) Although it provides a defense from the skeptic, RAT requires a denial of the principle of epistemic closure.  Epistemic closure does not hold if one does not know all of the known entailments of a knowledge claim.  The denial of epistemic closure is rejected by many philosophers who regard the principle as intuitive.

Another issue with RAT is how one defines "relevant alternatives."  "A relevant alternative," Dretske writes, "is an alternative that might have been realized in the existing circumstances if the actual state of affairs had not materialized." [ 18 ] Selected publications [ edit ] 1969, Seeing and Knowing , Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-7100-6213-3 1981, Knowledge and the Flow of Information , Cambridge, Massachusetts The MIT Press.

ISBN 0-262-04063-8 1988, Explaining Behavior: Reasons in a World of Causes , Cambridge, Massachusetts The MIT Press.

ISBN 0-262-04094-8 1995, Naturalizing the Mind , Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.

ISBN 0-262-04149-9 2000, Perception, Knowledge and Belief , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-77742-9 See also [ edit ] Relevant alternatives theory Jean Nicod Prize References [ edit ] ^ Shook, J.R.; Hull, R.T. (2005).

Dictionary of Modern American Philosophers . Vol. 1. Thoemmes Continuum. p. 660.

ISBN 9781843710370 . Retrieved 2015-05-13 .

^ a b "Fred Dretske obituary" .

TheGuardian.com . 22 August 2013.

^ "Archives - INSTITUT JEAN NICOD" .

^ "American Academy of Arts and Sciences Elects Petroski, Five Others from Duke | Duke Pratt School of Engineering" . Archived from the original on 2015-07-13 . Retrieved 2015-07-09 .

^ "Frederick I. Dretske Obituary: View Frederick Dretske's Obituary by The News & Observer" . legacy.com . Retrieved 2015-05-13 .

^ Dretske (1969, pp. 78–93) ^ (Dretske 1981, vii) ^ Dretske (1981, p. 65) ^ Dretske (1981, p. 86) ^ Dretske (1981, pp. 169–235) ^ Dretske (1988, p. 15) ^ Dretske (1988, pp. 79–85) ^ Dretske (1988, 51–77) ^ Dretske (1988, pp. 64–70) ^ Dretske (1995, p. xiii) ^ Dretske (1995, pp. 2–22) ^ Dretske, Fred. 1970. "Epistemic Operators", The Journal of Philosophy , 67, pp. 1007–23.

^ Dretske (1970, p. 1021) External links [ edit ] An Interview with Fred Dretske where colleagues ask about his work. From The Dualist , Stanford's Undergraduate Journal of Philosophy WHAT GOOD IS CONSCIOUSNESS?

THE MIND'S AWARENESS OF ITSELF Where is the Mind when the Body Performs?

Archived 2012-10-20 at the Wayback Machine First Person Warrant: Comments On Siewert's The Significance Of Consciousness Perception without Awareness PSYCHOLOGICAL VS. BIOLOGICAL EXPLANATIONS OF BEHAVIOR EXPERIENCE AS REPRESENTATION HOW DO YOU KNOW YOU ARE NOT A ZOMBIE?

KNOWING WHAT YOU THINK vs KNOWING THAT YOU THINK IT, or Externalism: Thought and Their Content What We See , Howison Lectures in Philosophy , 14 November 2007, University of California, Berkeley v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fred_Dretske&oldid=1293269503 " Categories : 1932 births 2013 deaths Action theorists Analytic philosophers American philosophers of mind American epistemologists Duke University faculty Stanford University faculty University of Minnesota College of Liberal Arts alumni University of Wisconsin–Madison faculty 20th-century American philosophers 21st-century American philosophers Jean Nicod Prize laureates Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 19:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fred Dretske 11 languages Add topic

