Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Thought Toggle Thought subsection 2.1 Influences 2.2 Early works 2.3 The Idea of the Holy 2.4 Later works 3 Influence Toggle Influence subsection 3.1 Christian theology 3.2 Non-Christian theology and spirituality 3.3 Religious studies 3.4 Psychology 3.5 Philosophy 3.6 Other 4 Ecumenical activities 5 Works Toggle Works subsection 5.1 In German 5.2 English translations 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Rudolf Otto 34 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Kiswahili Lietuvių مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский سرائیکی Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German theologian, philosopher and comparative religionist (1869–1937) For the German painter, see Rudolf Otto (painter) .

Rudolf Otto Born ( 1869-09-25 ) 25 September 1869 Peine , North German Confederation Died 6 March 1937 (1937-03-06) (aged 67) Marburg , Germany Academic background Alma mater University of Erlangen University of Göttingen Influences Friedrich Schleiermacher , Immanuel Kant , Jakob Fries Academic work Discipline Theology and comparative religion School or tradition History of religions school Notable works The Idea of the Holy Notable ideas The numinous Influenced Eliade , Jung , Campbell , C. S. Lewis , Tillich , Barth , Rahner , Heidegger , Wach , Horkheimer , Gadamer , Strauss Part of a series on Lutheranism Background Christianity Start of the Reformation Reformation Protestantism Doctrine and theology Bible Old Testament New Testament Creeds Apostles' Creed Nicene Creed Athanasian Creed Book of Concord Augsburg Confession Apology of the Augsburg Confession Luther's Small / Large Catechism Smalcald Articles Treatise on the Power and Primacy of the Pope Formula of Concord Distinctive theological concepts Theology of Martin Luther Justification Law and Gospel Sola gratia Sola scriptura Christology Sanctification Two kingdoms catholicity Two states of the Church Priesthood of all believers Divine Providence Marian theology Theology of the Cross Sacramental Union Other relevant topics Homosexuality Sacraments and worship Baptism Eucharist Confession Confirmation Matrimony Anointing of the Sick Holy Orders Divine Service Matins Vespers Liturgical calendar Calendar of saints Lutheran hymn Lutheran hymnwriters Normative principle Lutheran art Organization Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference Global Confessional & Missional Lutheran Forum International Lutheran Council Lutheran World Federation Denominations Lutheranism by region Movements History of Lutheranism Crypto-Lutherans Gnesio-Lutherans Lutheran orthodoxy Pietists Radical Pietism Haugeans Laestadians Finnish Awakening Old Lutherans Neo-Lutherans High church Lutherans Confessional Lutheranism Key figures Missionaries John Campanius Bartholomäus Ziegenbalg Hans Egede Johann Heinrich Callenberg Johann Phillip Fabricius Paul Henkel John Christian Frederick Heyer Karl Graul Martti Rautanen Wilhelm Sihler F. C. D. Wyneken Hans Paludan Smith Schreuder Lars Olsen Skrefsrud Ludwig Ingwer Nommensen Onesimos Nesib Paul Olaf Bodding Johann Flierl Christian Keyser Jens Christensen Bible Translators Martin Luther Casiodoro de Reina Kjell Magne Yri Onesimos Nesib Aster Ganno Kristian Osvald Viderø Jákup Dahl Bartholomäus Ziegenbalg Johann Phillip Fabricius William Tyndale John Rogers George Constantine Jozef Roháček Johannes Avetaranian Guðbrandur Þorláksson Ludvig Olsen Fossum Hans Egede / Paul Egede Otto Fabricius Nils Vibe Stockfleth Olaus Petri / Laurentius Petri Martti Rautanen Primož Trubar Jurij Dalmatin Ludwig Ingwer Nommensen Sebastian Krelj Mikael Agricola Norwegian Bible Society Swedish Bible Society Samuel Ludwik Zasadius Stanislovas Rapolionis Laurentius Andreae Hans Tausen Olaf M. Norlie Jonas Bretkūnas Hans Paludan Smith Schreuder Antonio Brucioli Mikołaj Jakubica Matthias Bel Johann Ernst Glück William F. Beck Theologians Martin Luther / Katharina von Bora Philip Melanchthon Johannes Bugenhagen Johannes Brenz Justus Jonas Hans Tausen Laurentius Petri Olaus Petri Mikael Agricola Matthias Flacius Martin Chemnitz Johann Gerhard Abraham Calovius Johannes Andreas Quenstedt Johann Wilhelm Baier Philipp Spener David Hollaz August Hermann Francke Henry Muhlenberg Lars Levi Laestadius Charles Porterfield Krauth C. F. W. Walther Søren Kierkegaard Albrecht Ritschl Wilhelm Herrmann F. W. Stellhorn Rudolf Otto Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Bultmann Paul Tillich Hermann Sasse Dietrich Bonhoeffer Wolfhart Pannenberg Robert Jenson v t e Rudolf Otto (25 September 1869 – 7 March 1937) was a German Lutheran theologian, philosopher, and comparative religionist . He is regarded as one of the most influential scholars of religion in the early twentieth century and is best known for his concept of the numinous , a profound emotional experience he argued was at the heart of the world's religions.

[ 1 ] While his work started in the domain of liberal Christian theology , its main thrust was always apologetical , seeking to defend religion against naturalist critiques, making him a more conservative figure.

[ 2 ] Otto eventually came to conceive of his work as part of a science of religion, which was divided into the philosophy of religion , the history of religion , and the psychology of religion .

[ 2 ] Life [ edit ] Born in Peine near Hanover , Otto was raised in a pious Christian family.

[ 3 ] He attended the Gymnasium Andreanum in Hildesheim and studied at the universities of Erlangen and Göttingen , where he wrote his dissertation on Martin Luther 's understanding of the Holy Spirit ( Die Anschauung von heiligen Geiste bei Luther: Eine historisch-dogmatische Untersuchung ), and his habilitation on Kant ( Naturalistische und religiöse Weltansicht ). By 1906, he held a position as extraordinary professor , and in 1910 he received an honorary doctorate from the University of Giessen .

Otto's fascination with non-Christian religions was awakened during an extended trip from 1911 to 1912 through North Africa, Palestine , British India , China, Japan, and the United States.

[ 4 ] He cited a 1911 visit to a Moroccan synagogue as a key inspiration for the theme of the Holy he would later develop.

[ 3 ] Otto became a member of the Prussian parliament in 1913 and retained this position through the First World War .

[ 4 ] In 1917, he spearheaded an effort to simplify the system of weighting votes in Prussian elections.

[ 2 ] He then served in the post-war constituent assembly in 1918, and remained involved in the politics of the Weimar Republic .

[ 4 ] Meanwhile, in 1915, he became ordinary professor at the University of Breslau , and in 1917, at the University of Marburg 's Divinity School, then one of the most famous Protestant seminaries in the world. Although he received several other calls, he remained in Marburg for the rest of his life. He retired in 1929 but continued writing afterward. On 6 March 1937, he died of pneumonia , after suffering serious injuries falling about twenty meters from a tower in October 1936. There were lasting rumors that the fall was a suicide attempt but this has never been confirmed.

[ 2 ] He is buried in the Marburg cemetery.

Thought [ edit ] Influences [ edit ] In his early years Otto was most influenced by the German idealist theologian and philosopher Friedrich Schleiermacher and his conceptualization of the category of the religious as a type of emotion or consciousness irreducible to ethical or rational epistemologies .

[ 4 ] In this, Otto saw Schleiermacher as having recaptured a sense of holiness lost in the Age of Enlightenment . Schleiermacher described this religious feeling as one of absolute dependence; Otto eventually rejected this characterization as too closely analogous to earthly dependence and emphasized the complete otherness of the religious feeling from the mundane world (see below).

[ 4 ] In 1904, while a student at the University of Göttingen , Otto became a proponent of the philosophy of Jakob Fries along with two fellow students.

[ 2 ] Early works [ edit ] Otto's first book, Naturalism and Religion (1904) divides the world ontologically into the mental and the physical, a position reflecting Cartesian dualism . Otto argues consciousness cannot be explained in terms of physical or neural processes, and also accords it epistemological primacy by arguing all knowledge of the physical world is mediated by personal experience. On the other hand, he disagrees with Descartes ' characterization of the mental as a rational realm, positing instead that rationality is built upon a nonrational intuitive realm.

[ 2 ] In 1909, he published his next book, The Philosophy of Religion Based on Kant and Fries , in which he examines the thought of Kant and Fries and from there attempts to build a philosophical framework within which religious experience can take place. While Kant's philosophy said thought occurred in a rational domain, Fries diverged and said it also occurred in practical and aesthetic domains; Otto pursued Fries' line of thinking further and suggested another nonrational domain of the thought, the religious. He felt intuition was valuable in rational domains like mathematics, but subject to the corrective of reason, whereas religious intuitions might not be subject to that corrective.

[ 2 ] These two early works were influenced by the rationalist approaches of Immanuel Kant and Jakob Fries. Otto stated that they focused on the rational aspects of the divine (the "Ratio aeterna") whereas his next (and most influential) book focused on the nonrational aspects of the divine.

[ 5 ] The Idea of the Holy [ edit ] Main article: The Idea of the Holy This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Germany Ideologies Agrarian Christian democracy Liberal Ordo Ritter School Monarchism Nationalist Neue Rechte Völkisch Paternalistic Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Romanticism Right-Hegelianism Historical School Value Principles Authority Christian values Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Federalism Gemeinschaft Geopolitik Germanisation Heimat Imperialism In Treue fest Kultur Medievalism Monarchism Organicism Patriotism Political theology Prussian virtues Sittlichkeit Social market economy Sonderweg Subsidiarity Volk Volksgeist History Holy Roman Empire The Junkers German Confederation Carlsbad Decrees Anti-Socialist Laws German Reich German Empire State Socialism Völkisch movement George-Kreis Leipzig school Freikorps Monarchism in Bavaria after 1918 Perceived Weimar decadence Conservative Revolution Oster conspiracy 20 July plot Historikerstreit Heidelberg Manifesto German reunification Erklärung 2018 Intellectuals Fichte Freyer Gadamer von Galen George Gehlen Gogarten Görres Hamann Hartmann Heidegger Hegel Herder Hielscher von Hildebrand Hoppe Jünger (Ernst) Jünger (Friedrich) Kantorowicz Klages Kommerell Koselleck Langbehn von Lilienfeld Lorenz Löwith Lübbe Mann (early) Maschke Moeller van den Bruck Müller Nolte Novalis Otto Pieper Plessner von Ranke Reck-Malleczewen Ritter (Gerhard) Ritter (Joachim) Röpke Rüstow von Salomon Scheler Schelsky Schlegel Schmitt Sieferle Sloterdijk Sombart Spaemann Spengler Steinbuch von Treitschke Voegelin Weber Literature Addresses to the German Nation (1806) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) The National System (1837) Degeneration (1892) Ressentiment (1912) Reflections of a Nonpolitical Man (1918) The Decline of the West (1918, 1922) Ideology and Utopia (1929) Man and Technics (1931) The Concept of the Political (1932) On the Marble Cliffs (1939) Man (1940) Diary of a Man in Despair (1947) Man in the Age of Technology (1949) The Questionnaire (1951) Fascism in Its Epoch (1963) Envy (1966) Moral und Hypermoral (1969) Germany Abolishes Itself (2010) Finis Germania (2017) Commentators Anrich Aust Bolz Broder Deschner Thomas Fasbender Herman Höhler Hoven Joffe Krause Landt Kuby Hermann Löns Löwenthal Mann (Golo) Maurer Nagel Nebel Noelle-Neumann Otte Pirinçci Röhl Safranski Sarrazin von Schrenck-Notzing Schwilk Stein Strauss (Botho) Stürmer Tichy Weißmann Zehrer Zitelmann Politicians Adenauer Ancillon Barschel von Bismarck von Bose Brüning Fehrenbach Filbinger von Gerlach Goerdeler Held von Hindenburg Hugenberg Jongen Jung Kapp Kohl Krah Lengsfeld Maaßen von Merkatz Merz Michaelis von Papen Petry von Radowitz Rauschning Ritter von Kahr von Roon Schäffer Schäffler von Schleicher Stresemann vom Stein Stoecker von Storch Strauss Wagener Weidel von Westarp Wilhelm II Winnig Jurists Böckenförde von Gierke Möser Quabbe von Savigny Schmitt Stahl Wackenroder Wagener Activists Kohlmann Kubitschek Seibt Billy Six von Stauffenberg Stürzenberger von Thurn und Taxis (Elisabeth) von Thurn und Taxis (Gloria) Parties Active Alternative for Germany (AfD) Bavaria Party (BP) Bündnis Deutschland (BD) Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU) Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU) Centre Party Ecological Democratic Party (ÖDP) Family Party of Germany The Republicans (REP) Values Union (WU) We Citizens (WB) Defunct Bavarian People's Party (BVP) Conservative Party Free Conservative Party (FKP) German Conservative Party (DkP) German Freedom Party German National People's Party (DNVP) German Party (DP) German People's Party (DVP) Organizations Aufbau Vereinigung Bibliothek des Konservatismus Desiderius-Erasmus-Stiftung Die Deutschen Konservativen Forum of German Catholics Gerhard Löwenthal Prize German Burschenschaft German Taxpayers Federation Citizens' Movement Pax Europa Hanns Seidel Foundation Hans Filbinger Foundation Identitäre Aktion Institut für Staatspolitik Konrad Adenauer Foundation PEGIDA Studienzentrum Weikersheim Tradition und Leben Defunct Der Stahlhelm, Bund der Frontsoldaten Germany Foundation Queen Louise League Media Die Achse des Guten Antaios (Defunct) Bild Cato Cicero COMPACT Deutsche Rundschau Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung Junge Freiheit Kreuzzeitung (Defunct) Politically Incorrect Preußische Allgemeine Zeitung Süddeutsche Monatshefte Der Türmer Verlag Antaios Die Welt Welt am Sonntag Related topics Alternative Mitte Bavarian nationalism Böckenförde dilemma European New Right Conservatism in Austria Conservatism in Switzerland Criticism of multiculturalism Cultural pessimism Freischwebende Intelligenz Immigration to Germany Criminality Remigration Metapolitics Politics of Germany Liberalism Stahlhelm-Fraktion Conservatism portal Germany portal v t e Otto's most famous work, The Idea of the Holy was one of the most successful German theological books of the 20th century, has never gone out of print, and is available in about 20 languages. The central argument of the book concerns the term numinous , which Otto coined. He explains the numinous as a "non-rational, non-sensory experience or feeling whose primary and immediate object is outside the self". This mental state "presents itself as ganz Andere , [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] wholly other, a condition absolutely sui generis and incomparable whereby the human being finds himself utterly abashed." [ 9 ] According to Mark Wynn in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , The Idea of the Holy falls within a paradigm in the philosophy of emotion in which emotions are seen as including an element of perception with intrinsic epistemic value that is neither mediated by thoughts nor simply a response to physiological factors. Otto therefore understands religious experience as having mind-independent phenomenological content rather than being an internal response to belief in a divine reality. Otto applied this model specifically to religious experiences, which he felt were qualitatively different from other emotions.

[ 10 ] Otto felt people should first do serious rational study of God, before turning to the non-rational element of God as he did in this book.

[ 5 ] [ 11 ] Later works [ edit ] In Mysticism East and West , published in German in 1926 and English in 1932, Otto compares and contrasts the views of the medieval German Christian mystic Meister Eckhart with those of the influential Hindu philosopher Adi Shankara , the key figure of the Advaita Vedanta school.

[ 2 ] Influence [ edit ] Otto left a broad influence on theology, religious studies , and philosophy of religion , which continues into the 21st century.

[ 12 ] Christian theology [ edit ] Karl Barth , an influential Protestant theologian contemporary to Otto, acknowledged Otto's influence and approved a similar conception of God as ganz Andere or totaliter aliter , [ 13 ] thus falling within the tradition of apophatic theology .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Otto was also one of the very few modern theologians to whom C. S. Lewis indicates a debt, particularly to the idea of the numinous in The Problem of Pain . In that book Lewis offers his own description of the numinous: [ 16 ] Suppose you were told there was a tiger in the next room: you would know that you were in danger and would probably feel fear.  But if you were told "There is a ghost in the next room," and believed it, you would feel, indeed, what is often called fear, but of a different kind. It would not be based on the knowledge of danger, for no one is primarily afraid of what a ghost may do to him, but of the mere fact that it is a ghost.  It is "uncanny" rather than dangerous, and the special kind of fear it excites may be called Dread. With the Uncanny one has reached the fringes of the Numinous. Now suppose that you were told simply "There is a mighty spirit in the room," and believed it. Your feelings would then be even less like the mere fear of danger: but the disturbance would be profound. You would feel wonder and a certain shrinking—a sense of inadequacy to cope with such a visitant and of prostration before it—an emotion which might be expressed in Shakespeare's words "Under it my genius is rebuked." This feeling may be described as awe, and the object which excites it as the Numinous.

German-American theologian Paul Tillich acknowledged Otto's influence on him, [ 2 ] as did Otto's most famous German pupil, Gustav Mensching (1901–1978) from Bonn University .

[ 17 ] Otto's views can be seen [ clarification needed ] in the noted Catholic theologian Karl Rahner 's presentation of man as a being of transcendence .

[ citation needed ] More recently, Otto has also influenced the American Franciscan friar and inspirational speaker Richard Rohr .

[ 18 ] : 139 Non-Christian theology and spirituality [ edit ] Otto's ideas have also exerted an influence on non-Christian theology and spirituality. They have been discussed by Orthodox Jewish theologians including Joseph Soloveitchik [ 19 ] and Eliezer Berkovits .

[ 20 ] The Iranian-American Sufi religious studies scholar and public intellectual Reza Aslan understands religion as "an institutionalized system of symbols and metaphors [...] with which a community of faith can share with each other their numinous encounter with the Divine Presence." [ 21 ] Further afield, Otto's work received words of appreciation from Indian independence leader Mohandas Gandhi .

[ 17 ] Aldous Huxley , a major proponent of perennialism , was influenced by Otto; in The Doors of Perception he writes: [ 22 ] The literature of religious experience abounds in references to the pains and terrors overwhelming those who have come, too suddenly, face to face with some manifestation of the mysterium tremendum . In theological language, this fear is due to the in-compatibility between man's egotism and the divine purity, between man's self-aggravated separateness and the infinity of God.

Religious studies [ edit ] In The Idea of the Holy and other works, Otto set out a paradigm for the study of religion that focused on the need to realize the religious as a non-reducible, original category in its own right.

[ citation needed ] The eminent Romanian-American historian of religion and philosopher Mircea Eliade used the concepts from The Idea of the Holy as the starting point for his own 1954 book, The Sacred and the Profane .

[ 12 ] [ 23 ] The paradigm represented by Otto and Eliade was then heavily criticized for viewing religion as a sui generis category, [ 12 ] until around 1990, when it began to see a resurgence as a result of its phenomenological aspects becoming more apparent.

[ citation needed ] Ninian Smart , who was a formative influence on religious studies as a secular discipline, was influenced by Otto in his understanding of religious experience and his approach to understanding religion cross-culturally.

[ 12 ] Psychology [ edit ] Carl Gustav Jung , the founder of analytic psychology , applied the concept of the numinous to psychology and psychotherapy , arguing it was therapeutic and brought greater self-understanding, and stating that to him religion was about a "careful and scrupulous observation… of the numinosum ".

[ 24 ] The American Episcopal priest John A. Sanford applied the ideas of both Otto and Jung in his writings on religious psychotherapy.

[ citation needed ] Philosophy [ edit ] The philosopher and sociologist Max Horkheimer , a member of the Frankfurt School , has taken the concept of "wholly other" in his 1970 book Die Sehnsucht nach dem ganz Anderen ("longing for the entirely Other").

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Walter Terence Stace wrote in his book Time and Eternity that "After Kant, I owe more to Rudolph Otto's The Idea of the Holy than to any other book." [ 27 ] Other philosophers influenced by Otto included Martin Heidegger , [ 17 ] Leo Strauss , [ 17 ] Hans-Georg Gadamer (who was critical when younger but respectful in his old age), [ citation needed ] Max Scheler , [ 17 ] Edmund Husserl , [ 17 ] Joachim Wach , [ 3 ] [ 17 ] and Hans Jonas .

[ citation needed ] Other [ edit ] The war veteran and writer Ernst Jünger and the historian and scientist Joseph Needham also cited Otto's influence.

[ citation needed ] Ecumenical activities [ edit ] Otto was heavily involved in ecumenical activities between Christian denominations and between Christianity and other religions.

[ 4 ] He experimented with adding a time similar to a Quaker moment of silence to the Lutheran liturgy as an opportunity for worshipers to experience the numinous.

[ 4 ] Works [ edit ] A full bibliography of Otto's works is given in Robert F. Davidson, Rudolf Otto's Interpretation of Religion (Princeton, 1947), pp. 207–9 In German [ edit ] Naturalistische und religiöse Weltansicht (1904) Die Kant-Friesische Religions-Philosophie (1909) Das Heilige – Über das Irrationale in der Idee des Göttlichen und sein Verhältnis zum Rationalen (Breslau, 1917) West-östliche Mystik (1926) Die Gnadenreligion Indiens und das Christentum (1930) Reich Gottes und Menschensohn (1934) English translations [ edit ] Naturalism and Religion , trans J. Arthur Thomson & Margaret Thomson (London: Williams and Norgate, 1907) [originally published 1904] The Life and Ministry of Jesus, According to the Critical Method (Chicago: Open Court, 1908), ISBN 0-8370-4648-3 .

The Idea of the Holy , trans JW Harvey (New York: OUP, 1923; 2nd edn, 1950; reprint, New York, 1970), ISBN 0-19-500210-5 [originally published 1917] Christianity and the Indian Religion of Grace (Madras, 1928) India's Religion of Grace and Christianity Compared and Contrasted , trans FH Foster (New York; London, 1930) 'The Sensus Numinis as the Historical Basis of Religion', Hibbert Journal 29, (1930), 1–8 The Philosophy of Religion Based on Kant and Fries , trans EB Dicker (London, 1931) [originally published 1909] Religious essays: A supplement to 'The Idea of the Holy' , trans B Lunn, (London, 1931) Mysticism East and West: A Comparative Analysis of the Nature of Mysticism , trans BL Bracey and RC Payne (New York, 1932) [originally published 1926] 'In the sphere of the holy', Hibbert Journal 31 (1932–3), 413–6 The original Gita: The song of the Supreme Exalted One (London, 1939) The Kingdom of God and the Son of Man: A Study in the History of Religion , trans FV Filson and BL Wolff (Boston, 1943) Autobiographical and Social Essays (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1996), ISBN 3-11-014518-9 See also [ edit ] Christian philosophy Christian ecumenism Christian mysticism Neurotheology Argument from religious experience Hard problem of consciousness The Varieties of Religious Experience by William James Perceiving God by William Alston The Perennial Philosophy by Aldous Huxley The Case for God by Karen Armstrong I and Thou by Martin Buber References [ edit ] ^ Adler, Joseph.

"Rudolf Otto's Concept of the Numinous" .

Gambier , OH: Kenyon College . Retrieved 19 October 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Alles, Gregory D. (2005).

"Otto, Rudolf" .

Encyclopedia of Religion .

Farmington hills , MI: Thomson Gale . Retrieved 6 March 2017 .

^ a b c "Louis Karl Rudolf Otto Facts" .

Encyclopedia of World Biography . Retrieved 24 October 2016 – via YourDictionary.

^ a b c d e f g Meland, Bernard E.

"Rudolf Otto, German philosopher and theologian" .

Encyclopædia Britannica Online . Retrieved 24 October 2016 .

^ a b Ross, Kelley.

"Rudolf Otto (1869–1937)" . Retrieved 19 October 2016 .

^ Otto, Rudolf (1996). Alles, Gregory D. (ed.).

Autobiographical and Social Essays . Berlin: Walter de Gruyter . p.

30 .

ISBN 978-3-110-14519-9 .

^ Elkins, James (2011). "Iconoclasm and the Sublime. Two Implicit Religious Discourses in Art History (pp. 133–151)". In Ellenbogen, Josh; Tugendhaft, Aaron (eds.).

Idol Anxiety .

Redwood City, California : Stanford University Press . p.

147 .

ISBN 978-0-804-76043-0 .

^ Mariña, Jacqueline (2010) [1997]. "26. Holiness (pp. 235–242)". In Taliaferro, Charles ; Draper, Paul ; Quinn, Philip L.

(eds.).

A Companion to Philosophy of Religion . Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons. p.

238 .

ISBN 978-1-444-32016-9 .

^ Eckardt, Alice L.; Eckardt, A. Roy (July 1980). "The Holocaust and the Enigma of Uniqueness: A Philosophical Effort at Practical Clarification".

Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science .

450 (1).

SAGE Publications : 169.

doi : 10.1177/000271628045000114 .

JSTOR 1042566 .

S2CID 145073531 .

Cited by: Katz, Steven T. (1991). "Defining the Uniqueness of the Holocaust". In Cohn-Sherbok, Dan (ed.).

A Traditional Quest. Essays in Honour of Louis Jacobs . London: Continuum International . p.

54 .

ISBN 978-0-567-52728-8 .

^ Wynn, Mark (19 December 2016).

"Section 2.1 Emotional feelings and encounter with God" .

Phenomenology of Religion .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Center for the Study of Language and Information, Stanford University . Retrieved 6 March 2017 .

^ Otto, Rudolf (1923).

The Idea of the Holy .

Oxford University Press . p. vii.

ISBN 0-19-500210-5 . Retrieved 31 December 2016 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b c d Sarbacker, Stuart (August 2016).

"Rudolf Otto and the Concept of the Numinous" .

Oxford Research Encyclopedias .

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199340378.013.88 .

ISBN 9780199340378 . Retrieved 18 February 2018 .

^ Webb, Stephen H.

(1991).

Re-figuring Theology. The Rhetoric of Karl Barth .

Albany , NY: SUNY Press . p.

87 .

ISBN 978-1-438-42347-0 .

^ Elkins, James (2011). "Iconoclasm and the Sublime. Two Implicit Religious Discourses in Art History". In Ellenbogen, Josh; Tugendhaft, Aaron (eds.).

Idol Anxiety .

Redwood City, California : Stanford University Press . p.

147 .

ISBN 978-0-804-76043-0 .

^ Mariña, Jacqueline (2010) [1997]. "26. Holiness (pp. 235–242)". In Taliaferro, Charles ; Draper, Paul ; Quinn, Philip L.

(eds.).

A Companion to Philosophy of Religion .

Hoboken, New Jersey : John Wiley & Sons . p.

238 .

ISBN 978-1-444-32016-9 .

^ Lewis, C.S.

(2009) [1940].

The Problem of Pain . New York City: HarperCollins . pp.

5–6 .

ISBN 978-0-007-33226-7 .

^ a b c d e f g Gooch, Todd A. (2000).

The Numinous and Modernity: An Interpretation of Rudolf Otto's Philosophy of Religion . Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.

ISBN 3-11-016799-9 .

^ Rohr, Richard (2012).

Immortal Diamond: The Search for Our True Self . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

ISBN 978-1-118-42154-3 .

^ Solomon, Norman (2012).

The Reconstruction of Faith . Portland: The Littman Library of Jewish Civilization. pp.

237– 243.

ISBN 978-1-906764-13-5 .

^ Berkovits, Eliezer , God, Man and History , 2004, pp. 166, 170.

^ Aslan, Reza (2005).

No god but God: The Origins, Evolution, And Future of Islam . New York: Random House Trade Paperbacks. p. xxiii.

ISBN 1-4000-6213-6 .

^ Huxley, Aldous (2004).

The Doors of Perception and Heaven and Hell . Harper Collins. p. 55.

ISBN 9780060595180 .

^ Eliade, Mircea (1959) [1954].

"Introduction (p. 8)" .

The Sacred and the Profane. The Nature of Religion . Translated from the French by Willard R. Trask.

Boston : Houghton Mifflin Harcourt .

ISBN 978-0-156-79201-1 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Agnel, Aimé.

"Numinous (Analytical Psychology)" .

International Dictionary of Psychoanalysis . Retrieved 9 November 2016 – via Encyclopedia.com .

^ Adorno, Theodor W.

; Tiedemann, Rolf (2000) [1965].

Metaphysics. Concept and Problems . Trans. Edmund Jephcott. Stanford University Press. p.

181 .

ISBN 978-0-804-74528-4 .

^ Siebert, Rudolf J. (1 January 2005). "The Critical Theory of Society: The Longing for the Totally Other".

Critical Sociology .

31 ( 1– 2).

Thousands oaks , CA: SAGE Publications : 57– 113.

doi : 10.1163/1569163053084270 .

S2CID 145341864 .

^ Stace, Walter Terence (1952).

Time and Eternity . Princeton: Princeton University Press. p. vii.

ISBN 0-83711867-0 . Retrieved 20 June 2020 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Further reading [ edit ] Almond, Philip C., 1984, 'Rudolf Otto: An Introduction to his Philosophical Theology', Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Davidson, Robert F, 1947, Rudolf Otto's Interpretation of Religion , Princeton Gooch, Todd A, 2000, The Numinous and Modernity: An Interpretation of Rudolf Otto's Philosophy of Religion . Preface by Otto Kaiser and Wolfgang Drechsler , Berlin and New York: Walter de Gruyter.

ISBN 3-11-016799-9 .

Ludwig, Theodore M (1987), 'Otto, Rudolf' in Encyclopedia of Religion , vol 11, pp. 139–41 Raphael, Melissa, 1997, Rudolf Otto and the concept of holiness , Oxford: Clarendon Press Mok, Daniël (2012).

Rudolf Otto: Een kleine biografie . Preface by Gerardus van der Leeuw . Amsterdam: Uitgeverij Abraxas.

ISBN 978-90-79133-08-6 .

Mok, Daniël et al . (2002).

Een wijze uit het westen: Beschouwingen over Rudolf Otto . Preface by Rudolph Boeke . Amsterdam: De Appelbloesem Pers (i.e. Uitgeverij Abraxas).

ISBN 90-70459-36-1 (print), 978-90-79133-00-0 (ebook).

Moore, John Morrison, 1938, Theories of Religious Experience, with special reference to James, Otto and Bergson , New York External links [ edit ] Rudolf Otto at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Data from Wikidata Otto and the Numinous Numinous – references from several thinkers at Earthpages.ca International Congress: Rudolf Otto – University of Marburg , 2012 Works by Rudolf Otto at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Rudolf Otto at the Internet Archive Newspaper clippings about Rudolf Otto in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rudolf_Otto&oldid=1292172168 " Categories : 1869 births 1937 deaths 19th-century Christian biblical scholars 19th-century German educational theorists 19th-century German educators 19th-century German essayists 19th-century German historians 19th-century German male writers 19th-century German philosophers 19th-century German Protestant theologians 19th-century social scientists 20th-century biblical scholars 20th-century German educational theorists 20th-century German educators 20th-century German essayists 20th-century German historians 20th-century German male writers 20th-century German philosophers 20th-century German politicians 20th-century German Protestant theologians 20th-century German memoirists 20th-century German social scientists German consciousness researchers and theorists Deaths from pneumonia in Germany German epistemologists German autobiographers German ethicists German Lutheran theologians German male essayists German male non-fiction writers German spiritual writers German historians of philosophy Historians of psychology German historians of religion Idealists Kant scholars Literacy and society theorists Lutheran philosophers Metaphilosophers Metaphysics writers Mysticism scholars 20th-century Christian mystics Ontologists People from Peine (district) People from the Province of Hanover People in Christian ecumenism Phenomenologists German philosophers of culture German philosophers of education German philosophers of history Philosophers of identity German philosophers of mind Philosophers of psychology German philosophers of religion Philosophers of social science Rationalists Religious pluralism Scholars of comparative religion Theorists on Western civilization Academic staff of the University of Breslau University of Göttingen alumni Academic staff of the University of Marburg Weimar Republic politicians Writers about activism and social change Writers about religion and science Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2016 Articles with hCards Articles containing German-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2016 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2019 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 15:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rudolf Otto 34 languages Add topic

