Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Notes 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Heraclides Ponticus 32 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Magyar Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek philosopher and astronomer (c. 390–c. 310 BC) This article is about the philosopher. For the former butterfly genus, see Papilio . For the historian, see Heracleides  of Cyme .

Heraclides Ponticus ( Ancient Greek : Ἡρακλείδης ὁ Ποντικός Herakleides ; c. 390 BC – c. 310 BC) [ 1 ] was a Greek philosopher and astronomer who was born in Heraclea Pontica , now Karadeniz Ereğli , Turkey , and migrated to Athens . He is best remembered for proposing that the Earth rotates on its axis, from west to east, once every 24 hours.

[ 2 ] He is also hailed as the originator of the heliocentric theory, although this is disputed.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Life [ edit ] Heraclides' father was Euthyphron, [ 5 ] a wealthy nobleman who sent his son to study at the Platonic Academy in Athens under its founder Plato and under his successor Speusippus . According to the Suda , Plato , on his departure for Sicily in 361/360 BC, left the Academy in the charge of Heraclides. Heraclides was nearly elected successor to Speusippus as head of the academy in 339/338 BC, but narrowly lost to Xenocrates .

[ 6 ] All of Heraclides' writings have been lost; only a few fragments remain. Like the Pythagoreans Hicetas and Ecphantus , Heraclides proposed that the apparent daily motion of the stars was created by the rotation of the Earth on its axis once a day. This view contradicted the accepted Aristotelian model of the universe, which said that the Earth was fixed and that the stars and planets in their respective spheres might also be fixed.

Simplicius says that Heraclides proposed that the irregular movements of the planets can be explained if the Earth moves while the Sun stays still.

[ 7 ] Although some historians [ 8 ] have proposed that Heraclides taught that Venus and Mercury revolve around the Sun, a detailed investigation of the sources has shown that "nowhere in the ancient literature mentioning Heraclides of Pontus is there a clear reference for his support for any kind of heliocentrical planetary position." [ 9 ] A punning on his name, dubbing him Heraclides "Pompicus," suggests he may have been a rather vain and pompous man and the target of much ridicule.

[ 10 ] Diogenes Laërtius , citing Aristoxenus as his source, states that Heraclides forged plays under the name of Thespis , and further states that Camaeleon claimed that Heraclides had plagiarised commentaries on Hesiod and Homer from him.

[ 11 ] Laërtius also conveys a story in which Dionysius the Deserter fooled Heraclides by forging a play, Parthenopaeus , under the name of Sophocles . Heraclides was deceived by this easily and cited it as the work of Sophocles.

[ 12 ] However, Heraclides seems to have been a versatile and prolific writer on philosophy, mathematics , music , grammar , physics , history and rhetoric , notwithstanding doubts about attribution of many of the works. It appears that he composed various works in dialogue form.

Heraclides also seems to have had an interest in the occult. In particular he focused on explaining trances, visions and prophecies in terms of the retribution of the gods, and reincarnation.

[ 2 ] A quote of Heraclides, of particular significance to historians, is his statement that fourth century B.C.

Rome was a Greek city.

[ citation needed ] Heraclides Ponticus refers with much admiration that Pythagoras would remember having been Pirro and before Euphorbus and before some other mortal.

[ citation needed ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Dorandi 1999 , p. 48.

^ a b Porter 2000 .

^ Eastwood 1992 , p. 233.

^ Gottschalk 1980 , p. 64-66.

^ Gottschalk 1980 , p. 2.

^ Guthrie 1986 , p. 470.

^ Simplicius 1997 , p. 48.

^ Heath 1921 , pp. 312, 316–317.

^ Eastwood 1992 , p. 256.

^ Davidson 2007 , p. 45.

^ Laërtius 1925 , § 92.

^ Laërtius 1925 , § 92-93.

References [ edit ] Dorandi, Tiziano (1999). "Chapter 2: Chronology". In Algra, Keimpe; et al. (eds.).

The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . p.

48 .

ISBN 9780521250283 .

Davidson, Martin P. (2007).

The Stars And The Mind . Fabri Press. p. 45.

ISBN 978-1-4067-7147-3 .

Eastwood, Bruce (1992). "Heraclides and Heliocentrism: Texts, Diagrams, and Interpretations".

Journal for the History of Astronomy .

23 (4): 233– 260.

Bibcode : 1992JHA....23..233E .

doi : 10.1177/002182869202300401 .

S2CID 118643709 .

Gottschalk, H. B. (1980).

Heraclides of Pontus .

Clarendon Press .

ISBN 0-19-814021-5 .

Guthrie, W. K. C. (1986).

A History of Greek Philosophy: Volume 5, The Later Plato and the Academy (Later Plato & the Academy) . Cambridge University Press. p. 470.

ISBN 0-521-31102-0 .

Heath, Thomas L. (1921).

A History of Greek Mathematics: From Thales to Euclid . Oxford: Clarendon Press. pp.

312 , 316– 317.

Hutchinson, D. S.; Johnson, Monte Ransome (25 January 2015).

"Protrepticus: New Reconstruction, includes Greek text" .

Laërtius, Diogenes .

"The Peripatetics: Heraclides" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 1:5. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library. § 92.

Porter, Roy, ed. (2000). "Heraklides of Ponticus".

The Hutchinson Dictionary of Scientific Biography (1st ed.).

Hodder & Stoughton .

ISBN 978-1859863046 .

Simplicius (1997).

On Aristotle's Physics 2 . Translated by Fleet, Barries. Ithaca: Cornell University Press . p. 48.

ISBN 0-8014-3283-9 .

Further reading [ edit ] Diogenes Laërtius trans. C.D. Yonge (1853) "Lives of Eminent Philosophers" O. Voss (1896) De Heraclidis Pontici vita et scriptis Wehrli, F. (1969) Herakleides Pontikos. Die Schule des Aristoteles vol. 7, 2nd edn. Basel.

Heraclides of Pontus. Texts and translations , edited by Eckart Schütrumpf; translators Peter Stork, Jan van Ophuijsen, and Susan Prince, New Brunswick, N.J., Transaction Publishers, 2008 Heraclides of Pontus. Discussion , edited by William W. Fortenbaugh, Elizabeth Pender, New Brunswick, N.J. : Transaction Publishers, 2009 Neugebauer, Otto (1969) [1957].

The Exact Sciences in Antiquity (2 ed.).

Dover Publications .

ISBN 978-0-486-22332-2 .

O. Neugebauer (1975) A History of Ancient Mathematical Astronomy External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

"Heraclides Ponticus" .

MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive .

University of St Andrews .

v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy v t e Platonists Ancient Academics Old Plato Aristotle Eudoxus Philip of Opus Aristonymus Coriscus and Erastus of Scepsis Demetrius of Amphipolis Euaeon of Lampsacus Heraclides and Python of Aenus Hestiaeus of Perinthus Lastheneia of Mantinea Timolaus of Cyzicus Speusippus Axiothea of Phlius Heraclides Ponticus Menedemus of Pyrrha Xenocrates Crantor Polemon Crates of Athens Skeptics Middle Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus New Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Dio of Alexandria Middle Platonists Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Anonymous Theaetetus Commentator Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Justin Martyr Gaius Albinus Alcinous Alexander Peloplaton Apuleius Atticus Maximus of Tyre Numenius of Apamea Ammonius Saccas Longinus Clement of Alexandria Origen Origen the Pagan Calcidius Neoplatonists Plotinus Students Amelius Porphyry of Tyre Iamblichus Sopater Eustathius of Cappadocia Sosipatra Aedesius Dexippus Chrysanthius Theodorus of Asine Julian Salutius Maximus of Ephesus Eusebius of Myndus Priscus of Epirus Antoninus Hypatia Gaius Marius Victorinus Augustine Macrobius Boethius Academy Plutarch of Athens Asclepigenia Hierocles Syrianus Hermias Aedesia Proclus Marinus Isidore Ammonius Hermiae Asclepiodotus Hegias Zenodotus Agapius Damascius Simplicius Priscian John Philoponus Olympiodorus David the Invincible Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Medieval John Scotus Eriugena Al-Farabi Anselm Peter Abelard Bernard Gilbert Thierry Henry of Ghent Bonaventure Theodoric of Freiberg Meister Eckhart Berthold of Moosburg Paul of Venice Modern Renaissance Florentine Academy Plethon Marsilio Ficino Cristoforo Landino Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Giordano Bruno Blaise Pascal Cambridge Ralph Cudworth Henry More Anne Conway Thomas Taylor Emanuel Swedenborg Josiah Royce Aleksei Losev Contemporary Analytic Gottlob Frege Bertrand Russell Kurt Gödel Roderick Chisholm W. V. O. Quine Jan Łukasiewicz Crispin Wright Edward N. Zalta Continental Edmund Husserl Leo Strauss Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Spain Netherlands Norway 2 Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Heraclides_Ponticus&oldid=1301954600 " Categories : 390s BC births 310s BC deaths 4th-century BC Greek philosophers Academic philosophers Ancient Greek astronomers Ancient Pontic Greeks Metic philosophers in Classical Athens People from Heraclea Pontica Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use shortened footnotes from July 2023 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 15:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Heraclides Ponticus 32 languages Add topic

