Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 In Antiquity 3 Buddhism 4 Christianity Toggle Christianity subsection 4.1 Middle Ages 4.1.1 Unam sanctam and Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus 4.1.2 Tolerance of the Jews 4.1.3 Vladimiri 4.1.4 Erasmus 4.1.5 More 4.2 Reformation 4.2.1 Castellio 4.2.2 Bodin 4.2.3 Montaigne 4.2.4 Edict of Torda 4.2.5 Maximilian II 4.2.6 The Warsaw Confederation, 1573 4.2.7 Edict of Nantes 4.3 The Enlightenment 4.3.1 Milton 4.3.2 Rudolph II 4.3.3 In the American colonies 4.3.4 Spinoza 4.3.5 Locke 4.3.6 Bayle 4.3.7 English Toleration Act 1688 4.3.8 Voltaire 4.3.9 Lessing 4.3.10 French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen 4.3.11 The First Amendment to the United States Constitution 4.4 In the nineteenth century 4.4.1 Roman Catholic Relief Act 4.4.2 Mill 4.4.3 Syllabus of Errors 4.4.4 Renan 4.5 In the twentieth century 4.5.1 UN Declaration on Religious Tolerance (1981)—critique 5 Hinduism 6 Daoism 7 Islam Toggle Islam subsection 7.1 Religious tolerance in Quran 7.2 Prohibition on access to holy places 7.3 Religious tolerance in Medieval Iberia 8 Judaism 9 Modern analyses and critiques Toggle Modern analyses and critiques subsection 9.1 Modern definition 9.2 Tolerating the intolerant 9.3 Other criticisms and issues 10 See also 11 Sources 12 References 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Religious tolerance 23 languages العربية Български Català Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Hausa हिन्दी Interlingua Italiano Қазақша Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski తెలుగు ไทย Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Allowing or permitting a religion of which one disapproves For other uses, see Tolerance .

See also: Religious intolerance and Religious pluralism Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Sculpture Für Toleranz ("for tolerance") by Volkmar Kühn , Gera , Germany (2001) " Grave with the Hands "  in Roermond . Jacob van Gorcum, a Protestant (of the Reformed Church ), who died in 1880 and his wife Josephina, a Catholic , who died in 1888, are buried in the Protestant and Catholic sections of the cemetery respectively, but their tombs are joined  by "hands" over the wall.

Religious tolerance or religious toleration may signify "no more than forbearance and the permission given by the adherents of a dominant religion for other religions to exist, even though the latter are looked on with disapproval as inferior, mistaken, or harmful".

[ 1 ] Historically, most incidents and writings pertaining to toleration involve the status of minority and dissenting viewpoints in relation to a dominant state religion .

[ 2 ] However, religion is also sociological, and the practice of toleration has always had a political aspect as well.

[ 3 ] : xiii An overview of the history of toleration and different cultures in which toleration has been practiced, and the ways in which such a paradoxical concept has developed into a guiding one, illuminates its contemporary use as political, social, religious, and ethnic, applying to LGBT individuals and other minorities, and other connected concepts such as human rights .

Definition [ edit ] The term "tolerance" derives from the Latin tolerantia , meaning "endurance" or "the ability to bear." [ 4 ] For Cicero, tolerantia was a personal virtue—the capacity to endure hardship, injustice, or misfortune with composure.

[ 5 ] By the sixteenth century the notion of tolerance began to take on a more political dimension, associated with maintaining peace and social concord amid religious conflict. This is seen in developments like the 1555 Peace of Augsburg, even though the term itself was not explicitly invoked.

[ 6 ] Over time, the concept evolved from mere forbearance—what John Horton describes as "putting up with" disapproved beliefs—toward a broader commitment to recognizing and respecting diversity.

[ 7 ] The concept of tolerance is multifaceted, shaped by various academic disciplines including philosophy, sociology, political science, religious studies, and law. Tolerance research reveals a plurality of interpretations, each contingent upon specific social, political, and cultural contexts. In antiquity, Cicero’s notion of tolerantia emphasized endurance in the face of adversity.

[ 8 ] Early modern thinkers such as Baruch Spinoza, [ 9 ] Pierre Bayle, [ 10 ] and John Locke [ 11 ] explored tolerance primarily in political terms.

By the 18th century, Moses Mendelssohn advocated for religious tolerance as a fundamental human right, [ 12 ] a position later expanded by figures such as John Rawls, [ 13 ] who framed tolerance as a virtue of justice, and Michael Walzer, [ 14 ] who linked it to the necessity of pluralism.

Scholars such as John Horton, David Heyd, and Anna Galeotti have further debated whether tolerance inherently involves disapproval or can be redefined as recognition.

[ 15 ] Key conditions for the emergence of tolerance include power dynamics, social conflict, and normative disagreement. As Karl Popper famously asserted, tolerance must have limits to prevent its self-destruction, particularly in the face of intolerance.

[ 16 ] Contemporary research emphasizes that tolerance involves both rejection and acceptance, underscoring its normative and complex nature. Thus, the ambiguity and contextuality of tolerance present significant challenges in arriving at a unified definition.

Renaissance humanism emphasized individual dignity, critical thinking, and ethical living over religious dogma. Thinkers such as Erasmus and Jean Bodin promoted tolerance by valuing personal conscience and diversity of belief. Their approach resisted both Catholic and Protestant intolerance, favoring persuasion over coercion and rejecting harsh condemnations of heresy.

[ 17 ] Humanist ideals later influenced Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who argued that a humane society must support “the positive welcoming and prizing of human individuality”.

[ 18 ] Liberalism, particularly through John Stuart Mill, expanded the idea of tolerance beyond religion to include political and cultural pluralism. Mill defended the necessity of free expression, even of offensive ideas, as a path to truth and societal benefit.

[ 19 ] John Rawls later developed the theory of political liberalism, grounding it in equality, fairness, and a shared public reason that all citizens could endorse regardless of personal beliefs.

[ 20 ] However, critics like Adam Seligman caution that liberal tolerance sometimes becomes “principled indifference,” privatizing difference rather than engaging with it.

[ 21 ] Together, humanism and liberalism created philosophical foundations for modern notions of tolerance by emphasizing respect, equality, and freedom of conscience.

Religious tolerance has deep historical roots within religious and metaphysical traditions predating Enlightenment liberalism. In Jewish thought, Moses is depicted as an exemplar of tolerance (Numbers 12:3), a virtue further emphasized by Maimonides as essential for wise and just political leadership [ 22 ] . Moses Mendelssohn articulated a metaphysical defense of religious diversity, viewing it as part of divine providence and necessary for spiritual and social perfection.

[ 23 ] Christian mysticism also contributed to early notions of tolerance by recognizing multiple paths to the divine, minimizing dogmatic authority. Figures such as Dionysios the Areopagite and Meister Eckhart highlighted individual spiritual experience and unity with the divine, allowing for varied approaches to ultimate reality.

[ 24 ] These traditions laid the groundwork for later concepts of tolerance by emphasizing respect for difference and the legitimacy of diverse religious expressions within a shared spiritual framework.

Contemporary scholarship has adopted an inclusive and active approach to defining religious tolerance. Twenty-first century definitions of religious tolerance have drawn upon sociological, anthropological, and psychological perspectives. Religious tolerance is now commonly understood as: “people’s capacity or willingness to accept, respect, and coexist with differing viewpoints, beliefs, practices, or behaviours without resorting to aggression, discrimination, or conflict.” [ 25 ] Sociologist Charles Taylor emphasizes the importance of balancing “the autonomy of religious groups and the overarching principles of civic life” for a tolerant society.

[ 26 ] In a keynote speech, Ambassador Maurizio Massari stated that “tolerance is a key ingredient of democracy.” [ 27 ] Recent studies indicate that individuals who feel accepted in inclusive societies are more likely to engage in civic and political life.Education and media literacy programs are seen as vital for cultivating tolerance.

[ 28 ] Psychological research by Hook and colleagues finds that intellectual humility in relation to religious beliefs encourages greater religious tolerance. This humility fosters openness to other perspectives, strengthens mutual understanding, and reduces defensiveness.

[ 29 ] Suryani and Muslim advocate incorporating religious tolerance into religious education curricula to address pluralism, social cohesion, interfaith respect, and open-mindedness.

[ 30 ] Research from Indonesia suggests that religious education in schools can promote interfaith understanding and tolerance.

[ 31 ] The expanded concept of religious tolerance is increasingly linked to human rights, education, and LGBTQ+ rights. It is now seen as an evolving process of dialogue and active engagement, valuing all religious traditions within a pluralistic society. Modern conceptions of tolerance advocate not just coexistence, but the broader framework of religious freedom. Some scholars argue that "religious freedom" better expresses the commitment to equal dignity and personal growth, integrating with human rights and encouraging active respect over passive acceptance.

[ 32 ] In Antiquity [ edit ] Minerva as a symbol of enlightened wisdom protects the believers of all religions ( Daniel Chodowiecki , 1791) Religious toleration has been described as a "remarkable feature" of the Achaemenid Empire of Persia.

[ 33 ] Cyrus the Great assisted in the restoration of the sacred places of various cities.

[ 33 ] In the Old Testament , Cyrus was said to have released the Jews from the Babylonian captivity in 539–530 BCE, and permitted their return to their homeland.

[ 34 ] The Hellenistic city of Alexandria , founded 331 BCE, contained a large Jewish community which lived in peace with equivalently sized Greek and Egyptian populations. According to Michael Walzer , the city provided "a useful example of what we might think of as the imperial version of multiculturalism." [ 35 ] Before Christianity became the state church of the Roman Empire , it encouraged conquered peoples to continue worshipping their own gods. "An important part of Roman propaganda was its invitation to the gods of conquered territories to enjoy the benefits of worship within the imperium ." [ 36 ] Christians were singled out for persecution because of their own rejection of Roman pantheism and refusal to honor the emperor as a god.

[ 37 ] There were some other groups that found themselves to be exceptions to Roman tolerance, such as the Druids , the early followers of the cult of Isis , the Bacchanals , the Manichaens and the priests of Cybele , and Temple Judaism was also suppressed.

In the early 3rd century, Cassius Dio outlined the Roman imperial policy towards religious tolerance: You should not only worship the divine everywhere and in every way in accordance with our ancestral traditions, but also force all others to honour it. Those who attempt to distort our religion with strange rites you should hate and punish, not only for the sake of the gods … but also because such people, by bringing in new divinities, persuade many folks to adopt foreign practices, which lead to conspiracies, revolts, and factions, which are entirely unsuitable for monarch".

— Dio Cassius, Hist. Rom. LII.36.1–2 [ 38 ] In 311 CE, Roman Emperor Galerius issued a general edict of toleration of Christianity, in his own name and in those of Licinius and Constantine I (who converted to Christianity the following year).

[ 39 ] Saint Catherine's Monastery of the Sinai region of Egypt claims to have once had possession of an original letter of protection from Mohammed , known as the Ashtiname of Muhammad and traditionally dated to 623 CE. The monastery's tradition holds that a Christian delegation from the Sinai requested for the continued activity of the monastery, and regional Christianity per se . The original no longer exists, but a claimed 16th century copy of it remains on display in the monastery.

[ 40 ] While several twentieth century scholars accepted the document as a legitimate original, some modern scholars now question the documentary's authenticity.

[ 41 ] Buddhism [ edit ] Further information: Dorje Shugden Controversy Since the 19th century, Western intellectuals and spiritualists have viewed Buddhism as an unusually tolerant faith.

[ 42 ] James Freeman Clarke said in Ten Great Religions (1871) that "Buddhists have founded no Inquisition; they have combined the zeal which converted kingdoms with a toleration almost inexplicable to our Western experience." [ 43 ] Bhikkhu Bodhi , an American-born Buddhist convert, stated: Buddhist tolerance springs from the recognition that the dispositions and spiritual needs of human beings are too vastly diverse to be encompassed by any single teaching, and thus that these needs will naturally find expression in a wide variety of religious forms.

[ 44 ] The Edicts of Ashoka issued by King Ashoka the Great (269–231 BCE), a Buddhist, declared ethnic and religious tolerance. His Edict in the 12th main stone writing of Girnar on the third century BCE which state that "Kings accepted religious tolerance and that Emperor Ashoka maintained that no one would consider his / her is to be superior to other and rather would follow a path of unity by accuring the essence of other religions".

[ 45 ] However, Buddhism has also had  controversies regarding toleration. In addition, the question of possible intolerance among Buddhists in Sri Lanka and Myanmar has been raised by Paul Fuller.

[ 46 ] Christianity [ edit ] Further information: Persecution of Christians and Persecutions by Christians (disambiguation) The books of Exodus , Leviticus and Deuteronomy make similar statements about the treatment of strangers. For example, Exodus 22:21 says: "Thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt". These texts are frequently used in sermons to plead for compassion and tolerance of those who are different from us and less powerful.

[ 47 ] Julia Kristeva elucidated a philosophy of political and religious toleration based on all of our mutual identities as strangers.

[ 48 ] The New Testament Parable of the Tares , which speaks of the difficulty of distinguishing wheat from weeds before harvest time, has also been invoked in support of religious toleration. In his "Letter to Bishop Roger of Chalons", Bishop Wazo of Liege (c. 985–1048) relied on the parable [ 49 ] to argue that "the church should let dissent grow with orthodoxy until the Lord comes to separate and judge them".

[ 50 ] Roger Williams used this parable to support government toleration of all of the "weeds" (heretics) in the world, because civil persecution often inadvertently hurts the "wheat" (believers) too. Instead, Williams believed it was God's duty to judge in the end, not man's. This parable lent further support to Williams' belief in a wall of separation between church and state as described in his 1644 book, The Bloody Tenent of Persecution .

[ 51 ] Middle Ages [ edit ] In the Middle Ages , there were instances of toleration of particular groups. The Latin concept tolerantia was a "highly-developed political and judicial concept in medieval scholastic theology and canon law." [ 52 ] Tolerantia was used to "denote the self-restraint of a civil power in the face of" outsiders, like infidels, Muslims or Jews, but also in the face of social groups like prostitutes and lepers.

[ 52 ] Heretics such as the Cathari , Waldensians , Jan Hus , and his followers, the Hussites , were persecuted.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] Later theologians belonging or reacting to the Protestant Reformation began discussion of the circumstances under which dissenting religious thought should be permitted. Toleration "as a government-sanctioned practice" in Christian countries, "the sense on which most discussion of the phenomenon relies—is not attested before the sixteenth century".

[ 55 ] Unam sanctam and Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus [ edit ] Centuries of Roman Catholic intoleration of other faiths was exemplified by Unam sanctam , a papal bull issued by Pope Boniface VIII on 18 November 1302. The bull laid down dogmatic propositions on the unity of the Catholic Church , the necessity of belonging to it for eternal salvation ( Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus ), the position of the Pope as supreme head of the Church, and the duty thence arising of submission to the Pope in order to belong to the Church and thus to attain salvation. The bull ends, "Furthermore, we declare, we proclaim, we define that it is absolutely necessary for salvation that every human creature be subject to the Roman Pontiff." Tolerance of the Jews [ edit ] Main article: Antisemitism in Christianity In Poland in 1264, the Statute of Kalisz was issued, guaranteeing freedom of religion for the Jews in the country.

Clement VI In 1348, Pope Clement VI (1291–1352) issued a bull pleading with Catholics not to murder Jews, whom they blamed for the Black Death . He noted that Jews died of the plague like anyone else, and that the disease also flourished in areas where there were no Jews. Christians who blamed and killed Jews had been "seduced by that liar, the Devil". He took Jews under his personal protection at Avignon , but his calls for other clergy to do so failed to be heeded.

[ 56 ] Johann Reuchlin (1455–1522) was a German humanist and a scholar of Greek and Hebrew who opposed efforts by Johannes Pfefferkorn , backed by the Dominicans of Cologne, to confiscate all religious texts from the Jews as a first step towards their forcible conversion to the Catholic religion.

[ 57 ] Despite occasional spontaneous episodes of pogroms and killings, as during the Black Death, Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth was a relatively tolerant home for the Jews in the medieval period. In 1264, the Statute of Kalisz guaranteed safety, personal liberties, freedom of religion , trade, and travel to Jews. By the mid-16th century, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth was home to 80% of the world's Jewish population. Jewish worship was officially recognized, with a Chief Rabbi originally appointed by the monarch. Jewish property ownership was also protected for much of the period, and Jews entered into business partnerships with members of the nobility.

[ 58 ] Vladimiri [ edit ] Paulus Vladimiri (c. 1370–1435) was a Polish scholar and rector who at the Council of Constance in 1414, presented a thesis, Tractatus de potestate papae et respectu infidelium (Treatise on the Power of the Pope and the Emperor Respecting Infidels). In it he argued that pagan and Christian nations could coexist in peace and criticized the Teutonic Order for its wars of conquest of native non-Christian peoples in Prussia and Lithuania. Vladimiri strongly supported the idea of conciliarism and pioneered the notion of peaceful coexistence among nations—a forerunner of modern theories of human rights . Throughout his political, diplomatic and university career, he expressed the view that a world guided by the principles of peace and mutual respect among nations was possible and that pagan nations had a right to peace and to possession of their own lands.

Erasmus [ edit ] Erasmus Desiderius Erasmus Roterodamus (1466–1536), was a Dutch Renaissance humanist and Catholic whose works laid a foundation for religious toleration. For example, in De libero arbitrio , opposing certain views of Martin Luther , Erasmus noted that religious disputants should be temperate in their language, "because in this way the truth, which is often lost amidst too much wrangling may be more surely perceived." Gary Remer writes, "Like Cicero , Erasmus concludes that truth is furthered by a more harmonious relationship between interlocutors." [ 59 ] Although Erasmus did not oppose the punishment of heretics, in individual cases he generally argued for moderation and against the death penalty. He wrote, "It is better to cure a sick man than to kill him." [ 60 ] More [ edit ] Saint Thomas More (1478–1535), Catholic Lord Chancellor of King Henry VIII and author, described a world of almost complete religious toleration in Utopia (1516), in which the Utopians "can hold various religious beliefs without persecution from the authorities." [ 61 ] However, More's work is subject to various interpretations, and it is not clear that he felt that earthly society should be conducted the same way as in Utopia. Thus, in his three years as Lord Chancellor, More actively approved of the persecution of those who sought to undermine the Catholic faith in England.

[ 62 ] Reformation [ edit ] At the Diet of Worms (1521), Martin Luther refused to recant his beliefs citing freedom of conscience as his justification.

[ 63 ] According to Historian Hermann August Winkler, the individual's freedom of conscience became the hallmark of Protestantism .

[ 64 ] Luther was convinced that faith in Jesus Christ was the free gift of the Holy Spirit and could therefore not be forced on a person. Heresies could not be met with force, but with preaching the gospel revealed in the Bible. Luther: "Heretics should not be overcome with fire, but with written sermons." In Luther's view, the worldly authorities were entitled to expel heretics. Only if they undermine the public order, should they be executed.

[ 65 ] Later proponents of tolerance such as Sebastian Franck and Sebastian Castellio cited Luther's position. He had overcome, at least for the Protestant territories and countries, the violent medieval criminal procedures of dealing with heretics. But Luther remained rooted in the Middle Ages insofar as he considered the Anabaptists ' refusal to take oaths, do military service, and the rejection of private property by some Anabaptist groups to be a political threat to the public order which would inevitably lead to anarchy and chaos.

[ 66 ] So Anabaptists were persecuted not only in Catholic but also in Lutheran and Reformed territories. However, a number of Protestant theologians such as John Calvin , Martin Bucer , Wolfgang Capito , and Johannes Brenz as well as Landgrave Philip of Hesse opposed the execution of Anabaptists.

[ 67 ] Ulrich Zwingli demanded the expulsion of persons who did not accept the Reformed beliefs, in some cases the execution of Anabaptist leaders. The young Michael Servetus also defended tolerance since 1531, in his letters to Johannes Oecolampadius , but during those years some Protestant theologians such as Bucer and Capito publicly expressed they thought he should be persecuted.

[ 68 ] The trial against Servetus, an Antitrinitarian , in Geneva was not a case of church discipline but a criminal procedure based on the legal code of the Holy Roman Empire . Denying the Trinity doctrine was long considered to be the same as atheism in all churches. The Anabaptists made a considerable contribution to the development of tolerance in the early-modern era by incessantly demanding freedom of conscience and standing up for it with their patient suffering.

[ 69 ] Castellio [ edit ] Castellio Sebastian Castellio (1515–1563) was a French Protestant theologian who in 1554 published under a pseudonym the pamphlet Whether heretics should be persecuted (De haereticis, an sint persequendi) criticizing John Calvin 's execution of Michael Servetus : "When Servetus fought with reasons and writings, he should have been repulsed by reasons and writings." Castellio concluded: "We can live together peacefully only when we control our intolerance. Even though there will always be differences of opinion from time to time, we can at any rate come to general understandings, can love one another, and can enter the bonds of peace, pending the day when we shall attain unity of faith." [ 70 ] Castellio is remembered for the often quoted statement, "To kill a man is not to protect a doctrine, but it is to kill a man.

[ 71 ] Bodin [ edit ] Jean Bodin (1530–1596) was a French Catholic jurist and political philosopher. His Latin work Colloquium heptaplomeres de rerum sublimium arcanis abditis ("The Colloqium of the Seven") portrays a conversation about the nature of truth between seven cultivated men from diverse religious or philosophical backgrounds: a natural philosopher, a Calvinist, a Muslim, a Roman Catholic, a Lutheran, a Jew, and a skeptic. All agree to live in mutual respect and tolerance.

Montaigne [ edit ] Michel de Montaigne (1533–1592), French Catholic essayist and statesman, moderated between the Catholic and Protestant sides in the Wars of Religion . Montaigne's theory of skepticism led to the conclusion that we cannot precipitously decide the error of others' views. Montaigne wrote in his famous "Essais": "It is putting a very high value on one's conjectures, to have a man roasted alive because of them...To kill people, there must be sharp and brilliant clarity." [ 72 ] Edict of Torda [ edit ] For broader coverage of this topic, see Edict of Torda .

In 1568, King John II Sigismund of Hungary, encouraged by his Unitarian Minister Francis David (Dávid Ferenc), issued the Edict of Torda decreeing religious toleration of all Christian denominations except Romanian Orthodoxy . It did not apply to Jews or Muslims but was nevertheless an extraordinary achievement of religious tolerance by the standards of 16th-century Europe.

Maximilian II [ edit ] In 1571, Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian II granted religious toleration to the nobles of Lower Austria, their families and workers.

[ 73 ] The Warsaw Confederation, 1573 [ edit ] Original act of the Warsaw Confederation 1573 – the official sanctioning of religious freedom in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Part of a series on Conservatism in Poland Schools Old Conservatives Austrian Partition: Podolacy [ pl ] , Stańczycy [ pl ] Prussian partition: Neoconservatives Russian partition: Biali , Realists, Żubry [ pl ] New Conservatives Endecja Chadecja Ideologies Christian democracy Civic nationalism Golden Liberty Monarchism National Democracy National conservatism Nationalism Christian Populism Kaczyzm Traditionalism Principles Catholic social teaching Familialism Germanophobia Nobility Szlachta Patriotism Polish culture Sovereignty History Januszajtis putsch Polish Messianism National League November Uprising Romanticism in Poland Christ of Europe Winkelriedism [ pl ] Sarmatism Targowica Confederation Intellectuals Balicki Bobrzyński Chrzanowski Czartoryski Dmowski Doboszyński Giertych Głąbiński Gumplowicz Jeske-Choińskis Koneczny Konopczyński Krasiński Krasnodębski Legutko Cat-Mackiewicz Nawrocki Ossendowski Piasecki Sienkiewicz Szujski Tarnowski Tyrmand Rydzyk Wielomski Politicians Bobrzyński Bałażak Braun Czartoryski Dmowski Duda Głąbiński Grabski Hall Kaczyński (Lech) Kaczyński (Jarosław) Kucharzewski Jaworski Morawiecki (Kornel) Morawiecki (Mateusz) Nawrocki Popławski Rybarski Szujski Szydło Wielopolski Zamoyski Ziobro Literature The Trilogy (1884–1888) Quo Vadis (1895–1896) The Knights of the Cross (1900) The Demon in Democracy (2016) Parties Active Agreement Centre for Poland Law and Justice‎ League of Polish Families Renewal of the Republic of Poland Repair Poland Movement Right Wing of the Republic Defunct Centre Agreement Christian National Union Movement for the Reconstruction of Poland Movement for the Republic National Party Poland Comes First Poland Together Solidarity Electoral Action Sovereign Poland‎ The Republicans‎ There is One Poland Historical Hetmans' Party National-Democratic Party National Party Państwowe Zjednoczenie na Kresach Polish Party Polish Electoral Society in Silesia Popular National Union Organisations Fighting Solidarity Camp of Great Poland Conservative-Monarchist Club Institute for Legacy of Polish National Thought National Union Ordo Iuris Polish Coalition Polish League Polish League Against Defamation Polish Nobility Association United Right Media Do Rzeczy Gazeta Polska Najwyższy Czas!

Nasz Dziennik Radio Maryja Sieci Uważam Rze Related topics Fourth Polish Republic Politics of Poland Liberalism March for Life and Family Mohair berets Sejm cross Conservatism portal Poland portal v t e The Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth had a long tradition of religious freedom. The right to worship freely was a basic right given to all inhabitants of the Commonwealth throughout the 15th and early 16th centuries, however complete freedom of religion was officially recognized in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1573 in the Warsaw Confederation . The Commonwealth kept religious-freedom laws during an era when religious persecution was an everyday occurrence in the rest of Europe.

[ 74 ] [ page needed ] The Warsaw Confederation was a private compact signed by representatives of all the major religions in Polish and Lithuanian society, in which they pledged each other mutual support and tolerance. The confederation was incorporated into the Henrican articles , which constituted a virtual Polish–Lithuanian constitution.

Edict of Nantes [ edit ] The Edict of Nantes , issued on April 13, 1598, by Henry IV of France , granted Protestants—notably Calvinist Huguenots —substantial rights in a nation where Catholicism was the state religion. The main concern was civil unity [ 75 ] —the edict separated civil law from religious rights, treated non-Catholics as more than mere schismatics and heretics for the first time, and opened a path for secularism and tolerance. In offering general freedom of conscience to individuals, the edict offered many specific concessions to the Protestants, such as amnesty and the reinstatement of their civil rights, including the right to work in any field or for the State, and to bring grievances directly to the king. The edict marked the end of the religious wars in France that tore apart the population during the second half of the 16th century.

The Edict of Nantes was revoked in 1685 by King Louis XIV with the Edict of Fontainebleau , leading to renewed persecution of Protestants in France. Although strict enforcement of the revocation was relaxed during the reign of Louis XV , it was not until 102 years later, in 1787, when Louis XVI signed the Edict of Versailles —known as the Edict of Tolerance —that civil status and rights to form congregations by Protestants were restored.

[ 76 ] The Enlightenment [ edit ] Beginning in the Enlightenment commencing in the 1600s, politicians and commentators began formulating theories of religious toleration and basing legal codes on the concept. A distinction began to develop between civil tolerance , concerned with "the policy of the state towards religious dissent"., [ 77 ] and ecclesiastical tolerance , concerned with the degree of diversity tolerated within a particular church.

[ 78 ] Milton [ edit ] Milton John Milton (1608–1674), English Protestant poet and essayist, called in the Areopagitica for "the liberty to know, to utter, and to argue freely according to conscience, above all liberties" (applied, however, only to the conflicting Protestant denominations, and not to atheists, Jews, Muslims or even Catholics). "Milton argued for disestablishment as the only effective way of achieving broad toleration. Rather than force a man's conscience, government should recognize the persuasive force of the gospel." [ 79 ] Rudolph II [ edit ] In 1609, Rudolph II decreed religious toleration in Bohemia .

[ 80 ] In the American colonies [ edit ] The Maryland Toleration Act , passed in 1649.

In 1636, Roger Williams and companions at the foundation of Rhode Island entered into a compact binding themselves "to be obedient to the majority only in civil things". Williams spoke of "democracie or popular government." [ 81 ] Lucian Johnston writes, "Williams' intention was to grant an infinitely greater religious liberty than what existed anywhere in the world outside of the Colony of Maryland." In 1663, Charles II granted the colony a charter guaranteeing complete religious toleration.

[ 82 ] Also in 1636, Congregationalist Thomas Hooker and a group of companions founded Connecticut . They combined the democratic form of government that had been developed by the Separatist Congregationalists in Plymouth Colony ( Pilgrim Fathers ) with unlimited freedom of conscience. Like Martin Luther, Hooker argued that as faith in Jesus Christ was the free gift of the Holy Spirit it could not be forced on a person.

[ 83 ] Penn In 1649 Maryland passed the Maryland Toleration Act , also known as the Act Concerning Religion, a law mandating religious tolerance for Trinitarian Christians only (excluding Nontrinitarian faiths). Passed on September 21, 1649 by the assembly of the Maryland colony, it was the first law requiring religious tolerance in the British North American colonies. The Calvert family sought enactment of the law to protect Catholic settlers and some of the other denominations that did not conform to the dominant Anglicanism of England and her colonies.

In 1657, New Amsterdam , governed by Dutch Calvinists , granted religious toleration to Jews.

[ 84 ] They had fled from Portuguese persecution in Brazil.

[ 85 ] In the Province of Pennsylvania , William Penn and his fellow Quakers heavily imprinted their religious values of toleration on the Pennsylvania government. The Pennsylvania 1701 Charter of Privileges extended religious freedom to all monotheists, and government was open to all Christians.

Spinoza [ edit ] Tractatus Theologico-Politicus of Spinoza Baruch Spinoza (1632–1677) was a Dutch Jewish philosopher. He published the Theological-Political Treatise anonymously in 1670, arguing (according to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) that "the freedom to philosophize can not only be granted without injury to piety and the peace of the Commonwealth, but that the peace of the Commonwealth and Piety are endangered by the suppression of this freedom", and defending, "as a political ideal, the tolerant, secular, and democratic polity". After interpreting certain Biblical texts , Spinoza opted for tolerance and freedom of thought in his conclusion that "every person is in duty bound to adapt these religious dogmas to his own understanding and to interpret them for himself in whatever way makes him feel that he can the more readily accept them with full confidence and conviction." [ 86 ] Locke [ edit ] English philosopher John Locke (1632–1704) published A Letter Concerning Toleration in 1689. Locke's work appeared amidst a fear that Catholicism might be taking over England, and responds to the problem of religion and government by proposing religious toleration as the answer.
Unlike Thomas Hobbes , who saw uniformity of religion as the key to a well-functioning civil society, Locke argued that more religious groups actually prevent civil unrest. In his opinion, civil unrest results from confrontations caused by any magistrate's attempt to prevent different religions from being practiced, rather than tolerating their proliferation. However, Locke denies religious tolerance for Catholics, for political reasons, and also for atheists because "Promises, covenants, and oaths, which are the bonds of human society, can have no hold upon an atheist". A passage Locke later added to An Essay Concerning Human Understanding questioned whether atheism was necessarily inimical to political obedience.

Bayle [ edit ] Bayle Pierre Bayle (1647–1706) was a French Protestant scholar and philosopher who went into exile in Holland. In his " Dictionnaire Historique et Critique " and "Commentaire Philosophique" he advanced arguments for religious toleration (though, like some others of his time, he was not anxious to extend the same protection to Catholics he would to differing Protestant sects). Among his arguments were that every church believes it is the right one so "a heretical church would be in a position to persecute the true church". Bayle wrote that "the erroneous conscience procures for error the same rights and privileges that the orthodox conscience procures for truth." [ 87 ] Bayle was repelled by the use of scripture to justify coercion and violence: "One must transcribe almost the whole New Testament to collect all the Proofs it affords us of that Gentleness and Long-suffering, which constitute the distinguishing and essential Character of the Gospel." He did not regard toleration as a danger to the state, but to the contrary: "If the Multiplicity of Religions prejudices the State, it proceeds from their not bearing with one another but on the contrary endeavoring each to crush and destroy the other by methods of Persecution. In a word, all the Mischief arises not from Toleration, but from the want of it." [ 88 ] English Toleration Act 1688 [ edit ] Following the Glorious Revolution , when the Dutch king William came to the English throne, the Toleration Act 1688 adopted by the English Parliament allowed freedom of worship to Nonconformists who had pledged to the oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy and rejected transubstantiation . The Nonconformists were Protestants who dissented from the Church of England such as Baptists and Congregationalists. They were allowed their own places of worship and their own teachers, if they accepted certain oaths of allegiance. The Act, however, did not apply to Catholics and non-trinitarians, and continued the existing social and political disabilities of Dissenters, including their exclusion from political office and from the universities of Oxford and Cambridge .

Voltaire [ edit ] Voltaire François-Marie Arouet, the French writer, historian and philosopher known as Voltaire (1694–1778) published his Treatise on Toleration in 1763. In it he attacked religious views, but also said, "It does not require great art, or magnificently trained eloquence, to prove that Christians should tolerate each other. I, however, am going further: I say that we should regard all men as our brothers. What? The Turk my brother? The Chinaman my brother? The Jew? The Siam? Yes, without doubt; are we not all children of the same father and creatures of the same God?" [ 89 ] On the other hand, Voltaire in his writings on religion was spiteful and intolerant of the practice of the Christian religion, [ citation needed ] and  Orthodox rabbi Joseph Telushkin has claimed that the most significant of Enlightenment hostility against Judaism was found in Voltaire.

[ 90 ] Lessing [ edit ] Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (1729–1781), German dramatist and philosopher, trusted in a "Christianity of Reason", in which human reason (initiated by criticism and dissent) would develop, even without help by divine revelation. His plays about Jewish characters and themes, such as "Die Juden" and " Nathan der Weise ", "have usually been considered impressive pleas for social and religious toleration".

[ 91 ] The latter work contains the famous parable of the three rings, in which three sons represent the three Abrahamic religions, Christianity, Judaism, and Islam. Each son believes he has the one true ring passed down by their father, but judgment on which is correct is reserved to God.

[ 92 ] French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen [ edit ] Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (1789), adopted by the National Constituent Assembly during the French Revolution , states in Article 10: "No-one shall be interfered with for his opinions, even religious ones, provided that their practice does not disturb public order as established by the law." ("Nul ne doit être inquiété pour ses opinions, mêmes religieuses, pourvu que leur manifestation ne trouble pas l'ordre public établi par la loi.") [ 93 ] Napoleon emancipated the Jews in countries his imperial army conquered, expanding the impact of the French Declaration of Rights of Man.

The First Amendment to the United States Constitution [ edit ] For having lived long, I have experienced many instances of being obliged, by better information or fuller consideration, to change opinions even on important subjects, which I once thought right, but found to be otherwise. It is therefore that the older I grow the more apt I am to doubt my own judgment, and to pay more respect to the judgment of others.

Benjamin Franklin The First Amendment to the United States Constitution , ratified along with the rest of the Bill of Rights on December 15, 1791, included the following words: "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof..."
In 1802, Thomas Jefferson wrote a letter to the Danbury Baptists Association in which he said:
"...I contemplate with sovereign reverence that act of the whole American people which declared that their legislature should 'make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof,' thus building a wall of separation between Church & State." [ 94 ] In the nineteenth century [ edit ] The process of legislating religious toleration went unevenly forward, while philosophers continued to discuss the underlying rationale.

Roman Catholic Relief Act [ edit ] The Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829 adopted by the Parliament in 1829 repealed the last of the civil restrictions aimed at Catholic citizens of the United Kingdom.

Mill [ edit ] John Stuart Mill 's arguments in " On Liberty " (1859) in support of the freedom of speech were phrased to include a defense of religious toleration: Let the opinions impugned be the belief of God and in a future state, or any of the commonly received doctrines of morality... But I must be permitted to observe that it is not the feeling sure of a doctrine (be it what it may) which I call an assumption of infallibility. It is the undertaking to decide that question for others , without allowing them to hear what can be said on the contrary side. And I denounce and reprobate this pretension not the less if it is put forth on the side of my most solemn convictions.

[ 95 ] Syllabus of Errors [ edit ] The Syllabus of Errors was issued by Pope Pius IX in 1864.  It condemns 80 errors or heresies , including the following propositions regarding religious toleration: 77. In the present day it is no longer expedient that the Catholic religion should be held as the only religion of the State, to the exclusion of all other forms of worship.  78. Hence it has been wisely decided by law, in some Catholic countries, that persons coming to reside therein shall enjoy the public exercise of their own peculiar worship. 79. Moreover, it is false that the civil liberty of every form of worship, and the full power, given to all, of overtly and publicly manifesting any opinions whatsoever and thoughts, conduce more easily to corrupt the morals and minds of the people, and to propagate the pest of indifferentism.

Renan [ edit ] Renan In his 1882 essay " What is a Nation?

", French historian and philosopher Ernest Renan proposed a definition of nationhood based on "a spiritual principle" involving shared memories, rather than a common religious, racial or linguistic heritage. Thus members of any religious group could participate fully in the life of the nation. "You can be French, English, German, yet Catholic, Protestant, Jewish, or practicing no religion".

[ 96 ] In the twentieth century [ edit ] In 1948, the United Nations General Assembly adopted Article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , which states: Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief, and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief in teaching, practice, worship and observance [ 97 ] Even though not formally legally binding, the Declaration has been adopted in or influenced many national constitutions since 1948. It also serves as the foundation for a growing number of international treaties and national laws and international, regional, national and sub-national institutions protecting and promoting human rights including the freedom of religion .

In 1965, the Catholic Vatican II Council issued the decree Dignitatis humanae (Religious Freedom) that states that all people must have the right to religious freedom.

[ 98 ] The Catholic 1983 Code of Canon Law states: Can. 748 §1. All persons are bound to seek the truth in those things which regard God and his Church and by virtue of divine law are bound by the obligation and possess the right of embracing and observing the truth which they have come to know. §2. No one is ever permitted to coerce persons to embrace the Catholic faith against their conscience.

In 1986, the first World Day of Prayer for Peace was held in Assisi. Representatives of one hundred and twenty different religions came together for prayer.

[ 99 ] In 1988, in the spirit of Glasnost , Soviet general secretary Mikhail Gorbachev promised increased religious toleration.

[ 100 ] UN Declaration on Religious Tolerance (1981)—critique [ edit ] The landmark document ' Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief ,' proclaimed by the United Nations General Assembly on 25 November 1981, has faced substantial criticism for scope, non-effective implementation, and conceptual clarity.

[ 101 ] Article 1(1) outlines that "UN declarations are not international treaties; rather, they are statements of agreed standards of action and moral obligation." [ 102 ] This non-binding nature means a lack of legal enforceability, and as a result, signatory states are neither under the legal obligations to take concrete actions nor face accountability mechanisms.

[ 103 ] Although religious minorities suffer most from such religious discrimination, the UN Declaration notably omits explicit reference to religious minorities . While the needs of religious communities or congregations are contemplated, religious minorities are not recognized.

[ 104 ] In article 2 of the Declaration, the definitions of the terms “intolerance and discrimination” appear to be equating with each other. Making a distinction between “intolerance” and “discrimination,” Natan Lerner has underscored the frequent application of the term “discrimination” in international treaties with its definite legal meaning, while the term “intolerance” is marked by impreciseness and ambiguity.

[ 105 ] Hinduism [ edit ] The Rigveda says Ekam Sath Viprah Bahudha Vadanti which translates to "The truth is One, but sages call it by different Names".

[ 106 ] Consistent with this tradition, India chose to be a secular country even though it was divided by partitioning on religious lines. Whatever intolerance Hindu scholars displayed towards other religions was subtle and symbolic and most likely was done to present a superior argument in defence of their own faith. Traditionally, Hindus showed their intolerance by withdrawing and avoiding contact with those whom they held in contempt, instead of using violence and aggression to strike fear in their hearts.
Pluralism and tolerance of diversity are built into Hindu theology. India's long history is a testimony to its tolerance of religious diversity.

Christianity came to India with St. Thomas in the first century CE, long before it became popular in the West.

Judaism came to India after the Jewish temple was destroyed by the Romans in 70 CE and the Jews were expelled from their homeland. In a recent book titled "Who are the Jews of India?" (University of California Press, 2000), author Nathan Katz observes that India is the only country where the Jews were not persecuted. The Indian chapter is one of the happiest of the Jewish Diaspora . Both Christians and Jews have existed in a predominant Hindu India for centuries without being persecuted. Zoroastrians from Persia (present day Iran ) entered India in the 7th century to flee Islamic conquest. They are known as Parsis in India. The Parsis are an affluent community in the city of Mumbai . Once treated as foreigners, they remain a minority community, yet still housing the richest business families in India; for example, the Tata family controls a huge industrial empire in various parts of the country.

Mrs. Indira Gandhi , the powerful Prime Minister of India (1966–77; 1980–84), was married to Feroz Gandhi , a Parsi (no relation to Mahatma Gandhi ).

[ 107 ] Daoism [ edit ] Daoism is the only indigenous religion rooted in the land of China, and it constitutes a vital component of Chinese civilization. Throughout its development over more than two millennia, Daoism has demonstrated remarkable inclusiveness—embracing not only religious and cultural traditions within the Chinese world but also those originating beyond it. This openness has enabled Daoism to endure through dynastic transitions, foreign invasions, and periods of social upheaval, continually adapting while preserving its core values.

[ 108 ] The highest object of Daoist belief is the Dao, which, as “that from which all things arise,” is regarded as the primordial origin, the fundamental force, and the underlying principle that governs the ceaseless transformation and movement of the cosmos. The Dao is understood as the ontological ground of all beings. Accordingly, Daoism venerates the “Great Dao,” a formless, indeterminate source—often described as wu (無), meaning “non-being” or “non-differentiation.” This conception of the Dao as inherently undivided and without fixed characteristics provides a profound philosophical foundation for Daoism’s religious tolerance. Since the Dao encompasses all things without exclusion, Daoist cosmology naturally resists rigid binaries and dogmatic boundaries.

[ 109 ] In a world rooted in fluid transformation, coexistence is not just ideal—it is ontological.

Doctrinally, Daoism advocates non-contention ( wu zheng 無爭) and harmonious coexistence with others. These values are clearly articulated in the Daodejing (《道德经》), particularly in Chapter 16: “To know eternity is to embrace whatever comes; To embrace whatever comes is to be just; To be just is to be complete; To be complete is to be like Heaven; To be like Heaven is to return to Tao.” [ 110 ] This passage expresses a cascading ethical progression: when individuals come to understand the eternal and unchanging principles of the universe ( chang 常, “constancy”), they develop a heart of tolerance and acceptance ( rong 容) toward all things. From this tolerance arises a sense of impartiality and fairness ( gong 公). Impartiality fosters completeness and thoroughness ( quan 全) in one’s conduct. Acting with such wholeness aligns a person with the natural order ( tian 天, “Heaven”). To live in accordance with the principles of Heaven is to be in harmony with the Dao—the Way. And to follow the Dao is to enter a state of lasting stability and peace, where one remains free from harm throughout life. This sequence illustrates a core Daoist vision of tolerance, peace, generativity, and balance—values that support engagement with other religious traditions in a spirit of concord and moderation. Rather than viewing diversity as a threat, Daoism frames it as a reflection of the Dao’s boundless creativity.

Historically, this inclusive and adaptive spirit enabled Daoism to engage in mutual exchange and synthesis with Confucianism and Buddhism. While each tradition retained its distinctive doctrines, they also influenced one another profoundly. One illustrative example is the Daoist adoption of Confucian moral values; the Taishang Ganying Pian (《太上感應篇》), compiled during the Song dynasty, is a seminal text that integrates Daoist metaphysics with Confucian ethics.

[ 111 ] The work emphasizes virtue, retribution, and moral responsibility, demonstrating how Daoism can incorporate external frameworks while maintaining its spiritual essence.

Through centuries of interaction, the three traditions—Confucianism, Buddhism, and Daoism—gradually converged to form a syncretic paradigm often described as “the unity of the Three Teachings” ( san jiao he yi 三教合一). This triadic model became deeply embedded in Chinese culture, shaping rituals, education, governance, and everyday ethics. Rather than competing for dominance, these traditions found ways to coexist, offering the Chinese people a multifaceted yet coherent spiritual worldview. This model of integration rather than exclusion is a testament to the Daoist ethos of accommodation and harmony.

[ 112 ] In today’s world, marked by religious pluralism, rising fundamentalism, and frequent intercultural tensions, Daoism’s example remains highly relevant. Its commitment to coexistence, openness to diversity, and refusal to impose rigid doctrinal boundaries offer valuable insights for contemporary discussions about religious tolerance and interfaith dialogue.

[ 113 ] By cultivating inward balance and outward harmony, Daoism reminds us that true peace begins with recognizing the interconnectedness of all beings. In this sense, the Dao is not merely a metaphysical principle—it is a lived ethic, guiding individuals and societies toward a more inclusive, compassionate world.

Islam [ edit ] See also: Al-Baqara 256 , Pacifism in Islam , Peace in Islamic philosophy , and Islam and other religions Participants make their way, to the King Abdullah I Mosque in Amman, Jordan from Our Lady Church, to attend the Voices of Religious Tolerance (VORT) conference on April 21, 2011 Religious tolerance in Quran [ edit ] Islam is an Abrahamic religion. One of the Quranic verses that deals with religious freedom is, “If your Lord had so wished, everyone on earth would have believed, all of them together! So will you force mankind to become believers?’.

[ 114 ] The verse advocates for man’s freedom of will. The words of Quran are regarded as the absolute truth, and human beings are called upon to utilize their conscience to recognize this truth, and follow this religion based on their own conviction. The verse also acts as a caution to the believers of Islam against employing any sort of physical, social or financial coercion relating to the matter of faith. Prophet Muhammad was commanded against utilizing any force for submission. He was instructed to, “Invite [people] to your Lord’s way with discretion and kindly instruction, and discuss [things] with them in the politest manner. Your Lord is quite aware as to who has strayed from His path, just as He is quite aware of those who have consented to be guided.” [ 115 ] The prescribed method of communication with individuals from other faiths is through a wise dialogue and good advice.

[ 116 ] Islam demonstrates a profound tolerance towards the people of the book, encompassing the Abrahamic religions, i.e., Christianity and Judaism. The Quran contains numerous verses that emphasize the status and respect toward the people of the book. The Quran invites Christians and Jews diplomatically and respectfully. However, if they reject the call, [ 117 ] the Quran still recognizes them as the people of the book, who are described with good manners and deeds.

[ 118 ] Similarly, the Quran gives equal status to worship places, for example, monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques.

[ 119 ] Islam further continues in religious tolerance towards Christians and Jews by making family connections with different religious groups. For instance, in the Quran chapter of Maida verse 5 states that Muslim men are allowed to marry the women of the book [ 120 ] without putting any condition on their conversion. However, there is a silence in the Quran regarding the marriage of Muslim women to the men of the book.

While Islam has plenty of references regarding the religious tolerance towards Christians and Jews, there is not much reference in the Quran regarding non-Abrahamic religions such as pagans or, for example, Hindus and Buddhists. With a reductionist approach, it can be concluded that Islam does not force anyone to their choice of faith.

[ 121 ] However, it also discourages Muslims from having strong ties with pagans, such as marriage; Muslims are not allowed to marry pagan men or women.

[ 122 ] The Quran , albeit having given importance to its 'true believers', commands its followers to tolerate 'the people of all faiths and communities' and to let them command their dignity, without breaking the Shariah law.

Certain verses of the Quran were interpreted to create a specially tolerated status for People of the Book , Jewish and Christian believers in the Old and New Testaments considered to have been a basis for Islamic religion: Verily! Those who believe and those who are Jews and Christians, and Sabians, whoever believes in God and the Last Day and do righteous good deeds shall have their reward with their Lord, on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.

[ 123 ] Under Islamic law , Jews and Christians were considered dhimmis , a legal status inferior to that of a Muslim but superior to that of other non-Muslims.

Jewish communities in the Ottoman Empire held a protected status and continued to practice their own religion, as did Christians, though both were subject to additional restrictions, such as restrictions on the areas where they could live or work or in clothing, [ 124 ] and both had to pay additional taxes.

[ 125 ] Yitzhak Sarfati, born in Germany, became the Chief Rabbi of Edirne and wrote a letter inviting European Jews to settle in the Ottoman Empire , in which he asked: "Is it not better for you to live under Muslims than under Christians?'".

[ 126 ] Sultan Beyazid II (1481–1512), issued a formal invitation to the Jews expelled from Catholic Spain and Portugal, leading to a wave of Jewish immigration.

According to Michael Walzer: The established religion of the [Ottoman] empire was Islam, but three other religious communities—Greek Orthodox, Armenian Orthodox, and Jewish—were permitted to form autonomous organizations. These three were equal among themselves, without regard to their relative numerical strength. They were subject to the same restrictions vis-à-vis Muslims—with regard to dress, proselytizing, and intermarriage, for example—and were allowed the same legal control over their own members.

[ 127 ] Prohibition on access to holy places [ edit ] According to the interpretation of the Quran, non-Muslims should not access the holiest places, namely Mecca and Medina mosques. Since the 9th year of Prophet Muhammad’s migration, the Pagans were not allowed to perform pilgrimage around Kaߵba. Moreover, they were not allowed to occupy the mosques and the worshiping places of the Muslims. In chapter, The Repentance al-Tawba, Allah says to Muhammad, “O believers! Indeed, the polytheists are ˹spiritually˺ impure, so they should not approach the Sacred Mosque after this year.” [ 128 ] Based on the interpretation of Abu Hayyan al-Andalusi, “polytheists” are the unbelievers, which does not include the people of the book, i.e., Christians and Jews, who are monotheists. Abu Hayyan’s exegesis aligns with the Jurisprudence of Abu Hanifa, the founder of one of the four Islamic Law schools, allowing Christians and Jews to access mosques. The scholars also emphasized that the “impurity” that is mentioned in the Quran is meant in an allegorical way. Those who are spiritually impure should not enter the Sacred places. They support their argument that the people of the book cannot be considered impure by the Quran [ 120 ] because elsewhere in the book, the believers are allowed to eat food of the people of the book, as it is halal (religiously permissible).

However, the Maliki school used analogy qiyas to conclude that every non-Muslim, including the People of the Book, are unbeliever and, therefore, should not access the sacred places. They also made an analogy between the Holy Mosque and all other mosques. Based on this interpretation, many modern Muslims believe that they can pray anywhere as long as they face Mecca and the place is pure.

Religious tolerance in Medieval Iberia [ edit ] In Al-Andalus (Andalusia), from the 8th to the 15th centuries, under Muslim rule, a degree of  religious tolerance was granted to Christians and Jews. This part of history is known for its supposed religious tolerance, especially under the Umayyad Caliphate where many cultural and intellectual achievements were made. Under this Islamic rule, non-Muslims were known as ‘ dhimmi ’ and Christians and Jews were granted certain protections whilst given the right to practice their faith in exchange for a tax, called jizya. However, the People of the Book are treated as second class citizens [ 129 ] The term Convivencia (co-existence) was coined by Americo Castro in the 1940s, to describe how the three religions lived together peacefully during this time. However, many scholars point out the oversimplification of this phenomenon.

[ 130 ] On one hand, there is the belief of the medieval Iberian Peninsula as a cross- cultural, peaceful era and on the other, it has been characterized as a place of conflict, not cooperation.

[ 130 ] As a pact of protection and submission, the dhimmi originally only protected the People of the Book , but as Islam expanded also other religions were included.

[ 131 ] In Al-Andalus the specific written regulation in use was the Pact of Umar , which defined a paradox in the treatment of the dhimmis which were considered both inferior and an integral part of the Umma at the same time: on the one hand they were granted religious freedom, protection, civil rights and exclusion from the military service and, on the other, they were forced to pay a tax, excluded from public offices and treated with inferiority and some discriminatory attitudes.

[ 132 ] However, there was a discrepancy between the written prescriptions and the reality of their application. This is evident especially regarding the Jewish community during the period of the Umayyad caliphate and the taifas, when Jews were occupying important roles as physicians, bureaucrats and even high-ranking administrators (as the cases of Hasdai ibn Shaprūt and Samuel ibn Nagrela show).

[ 133 ] The coexistence of the time cannot be defined as cultural mixing or inter-culturalism, despite the presence of mixed marriages; however, while there was disdain for the dhimmis and their inferiority status, this rarely resulted in racial or ethnic violence, fostering mostly peaceful coexistence.

Interfaith marriages in medieval Al-Andalus, frequently between Muslim men and Christian or Jewish women, allow an interesting perspective on the practice of religious tolerance. Intermarriage between Muslims and Christians in the Iberian Peninsula seems to have taken root shortly after the Islamic conquest of the region in 711.

[ 134 ] Inter-religious marriages were legally permissible within specific parameters outlined by Islamic law. Muslim men were allowed to marry Christian or Jewish women, known as dhimmis . In contrast muslim women were prohibited from marrying outside of Islam.

[ 135 ] Interfaith marriages in medieval Iberia had mutually beneficial aspects for both the dominant Muslim authorities and the minority religious communities. On the one hand, in early Muslim Iberia , such unions served to legitimize Muslim authority by connecting the new rulers to the local Visigothic nobility and allowing land acquisition through inheritance.

[ 136 ] On the other hand, marriages between Christian women and Muslim converts were seen as a possibility to maintain Christian communal cohesion while simultaneously facilitating the social advancement of male converts.

[ 137 ] The perception of these unions however varied: Interfaith unions were commonly regarded by the dominant groups as legitimate alliances, while the perception of such unions by subordinated communities was often one of coercion or exploitation.

[ 138 ] Even the recipient group of the bride could view such unions with suspicion, fearing a loss of status or internal cohesion through the integration of outsiders.

[ 139 ] Over time inter-religious marriages evolved into a habitus , an embedded social practice of interfaith coexistence and secret religious duality, notably among Crypto-Christians and Crypto-Muslims .

[ 140 ] As such, interfaith marriage in al-Andalus reveals the complex, lived dimensions of tolerance beyond official doctrine.

Jewish communities in Al-Andalus under Muslim rule experienced both opportunity and constraint. Unlike other communities in Europe they had a legal status as dhimmis . While this period is referred to as Convivencia , it had limitations. The Jewish community sometimes faced violence, such as the 1066 Granada massacre .

[ 141 ] In the 12th century, the Almohad dynasty imposed forced conversions and expulsions.

Maimonides , for example, wrote in his Epistle to Yemen that the Muslims had “oppressed, humiliated and hated us”.

[ 142 ] In the 19th century, scholars of the Wissenschaft des Judentums (Science of Judaism) movement, such as Leopold Zunz and Heinrich Graetz , highlighted this period as a “ Golden Age ” of Jewish life. Graetz portrayed Al-Andalus as a place where Jews “contributed to the greatness of the country” and wrote “joyous, gay poetry”.

[ 143 ] These idealized images were motivated by the idea of Jewish emancipation in Europe. However, modern historians now view this narrative as overly romanticized and they point out that Jews remained second-class citizens under Islamic law and suffered recurring episodes of discrimination.

[ 144 ] A clear gap is discussed between the ideal and the actual in the story of the Moriscos of Spain, showing that religious tolerance in Iberia was fragile and conditional depending on the ruler and the dynasty.

The Moriscos expulsion came after more than a century of conflict and mutual mistrust that followed the 1492 Christian conquest and the forced conversion or expulsion of Muslims in 1502 and 1526.

[ 145 ] Moriscos were suspected of secretly practicing Islam of following Arabic customs and traditions, and of resisting acculturation. They were believed by authorities and ecclesiastics to be a danger to both Catholic unity and national security. One of the main reasons for the expulsion was the uprising of the Morisco population in Alpujarras that the Spanish feared could soon be supported by the Ottomans . This process started in eastern Spain in 1609 and was extended to Andalusia in 1610.

[ 146 ] Morisco families were transported to ports and shipped mainly to North Africa and Ottoman lands. The expulsion depopulated entire villages, derailed local economies (especially agriculture), and marked the end of centuries of Muslim cultural contribution in southern Spain.

[ 147 ] The histories of Jews in Al-Andalus and Moriscos in Christian Spain reveal a fragile coexistence, challenging idealized views of medieval tolerance.

Judaism [ edit ] Further information: Persecution of Jews Jews have been among the most persecuted group in the world and have faced waves of discrimination as early as 605 BCE, when Jews who lived in the Neo-Babylonian Empire were persecuted and deported. During the Spanish Inquisition , royal decrees to force the conversion to Christianity led to mass expulsion of Jews from Spain. A major target of the Portuguese Inquisition were the conversos , Jews who converted to Christianity and were accused of practicing Crypto-Judaism .

Jews have also been used as scapegoats for tragedies and shortcomings, such as those seen in the Black Death Persecutions , the 1066 Granada Massacre , Expulsions from Europe and the Middle East, the Massacre of 1391 in Spain, the many Pogroms in the Russian Empire , and the tenets of Nazism prior to and during World War II , which lead to the Holocaust and the murder of six million Jews. In the post-war era, Jews were the subject of purges in the Soviet Union under Joseph Stalin , beginning in 1948. Stalin had plans to deport the entire Jewish population in the Soviet Union to Siberia .

[ 148 ] Modern analyses and critiques [ edit ] Contemporary commentators have highlighted situations in which toleration conflicts with widely held moral standards, national law, the principles of national identity, or other strongly held goals. Michael Walzer notes that the British in India tolerated the Hindu practice of suttee (ritual burning of a widow) until 1829. On the other hand, the United States declined to tolerate the Mormon practice of polygamy .

[ 149 ] The French head scarf controversy represents a conflict between religious practice and the French secular ideal.

[ 150 ] Toleration of the Romani people in European countries is a continuing issue.

[ 151 ] Modern definition [ edit ] Historian Alexandra Walsham notes that the modern understanding of the word toleration may be very different from its historic meaning.

[ 152 ] Toleration in modern parlance has been analyzed as a component of a liberal or libertarian view of human rights . Hans Oberdiek writes, "As long as no one is harmed or no one's fundamental rights are violated, the state should keep hands off, tolerating what those controlling the state find disgusting, deplorable or even debased. This for a long time has been the most prevalent defense of toleration by liberals... It is found, for example, in the writings of American philosophers John Rawls , Robert Nozick , Ronald Dworkin , Brian Barry , and a Canadian, Will Kymlicka , among others." [ 153 ] Isaiah Berlin attributes to Herbert Butterfield the notion that "toleration... implies a certain disrespect. I tolerate your absurd beliefs and your foolish acts, though I know them to be absurd and foolish. Mill would, I think, have agreed." [ 154 ] John Gray states that "When we tolerate a practice, a belief or a character trait, we let something be that we judge to be undesirable, false or at least inferior; our toleration expresses the conviction that, despite its badness, the object of toleration should be left alone." [ 155 ] However, according to Gray, "new liberalism—the
liberalism of Rawls, Dworkin, Ackerman and suchlike" seems to imply that "it is wrong for government to discriminate in favour of, or against, any form of life animated by a definite conception of the good." [ 156 ] Tolerating the intolerant [ edit ] Main article: Paradox of tolerance Walzer, Karl Popper [ 157 ] and John Rawls [ 158 ] have discussed the paradox of tolerating intolerance. Walzer asks "Should we tolerate the intolerant?" He notes that most minority religious groups who are the beneficiaries of tolerance are themselves intolerant, at least in some respects.

[ 159 ] Rawls argues that an intolerant sect should be tolerated in a tolerant society unless the sect directly threatens the security of other members of the society. He links this principle to the stability of a tolerant society, in which members of an intolerant sect in a tolerant society will, over time, acquire the tolerance of the wider society.

Other criticisms and issues [ edit ] Toleration has been described as undermining itself via moral relativism : "either the claim self-referentially undermines itself or it provides us with no compelling reason to believe it. If we are skeptical about knowledge, then we have no way of knowing that toleration is good." [ 160 ] Ronald Dworkin argues that in exchange for toleration, minorities must bear with the criticisms and insults which are part of the freedom of speech in an otherwise tolerant society.

[ 161 ] Dworkin has also questioned whether the United States is a "tolerant secular" nation, or is re-characterizing itself as a "tolerant religious" nation, based on the increasing re-introduction of religious themes into conservative politics. Dworkin concludes that "the tolerant secular model is preferable, although he invited people to use the concept of personal responsibility to argue in favor of the tolerant religious model." [ 162 ] In The End of Faith , Sam Harris asserts that society should be unwilling to tolerate unjustified religious beliefs about morality, spirituality, politics, and the origin of humanity, especially beliefs which promote violence.

See also [ edit ] Anekantavada A Critique of Pure Tolerance Freedom From Religion Foundation Freedom of religion Freedom of religion by country History of Christian thought on persecution and tolerance Inclusivism Christianity and other religions Islam and other religions International Day of Human Fraternity Multifaith space Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance Religious discrimination Religious intolerance Religious persecution Religious pluralism Secular state Separation of church and state Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 ( license statement/permission ). Text taken from Rethinking Education: Towards a global common good?​ , 24, UNESCO.

References [ edit ] ^ Perez Zagorin, How the Idea of Religious Toleration Came to the West (Princeton: Princeton University Press 2003) ISBN 0691092702 , pp. 5–6, quoting D.D. Raphael et al.

^ Joachim Vahland, 'Toleranzdiskurse', Zeno no. 37 (2017), pp. 7–25 ^ Gervers, Peter; Gervers, Michael; Powell, James M., eds. (2001).

Tolerance and Intolerance: Social Conflict in the Age of the Crusades . Syracuse University Press.

ISBN 9780815628699 .

^ "Toleration - Etymology, Origin & Meaning" .

etymonline . Retrieved 2025-05-30 .

^ Heyd, David, ed. (1998).

Toleration: an elusive virtue . Princeton paperbacks (2. pr., 1. paperback pr ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-04371-5 .

^ Rowley, Matthew; Tol, Marietta van der (2024-06-07), "The Peace of Augsburg (1555)" , A Global Sourcebook in Protestant Political Thought, Volume I (1 ed.), London: Routledge, pp.

261– 263, doi : 10.4324/9781003247531-77 , ISBN 978-1-003-24753-1 , retrieved 2025-05-30 ^ Heyd, David, ed. (1998).

Toleration: an elusive virtue . Princeton paperbacks (2. pr., 1. paperback pr ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-04371-5 .

^ Forst, R. (2017) “Toleration,” in Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Available at: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/toleration/ ^ Spinoza, B. (1670) Tractatus Theologico-Politicus .

^ Bayle, P. (1682) Pensées diverses sur l’occasion de la Comète .

^ Locke, J. (1689) A Letter Concerning Toleration . Ed. Tully. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1983.

^ Mendelssohn, M. (1983) “Vorrede,” in Elbogen, I. et al. (eds.) Moses Mendelssohn, Gesammelte Schriften. Jubiläumsausgabe , Vol. 8. Stuttgart/Bad Cannstatt: Friedrich Frommann Verlag, pp. 3–25.

^ Rawls, J. (1993) Political Liberalism . Columbia: Columbia University Press.

^ Walzer, M. (1998) Über Toleranz. Von der Zivilisierung der Differenz . Translated and edited by Otto Kallscheuer. Hamburg: Rotbuch-Verlag.

^ Matviyets, A. S. (2023). “Defining tolerance: Conditions and resources for tolerance,” in Tolerance and Intolerance in Religion and Beyond , pp. 3–4. Routledge.

^ Popper, K. (2012) The Open Society and Its Enemies . London: Routledge, p. 581.

^ Remer, Gary.

Humanism and the Rhetoric of Toleration . University Park, PA: The Pennsylvania State University Press, 1996, pp. 2–19. ISBN 9780271028118.

^ Mendus, Susan (ed.).

Justifying Toleration: Conceptual and Historical Perspectives . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988, pp. 122, 131. ISBN 9780511735295.

^ Mill, John Stuart.

On Liberty (2nd ed.). London: John W. Parker & Son, 1860, pp. 18–21. ISBN 9781499238341.

^ Rawls, John.

Political Liberalism . New York: Columbia University Press, 2005, pp. 133–137. ISBN 9780231130899.

^ Seligman, Adam B.

Modernity’s Wager: Authority, the Self, and Transcendence . Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003, pp. 99–104. ISBN 9780691116365.

^ Matviyets, Anne Sarah; Veltri, Giuseppe; Rüpke, Jörg (2023-08-10).

Tolerance and Intolerance in Religion and Beyond: Challenges from the Past and in the Present (1 ed.). London: Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781003082484 .

ISBN 978-1-003-08248-4 .

^ Gottlieb, Michah (2011-03-03).

Faith and Freedom . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195398946.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-539894-6 .

^ Seubert, Harald; Bartosch, David (2013), Yousefi, Hamid Reza; Seubert, Harald (eds.), "Toleranz in europäischen Traditionen" , Toleranz im Weltkontext (in German), Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, pp.

53– 63, doi : 10.1007/978-3-658-00116-2_4 , ISBN 978-3-658-00115-5 , retrieved 2025-05-30 ^ Suryani, A., & Muslim, A. B. (2024). "Religious Tolerance, Intellectual Humility, and Democratic Education." In A. Suryani & A. B. Muslim, Embracing Diversity: Preparing Future Teachers to Foster Religious Tolerance (p. 14). Springer Nature Singapore.

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-1616-6_2 ^ Ibid., p. 16.

^ Massari, M. (2023). "Tolerance is a key ingredient of democracy." Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe.

https://www.osce.org/files/f/documents/2/8/13570.pdf ^ Leaning, M. (2019). "An Approach to Digital Literacy through the Integration of Media and Information Literacy." Media and Communication , 7(2), 4–13.

https://doi.org/10.17645/mac.v7i2.1931 ^ Hook, J. N., Farrell, J. E., Johnson, K. A., Van Tongeren, D. R., Davis, D. E., & Aten, J. D. (2017). "Intellectual humility and religious tolerance." The Journal of Positive Psychology , 12(1), 29–35.

https://doi.org/10.1080/17439760.2016.1167937 ^ Suryani, A., & Muslim, A. B. (2024).

Embracing Diversity , pp. 14–16.

^ Parker, L. (2014). "Religious Education for Peaceful Coexistence in Indonesia?" South East Asia Research , 22(4), 487–504.

https://doi.org/10.5367/sear.2014.0231 ^ Ziebertz, H.-G., & Hirsch Ballin, E. (2016).

Freedom of Religion in the 21st Century: A human rights perspective on the relation between politics and religion . BRILL, p. viii.

https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004304390 ^ a b Fisher, William Bayne; Gershevitch, I. (1968).

The Cambridge History of Iran . Cambridge University Press. p. 412.

ISBN 9780521200912 .

^ "Book of Ezra | King James Bible" . Kingjamesbibletrust.org. Archived from the original on May 10, 2011 . Retrieved March 21, 2011 .

^ Walzer, Michael (1997).

On Toleration . New Haven: Yale University Press. p.

17 .

ISBN 978-0300076004 .

^ Witte, John Jr. and Johan D. van de Vyver, Religious Human Rights in Global Perspective (The Hague: Kluwer 1996) p. 74 ISBN 9041101764 ^ Logan, Donald F., A history of the church in the Middle Ages (New York:Routledge, 2002) ISBN 0415132894 , p. 8 ^ Rowe, C.K.

World Upside Down: Reading Acts in the Graeco-Roman Age.

Oxford University Press, 2011, 165.

^ "Valerius Maximianus Galerius" Archived 2021-04-17 at the Wayback Machine , Karl Hoeber, Catholic Encyclopedia 1909 Ed, retrieved 1 June 2007.

^ "The Patent of Mohammed Granted to the Holy Monastery of Sinai" SinaiMonastery.com . Retrieved 11 May 2021.

^ Sanni, Amidu Olalekan. (2015). The Covenants of the Prophet Muḥammad with the Christians of the World. Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs, 35(4), 589–592. doi:10.1080/13602004.2015.1112122 ^ Coleman, James William (2002).

The new Buddhism: The western transformation of an ancient tradition . Oxford University Press. p. 7.

ISBN 9780190288228 .

^ Tweed, Thomas, The American Encounter with Buddhism, 1844–1912 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press 2000) p. 101 ISBN 0807849065 ^ Bhikkhu Bodhi, "Tolerance and Diversity" Archived 2021-04-19 at the Wayback Machine .

Access to Insight , 5 June 2010. Accessed March 6, 2011 ^ Kristin Scheible, "Towards a Buddhist Policy of Tolerance: the case of King Ashoka" in Neusner, Jacob, ed.

Religious Tolerance in World Religions (West Conshohocken, PA, Templeton Foundation Prsss 2008) p. 323 ^ "The Face of Buddhist Terror" .

Time . July 2013.

^ February 5, 2008 posting by Rabbi David Kominsky ...For You Were Strangers in the Land of Egypt Archived 2021-04-20 at the Wayback Machine . Accessed January 25, 2011 ^ Walzer, Michael On Toleration (New Haven: Yale University Press 1997) pp. 80–81 ^ Richard Landes (2000).

"The Birth of Heresy: A Millennial Phenomenon" .

Journal of Religious History .

24 (1): 26– 43.

doi : 10.1111/1467-9809.00099 . Archived from the original on 2010-04-14 . Retrieved 2021-04-18 .

^ Jeffrey Burton Russell, Dissent and Order in the Middle Ages: The Search for Legitimate Authority (New York: Twayne Publishers 1992), p. 23 ^ James P. Byrd (2002).

The challenges of Roger Williams: religious liberty, violent persecution, and the Bible . Mercer University Press.

ISBN 978-0865547711 . Retrieved 15 June 2011 .

^ a b Walsham 2006: 234.

^ Ellwood, Robert S. and Gregory D. Alles, eds. (2007), The Encyclopedia of World Religions , New York, p. 431 ^ Fudge, Thomas A. (2013), The Trial of Jan Hus. Medieval Heresy and Criminal Procedures , Oxford University Press, New York ^ Drake, H.A. (November 1996). "Lambs into Lions: Explaining Early Christian Intolerance".

Past & Present (153): 3– 36.

doi : 10.1093/past/153.1.3 .

JSTOR 651134 .

^ Tuchman, Barbara, A Distant Mirror: The Calamitous 14th Century (New York: Alfred A. Knopf 1978), p. 113 ^ Rummel, Erika, "The case against Johann Reuchlin" (pp. iv–xv) University of Toronto Press, 2002 ISBN 0802084842 , 978-0802084842 .

^ Poland Archived 2021-03-08 at the Wayback Machine . Jewish Virtual Library. Retrieved on 2011-06-15.

^ Remer, Gary, Humanism and the Rhetoric of Toleration (University Park: University of Pennsylvania Press 1996) p. 95 ISBN 0271028114 ^ James Anthony Froude; Desiderius Erasmus (1894).

Life and letters of Erasmus: lectures delivered at Oxford 1893–94 . Longmans, Green. pp.

359 – . Retrieved 15 June 2011 .

^ Marius, Richard Thomas More: a biography (Cambridge, Ma: Harvard University press, 1999) p. 175 ISBN 0674885252 ^ Marius, Richard Thomas More: a biography (Cambridge, Ma: Harvard University press, 1999) p. 386 ISBN 0674885252 ^ Olmstead, Clifton E. (1960), History of Religion in the United States , Englewood Cliffs, NJ, p. 5 ^ Winkler, Hermann August (2012), Geschichte des Westens. Von den Anfängen in der Antike bis zum 20. Jahrhundert , Third, Revised Edition, Munich (Germany), p. 152 ^ Ohst, Martin (2005), Toleranz/ Intoleranz , in Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart , Fourth Edition, Tübingen (Germany), Volume 8, col. 463 ^ Heinrich Bornkamm (1962), Toleranz. In der Geschichte des Christentums , in Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart , Third Edition, Tübingen (Germany), Vol. VI, col. 937–38 ^ Karl Heussi (1957), Kompendium der Kirchengeschichte , Eleventh Edition, Tübingen (Germany), pp. 316, 328 ^ Gonzalez Echeverría, Fco Javier (2012). El Amor a la Verdad. Vida y Obra de Miguel Servet p. 256. "Inherent of human condition is the sickness of believing the rest are impostors and heathen, and not ourselves, because nobody recognizes his own mistakes [..] If one must condemn everyone that misses in a particular point then every mortal would have to be burnt a thousand times. The apostles and Luther himself have been mistaken [..] If I have taken the word, by any reason, it has been because I think it is grave to kill men, under the pretext that they are mistaken on the interpretation of some point, for we know that even the chosen ones are not exempt from sometimes being wrong" (Michael Servetus) ^ Heinrich Bornkamm (1962), col. 939 ^ Zweig, Stefan (1951).

Erasmus; The Right to Heresy: Castellio against Calvin . London: Cassell. p. 312.

OCLC 24340377 .

^ Sebastian Castellio, Contra libellum, # 77, Vaticanus .

^ E.M. Curley, "Skepticism and Toleration: the Case of Montaigne" , Accessed February 27, 2011 ^ Grossman, Walter (1979). "Toleration – Exercitium Religionis Privatum".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

40 (1): 129– 34.

doi : 10.2307/2709265 .

JSTOR 2709265 .

^ Zamoyski, Adam.

The Polish Way . New York: Hippocrene Books, 1987 [ ISBN missing ] ^ In 1898 the tricentennial celebrated the edict as the foundation of the coming Age of Toleration; the 1998 anniversary, by contrast, was commemorated with a book of essays under the evocatively ambivalent title, Coexister dans l'intolérance (Michel Grandjean and Bernard Roussel, editors, Geneva, 1998).

^ Encyclopedia of the Age of Political Ideals, Edict of Versailles (1787) [ usurped ] , downloaded 29 January 2012 ^ John Coffey, Persecution and Toleration in Protestant England, 1558–1689 . Longman Publishing Group (2000).

ISBN 0582304652 . p. 11 ^ Coffey, p. 12 ^ Hunter, William Bridges A Milton Encyclopedia, Volume 8 (East Brunswick, NJ: Associated University Presses, 1980) pp. 71–72 ISBN 0838718418 ^ "Rudolph II" Archived 2008-05-26 at the Wayback Machine , Encyclopædia Britannica 15 Edition, retrieved 1 June 2007.

^ Heinrich August Winkler, Geschichte des Westens. Von den Anfängen in der Antike bis zum 20. Jahrhundert , Third Edition, 2012, Munich (Germany), p. 262 ^ Johnston, Lucian, Religious Liberty in Maryland and Rhode Island (Brooklyn: International Catholic Truth Society, 1903), pp. 30, 38 ^ Clifton E. Olmstead, History of Religion in the United States , 1960, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, pp. 74–75 ^ Hasia R. Diner , The Jews of the United States, 1654 to 2000 , 2004, University of California Press, ISBN 0520248481 , pp. 13–15 ^ Clifton E. Olmsted (1960) p. 124 ^ "Barcuch Spinoza" Archived 2012-09-30 at the Wayback Machine , revised June 2008, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Accessed February 25, 2011 ^ "Pierre Bayle" Archived 2021-04-30 at the Wayback Machine , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, updated August 19, 2008. Accessed March 6, 2011 ^ Joseph LoConte, "The Golden Rule of Toleration" Archived 2015-11-07 at the Wayback Machine . Accessed March 6, 2011 ^ Voltaire A Treatise on Toleration Archived 2006-01-07 at the Wayback Machine (1763) ^ Prager, D ; Telushkin, J .

Why the Jews?: The Reason for Antisemitism . New York: Simon & Schuster , 1983. pp. 128–29.

^ R. Robertson (1998). " 'Dies Hohe Lied der Duldung'? The Ambiguities of Toleration in Lessing's Die Juden and Nathan der Weise".

The Modern Language Review .

93 (1): 105– 20.

doi : 10.2307/3733627 .

JSTOR 3733627 .

^ Dirk Martin Grube, "Gotthold Ephraim Lessing's Ring Parable: An Enlightenment Voice on Religious Tolerance", in Boeve, Lieven, Faith in the Enlightenment? The critique of the Enlightenment revisited (New York: Rodopi 2006) pp. 39ff ISBN 978-90-420-2067-2 ^ "Déclaration des droits de l'Homme et du citoyen de 1789" Archived 2011-03-02 at the Wayback Machine . Accessed March 22, 2011 ^ Jefferson's Letter to the Danbury Baptists (June 1998) – Library of Congress Information Bulletin Archived 2019-10-04 at the Wayback Machine . Loc.gov. Retrieved on 2011-06-15.

^ John Stuart Mill (1806–1873) “On Liberty” 1859. ed. Gertrude Himmelfarb, UK: Penguin, 1985, pp. 83–84 ^ Ernest Renan, "Qu'est-ce qu'une nation?" Archived 2021-04-17 at the Wayback Machine , conference faite en Sorbonne, le 11 Mars 1882. Accessed January 13, 2011 ^ "The Universal Declaration of Human Rights" Archived 2014-12-08 at the Wayback Machine , United Nations 1948, retrieved 1 June 2007.

^ Dignitatis humanae Archived 2012-02-11 at the Wayback Machine , Decree on Religious Freedom, 1965, retrieved 1 June 2007.

^ "Address of John Paul II to the Representatives of the Christian Churches and Ecclesial Communities and of the World Religions" Archived 2008-12-27 at the Wayback Machine (1986) retrieved 1 June 2007.

^ "Russia" Archived 2008-07-22 at the Wayback Machine , Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved on 2011-06-15.

^ Pyper, Douglas; Dawson, Joanna (2025-05-29).

"General Debate: Freedom of religion or belief: 40th anniversary of the declaration on the elimination of religious intolerance" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Pyper, Douglas; Dawson, Joanna (2025-05-29).

"General Debate: Freedom of religion or belief: 40th anniversary of the declaration on the elimination of religious intolerance" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief General Assembly resolution 36/55 - Main Page" .

legal.un.org . Retrieved 2025-05-29 .

^ Ghanea, Nazila (2004), Ghanea, Nazila (ed.), "The 1981 UN Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief: Some Observations" , The Challenge of Religious Discrimination at the Dawn of the New Millennium , Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp.

9– 31, doi : 10.1007/978-94-017-5968-7_2 , ISBN 978-94-017-5968-7 , retrieved 2025-05-29 ^ "Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief General Assembly resolution 36/55 - Main Page" .

legal.un.org . Retrieved 2025-05-29 .

^ "Hinduism – a general introduction" . Religioustolerance.org . Retrieved 2012-06-21 .

^ "Religious Tolerance and Hinduism" (PDF) . Dr. M. Lal Goel/Aniket . Retrieved 2014-08-17 .

^ Helle, Horst J. (2017), "Daoism: China's Native Religion" , China: Promise or Threat?

, A Comparison of Cultures, Brill, pp.

71– 81, doi : 10.1163/j.ctt1w8h29s.12 , retrieved 2025-06-01 ^ Cheng, Pu (2024), Moffic, H. Steven; Gogineni, Rama Rao; Peteet, John R.; Aggarwal, Neil Krishan (eds.), "Basic Principles and Clinical Aspects of Taoism" , Eastern Religions, Spirituality, and Psychiatry: An Expansive Perspective on Mental Health and Illness , Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, pp.

167– 174, doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-56744-5_14 , ISBN 978-3-031-56744-5 , retrieved 2025-06-01 ^ Yuan, Zhiming.

"Tao Te Ching: Original Text and a Modern Interpretation" .

^ Du, Patrick.

"CONFUCIAN PURISM AND HAN LEARNING: HUI DONG'S COMMENTARY ON TAISHANG GANYINGPIAN" (PDF) .

^ Teiser, Stephen F.; Verellen, Franciscus (2011).

"Buddhism, Daoism, and Chinese Religion" .

Cahiers d'Extrême-Asie .

20 : 1– 12.

ISSN 0766-1177 .

^ Wei, Chiao (2015), Deeg, Max; Scheid, Bernhard (eds.), "Daoism in China" , Religion in China , Major Concepts and Minority Positions (1 ed.), Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, pp.

13– 28, doi : 10.2307/j.ctt1vw0pdc.7 , ISBN 978-3-7001-7759-3 , retrieved 2025-06-01 ^ Quran (10:99) ^ Quran (16:125) ^ Nafisi, Shadi (2018).

"Tolerance in Islam" .

HTS Teologiese Studies/Theological Studies .

74 (3): a5145.

doi : 10.4102/hts.v74i3.5145 .

hdl : 2263/71895 .

^ Quran (3:65) ^ Quran (3:113-114) ^ Quran(22:40) ^ a b Quran (5:5) ^ Quran(2:256) ^ Quran (2:221) ^ Quran 2:62 ^ H. Inalcik; The Ottoman Empire: The Classical Age 1300–1600, Phoenix Press, (2001) ^ D. Quataert, The Ottoman Empire, 1700–1922, CUP, 2005 ^ B. Lewis , "The Jews of Islam", New York (1984), pp. 135–36 ^ Michael Walzer, On Toleration (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1997) ISBN 0300076002 p. 17 ^ Quran (9:28) ^ Lewis, Bernard (1984).

The Jews of Islam (1st ed.). Routledge. p. 54.

ISBN 9780415611800 .

^ a b Jonathan, Ray (2005). [10.1353/jss.2005.0018 "Beyond Tolerance and Persecution: Reassessing Our Approach to Medieval Convivencia"].

Jewish Social Studies .

11 (2): 1– 18.

doi : 10.1353/jss.2005.0018 .

{{ cite journal }} : Check |url= value ( help ) ^ Cohen, Mark R. (1994).

Under crescent and cross: the Jews in the Middle Ages . Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4008-4433-3 .

^ Sakrani, Raja (2018).

"The Dhimmi as the Other of Multiple Convivencias in al-Andalus: Protection, Tolerance and Domination in Islamic Law" .

Rechtsgeschichte - Legal History .

2018 (26): 095– 138.

doi : 10.12946/rg26/095-138 .

^ Stillman, Norman A. (2010).

Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic world . Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-17678-2 .

^ Barton, Simon (March 2011).

"Marriage across frontiers: sexual mixing, power and identity in medieval Iberia" .

Journal of Medieval Iberian Studies .

3 (1): 1– 25.

doi : 10.1080/17546559.2011.556700 .

ISSN 1754-6559 .

^ Sant Cassia, Paul (2018).

"Marriages at the margins : interfaith marriages in the Mediterranean" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Barton, Simon (2011-03-01).

"Marriage across frontiers: sexual mixing, power and identity in medieval Iberia" .

Journal of Medieval Iberian Studies .

3 (1): 1– 25.

doi : 10.1080/17546559.2011.556700 .

ISSN 1754-6559 .

^ Sant Cassia, Paul (2018).

"Marriages at the margins : interfaith marriages in the Mediterranean" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Barton, Simon (2015).

Conquerors, brides, and concubines: interfaith relations and social power in medieval Iberia . Middle Ages series (1st ed.). Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 978-0-8122-9211-4 .

^ Barton, Simon (2011-03-01).

"Marriage across frontiers: sexual mixing, power and identity in medieval Iberia" .

Journal of Medieval Iberian Studies .

3 (1): 1– 25.

doi : 10.1080/17546559.2011.556700 .

ISSN 1754-6559 .

^ Sant Cassia, Paul (2018).

"Marriages at the margins : interfaith marriages in the Mediterranean" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Ṿisṭrits, Roberṭ (2010).

A lethal obsession: anti-semitism from antiquity to the global Jihad . New York: Random House.

ISBN 978-1-4000-6097-9 .

^ Maimonides, Moses (1952).

Epistle to Yemen . Internet Archive. New York : American Academy for Jewish Research.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Professor H. Graetz (1894).

History Of The Jews Vol III . Universal Digital Library. The Jewish Publication Society Of America.

^ Cohen, Mark R. (1994).

Under crescent and cross: the Jews in the Middle Ages . Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-03378-5 .

^ Harvey, Leonard P. (2008).

Muslims in Spain, 1500 to 1614 . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-31965-0 .

^ Amelang, James S. (2022-11-08), Solterer, Helen; Joos, Vincent (eds.), "The expulsion of the Moriscos, 1609–14: Still more questions than answers" , Migrants shaping Europe, past and present , Manchester University Press, doi : 10.7765/9781526166180.00011 , ISBN 978-1-5261-6618-0 , retrieved 2025-06-01 ^ Moreno Díaz del Campo, Francisco J.; Bernabé Pons, Luis F. (2024), Tavim, José Alberto; Martins, Hugo (eds.), "On money, properties and expulsions: Mudejars and Granadan Moriscos in Campo de Calatrava: Comparative insights" , More than Homesickness , Évora: Publicações do Cidehus, doi : 10.4000/11tyb , ISBN 978-972-778-389-2 , retrieved 2025-06-01 ^ "The Moscow Times" .

The Moscow Times . Retrieved 2022-12-22 .

^ Michael Walzer, On Toleration , (New Haven: Yale University Press 1997) p. 61 ISBN 0300076002 ^ John Bowen, "Muslims and Citizens" Archived 2011-09-14 at the Wayback Machine , The Boston Review February–March 2004. Accessed January 25, 2011 ^ "Romanies: A long road" , The Economist September 16, 2010. Accessed March 22, 2011 ^ Alexandra Walsham, Charitable Hatred: Tolerance and Intolerance in England, 1500–1700 . Manchester University Press (2006) ISBN 0719052394 p. 233.

^ Oberdiek, Hans, Tolerance: between forbearance and acceptance (Lanham, Maryland: Rowman and Littlefield, 2001) p. vi ISBN 0847687856 ^ Isaiah Berlin, "Four Essays on Liberty," London, Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1969, p. 184.

^ John Gray, "Enlightenment's Wake," London and New York: Routledge, p. 19.

^ Gray (1995), p. 20.

^ Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies , Vol. 1, Notes to the Chapters: Ch. 7, Note 4.

^ Rawls, John (31 March 2005).

John Rawls, A Theory of Justice , Harvard University Press, 1971, p. 216 . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674017726 .

Archived from the original on 2022-12-06 . Retrieved 2021-04-18 .

^ Michael Walzer, On Toleration , (New Haven: Yale University Press 1997) pp. 80–81 ISBN 0300076002 ^ "Toleration" Archived 2021-04-19 at the Wayback Machine , The Internet encyclopedia of Philosophy , Accessed March 21, 2011 ^ Ronald Dworkin, "Even bigots and Holocaust deniers must have their say" Archived 2021-04-18 at the Wayback Machine , The Guardian , February 14, 2006. retrieved March 21, 2011 ^ "Dworkin Explores Secular, Religious Models for Society" Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine , Virginia Law School News and Events , April 18, 2008. accessed March 21, 2011 Further reading [ edit ] Barzilai, Gad (2007).

Law and Religion . Ashgate.

ISBN 978-0754624943 .

Beneke, Chris (2006).

Beyond Toleration: The Religious Origins of American Pluralism . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0195305555 .

Coffey, John (2000).

Persecution and Toleration in Protestant England, 1558–1689 . Longman Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0582304659 .

Collins, Jeffrey R. "Redeeming the enlightenment: New histories of religious toleration." Journal of Modern History 81.3 (2009): 607–36. Historiography 1789 to 2009.

Curry, Thomas J. (1989).

Church and State in America to the Passage of the First Amendment . Oxford University Press; Reprint edition.

ISBN 978-0195051810 .

Grell, Ole Peter; Roy Porter, eds. (2000).

Toleration in Enlightenment Europe . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521651967 .

Hamilton, Marci A. (2005).

God vs. the Gavel: Religion and the Rule of Law . Edward R. Becker (Foreword). Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521853040 .

Hanson, Charles P. (1998).

Necessary Virtue: The Pragmatic Origins of Religious Liberty in New England . University Press of Virginia.

ISBN 978-0813917948 .

Jordan, W.K.

The Development of Religious Toleration in England . 4 volumes. Cambridge MA 1932-40.

Kaplan, Benjamin J. (2007).

Divided by Faith: Religious Conflict and the Practice of Toleration in Early Modern Europe . Belknap Press.

ISBN 978-0674024304 .

Laursen, John Christian; Nederman, Cary, eds. (1997).

Beyond the Persecuting Society: Religious Toleration Before the Enlightenment . University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 978-0812233315 .

LeCler, Joseph.

Toleration and the Reformation, trans. T.L. Westow. 2 vols. London 1960.

Murphy, Andrew R. (2001).

Conscience and Community: Revisiting Toleration and Religious Dissent in Early Modern England and America . Pennsylvania State University Press.

ISBN 978-0271021058 .

Oberdiek, Hans (2001).

Tolerance: between forbearance and acceptance . Rowman and Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0847687855 .

Tausch, Arno. "Are Practicing Catholics More Tolerant of Other Religions than the Rest of the World? Comparative Analyses Based on World Values Survey Data" (November 21, 2017). Available at SSRN 3075315 or doi : 10.2139/ssrn.3075315 Tønder, Lars (2013).

Tolerance: A Sensorial Orientation to Politics . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199315802 .

Walsham, Alexandra (2006).

Charitable Hatred: Tolerance and Intolerance in England, 1500–1700 . Manchester University Press.

ISBN 978-0719052392 .

Walsham, Alexandra. (2017) "Toleration, Pluralism, and Coexistence: The Ambivalent Legacies of the Reformation." Archiv für Reformationsgeschichte – Archive for Reformation History 108.1 (2017): 181–90.

Online Zagorin, Perez (2003).

How the Idea of Religious Toleration Came to the West . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0691121420 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tolerance .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Religious tolerance .

Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: God and Religious Toleration Religion and Foreign Policy Initiative , Council on Foreign Relations Background to the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights Text of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights "Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance" .

Various information on sensible religious topics .

Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance .

History of Religious Tolerance Outline for a Discussion on Toleration (Karen Barkey) Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine "Toleration" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Toleration , BBC Radio 4 discussion with Justin Champion, David Wootton & Sarah Barber ( In Our Time , May 20, 2004) Teaching Tolerance Test Yourself for Hidden Bias v t e Christianity and politics Christian left Christian right Key concepts Separation of church and state " Render unto Caesar " Two kingdoms doctrine Freedom of religion Movements Christian anarchism Christian democracy Clerical fascism Distributism Evangelical left Christian feminism Christian libertarianism Libertarian Christianity Christianism National Catholicism Christian pacifism Political Catholicism Christian reconstructionism Theoconservatism Paleoconservatism Integrism Christian communism Christian corporatism Christian socialism Theodemocracy Christian Zionism Christofascism Christian nationalism Christian Patriot movement Christian realism Identity Christianity Political influence of Evangelicalism in Latin America Liberal Catholicism Issues Abortion Homosexuality Poverty and wealth Christianity and environmentalism Theology Catholic social teaching Dominion theology Liberation theology Political theology China Korea Middle East Sub-Saharan Africa Social Gospel Prosperity gospel Symphonia Radical orthodoxy Integral mission Christian state Caesaropapism Christian republic Divine right of kings Related topics Christian views on genetically modified foods Christianity and other religions Civil religion State religion Theocracy Dallas Statement v t e Religious pluralism Category:Religious pluralism Topics Belief system Comparative religion Comparative theology Dogmatism History of religious pluralism Inclusivism Indifferentism Interfaith dialogue Interfaith marriage Mirari vos Moral relativism vs Traditionalist School Confessionalism (politics) Multifaith space Multiple religious belonging Perennialism Cambridge Platonists Philosophy of religion Religious pluralism Religious syncretism Separation of church and state Spiritual but not religious Syncretism Toleration Universalism Persons Eknath Easwaran Jacques Dupuis (Jesuit) John Hick Hajj Muhammad Legenhausen John Courtney Murray Swami Vivekananda Emanuel Swedenborg Paul F. Knitter Religions Buddhism and Christianity Buddhism and Hinduism Three teachings Religion portal Philosophy portal v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Religious_tolerance&oldid=1303801093 " Categories : Religion and society Human rights by issue Toleration Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links Pages with missing ISBNs CS1 errors: missing periodical CS1 errors: URL CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2016 Free-content attribution Free content from UNESCO Commons category link is locally defined Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 03:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Religious tolerance 23 languages Add topic

