Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and career Toggle Life and career subsection 1.1 On racial segregation in public schools 1.2 On race-neutrality in U.S. immigration policy 1.3 On the death penalty 2 Published works (selection) 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Ernest van den Haag 4 languages العربية Deutsch مصرى Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American sociologist Ernest van den Haag Photo of van den Haag from the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation Born September 15, 1914 The Hague , Netherlands Died March 21, 2002 (2002-03-21) (aged 87) Mendham Township, New Jersey , U.S.

Alma mater University of Iowa This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Ernest van den Haag (September 15, 1914 – March 21, 2002) was a Dutch-born American sociologist, social critic, and author. He was John M. Olin Professor of Jurisprudence and Public Policy at Fordham University . He was best known for his contributions to National Review .

Life and career [ edit ] Ernest van den Haag was born in 1914 in the Hague to Moses "Max" Melamerson and Flora Haag Melamerson. He changed his surname in the early 1940s. While van den Haag was still young, his family moved to Italy. Van den Haag grew up in Italy, and following his education began a life in politics. In the late 1930s, he was a left-wing activist and communist. During this time, Italy was ruled by Benito Mussolini 's fascist regime. In 1937, van den Haag was nearly murdered by a political assassin who shot him five times. After being shot, he spent nearly three years in prison. Nearly eighteen months of those three years were spent in solitary confinement. After release, fearing re-imprisonment, van den Haag drifted between European countries in an attempt to evade Italy and Mussolini. In 1940, he made his way to Portugal and fled to the United States, arriving at Ellis Island , not knowing any English. Living in New York, van den Haag worked as a bus boy and sold vegetables; eventually he was able to secure admission to the University at Iowa , where a group of faculty members recognized his intellectual gifts and agreed to pay for his tuition. In 1942, van den Haag graduated with an M.A in economics. The same year, van den Haag met the political philosopher Sidney Hook . His friendship with Hook forever changed van den Haag, converting him from being a left-wing activist and communist, to the opposite end of the spectrum; van den Haag was now a conservative. Over the years, van den Haag took particular interest in the field of capital punishment and the death penalty. His book Punishing Criminals: Concerning a Very Old and Painful Question (1975) developed his reputation on being one of the foremost thinkers and proponents on the death penalty . Van den Haag was considered by his colleagues to be an expert on the issue of capital punishment.

[ 1 ] Van den Haag died in Mendham, New Jersey .

On racial segregation in public schools [ edit ] He was an early opponent of the Supreme Court 's decision in Brown v. Board of Education which found segregation in schools unconstitutional, [ 2 ] and testified in favor of segregation.

[ 3 ] He also argued that continued school segregation was desirable because of the "genetic intellectual inferiority" of black students. In a National Review cover-page article, van den Haag dismissed recent research undermining the notion of innate ethnic differences in intelligence, stating that he believed such differences existed and accounted for "much" of the poorer academic performance of black students, thus necessitating separate schooling.

[ 4 ] This article caused controversy among readers of the National Review , several of whom wrote angry letters against the decision to print such "bigotry".

[ 5 ] In 1966, he testified before the International Court of Justice in support of apartheid in South Africa .

[ 6 ] On race-neutrality in U.S. immigration policy [ edit ] In another article, from 1965, he opposed the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 , which replaced an immigration system largely excluding Asians and discriminating against southern and eastern Europeans with a race-neutral program based on skills and family connections to U.S. citizens and permanent residents, which enabled an increase in immigration from Asia. Van den Haag instead advocated greater rather than less immigration restriction.  He also expressly defended the practice of fashioning immigration policies in favor of European ethnicity, arguing that "The wish to preserve... the identity of one's nation requires no justification." He likened such a practice to a harmless expression of sentiment, similar to preferring to associate with one's own family rather than strangers. "The wish not to see one's country overrun by groups one regards as alien need not be based on feelings of superiority or 'racism.'" [ 7 ] On the death penalty [ edit ] Van den Haag's particular field of interest, the field he contributed the most to in terms of publications, was the death penalty, particularly in the context of the capital punishment debate in the United States before and after the Furman v. Georgia ruling in 1972, which (temporarily) abolished capital punishment nationwide. Van den Haag was a respected debater, and when he was not contributing to the National Review or other publications, he was active in debating the issue of the death penalty. His main argument in its defence stemmed from key themes such as deterrence, and retributive punishment for severe criminals.

[ 8 ] On Firing Line , he joined a programme dedicated to the death penalty debate on December 13, 1976, after the Gregg v. Georgia ruling (but weeks before the resumption of executions with Gary Gilmore , who was a subject of the deterrence argument) and was cited in a previous programme with Truman Capote in 1968, regarding an off-cam argument with regard to the efficiency of the punishment, which Capote challenged.

[ 9 ] In his book Punishing Criminals , van den Haag defines the primary role of government as "securing rights and duties by specifying them through laws and enforcing the laws." [ 10 ] Van den Haag believed the paramount duty of government is to "provide legal order in which citizens can be secure in their lives, their liberties, and their pursuit of happiness." [ 11 ] The law exists to provide legal order. Van den Haag disputed claims that capital punishment is just a form of legal retribution by claiming that if laws are knowingly broken, legal order can only be maintained by enforcement. Justice, van den Haag claimed, is blindfolded, while retribution carries the weight of passion behind it; justice being delivered to someone who violates social order knowingly is equal, thus the term legal retribution is void.

[ 12 ] Van den Haag also argued that people commit crimes because they believe, one way or another, they will benefit from committing the crime. Thus it is society's duty to make all crimes as disadvantageous as possible. Van den Haag uses economic examples to further prove his point. In economics, there is a concept named opportunity cost . Opportunity cost forces an individual to weigh the benefits versus the sacrifices of making a decision. Van den Haag believes people look at committing the crime the same way they would view an opportunity; they would weigh the profits versus the punishment. Temptation to commit a crime will be significantly decreased if the punishment for committing the crime is more severe.

[ 13 ] The death penalty offers the greatest weighted punishment for committing an offense. Van den Haag also related Marxist theory behind his justification of the death penalty. Marxists, Van den Haag argued, believe that "Legal justice never can do less, though it can do more." [ 14 ] Legal justice should distribute punishment equally among violators and more frequently in order to deter crime.

[ 15 ] Van den Haag also related to the Marxist belief in class warfare. Van den Haag states, "Obviously, the poor and powerless are more tempted to take what is not theirs, or to rebel, than the powerful and wealthy, who need not take what they already have." [ 16 ] The threat of severe punishment diminishes temptation, which van den Haag argued is to be the greatest use of the death penalty, deterrence.

Van den Haag also believed that law breakers have more of an inclination to repeat their bad actions. He said that breaking the law leads to a form of moral decay, in which offenders can no longer distinguish right from wrong, and thus repeat offending is common. To lower the crime rate, and the tendency of individuals toward committing more violent crimes over time, van den Haag said, "The only permanent, and irrevocable incapacitation is execution." [ 17 ] Van den Haag believed that any temporary or permanent incapacitation only reduces the crime rate if there are no more compensating increases in crime by other people. He argued that, without the strong deterrent effect of a  death penalty, an increase in crime and criminals remains a factor.

[ 18 ] Van den Haag believed homicide to be the most deplorable crime a human being can commit. In his book The Death Penalty : A Debate , he argues that "the state must teach that killing anyone deliberately, for whatever reason, is needless and wrong." [ 19 ] Van den Haag believed that capital punishment has a direct correlation with a decrease in murders. Rehabilitation as a response to criminals who murder is not an option because, as van den Haag states, "no effective method to achieve it [rehabilitation] has been found." [ 20 ] He said that, even if a proper method of rehabilitation can be found, it would not reduce the crime rate, because rehabilitation only works after the crime has been committed, i.e. in the case of murder, once an innocent life had been lost. He argued that deterrence is the only thing that can have any effect on the actual crime rate. Overall, van den Haag directed his argument toward the fact that the death penalty ought only to exist to protect innocent lives. To sum up his entire argument against his opposition in one quote, van den Haag contends, "I'd rather execute a man convicted of having murdered others than put the lives of innocents at risk. I find it hard to understand the opposite choice." [ 21 ] While he recognized that innocent people would sometimes be executed, Van den Haag contended that no penalty was irreversible , except for fines , and that while an execution (once performed) was also irrevocable - that is, could not be undone or set aside - the notion of sentencing innocents to prison time unduly was equally disturbing, and in no way certain to be discovered. As the prospect of execution would purportedly harden a jury not to impose a guilty verdict easily, the irrevocability sentiment viz. a life sentence would make a court more prone to mistakes, also with disastrous consequences. The innocence argument, in Van den Haag's mind, thus must be aimed at the justice system, and not exclusively against a punishment as such.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Published works (selection) [ edit ] Throughout his life, Ernest van den Haag wrote many books and articles about society, and more specifically about capital punishment .  His works include: The Death Penalty: A Debate , 1983 (co-authored with John P. Conrad ) The Jewish Mystique , 1968 Political violence and civil disobedience , 1972 Punishing Criminals: Concerning a Very Old and Painful Question , 1975 References [ edit ] ^ "Ernest van den Haag Papers, 1935-2000 - M.E. Grenander Department of Special Collections & Archives" .

^ Ernest van den Haag, Social Science Testimony in the Desegregation Cases – A Reply to Professor Kenneth Clark , 6 Villanova Law Review 69(1960) ^ Raymond Wolters, Race and Education, 1954–2007, 37–38 (2008) ^ Ernest van den Haag, "Intelligence or Prejudice?," in National Review XVI, No. 48 (December 1, 1964) pp. 1059–63.

^ "Intelligence or Prejudice?: Some Letters and a Reply," in National Review (February 9, 1965) pp. 101–02 ^ John P. Jackson, Jr., Science For Segregation: Race, Law, and the Case Against Brown v. Board of Education 143 (2005) ^ Ernest van den Haag, "More Immigration?," in National Review (September 21, 1965) pp. 821–22, 842.

^ M. E. Grenander Department of Special Collections & Archives, "Archives of Public Affairs "Finding Aid for the Ernest van den Haag Papers, 1935–2000"." Accessed November 19, 2012.

^ "Firing Line with William F. Buckley Jr.: The Death Penalty" .

YouTube . 30 January 2017.

^ Van den Haag, Ernest, Punishing Criminals: Concerning a Very Old and Painful Question, (New York: Basic Books, 1975),  p. 1.

^ Van den Haag, p. 1.

^ Van den Haag, p. 11.

^ Van den Haag, p. 20.

^ Van den Haag, p. 32.

^ Van den Haag, p. 33.

^ Van den Haag, p. 45.

^ Van den Haag, p. 51.

^ Van den Haag, p. 52 ^ Van den Haag, Ernest, The Death Penalty: a Debate. (New York: Plenum Press, 1983), p. 10.

^ Van den Haag, Ernest, The Death Penalty: a Debate , p. 53.

^ Ernest van den Haag, The Death Penalty: a Debate p. 69.

^ Elizabeth Linehan, Executing the Innocent ("As Ernest Van Den Haag says, 'The conviction of some innocents is an unintended, yet unavoidable, byproduct of bringing the guilty to justice.'") ^ https://scholarlycommons.law.northwestern.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=&httpsredir=1&article=5580&context=jclc [ bare URL ] External links [ edit ] The war in Katanga; the United Nations in the Congo, report of a mission.

by Ernest van den Haag Ernest van den Haag, The Ultimate Punishment: A Defense.

Appearances on C-SPAN Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Italy Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Poland Israel Academics CiNii People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ernest_van_den_Haag&oldid=1304278005 " Categories : 1914 births 2002 deaths American sociologists Dutch emigrants to the United States Fordham University faculty People involved in race and intelligence controversies Writers from New York City Member of the Mont Pelerin Society National Review people Hidden categories: All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from August 2024 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 02:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ernest van den Haag 4 languages Add topic

