Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Activities Toggle Activities subsection 2.1 Publications 2.2 Conferences 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents IEEE Signal Processing Society Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Society of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "IEEE Signal Processing Society" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The IEEE Signal Processing Society ( IEEE SPS ) is one of the nearly 40 technical societies of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and the first one created.

[ 1 ] Its mission is to "advance and disseminate state-of-the-art scientific information and resources; educate the signal processing community; and provide a venue for people to interact and exchange ideas." [ 2 ] History [ edit ] The Signal Processing Society was formed in 1948 as the Professional Group on Audio of the Institute of Radio Engineers.

[ 3 ] Activities [ edit ] The Society organizes many conferences every year and operates local chapters around the world.  It coordinates the operation of several councils, task forces, and technical committees.

Publications [ edit ] The Signal Processing Society oversees the publication of several periodicals, including a magazine ( IEEE Signal Processing Magazine ), a newsletter ( Inside Signal Processing e-Newsletter ), and multiple scholarly journals : [ 4 ] IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing IEEE Signal Processing Letters IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing IEEE Transactions on Image Processing IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing Co-sponsored journals include: IEEE Computing in Science and Engineering Magazine IEEE MultiMedia Magazine IEEE Sensors Journal IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing IEEE Transactions on Multimedia IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications The IEEE Signal Processing electronic Library (SPeL) is a comprehensive digital library and electronic collection of more than 50 years of the IEEE Signal Processing Society's periodicals, which includes all four transactions and letters, newsletters, magazines, and technical proceedings of the two major Society conferences and of most workshops. IEEE SPeL also features four joint transactions, which the Society is a partner. The library collection is available on three DVD-ROMs. It has a search engine, which allows searches based on full-text, as well as searches by such fields as author, title, subject and date. The collection provides a comprehensive database, which contains information about the technical articles that are published in the Society's journals.

Conferences [ edit ] The IEEE Signal Processing Society organizes and sponsors technical conferences, symposia, and workshops dedicated to providing opportunities to network with peers from around the world and to exchange high-quality, rigorously peer-reviewed scientific and technological knowledge.

The two flagship conferences of the IEEE Signal Processing Society are: IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP) IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) A list of all conferences and workshops can be found here .

See also [ edit ] International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP) International Conference on Information Processing in Sensor Networks (IPSN) References [ edit ] ^ "IEEE Societies, Councils and Technical Communities" . Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers . Retrieved 2009-05-01 .

^ IEEE SPS web site ^ IEEE Global History Network (2011).

"IEEE Signal Processing Society History" . IEEE History Center . Retrieved 7 July 2011 .

^ "SPS Periodicals" . IEEE Signal Processing Society . Retrieved 2009-05-01 .

v t e Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Subsidiaries GlobalSpec IEEE Standards Association Predecessors American Institute of Electrical Engineers Institute of Radio Engineers Technical councils Biometrics Council Council on Electronic Design Automation Council on Superconductivity Nanotechnology Council Sensors Council Systems Council Technical Activities Board Technical societies Aerospace and Electronic Systems Antennas and Propagation Broadcast Technology Circuits and Systems Communications Components Packaging, and Manufacturing Technology Computational Intelligence Computer Consumer Electronics Control Systems Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation Education Electromagnetic Compatibility Electron Devices Engineering in Medicine and Biology Geoscience and Remote Sensing Industrial Electronics Industry Applications Information Theory Instrumentation and Measurement Intelligent Transportation Systems Magnetics Nuclear and Plasma Sciences Oceanic Engineering Photonics Power and Energy Power Electronics Product Safety Engineering Professional Communication Reliability Robotics and Automation Signal Processing Social Implications of Technology Solid-State Circuits Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Technology Management Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control Vehicular Technology Related Certified Software Development Professional Computer-Aided Design Technical Committee Engineering and Technology History Wiki Engineering for Change Eta Kappa Nu IEEE Access IEEE Cloud Computing IEEE conferences IEEEXtreme IEEEmadC IEEE Rebooting Computing IEEE Xplore Internet Technical Committee IEEE Life Sciences List of IEEE awards List of IEEE milestones List of IEEE publications IEEE Registration Authority IEEE Smart Grid IEEE style Technical Committee on VLSI Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States France BnF data Czech Republic 2 Israel Academics CiNii Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=IEEE_Signal_Processing_Society&oldid=1272622980 " Category : IEEE societies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from January 2020 All articles lacking reliable references This page was last edited on 29 January 2025, at 15:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents IEEE Signal Processing Society Add languages Add topic

