Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Etymology 3 Key principles 4 Epistemology Toggle Epistemology subsection 4.1 Pramanas 4.1.1 Rules of epistemology 5 Metaphysics Toggle Metaphysics subsection 5.1 Ontology 5.1.1 Chit 5.1.2 Achit 5.1.3 Ishvara 5.1.3.1 Antaryamin 5.1.3.2 Brahman 5.2 Causality 6 Soteriology Toggle Soteriology subsection 6.1 Moksha (Liberation) 6.2 Bhakti as the means of attaining  moksha 7 Traditions following Vishishtadvaita 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Vishishtadvaita 22 languages العربية বাংলা Español Esperanto فارسی Français हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia ಕನ್ನಡ Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം नेपाली Polski Português Русский संस्कृतम् Slovenčina தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Vishishtadvaita Vedanta ) This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Vishishtadvaita" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article uses texts from within a religion or faith system without referring to secondary sources that critically analyse them.

Please help improve this article .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) One of the most popular schools of the Vedanta school of Hindu philosophy Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e Part of a series on Vaishnavism Supreme deity Vishnu / Krishna / Rama Important deities Dashavatara Matsya Kurma Varaha Narasimha Vamana Parasurama Rama Balarama Krishna Buddha Kalki Other forms Dhanvantari Guruvayurappan Hayagriva Jagannath Mohini Nara-Narayana Prithu Shrinathji Venkateshvara Vithoba Consorts Lakshmi Bhumi Sita Radha Rukmini Alamelu Related Garuda Hanuman Shesha Shasta Holy scriptures Vedas Upanishads Vaikhanasa Pancharatra Bhagavad Gita Mahabharata Ramayana Harivamsa Divya Prabandha Gita Govinda Puranas Vishnu Bhagavata Naradiya Garuda Padma Agni Sampradayas Sri ( Vishishtadvaita , Akshar Purushottam Darshan ) Rudra ( Śuddhādvaita ) Kumara ( Dvaitadvaita ) Brahma ( Tattvavada or ( Dvaita )), Acintyabhedabheda ) Others Ekasarana Dharma Mahanubhava Pranami Radha Vallabha Ramsnehi Sant Mat Vaishnava-Sahajiya Warkari Teachers—acharyas Chaitanya Chakradhara Dadu Dayal Harivansh Jayatirtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvara Kabir Madhavdev Madhvacharya Manavala Mamunigal Namadeva Nammalvar Nathamuni Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Padmanabha Tirtha Pillai Lokacharya Purandara Dasa Raghuttama Tirtha Raghavendra Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ravidas Satyanatha Tirtha Satyabhinava Tirtha Satyabodha Tirtha Satyadharma Tirtha Satyadhyana Tirtha Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Swaminarayan Sripadaraja Tukaram Tulsidas Vallabha Vedanta Desika Vidyapati Vishnuswami Viṭṭhalanātha Vyasatirtha Vadiraja Tirtha Yamunacharya Sri Kantha Krishnamacharyulu Annamacharya Bhadrachala Ramadasu Related traditions Bhagavatism Vaikhanasas Pancharatra Tenkalai Vadakalai Munitraya Krishnaism Jagannathism Haridasa Sahajiya Baul Pushtimarg Gaudiya ISKCON Ramanandi Kapadi Balmiki Kabir panth Dadu panth Mahanam v t e Ramanujacharya idol in Ranganathaswamy Temple , Srirangam Vishishtadvaita ( IAST Viśiṣṭādvaita ; Sanskrit : विशिष्टाद्वैत ) is a school of Hindu philosophy belonging to the Vedanta tradition. Vishishta Advaita means "non-duality with distinctions" and recognizes Brahman (ब्रह्म) as the promordial quality while also acknowledging its existential multiplicity. This philosophy can be characterized as a form of qualified monism , or a qualified non-dualism . It upholds the belief that all diversity ultimately stems from a fundamental underlying unity.

According to Vishishtadvaita, Vishnu is Brahman ( Param Brahman ) is the Supreme Lord ( Ishvara ), who is the supreme person ( Paramatman ) and has noble attributes such as omniscience , omnipotence , omnipresence , and omnibenevolence . The universe depends upon God (Ishvara) for its being as well as for its qualities.

[ 1 ] Ramanuja , the 11–12th century philosopher and the main proponent of Vishishtadvaita philosophy, contends that the Prasthanatrayi ("The three sources"), namely the Upanishads , the Bhagavad Gita , and the Brahma Sutras are to be interpreted in a way that shows this unity in diversity , for any other way would violate their consistency.

Vedanta Desika , another major scholar who significantly helped expand the philosophy of Vishishtadvaita, defines Vishishtadvaita using the statement, Aseṣa Chit-Achit Prakāram Brahmaikameva Tatvam : Brahman , as qualified by the sentient and insentient modes (or attributes), is the Ultimate reality .

Part of a series on Hindu philosophy Orthodox Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Heterodox Charvaka Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Ajñana Sub-schools Smartist Advaita Vaishnavite Bhedabheda Vishishtadvaita Dvaita Shuddhadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Svabhavika Bhedabheda Mahanubhava Ekasarana Dharma Akshar Purushottam Darshan Shaivite Shaiva Siddhanta Pratyabhijna Panchartika Pramanavada Shakti Vishishtadvaita Shiva Bhedabeda Shiva Advaita Neo-Vedanta Integral yoga Teachers ( Acharyas ) Nyaya Akṣapāda Gotama Jayanta Bhatta Raghunatha Siromani Mīmāṃsā Jaimini Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Prabhākara Advaita (Mayavada) Gaudapada Vāchaspati Misra Adi Shankara Vishishtadvaita Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Dvaita (Tattvavada) Madhvacharya Jayatirtha Vyasatirtha Shuddhadvaita Vallabha Achintya Bheda Abheda Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Svabhavika Bhedabheda Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Purushottam Keshav Kashmiri Harivyas devacharya Mahanubhava Chakradhara Ekasarana Dharma Sankardev Akshar Purushottam Darshan Swaminarayan Tantra Shakta Abhinavagupta Nigamananda Paramahansa Ramprasad Sen Bamakhepa Kamalakanta Bhattacharya Anandamayi Ma Neo-Vedanta Vivekananda Aurobindo Radhakrishnan Others Samkhya Kapila Yoga Patanjali Vaisheshika Kaṇāda , Prashastapada Secular Valluvar Major texts Śruti Smṛti Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Upanishads Principal Upanishads Minor Upanishads Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama (Hinduism) Vachanamrut Shastras and Sutras Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Puranas Dharmaśāstra Arthashastra Kama Sutra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Shiva Samhita Secular ethics Kural Hinduism Other Indian philosophies v t e History [ edit ] The earliest Vishishtadvaita works are no longer available.

[ 2 ] However, the earliest philosophers who are thought to have developed the system are named in Ramanuja's Vedarthasamgraha : Bodhayana, Dramida, Tanka, Guhadeva, Kapardi, and Bharuci.

[ 3 ] Bodhayana is considered to have written an extensive vritti (commentary) on the Purva and Uttara Mimamsas . Tanka is attributed with having written commentaries on Chandogya Upanishad and Brahma Sutras.

Nathamuni of the ninth century AD, the foremost Acharya of the Vaishnavas , collected the Tamil prabandhas , classified them, made the redaction, set the hymns to music, and spread them everywhere. He is said to have received the divine hymns straight from Nammalvar , the foremost of the twelve Alvars , by yogic insight in the temple at Alwar Thirunagari, which is located near Tirunelveli in South India .

Yamunacharya renounced kingship and spent his last days in the service of the deity at Srirangam and in laying the fundamentals of the Vishishtadvaita philosophy by writing four basic works on the subject.

[ citation needed ] Ramanuja is the main proponent of Vishishtadvaita philosophy.

[ 4 ] Ramanuja continues along the line of thought of his predecessors while expounding the knowledge expressed in the Upanishads, the Brahma Sutras, and the Bhagavad Gita.

Vedanta Desika and Pillai Lokacharya , disciples in the tradition of Ramanuja, had minor disagreements not on the philosophy , but on some aspects of the theology , giving rise to the Vadakalai and Tenkalai schools of thought.

[ citation needed ] Etymology [ edit ] Viśiṣṭa means most exclusive (not equal/different from the rest).

Key principles [ edit ] There are three key principles of Vishishtadvaita: [ 5 ] Tattva : The knowledge of the three real entities, namely jiva (living souls, the sentient), ajiva (the nonsentient) and Ishvara ( Vishnu-Narayana or Parabrahman , Supreme-self and the cause of all manifestations and in-dwelling giver of grace based on Karma).

Hita : The means of realization, as through bhakti (devotion) and prapatti (self-surrender) Purushartha : The goal to be attained, as moksha or liberation from bondage.

Epistemology [ edit ] Pramanas [ edit ] Pramana ("sources of knowledge", Sanskrit) refers to factual knowledge obtained through reasoning of any object.

In Vishishtadvaita Vedanta, only the following three pramanas are accepted as valid means of knowledge: Pratyaksa — knowledge gained through perception. Perception in this context generally refers to sensory perception. In modern-day usage, this will also include knowledge obtained by means of observation through scientific instruments, since they are considered an extension of perception.

Anumana — knowledge gained through inference. Inference refers to deductive reasoning and analysis.

Shabda — knowledge gained by means of shruti . Shruti refers to knowledge gained from scriptures—primarily the Upanishads, the Brahma Sutras, and the Bhagavad Gita.

Rules of epistemology [ edit ] There are three rules of hierarchy when there is apparent conflict between the three modes of acquiring knowledge: Shabda or Shruti , Pramana occupies the highest position in matters which cannot be settled or resolved by pratyaksa (perception) or by anumana (inference).

Anumana occupies the next position. When an issue cannot be settled through sensory perception alone, it is settled based on inference, that is, whichever is the more logical argument.

When pratyaksa yields a definitive position on a particular issue, such a perception cannot be ignored by interpreting Shabda in a way that violates that perception.

Metaphysics [ edit ] Ontology [ edit ] Vishishtadvaita ontology outlines three entities: Chit (sentient beings), achit (insentient entities), and Ishvara ( Parabrahman ): Chit [ edit ] In Vishishtadvaita, chit is synonymous with jiva and atman .

[ 6 ] Chit includes all beings with sentience, consciousness, and individual self-awareness. A jiva has both knowledge as its nature and is a knower. This is likened to a flame which illuminates itself and other objects.

[ 7 ] It is similar to the Purusha of Samkhya system.

There are three types of jivas : Nitya: eternally free jivas who were never bound in samsara Mukta : jivas previously in samsara, but now free Baddha: jivas bound in samsara [ 8 ] Characteristics of the jiva include: Being indivisible.

[ 9 ] Being the agent of action and enjoyer of its results [ 10 ] Being infinite in number and different from each other [ 11 ] Achit [ edit ] Achit is the world of insentient entities as denoted by matter or, more specifically, the non-conscious Universe. It is similar to the Prakriti of the Samkhya system.

There are three achit entities.

Prakrti: primordial cosmic matter and everything that evolves from it. For example, the material world.

Nitya-vibhuti: transcendental spiritual universe Kala: time [ 12 ] Ishvara [ edit ] Ishvara (denoted by Vishnu (Narayana)) is the Supreme Cosmic Spirit who maintains complete control over the Universe and all the sentient beings, which together also form the pan-organistic body of Ishvara. The triad of Ishvara, along with the universe and the sentient beings, is Brahman, which signifies the completeness of existence. Ishvara is Parabrahman endowed with innumerable auspicious qualities (Kalyana Gunas). Ishvara is perfect, omniscient, omnipresent, incorporeal, independent, the creator of the universe, its active ruler, and also its eventual destroyer.

[ 13 ] He is causeless, eternal, and unchangeable—and is yet the material and the efficient cause of the universe and sentient beings. He is both immanent (like whiteness in milk) and transcendent (like a watch-maker independent of a watch). He is the subject of worship. He is the basis of morality and the giver of the fruits of one's Karma. He rules the world with His Maya—His divine power.

[ citation needed ] Antaryamin [ edit ] The inner controller ( antar-yāmin ) is the thread connecting everything, governing this world, the next, and all beings from within (Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 3.7.3-23).

[ 14 ] "He who inhabits water, yet is within water, whom water does not know, whose body water is and who controls water from within—He is your Self, the Inner Controller, the Immortal." "He who inhabits the sun, yet is within the sun, whom the sun does not know, whose body the sun is and who controls the sun from within—He is your Self, the Inner Controller, the Immortal" — Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 3.7.4–14 Brahman [ edit ] There is a subtle difference between Ishvara and Brahman. Ishvara is the substantive part of Brahman , while Jivas and jagat are its modes (also secondary attributes), and kalyana-gunas (auspicious attributes) are the primary attributes. The secondary attributes become manifested in the effect state when the world is differentiated by name and form. The kalyana-gunas are eternally manifest.

Brahman is the description of Ishvara when comprehended in fullness—i.e., a simultaneous vision of Ishvara with all his modes and attributes.

Cit and acit are completely dependent on Brahman.

[ 15 ] The following examples illustrate the relationship between Brahman and jivas : sharira/shariri ( body/soul ); dravya/guna ( substance/attribute ); aṃsi/aṃsa ( whole/part ); visayi/visaya ( subject/object ); angi/angā ( organism/organs ); [ 16 ] These relationships can be experienced holding Brahman as the father, son, mother, sister, wife, husband, friend, lover and lord. Hence, Brahman is a personal being.

What does Nirguna Brahman mean?

Ramanuja argues vehemently against understanding Brahman as one without attributes. Brahman is Nirguna in the sense that impure qualities do not touch it. He provides three valid reasons for making such a claim: Shruti/Shabda Pramana: All shrutis and shabdas denoting Brahman always list either attributes inherent to Brahman or not inherent to Brahman. The shrutis only seek to deny Brahman from possessing impure and defective qualities, which affect the world of beings. There is evidence in the shrutis in this regard. The shrutis proclaim Brahman to be beyond the tri-gunas, which are observed. However, Brahman possesses an infinite number of transcendental attributes, the evidence of which is given in vakhyas like "satyam jnanam anantam Brahma" ( Taittiriya Upanishad ).

Pratyaksha Pramana: Ramanuja states that "a contentless cognition is impossible". And all cognition must necessarily involve knowing Brahman through the attributes of Brahman.

Anumana Pramana: Ramanuja states that "Nirgunatva" itself becomes an attribute of Brahman on account of the uniqueness of no other entity being Nirguna.
Ramanuja had simplified the relationship between Brahman and soul . According to him, though the soul (Atman) is an integral part of Brahman, it has independent existence .

[ 17 ] Causality [ edit ] Like the Samkhya system, Vishishtadvaita upholds the theory of Satkaryavada as opposed to Asatkaryavada . Per satkaryavada, effects are not new entities, but modifications of the cause.

The Vishishtadvaita theory is called Brahma-parinama-vada, with "parinama-vada" meaning the evolution of the effect from the cause. Brahman is both the cause and the effect, but the underlying entity is the same in all forms.

Brahman is assigned two kāraṇatvas (ways of being the cause): Nimitta kāraṇatva — Being the Efficient/ Instrumental cause . For example, a goldsmith is assigned Nimitta kāraṇatva as he acts as the maker of jewellery and thus becomes the jewellery's Instrumental cause .

Upādāna kāraṇatva — Being the material cause . For example, the gold is assigned Upādāna kāraṇatva as it acts as the material of the jewellery and thus becomes the jewellery's material cause .

According to Vishishtadvaita, the Universe and Sentients always exist. However, they begin from a subtle state and transform. The subtle state is called a causal state, while the transformed state is called the effect state. The causal state is when Brahman is internally not distinguishable by name and form.

It can be said that Vishishtadvaita follows Brahma-Prakara-Parinama Vada. That is to say, it is the modes (Jivas and Jagat) of Brahman which is under evolution. The cause and effect only refer to the pan-organistic body transformation. Brahman, as the Universal Self, is unchanging and eternal.

Brahman, having the subtle (sūkṣma) chit and achit entities as his Śarīra/Prakāra(body/mode) before manifestation, is the same Brahman having the expanded (sthūla) chit and achit entities as Śarīra/Prakāra(body/mode) after manifestation.

[ citation needed ] Soteriology [ edit ] The purpose or goal of human existence is called purushartha . According to the Vedas, there are four goals namely artha (wealth), kama (pleasure), dharma (righteousness) and moksha (permanent freedom from worldly bondage). According to this philosophy, the first three goals are not an end by themselves but need to be pursued with the ideal of attaining moksha.

[ 18 ] Moksha (Liberation) [ edit ] Moksha means liberation or release from samsara , the cycle of rebirth. In Vishishtadvaita, baddha (bounded) jiva is only self-aware and is in a state of ignorance of sharira-shariri relationship. Karma loaded with countless births and deaths in samsara keeps the jiva from dharma-bhuta-jnana (attributive consciousness) of God. With the creation process of Isvara , evolving through different bodies, jiva attains a human body in which it puts effort to gain the true nature of self and true knowledge of God through Bhakti and attains a liberated state with the grace of God. Liberation simply means gaining true knowledge of God and serving God in Vaikuntha (God's abode). In liberation, jiva keeps its individuality and has infinite knowledge and bliss like Brahman , but doesn't become one with Brahman . Unlike Advaita, liberation is only after death ( videhamukti ) and there is no concept of jivanmukti .

[ 19 ] The Vadakalai school accepts the importance of God's grace in gaining liberation alongside individual effort, similar to how a baby monkey must hold onto its mother. The Tenkalai school sees God's grace as the only requirement for liberation, similar to how a cat will carry a kitten without any effort from the kitten.

[ 20 ] Bhakti as the means of attaining  moksha [ edit ] Bhakti is the sole means of liberation in Vishishtadvaita. Through Bhakti (devotion), a Jiva ascends to Vaikuntha , where it continues to delight in His service in a body which is sat-cit-ananda .

Karma Yoga and Jnana Yoga are sub-processes of Bhakti, total surrender, as the devotee acquires the knowledge that the deity is the inner self. A devotee realizes his own state as dependent on, supported by, and led by the deity, who is the Master. One is to lead a life as an instrument of the deity, offering all his thought, word, and deed to the feet of the deity. One is to see the deity in everything and everything in Him. This is the unity in diversity achieved through devotion.

[ 21 ] Ramanuja accepts Sharanagati, total surrender at the Lord's lotus feet, as the sole means to moksha. Wherein, moksha is defined as liberation from samsara and going to Vaikuntha to serve Narayana ( Balaji ) in a spiritual body. This is a distinguishing feature of this school of philosophy, as both Adi Shankara's Advaita and Madhvacharya 's Dvaita accept bhakti for two different concepts of moksha. Ramanuja has supported this opinion with various citations directly from the Vedas, and various incidents that highlight sharanagati as a means to attain personal stay in the realm of Vaikuntha. Observing total surrender at the Lord's feet guarantees moksha at the end of this birth, and in the time between sharanagati and death, the surrendered soul must spend his time performing the nine forms of devotion .

[ 22 ] Traditions following Vishishtadvaita [ edit ] Sri Vaishnava Sampradaya of southern India [ 23 ] Sri Ramanandi Sect [ 24 ] of Northern India, it has the largest monastic order in whole India Dāmodariya Vaiśņava sampradaya of Assam Swaminarayan sampradaya of Gujarat See also [ edit ] Turiya Achintya Bheda Abheda Virashaivism Shiva Advaita Suddhadvaita Dvaitadvaita References [ edit ] ^ Wainwright, William (19 December 2012).

"Concepts of God" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2018 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ Chandrankunnel, Matthew (2008).

Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics . New Delhi: Global Vision Publishing House. p. 945.

^ Dasgupta, Surendranath (1922).

History of Indian philosophy vol.1 . p. 433.

^ Jones, Constance (2007).

Encyclopedia of Hinduism . New York: Infobase Publishing. p. 490.

ISBN 978-0816073368 .

^ Srinivasachari, P. N. (1970).

The philosophy of Vis'iṣṭādvaita . Adyar, Madras. p. 22.

ISBN 0-8356-7495-9 .

OCLC 507290 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Makarand Joshi.

Vaisnavism Its Philosophy Theology And Religious Discipline SM Srinivasa Chari 2000 . p. 66.

^ Makarand Joshi.

Vaisnavism Its Philosophy Theology And Religious Discipline SM Srinivasa Chari 2000 . pp.

68– 69.

^ Makarand Joshi.

Vaisnavism Its Philosophy Theology And Religious Discipline SM Srinivasa Chari 2000 . pp.

71– 72.

^ Makarand Joshi.

Vaisnavism Its Philosophy Theology And Religious Discipline SM Srinivasa Chari 2000 . p. 71.

^ Makarand Joshi.

Vaisnavism Its Philosophy Theology And Religious Discipline SM Srinivasa Chari 2000 . p. 72.

^ Makarand Joshi.

Vaisnavism Its Philosophy Theology And Religious Discipline SM Srinivasa Chari 2000 . p. 75.

^ Makarand Joshi.

Vaisnavism Its Philosophy Theology And Religious Discipline SM Srinivasa Chari 2000 . p. 85.

^ White Yajurveda 32.3 ^ Bartley, C. J. (2011).

An introduction to Indian philosophy . London: Continuum. pp. 10, 178.

ISBN 978-1-84706-448-6 .

^ Sethy, Deepak Kumar (1 September 2024).

"An Exposition of the Notion Self and Identity in the Philosophy of Rāmānuja: A Critical Study" .

Journal of Indian Council of Philosophical Research .

41 (3): 381– 399.

doi : 10.1007/s40961-024-00332-5 .

ISSN 2363-9962 .

^ Sethy, Deepak Kumar (1 September 2024).

"An Exposition of the Notion Self and Identity in the Philosophy of Rāmānuja: A Critical Study" .

Journal of Indian Council of Philosophical Research .

41 (3): 381– 399.

doi : 10.1007/s40961-024-00332-5 .

ISSN 2363-9962 .

^ J.L.Mehta VOl3 ^ Srinivasachari, P. N. (1970).

The philosophy of Vis'iṣṭādvaita . Adyar, Madras. pp.

315– 317.

ISBN 0-8356-7495-9 .

OCLC 507290 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Tapasyananda, Swami.

Bhakti Schools of Vedanta pg. 54-83 ^ "Vishishtadvaita." Britannica Academic , Encyclopædia Britannica, 31 Mar. 2015.

^ "VishistAdvaitham Part 1 - Sri Velukkudi Krishnan" .

video.google.com . Archived from the original on 22 June 2011.

^ "9 forms of bhakti" .

^ Carman, John (2005).

Encyclopedia of Religion . Vol. 13 (2nd ed.). Gale. p. 8727.

^ "Ramanandi Sampradaya" .

External links [ edit ] The Siddhanta Sangraha, English translation from the 18th century Viśiṣṭādvaita doctrine of Soul according to Rāmānuja and Veṅkaṭanātha , Surendranath Dasgupta, 1940 v t e Indian philosophy Topics Atheism Atomism Idealism Logic Monotheism Vedic philosophy Kama Artha Moksha Ancient Āstika Hindu : Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Shaiva Raseśvara Pashupata Shaivism Pāṇiniya Nāstika Ājīvika Ajñana Charvaka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist philosophy and Early Buddhist schools Śūnyatā Madhyamaka Yogachara Sautrāntika Svatantrika Medieval Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Sikh Philosophy Shaiva Pratyabhijna Pashupata Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Modern Integral yoga Gandhism Radical Humanism Progressive utilization theory Texts Abhinavabharati Arthashastra Bhagavad Gita Bhagavata Purana Brahma Sutra Buddhist texts Dharmashastra Hindu texts Jain Agamas Kamasutra Mimamsa Sutras All 108 texts Principal Nyāya Sūtras Nyayakusumanjali Panchadasi Samkhyapravachana Sutra Sangam texts Sarvadarsanasangraha Shiva Sutras Tarka-Sangraha Tattvacintāmaṇi Tirukkuṟaḷ Upanishads Minor Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Vedangas Vedas Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Yoga Vasistha More...

Philosophers Adi Shankara Abhinavagupta Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Maṇḍana Miśra Valluvar Avatsara Vāchaspati Misra Uddalaka Aruni Gautama Buddha Yājñavalkya Gārgī Vāchaknavī Buddhaghosa Patañjali Kanada Kapila Brihadratha Ikshvaku Jaimini Vyasa Chanakya Dharmakirti Akshapada Gotama Nagarjuna Padmasambhāva Vasubandhu Gaudapada Ramana Maharshi Vivekananda Dayananda Saraswati Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Raikva Sadananda Sakayanya Satyakama Jabala Madhvacharya Mahavira Guru Nanak More...

Concepts Abhava Abhasavada Abheda Adarsana Adrishta Advaita Aham Ahimsa Aishvarya Akrodha Aksara Anatta Ananta Anavastha Anupalabdhi Apauruṣheyā Artha Asiddhatva Asatkalpa Ātman Avyakta Bhrama Brahman Bhuman Bhumika Catuṣkoṭi Chaitanya Chidabhasa Cittabhumi Dāna Devatas Dharma Dhi Dravya Dhrti Ekagrata Guṇa Hitā Idam Ikshana Ishvaratva Jivatva Kama Karma Kasaya Kshetrajna Lakshana Matsya Nyaya Mithyatva Mokṣa Nididhyasana Nirvāṇa Nishkama Karma Niyama Padārtha Paramatman Paramananda Parameshashakti Parinama-vada Pradhana Prajna Prakṛti Pratibimbavada Pratītyasamutpāda Puruṣa Rājamaṇḍala Ṛta Sakshi Samadhi Saṃsāra Satya Satkaryavada Shabda Brahman Sphoṭa Sthiti Śūnyatā Sutram Svātantrya Iccha-mrityu Syādvāda Taijasa Tajjalan Tanmatra Tyāga Uparati Upekkhā Utsaha Vivartavada Viraj Yamas Yoga More...

v t e Sampradayas of Vaishnavism Major traditions Brahma Sampradaya of Madhvacharya Sri Sampradaya of Ramanuja Kumara Sampradaya of Nimbarka Rudra Sampradaya of Vishnuswami Related traditions Historical Bhagavatism Vaikhanasas Pancharatra Tenkalai Vadakalai Krishnaism Warkari Mahanubhava Sadh Haridasa Sahajiya Baul Pushtimarg Ekasarana Gaudiya Manipuri Radha-Vallabha Ramanandi Kapadi Balmiki Kabir panth Dadu panth Pranami Swaminarayan Ayyavazhi Mahanam Vedanta Philosophies Dvaitadvaita Dvaita Vishishtadvaita Shuddhadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vishishtadvaita&oldid=1304347019 " Categories : Hindu philosophy Nonduality Schools and traditions in ancient Indian philosophy Vaishnavism Vedanta Vishishtadvaita Vedanta Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles that may contain original research from December 2024 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing additional references from December 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking reliable references from June 2025 All articles lacking reliable references Articles needing more viewpoints from June 2025 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from March 2015 Use dmy dates from March 2015 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Sanskrit-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 13:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vishishtadvaita 22 languages Add topic

