Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Philosophical 2 Political 3 Religious Toggle Religious subsection 3.1 Heresy 3.2 Schism 4 Military 5 Judicial 6 Scientific 7 Organizational 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Dissent 16 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Deutsch Español فارسی हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Polski Русский Slovenčina Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Suppression of dissent ) Non-agreement or opposition to authority This article is about a philosophy of non-agreement. For other uses, see Dissent (disambiguation) .

Sticker art arguing that dissent is necessary for democracy .

Dissent is an opinion , philosophy or sentiment of non-agreement or opposition to a prevailing idea or policy enforced under the authority of a government , political party or other entity or individual . A dissenting person may be referred to as a dissenter .

The term's antonyms include agreement , consensus (when all or nearly all parties agree on something) and consent (when one party agrees to a proposition made by another).

Philosophical [ edit ] Part of a series on Pyrrhonism Pyrrhonists Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus Concepts Ataraxia Acatalepsy Adiaphora Aporia Dogma Epoché Similar philosophies Academic skepticism Modern influence Münchhausen trilemma Benson Mates Robert Fogelin Philosophy portal v t e In philosophical skepticism , particularly that of Pyrrhonism , the existence of dissent is a rationale for suspending judgment regarding the issue associated with the dissent. Dissent in this respect appears as one of the tropes in the Five Modes of Agrippa , pointing to the uncertainty demonstrated by the differences of opinions among philosophers and people in general.

Political [ edit ] Main article: Political dissent See also: Freedom of speech , Civil disobedience , and Sedition Political dissent is a dissatisfaction with or opposition to the policies of a governing body. Expressions of dissent may take forms from vocal disagreement to civil disobedience to the use of violence .

[ 1 ] In some political systems , dissent may be formally expressed by way of opposition politics , while politically repressive regimes may prohibit any form of dissent, leading to suppression of dissent and the encouragement of social or political activism . Individuals who do not conform or support the policies of certain states are known as " dissidents ". Several thinkers have argued that a healthy society needs not only to protect, but also to encourage dissent.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Religious [ edit ] Heresy [ edit ] Main article: Heresy Heresy is any belief or theory that is strongly at variance with established beliefs or customs, in particular the accepted beliefs of a church or religious organization. A heretic is a proponent of such claims or beliefs.

[ 4 ] Heresy is distinct from both apostasy , which is the explicit renunciation of one's religion, principles or cause, [ 5 ] and blasphemy , which is an impious utterance or action concerning God or sacred things.

[ 6 ] The term is usually used to refer to violations of important religious teachings, but is used also of views strongly opposed to any generally accepted ideas.

[ 7 ] It is used in particular in reference to Christianity , Judaism , and Islam .

[ 8 ] Schism [ edit ] Main article: Schism A schism (pronounced / ˈ s ɪ z ə m / SIZ -əm , / ˈ s k ɪ z ə m / SKIZ -əm or, less commonly, / ˈ ʃ ɪ z ə m / SHIZ -əm [ 9 ] )  is a division between people, usually belonging to an organization, movement, or religious denomination . The word is most frequently applied to a split in what had previously been a single religious body, such as the East–West Schism or the Great Western Schism . It is also used of a split within a non-religious organization or movement or, more broadly, of a separation between two or more people, be it brothers, friends, lovers, etc.

A schismatic is a person who creates or incites schism in an organization or who is a member of a splinter group.

Schismatic as an adjective means pertaining to a schism or schisms, or to those ideas, policies, etc. that are thought to lead towards or promote schism.

In religion, the charge of schism is distinguished from that of heresy , since the offence of schism concerns not differences of belief or doctrine but promotion of, or the state of, division.

[ 10 ] However, schisms frequently involve mutual accusations of heresy. In Roman Catholic teaching, every heresy is a schism, while there may be some schisms free of the added guilt of heresy.

[ 11 ] Liberal Protestantism , however, has often preferred heresy over schism.

Presbyterian scholar James I. McCord (quoted with approval by the Episcopalian Bishop of Virginia Peter Lee ) drew a distinction between them, teaching:  "If you must make a choice between heresy and schism, always choose heresy. As a schismatic, you have torn and divided the body of Christ. Choose heresy every time." [ 12 ] Military [ edit ] Main article: Dissent by military officers and enlisted personnel Officers and enlisted personnel regularly take an oral oath to support and defend the primary convening document (i.e. constitution, articles of confederation, ruling laws and statutes) and/or the supreme leader of the nation-state. There have been countless cases throughout human history where commissioned military officers and enlisted personnel—as individuals or small groups—have chosen to question and disobey the orders of their superior officers or the supreme leader of the state. Dissent by military officers falls into two main categories: violent and non-violent. In essence, when a military officer, military leader chooses to oppose the orders given to them by their superior officers or national leader, they must decide whether their counter-action will be violent or non-violent in nature and in aim.

Judicial [ edit ] Main article: Dissenting opinion A dissenting opinion (or dissent ) is an opinion in a legal case in certain legal systems written by one or more judges expressing disagreement with the majority opinion of the court which gives rise to its judgment. When not necessarily referring to a legal decision, this can also be referred to as a minority report .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Dissenting opinions are normally written at the same time as the majority opinion and any concurring opinions , and are also delivered and published at the same time.  A dissenting opinion does not create binding precedent nor does it become a part of case law . Even though they can sometimes be cited as a form of persuasive authority in subsequent cases when arguing that the court's holding should be limited or overturned. In some cases, a previous dissent is used to spur a change in the law, and a later case may result in a majority opinion adopting a particular understanding of the law formerly advocated in dissent.  As with concurring opinions, the difference in opinion between dissents and majority opinions can often illuminate the precise holding of the majority opinion.

Scientific [ edit ] Main article: Scientific dissent Scientific dissent is dissent from scientific consensus . Disagreements can be useful for finding problems in underlying assumptions, methodologies, and reasoning, as well as for generating and testing new ways of tackling the unknown.

[ 15 ] In modern times, with the increased role of science on the society and the politicization of science , a new aspect gained prominence: effects of scientific dissent on public policies.

[ 15 ] Scientific dissent is distinct from denialism , which is a deliberate rejection of scientific consensus usually for commercial or ideological reasons.

[ 16 ] Organizational [ edit ] Main article: Organizational dissent Organizational dissent is the "expression of disagreement or contradictory opinions about organizational practices and policies ".

[ 17 ] Since dissent involves disagreement it can lead to conflict , which if not resolved, can lead to violence and struggle. As a result, many organizations send the message – verbally or nonverbally – that dissent is discouraged. However, recent studies have shown that dissent serves as an important monitoring force within organizations . Dissent can be a warning sign for employee dissatisfaction or organizational decline. Redding (1985) found that receptiveness to dissent allows for corrective feedback to monitor unethical and immoral behavior , impractical and ineffectual organizational practices and policies, poor and unfavorable decision making , and insensitivity to employees' workplace needs and desires. Furthermore, Eilerman [ 18 ] argues that the hidden costs of silencing dissent include: wasted and lost time , reduced decision quality , emotional and relationship costs, and decreased job motivation . Perlow (2003) found that employee resentment can lead to a decrease in productivity and creativity which can result in the organization losing money , time , and resources .

See also [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Dissent .

Insubordination Dissident Eccentricity (behavior) References [ edit ] ^ "The difference between protest and dissent" , Columbia Journalism Review By Merrill Perlman, March 18, 2019 ^ Bailey, Gordon Ideology: Structuring Identities in Contemporary Life , p. 124 ^ Kozol, J.

(1981) Foreword. In Mackie, R. (Ed.), Literacy and revolution: The Pedagogy of Paulo Freire . p. XV ^ "Heresy | Define Heresy at Dictionary.com" . Dictionary.reference.com . Retrieved 2013-04-15 .

^ "Apostasy | Learn everything there is to know about Apostasy at" . Reference.com. Archived from the original on 2013-07-17 . Retrieved 2013-04-15 .

^ "Definitions of "blasphemy" at Dictionary.com" . Dictionary.reference.com . Retrieved 2015-11-27 .

^ "heresy – definition of heresy in English from the Oxford dictionary" .

oxforddictionaries.com . Archived from the original on July 20, 2012.

^ Daryl Glaser, David M. Walker (editors), Twentieth-Century Marxism (Routledge 2007 ISBN 978-1-13597974-4 ), p. 62 ^ The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition (2000) notes in Free Dictionary that "The word schism , which was originally spelled scisme in English, is traditionally pronounced (sĭ′zəm) . However, in the 16th century the word was respelled with an initial sch in order to conform to its Latin and Greek forms. From this spelling arose the pronunciation (skĭ′zəm) . Long regarded as incorrect, it became so common in both British and American English that it gained acceptability as a standard variant. Evidence indicates, however, that it is now the preferred pronunciation, at least in American English. In a recent survey 61 percent of the Usage Panel indicated that they use (skĭ′zəm) , while 31 percent said they use (sĭ′zəm) . A smaller number, 8 percent, preferred a third pronunciation, (shĭ′zəm) ." ^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Schism" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 24 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 327.

^ Forget, Jacques (1912).

"Schism" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 13. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ "Heresy better idea than schism?" .

Washington Times . 2004-01-31 . Retrieved 2010-07-05 .

^ Definition of "minority report" .

Oxford Dictionaries Online . Retrieved Nov 2012.

^ Definition of "minority report" , Macmillan Dictionary Retrieved Nov 2012.

^ a b de Melo‐Martín, I. and Intemann, K. (2013) "Scientific dissent and public policy" Archived 2023-05-22 at the Wayback Machine .

EMBO Reports , 14 (3): 231–235.

doi : 10.1038/embor.2013.8 ^ Diethelm, Pascal (2009). "Denialism: what is it and how should scientists respond?".

The European Journal of Public Health .

19 (1): 2– 4.

doi : 10.1093/eurpub/ckn139 .

PMID 19158101 .

^ Kassing, J. W. (1998).

Development and Validation of the Organizational Dissent Scale ^ Eilerman, D. (January 2006).

Conflict: Cost and opportunity.

Retrieved September 17, 2007 Further reading [ edit ] Charlan Jeanne Nemeth (2018).

In Defense of Troublemakers: The Power of Dissent in Life and Business . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0465096299 .

v t e Conformity Enforcement Proscription Damnatio memoriae Dissident / Dissenter Exile Émigré Homo sacer Ostracism Blacklisting Cancel culture Censorship Deplatforming Outcast Outlaw Civil death Vogelfrei Persona non grata Public enemy Enemy of the people Enemy of the state Scapegoating Shunning Governmental pressure Authoritarianism Harmonisation of law Nationalism Left-wing nationalism National conservatism Totalitarianism Tyranny of the majority Group pressure Bandwagon effect Brainwashing Closure (sociology) Collectivism Consensus reality Culture shock Dogma Echo chamber False consensus effect Fear of missing out Groupthink Hazing Herd mentality Identification (psychology) Indoctrination Invented tradition Memory conformity Mere-exposure effect Milieu control Mobbing Normalization Normative social influence Passing (sociology) Patriotism Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Propaganda Psychosocial issue Purity spiral Operant conditioning Rally 'round the flag effect Social construction of gender Social contagion Addiction Behavioral Crime Hysterical Suicide Emotional Social influence Social integration Socialization Spiral of silence Teasing Toxic positivity Untouchability Individual pressure Authoritarian personality Authoritarian leadership style Right-wing authoritarianism Control freak Obsessive–compulsive personality disorder Conformity Compliance Communal reinforcement Countersignaling Creeping normality Herd behavior Internalization Normalization of deviance Obedience Preference falsification Social proof Social reality Experiments Asch conformity experiments Breaching experiment Milgram experiment Stanford prison experiment Anticonformity Alternative media Anti-authoritarianism Anti-social behaviour Self-segregation Civil disobedience Cosmopolitanism Counterculture Culture jamming Deviance Devil's advocate Dissent / Defection Political Eccentricity Eclecticism Hermit Idiosyncrasy Individualism Insubordination Pueblo clown Rebellion Red team Satire Shock value Authority control databases International FAST National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐5xvrg
Cached time: 20250812001350
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.375 seconds
Real time usage: 0.509 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1665/1000000
Revision size: 13941/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 61987/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 857/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 78427/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.219/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7095326/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  411.094      1 -total
 32.90%  135.236      1 Template:Reflist
 19.81%   81.447      1 Template:Pyrrhonism_sidebar
 19.43%   79.878      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 18.27%   75.103      4 Template:Cite_web
 13.27%   54.544      1 Template:Short_description
  8.12%   33.378      2 Template:Navbox
  7.60%   31.253      1 Template:Conformity
  6.93%   28.472      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.64%   23.184      2 Template:Flatlist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:63221:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812001350 and revision id 1299683486. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dissent&oldid=1299683486 " Categories : Dissent Political opposition Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 20:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dissent 16 languages Add topic

