Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Academic programs 3 Student life Toggle Student life subsection 3.1 Financial aid 4 Housing Toggle Housing subsection 4.1 Conant Hall 4.2 Perkins Hall 4.3 Richards Hall and Child Hall 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard Kenneth C. Griffin Graduate School of Arts and Sciences 1 language 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′25.1″N 71°7′6.3″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.373639°N 71.118417°W ﻿ / 42.373639; -71.118417 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Harvard Graduate School of Arts and Sciences ) Graduate school of Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts Harvard Kenneth C. Griffin Graduate School of Arts and Sciences Former names Graduate Department of Harvard University (1872–1890) Graduate School of Harvard University (1890–1905) Graduate School of Arts and Sciences (1905–2023) Type Private Established 1872 ; 153 years ago ( 1872 ) Dean Emma Dench Students 4,824 (4,599 PhD ) [ 1 ] Location Cambridge , Massachusetts , United States Campus Urban Website gsas .harvard .edu The Harvard Kenneth C. Griffin Graduate School of Arts and Sciences ( GSAS ) is a graduate school within the Faculty of Arts and Sciences at Harvard University .

Formed in 1872, GSAS is responsible for most of Harvard's graduate degree programs in the humanities , social sciences , and natural sciences . The school offers Master of Arts (AM), Master of Science (SM), and Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) degrees in approximately 58 disciplines.

[ 2 ] Academic programs offered by the Harvard Graduate School of Arts and Sciences have consistently ranked at the top of graduate programs in the United States.

[ 3 ] The School's graduates include a diverse set of prominent public figures and academics. The vast majority of Harvard's Nobel Prize -winning alumni earned a degree at GSAS.

[ citation needed ] In addition to scholars and scientists, GSAS graduates have become U.S. Cabinet secretaries , Supreme Court justices , foreign heads of state , and heads of government .

History [ edit ] GSAS was formally created as the Graduate Department of Harvard University in 1872 and was renamed the Graduate School of Harvard University in 1890. Women were not allowed to enroll in GSAS until 1962.

[ 4 ] In 2023, the GSAS was renamed after a $300 million donation from philanthropist Kenneth C. Griffin to the Faculty of Arts and Sciences.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Academic programs [ edit ] The Graduate School of Arts and Sciences offers many degree programs, including: [ 7 ] African and African American Studies American Studies Anthropology Astronomy Bioengineering Biological Sciences in Public Health Celtic Languages and Literatures Chemistry and Chemical Biology Computer Science The Classics Comparative Literature Earth and Planetary Sciences East Asian Languages and Civilizations Economics Engineering and Applied Sciences English Germanic Languages and Literatures Government History History of Art and Architecture History of Science Human Evolutionary Biology Linguistics Mathematics Middle Eastern Studies Molecular and Cellular Biology Music Near Eastern Languages and Civilizations Organismic and Evolutionary Biology Philosophy Physics Psychology Romance Languages and Literatures Slavic Languages and Literatures Sociology South Asian Studies Statistics Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology Student life [ edit ] Lehman Hall is the center of GSAS student life on Harvard Yard As of 2019, Harvard's Graduate School of Arts and Sciences had 4,521 students, with the vast majority (4,392 students) pursuing PhDs.

[ 1 ] 46% of GSAS students are women, 30% of students are international, and 12% are underrepresented minorities. 20% of GSAS students pursue degrees in humanities , 26% in social sciences , and the remaining 54% in natural sciences .

[ 8 ] Financial aid [ edit ] GSAS guarantees full funding for all PhD students for five years, which covers tuition, health fees, and living expenses. The PhD funding packages include a combination of tuition grants, stipends, traineeships, teaching fellowships, research assistantships, and other academic appointments.

[ 9 ] Housing [ edit ] Conant Hall , as seen in 2017 Perkins Hall, as seen in 2013 As of 2017, Harvard's GSAS guarantees housing for all first-year graduate students, as long as the students apply for accommodations by April 22.

[ 10 ] GSAS offers housing through several on-campus residence halls, as well as Harvard-owned apartments, both on and off-campus. In addition, approximately 100 GSAS students live in Harvard's undergraduate houses and freshman dorms as resident tutors and proctors.

[ 11 ] GSAS residence halls include the following: [ 12 ] Conant Hall [ edit ] Constructed in 1894, Conant Hall was designed by Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge , reflecting the Georgian architecture of freshman residences found around Harvard Yard . It was built with funds gifted by Edwin Conant , whose name the building currently bears. Originally consisting of 29 suites, Conant has since undergone numerous renovations and currently houses 84 single rooms.

Perkins Hall [ edit ] Perkins Hall was built in 1893 according to the design of Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge . Consisting of 154 single rooms, Perkins is the oldest of the GSAS residence halls currently in use at Harvard. The funds for its construction were donated by Catharine Page Perkins, the widow of an oil tycoon, in memory of her husband's family. Perkins was originally intended to house undergraduate students from modest circumstances but as the number of graduate students increased, it was converted into a graduate residence. In the early 1900s, Perkins Hall was at the center of controversy involving "homosexual activity" at Harvard, and the university administration's attempts to suppress it, an affair that later became known as the Secret Court of 1920 .

[ 13 ] Richards Hall and Child Hall [ edit ] Designed by the German modernist architect Walter Gropius , Richards and Child Halls were built in 1949. Richards is named after the Nobel Prize-winning chemist Theodore Richards , while Child Hall takes its name from Francis J. Child . The two residence halls are constructed on the former Jarvis Field, where the first American football game was played in 1874. Child Hall houses approximately 100 students and Richards Hall houses over 70. The lawn space includes Richard Lippold's “World Tree” sculpture, a 27-feet-tall steel construction designed to be climbed by students.

References [ edit ] ^ a b "GSAS at a Glance" .

The Graduate School of Arts and Sciences . Harvard University . Retrieved 21 October 2020 .

^ "History" .

The Graduate School of Arts and Sciences . Harvard University . Retrieved 29 December 2019 .

^ Harvard University: Grad School , U.S. News & World Report , Retrieved: 7 April 2017 ^ History: Harvard Graduate School of Arts and Sciences , Retrieved: 7 April 2017 ^ "Kenneth C. Griffin makes gift of $300 million to FAS" .

The Harvard Gazette . April 11, 2023 . Retrieved April 11, 2023 .

^ Shaw, Jonathan (April 11, 2023).

"Ken Griffin's Naming Gift for the Graduate School" .

Harvard Magazine . Retrieved April 11, 2023 .

^ "Degree Programs" .

The Graduate School of Arts and Sciences . Harvard University . Retrieved 30 December 2019 .

^ GSAS at a Glance , Harvard University , Retrieved: 7 April 2017 ^ Funding and Aid ,  Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, Harvard University , Retrieved: 7 April 2017 ^ Housing Options for Graduate Students , Harvard University , Retrieved: 7 April 2017 ^ Fact: Housing and Dorms , Harvard University , Retrieved: 7 April 2017 ^ GSAS Residence Hall Handbook: 2017-2018 Archived 2017-08-24 at the Wayback Machine , Harvard University , Retrieved: 24 August 2017 ^ Wright, William.

Harvard's Secret Court: The Savage 1920 Purge of Campus Homosexuals.

St. Martin's Press : 2006 External links [ edit ] GSAS website Harvard Schools GSAS 150th Anniversary Our History Is a Treasure Box All at Their Best v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons 42°22′25.1″N 71°7′6.3″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.373639°N 71.118417°W ﻿ / 42.373639; -71.118417 Authority control databases International ISNI National United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_Kenneth_C._Griffin_Graduate_School_of_Arts_and_Sciences&oldid=1303609703 " Categories : Harvard University schools Graduate schools in the United States Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences University subdivisions in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using infobox university with the image name parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 00:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard Kenneth C. Griffin Graduate School of Arts and Sciences 1 language Add topic

