Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 First and second order disclosure 2 World-disclosing arguments 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents World disclosure 3 languages فارسی Français 한국어 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Revelation of intelligibility World disclosure ( German : Erschlossenheit , literally "development, comprehension") is how things become intelligible and meaningfully relevant to human beings, by virtue of being part of an ontological world – i.e., a pre-interpreted and holistically structured background of meaning. This understanding is said to be first disclosed to human beings through their practical day-to-day encounters with others, with things in the world, and through language.

The phenomenon was described by the German philosopher Martin Heidegger in the book Being and Time .

It has been discussed (not always using the same name) by philosophers such as John Dewey , Jürgen Habermas , Nikolas Kompridis and Charles Taylor .

[ 1 ] Some philosophers, such as Ian Hacking and Nikolas Kompridis , have also described how this ontological understanding can be re-disclosed in various ways (including through innovative forms of philosophical argument ).

First and second order disclosure [ edit ] The idea of disclosure supposes that the meaning of a word or thing depends upon the context in which we encounter it, including the way of life of which it is a part. For example, a table is part of a context with other things that give it its sense or purpose – e.g. chairs, food, a teapot, pencils, books – and we first learn about it through our everyday experience of it in particular contexts. Its meaning is "given" to us by virtue of its connection to various activities (e.g. writing, eating, conversation), and by qualities (e.g. conviviality) that give it value in relation to such activities. These constitute part of its "conditions of intelligibility." The implication is that we are always already "thrown" into these conditions, that is, thrown into a prior understanding of the things which we encounter on a daily basis – an understanding that is already somewhat meaningful and coherent. However, our understanding cannot be made fully conscious or knowable at one time, since this background understanding isn't itself an object: [T]he world is not a possible object of knowledge – because it is not an object at all, not an entity or set of entities. It is that within which entities appear, a field or horizon [that set] the conditions for any intra-worldly relation, and so is not analysable in terms of any such relation.

— Stephen Mulhall , Heidegger and Being and Time , p. 96 [ 2 ] According to Nikolas Kompridis , the initial disclosure of an ontological world is said to be "pre-reflective" or first-order disclosure.

[ 3 ] However, this so-called first-order disclosure is not fixed, as it can vary across historical time and cultural space. Furthermore, Kompridis has described a kind of second-order or reflective disclosure (a term introduced by philosopher James Bohman). Whereas first-order disclosure involves an implicit, unconscious and largely passive relation to meaning, reflective disclosure is an explicit re-working of meaning and the terms used to make sense of ourselves and the world, through the "refocusing" or "de-centering" of our understanding. Reflective disclosure is thus a way of acting back upon conditions of intelligibility, in order to clarify or reshape our background understanding. Because of this, reflective disclosure also affects conditions of possibility by impacting on such basic questions as "what counts as a thing, what counts as true/false, and what it makes sense to do." [ 4 ] While some philosophers, notably Jürgen Habermas and Richard Rorty , claim that disclosure is an aesthetic phenomenon (neither rational nor cognitive and therefore not philosophical), disclosive arguments have been employed in many contexts that are not primarily considered literary or "aesthetic," and some philosophers have argued for the importance of disclosure's (not to mention, aesthetics') place in human reason , most notably Nikolas Kompridis and Charles Taylor .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] World-disclosing arguments [ edit ] All testing, all confirmation and disconfirmation of a hypothesis takes place already within a system. And this system is not a more or less arbitrary and doubtful point of departure for all our arguments: no, it belongs to the essence of what we call an argument... as the element in which arguments have their life.

— Ludwig Wittgenstein [ 7 ] World-disclosing arguments are a family of philosophical argument described by Nikolas Kompridis in his book Critique and Disclosure .

[ 8 ] According to Kompridis, these arguments have distinctive forms, sometimes called styles of reasoning , [ 9 ] that start with a disclosive approach instead of, or in addition to methods that are deductive , inductive , etc.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] According to Kompridis and Taylor, these forms of argument attempt to reveal features of a wider ontological or cultural-linguistic understanding (or "world," in a specifically ontological sense), in order to clarify or transform the background of meaning and "logical space" on which an argument implicitly depends.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] A major example of this type of argument is said to be that of immanent critique , although it is not the only kind.

[ 14 ] In deductive arguments, the "test" of the argument's success are said to be its formal validity and soundness . However, in a world-disclosing argument, the primary criterion for success is the solution of a problem that could not be successfully dealt with under some previous understanding or paradigm, for example, after an epistemological crisis (see Paradigm shift ). It is therefore said to be possibility disclosing rather than "truth-preserving" or "truth-tracking." [ 15 ] The "claim" made by such an argument is that of a new insight, resulting from the adoption of a new stance or perspective that reveals, or discloses a new possibility for thinking and acting.

[ 16 ] Nikolas Kompridis has described two kinds of fallibilism in this regard. The first consists in being open to new evidence that could disprove some previously held position or belief (the taken-for-granted position of the observer in normal science ). The second refers to the consciousness of "the degree to which our interpretations, valuations, our practices, and traditions are temporally indexed" and subject to historical change. This "time-responsive" (as opposed to "evidence-responsive") fallibilism consists in an expectant openness to some future possibility. According to Kompridis, world-disclosing arguments are fallible in both senses of the word.

[ 17 ] Major examples of world disclosing arguments in philosophy are said to include: Transcendental arguments , in which an understanding of some feature of experience is shown to logically entail certain necessary conceptual pre-suppositions (e.g.

I. Kant 's transcendental self, Heidegger's elucidation of ontological being in Being and Time , L. Wittgenstein 's private language argument in Philosophical Investigations ); Dialectical arguments, where the premises argued from are shown to be logically weaker than the argument's conclusion (e.g.

G. W. F. Hegel 's master–slave dialectic and T. W. Adorno 's dialectic of Enlightenment ); Historical ontologies, such as those articulated by Michel Foucault (the historical ontology of power), Jacques Derrida (the historical ontology of meaning) and philosopher of science Ian Hacking ( scientific revolutions ); and Forms of argument that, "through the use of hermeneutic arguments and creative redescriptions" of our practices and cultural paradigms , re-disclose the background of cultural meaning and "logical space of possibility".

[ 18 ] Other modern philosophers who are said to employ world-disclosing arguments include Hans-Georg Gadamer , George Herbert Mead and Maurice Merleau-Ponty .

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Aletheia Disclosing New Worlds Embodied cognitive science Forms of life Habitus Heideggerian terminology Hidden curriculum Hubert Dreyfus Implicit cognition Implicit memory Receptivity Tacit knowledge Utopia for Realists References [ edit ] ^ Nikolas Kompridis, "On World Disclosure: Heidegger, Habermas and Dewey," Thesis Eleven, Vol. 37, No. 1, 29-45 (1994).

^ Stephen Mulhall.

Heidegger and Being and Time , Routledge, 1996. p. 96 ^ Nikolas Kompridis, Critique and Disclosure: Critical Theory between Past and Future , MIT Press , 2006.

^ Hubert Dreyfus, "Being and Power: Heidegger and Foucault," in International Journal of Philosophical Studies 4, 1 (March 1996): 4. cited in Nikolas Kompridis, Critique and Disclosure: Critical Theory between Past and Future , MIT Press, 2006. p.126 ^ Fred Dallmayr, " Critique and Disclosure: Critical Theory between Past and Future , University of Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews .

^ Charles Taylor, Philosophical Arguments (Harvard University Press, 1997), 12; 15.

^ Ludwig Wittgenstein, On Certainty (Oxford: Blackwell, 1975), 107.

^ Nikolas Kompridis, Critique and Disclosure (MIT Press, 2006) ^ Ian Hacking, Styles of Scientific Reasoning , John Rajchman and Cornel West, eds., Post-analytic Philosophy (New York:Columbia University Press, 1985), pp.145-65.

^ We can use the word "disclosure" for this, following Heidegger. And along with this goes a conception of critical reasoning, of especial relevance for moral thinking, that focuses on the nature of transitions in our thought." Charles Taylor, Philosophical Arguments (Harvard, 1995), 15.

^ "[D]eductive, inductive, or abductive [logic does] not count as a style of reasoning. This is as it should be... People everywhere make inductions, draw inferences to the best explanation, make deductions; those are not peculiarly scientific styles of thinking." Ian Hacking, Historical Ontology (Harvard, 2002), 90.

^ "[T]hrough a clarification of the conditions of intentionality, we come to a better understanding of what we are as knowing agents – and hence also as language beings – and thereby gain insight into some of the crucial anthropological questions that underpin our moral and spiritual beliefs... What reflection in this direction would entail is already fairly well known. It involves... our being able to articulate the background of our lives perspicuously." Charles Taylor, Philosophical Arguments" (Harvard, 1995), 14-15.

^ "[World disclosing] arguments cannot assume that the logical space necessary to rendering visible the inferential relations between the premises and the conclusions already exists; rather, their success depends on the degree to which they can expand existing logical space in order to make room for the conclusions to which they lead." Nikolas Kompridis, "World Disclosing Arguments ?" in Critique and Disclosure (MIT Press, 2006), 119." ^ "[Immanent] critique and reflective disclosure are practically indistinguishable, and that is because they are structurally homologous." Nikolas Kompridis, Critique and Disclosure (MIT Press, 2006), 254-255.

^ "Since we are not dealing with deductive or inductive styles of reasoning (which are truth-preserving, not possibility disclosing), we cannot know in advance what form [they] will take." Nikolas Kompridis, Critique and Disclosure (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2006), 174.

^ "[S]uccessful critique depends not just on showing that x is a disguised effect of y , which effect in turn requires the exclusion or repression of r . For this to be shown in the first place, critique needs to find the normative stance, the new interpretive perspective, in light of which what is familiar is defamiliarized, seen again, as if for the first time." Nikolas Kompridis, Critique and Disclosure (MIT Press, 2006), 254-255. See also "The test of disclosure" in the same volume, 139-146.

^ Nikolas Kompridis, "Two kinds of fallibilism", Critique and Disclosure (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2006), 181.

^ Nikolas Kompridis, "World Disclosing Arguments ?" in Critique and Disclosure , Cambridge:MIT Press (2006), 118-121.

v t e Martin Heidegger Philosophy Aletheia Dasein Ekstase Fundamental ontology Gestell Hermeneutic circle " Language speaks " Metaphysics of presence Ontic Terminology Thrownness World disclosure Works Being and Time (1927) " What Is Metaphysics?

" (1929) Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics (1929) " Introduction to Metaphysics " (1935) Black Notebooks (1931–41) " The Age of the World Picture " (1938) Contributions to Philosophy (1936–1938) " Hölderlin's Hymn "The Ister" " (1942) " Letter on Humanism " (1947) The Question Concerning Technology (1949) " The Origin of the Work of Art " (1950) What Is Called Thinking?

(1951–2) What Is Philosophy?

(1955) " Only a God Can Save Us " (1966) Heidegger Gesamtausgabe Film and TV Der Zauberer von Meßkirch (1989) Human, All Too Human (1999) The Ister (2004) Being in the World (2010) Related topics Heidegger scholars Heidegger Studies Studia Heideggeriana Relationship with Nazism Cassirer–Heidegger debate Thing theory v t e Worldview Related terms Basic beliefs / Beliefs Collective consciousness / Collective unconscious Conceptual system Context Conventional wisdom Conventions Cultural movement Epic poetry / National epics / World folk-epics Facts and factoids Framing Ideology Life stance Lifestyle Memes / Memeplex Mental model Metanarrative Mindset Norms Paradigm Philosophical theory Point of view Presuppositions Primal world beliefs Reality tunnel Schemata School of thought Set Social reality Theory of everything Umwelt Value system Aspects Biases Academic Attentional Attitude polarization Belief Cognitive list Collective narcissism Confirmation Congruence Cryptomnesia Cultural Ethnocentrism Filter bubble Homophily In-group favoritism Magical thinking Media Observational error Observer-expectancy Selective exposure Selective perception Self-deception Self-fulfilling prophecy Clever Hans effect placebo effect wishful thinking Status quo Stereotyping ethnic Change and maintenance Activism Argument Argumentum ad populum Attitude change Brainwashing Censorship Charisma Circular reporting Cognitive dissonance Critical thinking Crowd manipulation Cultural dissonance Deprogramming Echo chamber Education religious values Euphemism Excommunication Fearmongering Historical revisionism negationism Ideological repression Indoctrination Manipulation (psychology) Media manipulation Media regulation Missionaries Moral entrepreneurship Persuasion Polite fiction Political engineering Propaganda Propaganda model Proselytism Psychological warfare Religious conversion forced Religious persecution Religious uniformity Revolutions Rhetoric Self-censorship Social change Social control Social engineering Social influence Social progress Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Woozle effect Culture Anthropology cultural social Calendars Ceremonies Coronations Cross-cultural psychology Cultural psychology Doctrine Employment / Serfdom / Slavery Families Funerals / Burial Games Holidays Hygiene ritual Identity (philosophy) cultural Institutions Liminality Liturgy Marriage Myth and ritual Oaths Pilgrimages Play Rites of passage secular Rituals Social class / Social status / Caste Symbols Symbolic boundaries Worship Groupthink Abilene paradox Bandwagon effect Collectives Collective behavior animal Collective effervescence Collective intelligence Conformity Consensus theory Crowd psychology Cults Culture-bound syndromes Deindividuation Doublethink Emergence Emotional contagion Entitativity False consensus effect Folie à deux Group action Group cohesiveness Group dynamics Group emotion Group polarization Groupshift Herd behavior Holism Hysterical contagion Information cascade In-group and out-group Invisible hand Lynching Majoritarianism / Mob rule Mass action Mass psychogenic illness Milieu control Mobbing Moral panic Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Political correctness Pseudoconsensus Scapegoating Self-organization Social action Social behavior Social emotions Social exclusion Social facilitation animal Social group Social proof Social psychology Sociology Spontaneous order Status quo Stigmergy Swarm behaviour System justification Viral phenomena Knowledge Axioms tacit assumptions Conceptual framework Epistemology outline Evidence anecdotal scientific Explanations Faith fideism Gnosis Intuition Meaning-making Memory Meta-knowledge Methodology Observation Observational learning Perception Reasoning fallacious logic Revelation Testimony Tradition folklore Truth consensus theory criteria World disclosure Metaphysics Ætiology Afterlife Anima mundi Causality Concepts Consciousness mind–body problem Cosmogony Cosmology religious Creation myth Deities existence Destiny Eschatology Everything / Nothing Evolution Existence Fiction / Nonfiction Free will Future History Ideas Idios kosmos Illusions Incarnation Information Intelligence Magic Matter Miracles Mythology comparative National mythoi Nature philosophical Ontology Origin myths political Otherworlds axes mundi Physics natural philosophy Problem of evil Reality Souls Spirit Supernature Teleology Theology Time Unobservables Value Aesthetic taste Aesthetic Almsgiving / Charity Altruism Autonomy Beauty Codes of conduct Comedy Common good Conscience Consent Creativity Disgust Duty Economics Ecstasy emotional religious Elegance Emotions Aesthetic Entertainment Eroticism Ethics Étiquette Family values Food and drink prohibitions unclean animals Golden Rule Guilt / Culpability Happiness Harmony Honour Human rights Judgement Justice Law jurisprudence religious Liberty political freedom Love Magnificence Maxims Meaning of life Morality public Obligations Peace Piety Praxeology Principles Punishment Qualities Repentance Reverence Rights Sexuality ethics Sin Social stigma Stewardship Styles Sublime, The Suffering Sympathy Taboo Theodicy Trust Unspoken rules Virtues and Vices Works of art Wrongdoing Examples Attitudes Misanthropy Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Economic and political ideologies Anarchism Authoritarianism Capitalism Christian democracy Collectivism Colonialism Communalism Communism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Distributism Environmentalism Extremism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Globalism Green politics Imperialism Individualism Industrialisation Intellectualism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Masculism Militarism Monarchism Nationalism Pacifism Progressivism Radicalism Reformism Republicanism Sentientism Social democracy Socialism Utilitarianism Veganism Religions African traditional religions Baháʼí Buddhism Caodaism Cheondoism Chinese folk religion Christianity Eastern Orthodox Church Ethnic religions Hinduism Hòa Hảo Islam Jainism Judaism Korean shamanism Modern paganism Rastafari Secularity / Irreligion / Agnosticism / Atheism Shinto Sikhism Spiritism Taoism Tenrikyo Unitarian Universalism Zoroastrianism Schools of philosophy Agriculturalism Aristotelianism Atomism Averroism Cartesianism Cārvāka Collectivism Confucianism / New Confucianism Critical theory Cynicism Cyrenaics Determinism Dualism Eleatics Empiricism Epicureanism Eretrian school Existentialism Fatalism Foundationalism Hedonism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Historicism / New historicism Holism Humanism / Renaissance humanism Idealism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Individualism Ionian Kantianism / Neo-Kantianism Kokugaku Legalism Logicians Materialism Megarian school Modernism / Postmodernism Mohism Monism Natural law Naturalism (Chinese) Naturalism (Western) Nihilism Peripatetic Phenomenology Platonism / Neoplatonism Pluralism Positivism Pragmatism Pre-Socratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism / Neopythagoreanism Rationalism Reductionism Scholasticism / Neo-scholasticism Sentientism Social constructionism Sophism Spinozism Stoicism Structuralism / Post-structuralism Thomism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Yangism NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐jcp99
Cached time: 20250818005259
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.437 seconds
Real time usage: 0.568 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1918/1000000
Revision size: 12985/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 102069/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5480/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 28018/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.235/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15831416/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  414.998      1 -total
 30.43%  126.291      1 Template:Langx
 23.04%   95.632      3 Template:Navbox
 22.40%   92.966      1 Template:Martin_Heidegger
 15.45%   64.131      1 Template:Short_description
 14.00%   58.101     27 Template:Main_other
 11.04%   45.827      1 Template:Citation_needed
  9.77%   40.554      1 Template:Fix
  9.70%   40.236      2 Template:Cquote
  9.09%   37.727      2 Template:Blockquote Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:25185692:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818005259 and revision id 1285264912. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=World_disclosure&oldid=1285264912 " Categories : Philosophy of Martin Heidegger Ontology Concepts in metaphysics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2020 This page was last edited on 12 April 2025, at 17:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents World disclosure 3 languages Add topic

