Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Branches 2 Differences from other sciences 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Formal science 53 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano ქართული Қазақша Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Malagasy Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Русиньскый Русский Shqip سنڌي Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Taclḥit ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of abstract structures described by formal systems "Mathematics and Statistics" redirects here; not to be confused with Mathematical statistics , Mathematics , or Statistics .

Part of a series on Science General History Literature Method Philosophy Branches Formal Natural Physical Life Social Behavioural Cognitive Applied In society Communication Community Education Funding Policy Pseudoscience Scientist Science fiction Science portal Outline Category Article indexes Glossaries v t e Formal science is a branch of science studying disciplines concerned with abstract structures described by formal systems , such as logic , mathematics , statistics , theoretical computer science , artificial intelligence , information theory , game theory , systems theory , decision theory and theoretical linguistics . Whereas the natural sciences and social sciences seek to characterize physical systems and social systems , respectively, using theoretical and empirical methods, the formal sciences use language tools concerned with characterizing abstract structures described by formal systems and the deductions that can be made from them. The formal sciences aid the natural and social sciences by providing information about the structures used to describe the physical world, and what inferences may be made about them.

[ 1 ] Branches [ edit ] Logic (also a branch of philosophy ) Mathematics Statistics Systems science Data science Information theory Computer science Cryptography Differences from other sciences [ edit ] One reason why mathematics enjoys special esteem, above all other sciences, is that its laws are absolutely certain and indisputable, while those of other sciences are to some extent debatable and in constant danger of being overthrown by newly discovered facts.

— Albert Einstein [ 2 ] Because of their non-empirical nature, formal sciences are construed by outlining a set of axioms and definitions from which other statements ( theorems ) are deduced. For this reason, in Rudolf Carnap 's logical-positivist conception of the epistemology of science , theories belonging to formal sciences are understood to contain no synthetic statements , instead containing only analytic statements .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy – Study of general and fundamental questions Science – Systematic endeavour to gain knowledge Rationalism – Epistemological view centered on reason Abstract structure – Type of abstraction in science, mathematics, and philosophy Abstraction in mathematics – Process of extracting the underlying essence of a mathematical concept Abstraction in computer science – Technique for arranging complexity of computer systems Cognitive science – Interdisciplinary scientific study of cognitive processes Formalism (philosophy of mathematics) – View that mathematics does not necessarily represent reality, but is more akin to a game Formal grammar – Structure of a formal language Formal language – Sequence of words formed by specific rules Formal methods – Mathematical program specifications Formal system – Mathematical model for deduction or proof systems Form and content – Distinct aspects of a work of art Mathematical model – Description of a system using mathematical concepts and language Mathematical sciences – Group of areas of study that are primarily mathematical Mathematics Subject Classification – Classification scheme for mathematics Semiotics – Study of signs and sign processes Theory of forms – Philosophical theory attributed to Plato References [ edit ] ^ Ramoo, Dinesh (2024).

Critical Thinking . Thompson Rivers University Open Press.

^ Albert Einstein (1923). "Geometry and Experience".

Sidelights on relativity . Courier Dover Publications. p. 27.

Reprinted by Dover (2010), ISBN 978-0-486-24511-9 .

^ Carnap, Rudolf (1938). "Logical Foundations of the Unity of Science".

International Encyclopaedia of Unified Science . Vol. I. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

^ Thompson, Bill (2007), "2.4 Formal Science and Applied Mathematics", The Nature of Statistical Evidence , Lecture Notes in Statistics, vol. 189 (1st ed.), Springer, p. 15 Further reading [ edit ] Mario Bunge (1985).

Philosophy of Science and Technology . Springer.

Mario Bunge (1998).

Philosophy of Science . Rev. ed. of: Scientific research . Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, 1967.

C. West Churchman (1940).

Elements of Logic and Formal Science , J.B. Lippincott Co., New York.

James Franklin (1994).

The formal sciences discover the philosophers' stone . In: Studies in History and Philosophy of Science . Vol. 25, No. 4, pp. 513–533, 1994 Stephen Leacock (1906).

Elements of Political Science . Houghton, Mifflin Co, 417 pp.

Popper, Karl R.

(2002) [1959].

The Logic of Scientific Discovery . New York, NY: Routledge Classics.

ISBN 0-415-27844-9 .

OCLC 59377149 .

Bernt P. Stigum (1990).

Toward a Formal Science of Economics .

MIT Press Marcus Tomalin (2006), Linguistics and the Formal Sciences . Cambridge University Press William L. Twining (1997).

Law in Context: Enlarging a Discipline . 365 pp.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Formal sciences at Wikimedia Commons Interdisciplinary conferences — Foundations of the Formal Sciences Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Formal_science&oldid=1286612312 " Categories : Formal sciences Branches of science Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 April 2025, at 23:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Formal science 53 languages Add topic

