Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins Toggle Origins subsection 1.1 Ancient Egypt 1.2 India 1.3 East Asian 1.4 Ancient Greece and Rome 1.5 Christian views 1.5.1 Saint Augustine 1.5.2 Isidore of Seville 1.5.3 Peace and Truce of God 1.5.4 Saint Thomas Aquinas 1.5.5 Renaissance and Christian Humanists 1.5.6 First World War 1.5.7 Contemporary Catholic doctrine 1.5.8 Russian Orthodox Church 1.6 Just war tradition 2 Criteria Toggle Criteria subsection 2.1 Jus ad bellum 2.2 Jus in bello 2.3 Ending a war: Jus post bellum 3 Traditionalists and Revisionists Toggle Traditionalists and Revisionists subsection 3.1 Traditionalists 3.2 Revisionists 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Just war theory 29 languages العربية বাংলা Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Doctrine about when a war is ethically just "Just war" redirects here. For the 1996 science fiction novel, see Just War (novel) . For theories about warfare in general, see Military theory .

Saint Augustine was the first clear advocate of just-war theory.

Part of a series on War ( outline ) History Prehistoric Ancient Thermal Gunpowder Timeline Post-classical Castles Early modern Military revolution Pike and shot Napoleonic warfare Late modern Industrial warfare Fourth-gen warfare AI warfare Military Organization Command and control Defense ministry Reserves Ranks Branches: Army Navy Air force Marines Coast guard Border guard Special forces Cyber force Space force Specialties: Staff Engineers Intel Recon Medical Police Diving Pilot Land units: Infantry Armor Cavalry Artillery Special forces Signal corps Naval units: Warships Submarines Aircraft carriers Landing craft Auxiliary ships Air units: Fighters Bombers Command Close air support Electronic-warfare Reconnaissance Combat systems: Fire-control system Fire-control radar Director (military) Combat information center Sonar Radar Historical: Ship gun fire-control Gun data computer Torpedo data computer Development: Basic training Military manoeuvrers Combat training Battlespace Aerospace Aerial Airborne Space Land Cold-region Desert Fortification Jungle Mountain Urban Subterranean Tunnel Sea Amphibious Blue Brown Green Surface Underwater Seabed Cyber Information Weapons Air defence Armor Artillery Barrage Biological Camouflage Cavalry Horses Air cavalry Chemical Combined arms Conventional Cyber Denial Disinformation Drone / Robot Electromagnetic Firearms Infantry Loitering Missile Music Nuclear Psychological Radiological Submarine Unconventional Tactics List of military tactics Aerial Airlift Air assault Airbridge Airdrop Anti-aircraft Anti-sub Anti-tank Battle Cavalry Charge CQC Counterattack Counterinsurgency Convoy Defeat in detail Foxhole Drone Envelopment Formation Guerrilla Naval Rapid dominance Encirclement Investment Siege Swarm Screen Tactical objective Target saturation Trench Withdrawal Operational Military operation Special Operations research Blitzkrieg Expeditionary Deep operation Maneuver Operational manoeuvre group Raid Covert Stay-behind Strategy List of military strategies and concepts Military campaign Anti-access Attrition Commerce raiding Counter-offensive Culminating Defence in depth Fabian Empty fort Mosaic Deception Defensive Depth Goal Nuclear Naval Offensive Scorched earth Grand strategy Asymmetric Blockade Broken-backed Class Cold war Colonial Conquest Containment Divide and conquer Economic Endemic Fleet in being Irregular Liberation Limited Network-centric New generation Perpetual Political Princely Proxy Religious Resource Strategic Succession Technology Theater Total war World war Administrative Branch Policy Staff Training Service Sociology Organization Area of responsibility Chain of command Command and control Doctrine Order of battle Principles of war Economy of force Medicine Engineers Intelligence Ranks Technology and equipment Personnel Recruitment Conscription Draft evasion Mobilization Training Specialism Soldier Morale Volunteer Women Children Transgender Harassment Conscientious objector Conscription and sexism Counter-recruitment Logistics History War economy Arms industry Materiel Supply-chain management Military–industrial complex Base MOB FOB Outpost Science Power projection Loss-of-strength gradient Lanchester's laws Force multiplication Morale Law Belligerent Occupation Armistice Ceasefire Court-martial Desertion Geneva Conventions Geneva Protocol Islamic rules Justice Lawful / Unlawful combatant Perfidy Regular / Irregular Jewish laws on war Right of conquest Right of self-defence Rules of engagement Self-determination Martial law War crime War and genocide War treason Theory Air supremacy Appeasement Command of the sea Deterrence theory Full-spectrum dominance Overmatch Just war theory Principles of war Philosophy of war Security dilemma Tripwire force Wargaming Simulation Exercises Combat effectiveness Center of gravity Non-warfare Arms control Counter-insurgency Deterrence Disaster response Grey-zone Gunboat diplomacy Humanitarian aid Law enforcement Low-intensity conflict Military engineering Peacekeeping Peacebuilding Peace through strength Show of force Culture Awards and decorations Battle cry Warrior War film Military science fiction War novel Anti-war movement Foot drill War song Uniform Wargame Militarization / Militarism Antimilitarism Camp follower Books Seven Military Classics The Art of War De re militari Strategemata Related Women in war War resister War studies Horses in warfare Wartime sexual violence Fifth column Mercenary Pacifism Privateer Private military company Soldiers are murderers Lists Battles Military occupations Military terms Operations Sieges War crimes Wars Weapons Writers v t e The just war theory ( Latin : bellum iustum ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] is a doctrine , also referred to as a tradition, of military ethics that aims to ensure that a war is morally justifiable through a series of criteria , all of which must be met for a war to be considered just. It has been studied by military leaders, theologians, ethicists and policymakers. The criteria are split into two groups: jus ad bellum ("right to go to war") and jus in bello ("right conduct in war").

[ 3 ] There have been calls for the inclusion of a third category of just war theory ( jus post bellum ) dealing with the morality of post-war settlement and reconstruction. The just war theory postulates the belief that war, while it is terrible but less so with the right conduct, is not always the worst option. The just war theory presents a justifiable means of war with justice being an objective of armed conflict.

[ 4 ] Important responsibilities, undesirable outcomes, or preventable atrocities may justify war.

[ 3 ] Opponents of the just war theory may either be inclined to a stricter pacifist standard (proposing that there has never been nor can there ever be a justifiable basis for war) or they may be inclined toward a more permissive nationalist standard (proposing that a war need only to serve a nation's interests to be justifiable). In many cases, philosophers state that individuals do not need to be plagued by a guilty conscience if they are required to fight. A few philosophers ennoble the virtues of the soldier while they also declare their apprehensions for war itself.

[ 5 ] A few, such as Rousseau , argue for insurrection against oppressive rule.

The historical aspect, or the "just war tradition", deals with the historical body of rules or agreements that have applied in various wars across the ages. The just war tradition also considers the writings of various philosophers and lawyers through history, and examines both their philosophical visions of war's ethical limits and whether their thoughts have contributed to the body of conventions that have evolved to guide war and warfare.

[ 6 ] In the twenty-first century there has been significant debate between traditional just war theorists, who largely support the existing law of war and develop arguments to support it, and revisionists who reject many traditional assumptions, although not necessarily advocating a change in the law.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Origins [ edit ] Ancient Egypt [ edit ] A 2017 study found that the just war tradition can be traced as far back as to Ancient Egypt .

[ 9 ] Egyptian ethics of war usually centered on three main ideas, these including the cosmological role of Egypt, the pharaoh as a divine office and executor of the will of the gods, and the superiority of the Egyptian state and population over all other states and peoples. Egyptian political theology held that the pharaoh had the exclusive legitimacy in justly initiating a war, usually claimed to carry out the will of the gods.

Senusret I , in the Twelfth Dynasty , claimed, "I was nursed to be a conqueror...his [Atum's] son and his protector, he gave me to conquer what he conquered." Later pharaohs also considered their sonship of the god Amun-Re as granting them absolute ability to declare war on the deity's behalf. Pharaohs often visited temples prior to initiating campaigns, where the pharaoh was believed to receive their commands of war from the deities. For example, Kamose claimed that "I went north because I was strong (enough) to attack the Asiatics through the command of Amon, the just of counsels." A stele erected by Thutmose III at the Temple of Amun at Karnak "provides an unequivocal statement of the pharaoh's divine mandate to wage war on his enemies." As the period of the New Kingdom progressed and Egypt heightened its territorial ambition, so did the invocation of just war aid the justification of these efforts. The universal principle of Maat , signifying order and justice, was central to the Egyptian notion of just war and its ability to guarantee Egypt virtually no limits on what it could take, do, or use to guarantee the ambitions of the state.

[ 9 ] India [ edit ] The Indian Hindu epic , the Mahabharata , offers the first written discussions of a "just war" ( dharma-yuddha or "righteous war"). In it, one of five ruling brothers ( Pandavas ) asks if the suffering caused by war can ever be justified. A long discussion then ensues between the siblings, establishing criteria like proportionality ( chariots cannot attack cavalry, only other chariots; no attacking people in distress), just means (no poisoned or barbed arrows), just cause (no attacking out of rage), and fair treatment of captives and the wounded.

[ 10 ] In Sikhism , the term dharamyudh describes a war that is fought for just, righteous or religious reasons, especially in defence of one's own beliefs. Though some core tenets in the Sikh religion are understood to emphasise peace and nonviolence, especially before the 1606 execution of Guru Arjan by Mughal Emperor Jahangir , [ 11 ] military force may be justified if all peaceful means to settle a conflict have been exhausted, thus resulting in a dharamyudh .

[ 12 ] East Asian [ edit ] Chinese philosophy produced a massive body of work on warfare, much of it during the Zhou dynasty , especially the Warring States era . War was justified only as a last resort and only by the rightful sovereign; however, questioning the decision of the emperor concerning the necessity of a military action was not permissible. The success of a military campaign was sufficient proof that the campaign had been righteous.

[ 13 ] Japan did not develop its own doctrine of just war but between the 5th and the 7th centuries drew heavily from Chinese philosophy, and especially Confucian views. As part of the Japanese campaign to take the northeastern island Honshu , Japanese military action was portrayed as an effort to "pacify" the Emishi people, who were likened to "bandits" and "wild-hearted wolf cubs" and accused of invading Japan's frontier lands.

[ 14 ] Ancient Greece and Rome [ edit ] The notion of just war in Europe originates and is developed first in ancient Greece and then in the Roman Empire .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] It was Aristotle who first introduced the concept and terminology to the Hellenic world that called war a last resort requiring conduct that would allow the restoration of peace. Aristotle argues that the cultivation of a military is necessary and good for the purpose of self-defense, not for conquering: "The proper object of practising military training is not in order that men may enslave those who do not deserve slavery, but in order that first they may themselves avoid becoming enslaved to others" ( Politics , Book 7).

[ 18 ] Stoic philosopher Panaetius considered war inhuman, but he contemplated just war when it was impossible to bring peace and justice by peaceful means. Just war could be waged solely for retribution or defense, in both cases having to be declared officially. He also established the importance of treating the defeated in a civilized way, especially those who surrendered, even after a prolonged conflict.

[ 19 ] In ancient Rome , a "just cause" for war might include the necessity of repelling an invasion, or retaliation for pillaging or a breach of treaty.

[ 20 ] War was always potentially nefas ("wrong, forbidden"), and risked religious pollution and divine disfavor .

[ 21 ] A "just war" ( bellum iustum ) thus required a ritualized declaration by the fetial priests.

[ 22 ] More broadly, conventions of war and treaty-making were part of the ius gentium , the "law of nations", the customary moral obligations regarded as innate and universal to human beings.

[ 23 ] Christian views [ edit ] Christian theory of the Just War begins around the time of Augustine of Hippo (Saint Augustine).

[ 24 ] The Just War theory, with some amendments, is still used by Christians today as a guide to whether or not a war can be justified. Christians may argue "Sometimes war may be necessary and right, even though it may not be good." In the case of a country that has been invaded by an occupying force, war may be the only way to restore justice.

[ 25 ] Saint Augustine [ edit ] Saint Augustine held that individuals should not resort immediately to violence, but God has given the sword to government for a good reason (based upon Romans 13:4). In Contra Faustum Manichaeum book 22 sections 69–76, Augustine argues that Christians, as part of a government, need not be ashamed of protecting peace and punishing wickedness when they are forced to do so by a government. Augustine asserted that was a personal and philosophical stance: "What is here required is not a bodily action, but an inward disposition. The sacred seat of virtue is the heart." [ 26 ] Nonetheless, he asserted, peacefulness in the face of a grave wrong that could be stopped by only violence would be a sin. Defense of oneself or others could be a necessity, especially when it is authorized by a legitimate authority: They who have waged war in obedience to the divine command, or in conformity with His laws, have represented in their persons the public justice or the wisdom of government, and in this capacity have put to death wicked men; such persons have by no means violated the commandment, "Thou shalt not kill." [ 27 ] While not breaking down the conditions necessary for war to be just, Augustine nonetheless originated the very phrase itself in his work The City of God : But, say they, the wise man will wage Just Wars. As if he would not all the rather lament the necessity of just wars, if he remembers that he is a man; for if they were not just he would not wage them, and would therefore be delivered from all wars.

[ 27 ] Augustine further taught: No war is undertaken by a good state except on behalf of good faith or for safety.

[ 28 ] J. Mark Mattox writes, In terms of the traditional notion of jus ad bellum (justice of war, that is, the circumstances in which wars can be justly fought), war is a coping mechanism for righteous sovereigns who would ensure that their violent international encounters are minimal, a reflection of the Divine Will to the greatest extent possible, and always justified. In terms of the traditional notion of jus in bello (justice in war, or the moral considerations which ought to constrain the use of violence in war), war is a coping mechanism for righteous combatants who, by divine edict, have no choice but to subject themselves to their political masters and seek to ensure that they execute their war-fighting duty as justly as possible.

[ 29 ] Isidore of Seville [ edit ] Isidore of Seville writes: Those wars are unjust which are undertaken without cause. For aside from vengeance or to fight off enemies no just war can be waged.

[ 30 ] Peace and Truce of God [ edit ] Main article: Peace and Truce of God The medieval Peace of God (Latin: pax dei ) was a 10th century mass movement in Western Europe instigated by the clergy that granted immunity from violence for non-combatants.

Starting in the 11th Century, the Truce of God (Latin: treuga dei ) involved Church rules that successfully limited when and where fighting could occur: Catholic forces (e.g. of warring barons ) could not fight each other on Sundays, Thursdays, holidays, the entirety of Lent and Advent and other times, severely disrupting the conduct of wars. The 1179 Third Council of the Lateran adopted a version of it for the whole church.

Saint Thomas Aquinas [ edit ] Further information: Thomas Aquinas § Just war Saint Thomas Aquinas contributed to the development of the just war theory in medieval Europe.

The just war theory by Thomas Aquinas has had a lasting impact on later generations of thinkers and was part of an emerging consensus in medieval Europe on just war.

[ 31 ] In the 13th century Aquinas reflected in detail on peace and war. Aquinas was a Dominican friar and contemplated the teachings of the Bible on peace and war in combination with ideas from Aristotle , Plato , Socrates , Saint Augustine and other philosophers whose writings are part of the Western canon . Aquinas' views on war drew heavily on the Decretum Gratiani , a book the Italian monk Gratian had compiled with passages from the Bible. After its publication in the 12th century, the Decretum Gratiani had been republished with commentary from Pope Innocent IV and the Dominican friar Raymond of Penafort . Other significant influences on Aquinas just war theory were Alexander of Hales and Henry of Segusio .

[ 32 ] In Summa Theologica Aquinas asserted that it is not always a sin to wage war, and he set out criteria for a just war. According to Aquinas, three requirements must be met. Firstly, the war must be waged upon the command of a rightful sovereign . Secondly, the war needs to be waged for just cause, on account of some wrong the attacked have committed. Thirdly, warriors must have the right intent, namely to promote good and to avoid evil.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Aquinas came to the conclusion that a just war could be offensive and that injustice should not be tolerated so as to avoid war. Nevertheless, Aquinas argued that violence must only be used as a last resort. On the battlefield , violence was only justified to the extent it was necessary. Soldiers needed to avoid cruelty and a just war was limited by the conduct of just combatants. Aquinas argued that it was only in the pursuit of justice, that the good intention of a moral act could justify negative consequences, including the killing of the innocent during a war.

[ 35 ] Renaissance and Christian Humanists [ edit ] Various Renaissance humanists promoted Pacificist views.

John Colet famously preached a Lenten sermon before Henry VIII, who was preparing for a war, quoting Cicero "Better an unjust peace rather than the justest war." [ 36 ] Erasmus of Rotterdam wrote numerous works on peace which criticized Just War theory as a smokescreen and added extra limitations , notably The Complaint of Peace and the Treatise on War (Dulce bellum inexpertis).

A leading humanist writer after the Reformation was legal theorist Hugo Grotius , whose De jura belli ac pacis re-considered Just War and fighting wars justly.

First World War [ edit ] At the beginning of the First World War , a group of theologians in Germany published a manifesto that sought to justify the actions of the German government. At the British government's request, Randall Davidson , Archbishop of Canterbury , took the lead in collaborating with a large number of other religious leaders, including some with whom he had differed in the past, to write a rebuttal of the Germans' contentions. Both German and British theologians based themselves on the just war theory, each group seeking to prove that it applied to the war waged by its own side.

[ 37 ] Contemporary Catholic doctrine [ edit ] The just war doctrine of the Catholic Church found in the 1992 Catechism of the Catholic Church , in paragraph 2309, lists four strict conditions for "legitimate defense by military force:" [ 38 ] [ 39 ] The damage inflicted by the aggressor on the nation or community of nations must be lasting, grave and certain.

All other means of putting an end to it must have been shown to be impractical or ineffective.

There must be serious prospects of success.

The use of arms must not produce evils and disorders graver than the evil to be eliminated.

The Compendium of the Social Doctrine of the Church elaborates on the just war doctrine in paragraphs 500 to 501, while citing the Charter of the United Nations : [ 40 ] If this responsibility justifies the possession of sufficient means to exercise this right to defense, States still have the obligation to do everything possible "to ensure that the conditions of peace exist, not only within their own territory but throughout the world". It is important to remember that "it is one thing to wage a war of self-defense; it is quite another to seek to impose domination on another nation. The possession of war potential does not justify the use of force for political or military objectives. Nor does the mere fact that war has unfortunately broken out mean that all is fair between the warring parties".

The Charter of the United Nations ... is based on a generalized prohibition of a recourse to force to resolve disputes between States, with the exception of two cases: legitimate defence and measures taken by the Security Council within the area of its responsibilities for maintaining peace.

In every case, exercising the right to self-defence must respect "the traditional limits of necessity and proportionality".

Therefore, engaging in a preventive war without clear proof that an attack is imminent cannot fail to raise serious moral and juridical questions.

International legitimacy for the use of armed force, on the basis of rigorous assessment and with well-founded motivations, can only be given by the decision of a competent body that identifies specific situations as threats to peace and authorizes an intrusion into the sphere of autonomy usually reserved to a State.

— Compendium of the Social Doctrine of the Church [ 40 ] Pope John Paul II in an address to a group of soldiers noted the following: [ 41 ] Peace, as taught by Sacred Scripture and the experience of men itself, is more than just the absence of war. And the Christian is aware that on earth a human society that is completely and always peaceful is, unfortunately, an utopia and that the ideologies which present it as easily attainable only nourish vain hopes. The cause of peace will not go forward by denying the possibility and the obligation to defend it.

Russian Orthodox Church [ edit ] The War and Peace section in the Basis of the Social Concept of the Russian Orthodox Church is crucial for understanding the Russian Orthodox Church 's attitude towards war. The document offers criteria of distinguishing between an aggressive war, which is unacceptable, and a justified war, attributing the highest moral and sacred value of military acts of bravery to a true believer who participates in a justified war. Additionally, the document considers the just war criteria as developed in Western Christianity to be eligible for Russian Orthodoxy; therefore, the justified war theory in Western theology is also applicable to the Russian Orthodox Church.

[ 42 ] In the same document, it is stated that wars have accompanied human history since the fall of man , and according to the gospel , they will continue to accompany it. While recognizing war as evil, the Russian Orthodox Church does not prohibit its members from participating in hostilities if there is the security of their neighbours and the restoration of trampled justice at stake. War is considered to be necessary but undesirable. It is also stated that the Russian Orthodox Church has had profound respect for soldiers who gave their lives to protect the life and security of their neighbours.

[ 43 ] Just war tradition [ edit ] The just war theory, propounded by the medieval Christian philosopher Thomas Aquinas , was developed further by legal scholars in the context of international law .

Cardinal Cajetan , the jurist Francisco de Vitoria , the two Jesuit priests Luis de Molina and Francisco Suárez , as well as the humanist Hugo Grotius and the lawyer Luigi Taparelli were most influential in the formation of a just war tradition . The just war tradition, which was well established by the 19th century, found its practical application in the Hague Peace Conferences (1899 and 1907) and in the founding of the League of Nations in 1920. After the United States Congress declared war on Germany in 1917, Cardinal James Gibbons issued a letter that all Catholics were to support the war [ 44 ] because "Our Lord Jesus Christ does not stand for peace at any price... If by Pacifism is meant the teaching that the use of force is never justifiable, then, however well meant, it is mistaken, and it is hurtful to the life of our country." [ 45 ] Armed conflicts such as the Spanish Civil War , World War II and the Cold War were, as a matter of course, judged according to the norms (as established in Aquinas' just war theory) by philosophers such as Jacques Maritain , Elizabeth Anscombe and John Finnis .

[ 31 ] The first work dedicated specifically to just war was the 15th-century sermon De bellis justis of Stanisław of Skarbimierz (1360–1431), who justified war by the Kingdom of Poland against the Teutonic Knights .

[ 46 ] Francisco de Vitoria criticized the conquest of America by the Spanish conquistadors on the basis of just-war theory.

[ 47 ] With Alberico Gentili and Hugo Grotius , just war theory was replaced by international law theory, codified as a set of rules, which today still encompass the points commonly debated, with some modifications.

[ 48 ] Just-war theorists combine a moral abhorrence towards war with a readiness to accept that war may sometimes be necessary. The criteria of the just-war tradition act as an aid in determining whether resorting to arms is morally permissible. Just-war theories aim "to distinguish between justifiable and unjustifiable uses of organized armed forces"; they attempt "to conceive of how the use of arms might be restrained, made more humane, and ultimately directed towards the aim of establishing lasting peace and justice".

[ 49 ] The just war tradition addresses the morality of the use of force in two parts: when it is right to resort to armed force (the concern of jus ad bellum ) and what is acceptable in using such force (the concern of jus in bello ).

[ 50 ] In 1869 the Russian military theorist Genrikh Antonovich Leer [ ru ] theorized on the advantages and potential benefits of war.

[ 51 ] The Soviet leader Vladimir Lenin defined only three types of just war.

[ 52 ] But picture to yourselves a slave-owner who owned 100 slaves warring against a slave-owner who owned 200 slaves for a more "just" distribution of slaves. Clearly, the application of the term "defensive" war, or war "for the defense of the fatherland" in such a case would be historically false, and in practice would be sheer deception of the common people, of philistines, of ignorant people, by the astute slaveowners. Precisely in this way are the present-day imperialist bourgeoisie deceiving the peoples by means of "national ideology" and the term "defense of the fatherland" in the present war between slave-owners for fortifying and strengthening slavery.

[ 53 ] The anarcho-capitalist scholar Murray Rothbard (1926–1995) stated that "a just war exists when a people tries to ward off the threat of coercive domination by another people, or to overthrow an already-existing domination. A war is unjust , on the other hand, when a people try to impose domination on another people or try to retain an already-existing coercive rule over them." [ 54 ] Jonathan Riley-Smith writes: The consensus among Christians on the use of violence has changed radically since the crusades were fought. The just war theory prevailing for most of the last two centuries—that violence is an evil that can, in certain situations, be condoned as the lesser of evils—is relatively young. Although it has inherited some elements (the criteria of legitimate authority, just cause, right intention) from the older war theory that first evolved around AD 400, it has rejected two premises that underpinned all medieval just wars, including crusades: first, that violence could be employed on behalf of Christ's intentions for mankind and could even be directly authorized by him; and second, that it was a morally neutral force that drew whatever ethical coloring it had from the intentions of the perpetrators.

[ 55 ] Criteria [ edit ] The just war theory has two sets of criteria, the first establishing jus ad bellum (the right to go to war), and the second establishing jus in bello (right conduct within war).

[ 56 ] Jus ad bellum [ edit ] Main article: Jus ad bellum The just war theory directs jus ad bellum to norms that aim to require certain circumstances to enable the right to go to war.

[ 57 ] Competent authority Only duly constituted public authorities may wage war. "A just war must be initiated by a political authority within a political system that allows distinctions of justice. Dictatorships (e.g.

Hitler 's regime) or deceptive military actions (e.g. the 1968 US bombing of Cambodia ) are typically considered as violations of this criterion. The importance of this condition is key. Plainly, we cannot have a genuine process of judging a just war within a system that represses the process of genuine justice. A just war must be initiated by a political authority within a political system that allows distinctions of justice".

[ 58 ] Probability of success According to this principle, there must be good grounds for concluding that aims of the just war are achievable.

[ 59 ] This principle emphasizes that mass violence must not be undertaken if it is unlikely to secure the just cause.

[ 60 ] This criterion is to avoid invasion for invasion's sake and links to the proportionality criteria. One cannot invade if there is no chance of actually winning. However, wars are fought with imperfect knowledge, so one must simply be able to make a logical case that one can win; there is no way to know this in advance. These criteria move the conversation from moral and theoretical grounds to practical grounds.

[ 61 ] Essentially, this is meant to gather coalition building and win approval of other state actors.

Last resort The principle of last resort stipulates that all non-violent options must first be exhausted before the use of force can be justified. Diplomatic options, sanctions, and other non-military methods must be attempted or validly ruled out before the engagement of hostilities. Further, in regard to the amount of harm—proportionally—the principle of last resort would support using small intervention forces first and then escalating rather than starting a war with massive force such as carpet bombing or nuclear warfare .

[ 62 ] Just cause The reason for going to war needs to be just and cannot, therefore, be solely for recapturing things taken or punishing people who have done wrong; innocent life must be in imminent danger and intervention must be to protect life. A contemporary view of just cause was expressed in 1993 when the US Catholic Conference said: "Force may be used only to correct a grave, public evil, i.e., aggression or massive violation of the basic human rights of whole populations." Jus in bello [ edit ] Once war has begun, just war theory ( jus in bello ) also directs how combatants are to act or should act: Distinction Just war conduct is governed by the principle of distinction. The acts of war should be directed towards enemy combatants, and not towards non-combatants caught in circumstances that they did not create. The prohibited acts include bombing civilian residential areas that include no legitimate military targets , committing acts of terrorism or reprisal against civilians or prisoners of war (POWs), and attacking neutral targets. Moreover, combatants are not permitted to attack enemy combatants who have surrendered, or who have been captured, or who are injured and not presenting an immediate lethal threat, or who are parachuting from disabled aircraft and are not airborne forces , or who are shipwrecked .

Proportionality Just war conduct is governed by the principle of proportionality. Combatants must make sure that the harm caused to civilians or civilian property is not excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated by an attack on a legitimate military objective . This principle is meant to discern the correct balance between the restriction imposed by a corrective measure and the severity of the nature of the prohibited act.

Military necessity Just war conduct is governed by the principle of military necessity. An attack or action must be intended to help in the defeat of the enemy; it must be an attack on a legitimate military objective , and the harm caused to civilians or civilian property must be proportional and not excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated. Jus in bello allows for military necessity and does not favor a specific justification in allowing for counter-attack recourse.

[ 63 ] This principle is meant to limit excessive and unnecessary death and destruction.

Fair treatment of prisoners of war Enemy combatants who surrendered or who are captured no longer pose a threat. It is therefore wrong to torture them or otherwise mistreat them.

No means malum in se Combatants may not use weapons or other methods of warfare that are considered evil, such as mass rape , forcing enemy combatants to fight against their own side or using weapons whose effects cannot be controlled (e.g., nuclear / biological weapons ).

Ending a war: Jus post bellum [ edit ] In recent years, some theorists, such as Gary Bass, Louis Iasiello and Brian Orend, have proposed a third category within the just war theory. " Jus post bellum is described by some scholars as a new "discipline," or as "a new category of international law currently under construction".

[ 64 ] Jus post bellum [ 65 ] concerns justice after a war, including peace treaties, reconstruction, environmental remediation, war crimes trials, and war reparations.

Jus post bellum has been added to deal with the fact that some hostile actions may take place outside a traditional battlefield.

Jus post bellum governs the justice of war termination and peace agreements, as well as the prosecution of war criminals, and publicly labelled terrorists.The idea has largely been used to help decide what to do with prisoners taken during battle. It is through government labeling and public opinion that people use jus post bellum to justify the pursuit of individuals labeled as terrorists for the safety of the government's state in a modern context. The actual fault lies with the aggressor, and by being the aggressor, they forfeit their rights to honorable treatment by their actions. That theory is used to justify the actions taken by anyone fighting in a war to treat prisoners outside the bounds of war.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Traditionalists and Revisionists [ edit ] There are two altering views related to the just war theory that scholars align with, which are traditionalists and revisionists. The debates between these different viewpoints rest on the moral responsiblites of actors in jus in bello .

[ 68 ] Traditionalists [ edit ] In the just war theory as it pertains to jus in bello , traditionalist scholars view that the two principles, jus ad bellum and jus in bello , are distinct in which actors in war are morally responsible. The traditional view places accountability on leaders who start the war, while soldiers are accountable for actions breaking jus in bello .

[ 69 ] Revisionists [ edit ] Revisionist scholars view that moral responsibility in conduct of war is placed on individual soldiers who participate in war, even if they follow the rules associated with jus in bello . Soldiers that participate in unjust wars are morally responsible. The revisionist view is based on an individual level, rather than on a collective whole.

[ 70 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] See also [ edit ] Appeasement Christian pacifism Cost–benefit analysis Democratic peace theory Deterrence theory Peace and conflict studies Right of conquest Moral equality of combatants Supreme emergency Peace discourse in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict References [ edit ] ^ Cicero, Marcus Tullius; Miller, Walter (1913).

De officiis. With an English translation by Walter Miller . Robarts – University of Toronto. London Heinemann.

^ Fellmeth, Aaron X.; Horwitz, Maurice (2009).

"Bellum iustum" .

Guide to Latin in International Law . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acref/9780195369380.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-536938-0 . Retrieved 27 February 2022 .

^ a b Guthrie, Charles; Quinlan, Michael (2007). "III: The Structure of the Tradition".

Just War: The Just War Tradition: Ethics in Modern Warfare . Bloomsbury. pp.

11– 15.

ISBN 978-0747595571 .

^ Andersen-Rodgers, David; Crawford, Kerry F. (2023).

Human security: theory and action . Peace and security in the 21st century (2nd ed.). Lanham (Md.): Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-1-5381-5992-7 .

^ McHenry, Robert (22 March 2010).

"William James on Peace and War" .

blogs.britannica.com . Britannica Blog. Archived from the original on 31 October 2015 . Retrieved 6 August 2017 .

^ "Just War Theory" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 30 October 2016 .

^ Lazar, Seth (2017).

"Just War Theory: Revisionists Versus Traditionalists" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

20 (1): 37– 54.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-060314-112706 .

^ Lazar, Seth (2020).

"War" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 13 June 2023 .

^ a b Cox, Rory (2017). "Expanding the History of the Just War: The Ethics of War in Ancient Egypt".

International Studies Quarterly .

61 (2): 371.

doi : 10.1093/isq/sqx009 .

hdl : 10023/17848 .

^ Paul Robinson (2017).

Just War in Comparative Perspective . Routledge.

ISBN 9781351924528 .

^ Syan, Hardip Singh (2013).

Sikh Militancy in the Seventeenth Century: Religious Violence in Mughal and Early Modern India . London & New York: I.B.Tauris. pp.

3– 4, 252.

ISBN 9781780762500 . Retrieved 15 September 2019 .

^ Louis E. Fenech; W. H. McLeod (2014).

Historical Dictionary of Sikhism . Rowman & Littlefield. pp.

99– 100.

ISBN 9781442236011 .

^ Kwon, David (2023).

"A Confucian Contribution to the Catholic Just War Tradition" .

Journal of Interreligious Studies .

^ Friday, Karl F.

(2004).

Samurai, Warfare and the State in Early Medieval Japan . Routledge. pp.

21– 22.

ISBN 9781134330225 .

^ Gregory Raymond, The Greco-Roman Roots of the Western Just War Tradition , Routledge 2010.

^ Rory Cox, "The Ethics of War up to Thomas Aquinas" in (eds. Lazar & Frowe) The Oxford Handbook of Ethics of War , Oxford 2018.

^ Cian O'Driscoll, "Rewriting the Just War Tradition: Just War in Classical Greek Political Thought and Practice," International Studies Quarterly (2015).

^ Aristotle.

"Politics, Book 7" .

Perseus Digital Library .

^ Capelle, Wilhelm (2020).

History of Greek philosophy . De Gruyter. p. 358.

ISBN 9783112318744 .

^ Livy 9.1.10; Cicero , Divinatio in Caecilium 63; De provinciis consularibus 4; Ad Atticum VII 14, 3; IX 19, 1; Pro rege Deiotauro 13; De officiis I 36; Philippicae XI 37; XIII 35; De re publica II 31; III 35; Isidore of Seville , Origines XVIII 1, 2; Modestinus , Libro I regolarum = Digesta I 3, 40; E. Badian , Roman Imperialism in the Late Republic (Ithaca 1968, 2nd ed.), p.11.

^ William Warde Fowler , The Roman Festivals of the Period of the Republic (London 1925), pp. 33ff.; M. Kaser, Das altroemische Ius (Goettingen 1949), pp. 22ff; P. Catalano, Linee del sistema sovrannazionale romano (Torino 1965), pp. 14ff.; W. V. Harris, War and imperialism in Republican Rome, 327-70 B.C.

(Oxford 1979), pp. 161 ff.

^ Livy 1.32; 31.8.3; 36.3.9 ^ Cicero, De officiis 3.17.69; Marcia L. Colish , The Stoic Tradition from Antiquity to the Early Middle Ages (Brill, 1980), p. 150.

^ Christians and War: Augustine of Hippo and the "Just War theory" Archived 28 November 2006 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Forgiveness What is a Just War?" .

Bitesize .

BBC . 27 September 2024. Archived from the original on 13 March 2023 . Retrieved 11 May 2020 .

^ Robert L. Holmes (September 2001).

"A Time For War?" .

ChristianityToday.com . Retrieved 25 April 2015 .

^ a b "City of God" . Archived from the original on 25 July 2013 . Retrieved 25 April 2015 .

^ City of God, 22.6, quoted in Lockwood, Thornton.

"Cicero's Philosophy of Just War" .

PhilArchive . Retrieved 28 July 2023 .

The text seems from a missing fragment of Cicero 's dialog On the Republic , by the Laelius character.

^ Augustine: Political and Social Philosophy , §3-c "War and Peace – The Just War" ^ Etymologies 18.1.2–3, quoted in Lockwood, Thornton.

"Cicero's Philosophy of Just War" .

PhilArchive . Retrieved 28 July 2023 .

. The text seems from a missing fragment of Cicero 's dialog On the Republic , by the Laelius character.

^ a b Gregory M. Reichberg (2017).

Thomas Aquinas on War and Peace . Cambridge University Press. p. viii.

ISBN 9781107019904 .

^ Gregory M. Reichberg (2017).

Thomas Aquinas on War and Peace . Cambridge University Press. p. vii.

ISBN 9781107019904 .

^ Aquinas, Thomas.

Summa Theologica . Christian Classics Ethereal Library. pp. pt. II, sec. 2, q. 40, a. 1.

^ Seth Lazar; Helen Frowe, eds. (2018).

The Oxford Handbook of Ethics of War . Oxford University Press. p. 114.

ISBN 9780199943418 .

^ Seth Lazar; Helen Frowe, eds. (2018).

The Oxford Handbook of Ethics of War . Oxford University Press. p. 115.

ISBN 9780199943418 .

^ MacKenzie, Kathleen.

"John Colet of Oxford" (PDF) .

Dalhousie Review .

21 (1): 15– 28 . Retrieved 28 July 2023 .

^ Mews, Stuart. "Davidson, Randall Thomas, Baron Davidson of Lambeth (1848–1930), Archbishop of Canterbury", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , Oxford University Press , 2011.

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church (2 ed.). Liberia Editrice Vaticana. 2000.

ISBN 1574551108 . Retrieved 25 April 2015 .

^ "Just-War Theory, Catholic Morality, And The Response To International Terrorism" . Retrieved 11 May 2020 .

^ a b "Compendium of the Social Doctrine of the Church" . Retrieved 10 April 2024 .

^ Saunders, William (19 October 2000).

"The Church's Just War Theory" .

Catholic Education Resource Center . Retrieved 10 May 2020 .

^ Knorre, Boris; Zygmont, Aleksei (2019).

" 'Militant Piety in 21st-Century Orthodox Christianity: Return to Classical Traditions or Formation of a New Theology of War?" .

Religions .

11 : 2.

doi : 10.3390/rel11010002 .

Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License .

^ "Social Concepts, Chapter VIII" . Retrieved 23 November 2024 .

^ John Dear (23 February 2010).

"Ben Salmon and the Army of Peace" .

National Catholic Reporter .

^ C. T. Bridgeman (1962).

A History of the Parish of Trinity Church in the City of New York: The rectorship of Dr. William Thomas Manning 1908 to 1921 . p. 256.

^ David, Saul (1 October 2009).

"Ethics of War" .

The Encyclopedia of War from Ancient Egypt to Iraq . Dorling Kindersley Limited. p. 345.

ISBN 978-1-4053-4778-5 .

^ Victor M. Salas Jr. (2012).

"Francisco de Vitoria on the Ius Gentium and the American Indios" (PDF) .

Ave Maria Law Review . Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 December 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ Gutman R, Rieff D.

Crimes of War : What the Public Should Know . New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company ; 1999 ^ "JustWarTheory.com" . JustWarTheory.com. Archived from the original on 6 March 2019 . Retrieved 16 March 2010 .

^ "Home > Publications >" . Eppc.org. 1 September 1998. Archived from the original on 9 May 2009 . Retrieved 16 March 2010 .

^ Genrikh Antonovich Leer (1869).

Opyt kritiko-istoricheskogo issledovaniya zakonov isskusstva vedeniya voyny Опыт критико-исторического исследования законов искусства ведения войны [ Critico-historical research into the laws of the art of the conduct of war ]. Рипол Классик. p. 1ff.

ISBN 9785458055901 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Wollenberg, Erich.

"Just Wars in the Light of Marxism" . Marxists Internet Archive.

^ Lenin, Vladimir.

"Socialism and War, ch. 1" . Marxists Internet Archive.

^ Murray N. Rothbard.

"Just War" .

lewrockwell.com . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ Smith, Jonathan R.

"Rethinking the Crusades" . Catholic Education Resource Center. Archived from the original on 23 July 2001.

^ Childress, James F.

(1978). "Just-War Theories: The Bases, Interrelations, Priorities, and Functions of Their Criteria".

Theological Studies .

39 (3): 427– 445.

doi : 10.1177/004056397803900302 .

S2CID 159493143 .

^ Buchanan, Allen (January 2006).

"Institutionalizing the Just War" .

Philosophy and Public Affairs .

34 (1): 2– 38.

doi : 10.1111/j.1088-4963.2006.00051.x .

ISSN 0048-3915 .

^ "Just War Theory" . Archived from the original on 7 September 2013 . Retrieved 25 April 2015 .

^ Don Hubert and Thomas G. Weiss et al. "The Responsibility to Protect: Supplementary Volume to the Report of the International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty". (Canada: International Development Research Centre, 2001) ^ "War (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)" .

plato.stanford.edu . Retrieved 27 August 2014 .

^ Seybolt, Taylor B. (January 2007).

Humanitarian Military Intervention: The Conditions for Success and Failure . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-925243-5 .

^ "Just War Theory and the Last of Last Resort – Ethics & International Affairs" .

Ethics & International Affairs . 12 June 2015. Archived from the original on 21 June 2015 . Retrieved 2 April 2017 .

^ Mégret, Frédéric (2006).

" Jus in Bello and Jus ad Bellum " .

Proceedings of the Asil Annual Meeting .

100 : 121– 123.

doi : 10.1017/S0272503700024022 .

ISSN 0272-5037 .

JSTOR 25660075 .

^ Brabandere, Eric De (February 2014). "The Concept of Jus Post Bellum in International Law: A Normative Critique".

7 The Concept of Jus Post Bellum in International Law: A Normative Critique .

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199685899.003.0008 .

ISBN 978-0-19-968589-9 . Retrieved 20 September 2024 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ Easterday, Jenifer (2014). "Exploring the Normative Foundations of Jus Post Bellum: An Introduction". In Easterday, Jennifer S.; Iverson, Jens; Stahn, Carsten (eds.).

Exploring the Normative Foundations of Jus Post Bellum . Oxford University Press. pp.

1– 12.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199685899.003.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-968589-9 . Retrieved 27 October 2024 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ Thom Brooks (October 2012).

Studies in Moral philosophy: Just War Theory . Brill. p. 187.

ISBN 978-9004228504 .

^ David Kwon (May 2023).

Justice after War: Jus Post Bellum in the 21st Century . Catholic University of American Press.

ISBN 978-0813236513 .

^ a b Pattison, James (2018).

"The Case for the Nonideal Morality of War: Beyond Revisionism versus Traditionalism in Just War Theory" .

Political Theory .

46 (2): 242– 268.

doi : 10.1177/0090591716669394 .

ISSN 0090-5917 .

JSTOR 26419464 .

^ a b Sagan, Scott D.; Valentino, Benjamin A. (2019).

"Just War and Unjust Soldiers: American Public Opinion on the Moral Equality of Combatants" .

Ethics & International Affairs .

33 (4): 411– 444.

doi : 10.1017/s0892679419000431 .

ISSN 0892-6794 .

^ Benestad, J. Brian (9 August 2012).

Church, State, and Society . Catholic University of America Press.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt3fgpjc .

ISBN 978-0-8132-1923-3 .

Further reading [ edit ] This " further reading " section may need cleanup .

Please read the editing guide and help improve the section.

( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Benson, Richard.

"The Just War Theory: A Traditional Catholic Moral View" , The Tidings (2006). Showing the Catholic view in three points, including John Paul II 's position concerning war.

Blattberg, Charles.

Taking War Seriously . A critique of just war theory.

Brough, Michael W., John W. Lango, Harry van der Linden, eds., Rethinking the Just War Tradition (Albany, NY: SUNY Press , 2007). Discusses the contemporary relevance of just war theory. Offers an annotated bibliography of current writings on just war theory.

Brunsletter, D., & D. O'Driscoll, Just war thinkers from Cicero to the 21st century (Routledge, 2017).

Butler, Paul (2002–2003).

"By Any Means Necessary: Using Violence and Subversion to Change Unjust Law" .

UCLA Law Review .

50 : 721 – via HeinOnline.

Churchman, David.

Why we fight: the origins, nature, and management of human conflict (University Press of America, 2013) online .

Crawford, Neta. "Just War Theory and the US Countertenor War", Perspectives on Politics 1(1), 2003.

online Elshtain, Jean Bethke, ed.

Just war theory (NYU Press, 1992) online .

Evans, Mark (editor) Just War Theory: A Reappraisal ( Edinburgh University Press , 2005) Fotion, Nicholas .

War and Ethics (London, New York: Continuum , 2007).

ISBN 0-8264-9260-6 . A defence of an updated form of just war theory.

Heindel, Max .

The Rosicrucian Philosophy in Questions and Answers – Volume II ( The Philosophy of War , World War I reference , ed. 1918), ISBN 0-911274-90-1 (Describing a philosophy of war and just war concepts from the point of view of his Rosicrucian Fellowship ) Gutbrod, Hans.

Russia's Recent Invasion of Ukraine and Just War Theory ( "Global Policy Journal" , March 2022); applies the concept to Russia's February 2022 invasion of Ukraine.

Holmes, Robert L.

On War and Morality (Princeton University Press, 1989.

[ 1 ] Khawaja, Irfan. Review of Larry May, War Crimes and Just War , in Democratiya 10, ( [1] ), an extended critique of just war theory.

Kwon, David.

Justice after War: Jus Post Bellum in the 21st Century (Washington, D.C., Catholic University of America Press, 2023).

ISBN 978-0-813236-51-3 MacDonald, David Roberts.

Padre E. C. Crosse and 'the Devonshire Epitaph': The Astonishing Story of One Man at the Battle of the Somme (with Antecedents to Today's 'Just War' Dialogue) , 2007 Cloverdale Books , South Bend.

ISBN 978-1-929569-45-8 McMahan, Jeff. "Just Cause for War," Ethics and International Affairs , 2005.

Nájera, Luna. "Myth and Prophecy in Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda's Crusading "Exhortación" Archived 11 March 2011 at the Wayback Machine , in Bulletin for Spanish and Portuguese Historical Studies , 35:1 (2011). Discusses Sepúlveda 's theories of war in relation to the war against the Ottoman Turks.

Nardin, Terry, ed.

The ethics of war and peace: Religious and secular perspectives (Princeton University Press, 1998) online O'Donovan, Oliver .

The Just War Revisited (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003).

Steinhoff, Uwe.

On the Ethics of War and Terrorism (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2007). Covers the basics and some of the most controversial current debates.

Walzer, Michael .

Arguing about War , (Yale University Press, 2004).

ISBN 978-0-300-10978-8 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Just war theory .

"Just war theory" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Catholic Teaching Concerning Just War at Catholicism.org "Just War" In Our Time , BBC Radio 4 discussion with John Keane and Niall Ferguson (3 June 1999) v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject v t e Anti-war and peace movement Peace advocates Anti-nuclear organizations Anti-war movement Anti-war organizations Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions Coalition of Women for Peace Code Pink Conscientious objectors Counterculture Culture of Peace ECOPEACE Party Greenham Common Women's Peace Camp Iraq War resisters in Canada List of pacifist organisations List of peace activists New Socialist Party of Japan Pacifist Socialist Party Peace and conflict studies Peace camp Peace churches Peace commission Peace conference Peace congress Peace education Peace movement Peace psychology Peace treaty Peaceworker React, Include, Recycle Social Democratic Party (Japan) Unity The Women's Peace Crusade War resisters Women's International League for Peace and Freedom Ideologies Ahimsa Anarchism Anarcho-pacifism Anarcho-punks Christian anarchism Anti-imperialism Anti-nuclear movement Antimilitarism Appeasement Christian pacifism Deterrence theory Direct action Finvenkismo Green politics Hippie Isolationism Modern-war pacifism Non-interventionism Nonkilling Nonviolence Pacificism Pacifism Peace Satyagraha Soviet influence on the peace movement Testimony of peace World peace Media and cultural Art Books Concert Yutel for Peace Dances of Universal Peace Festival for Peace Films Imagine Piano Peace Project International Day of Non-Violence International Day of Peace Dialogue Among Civilizations List of peace prizes List of places named Peace Monuments and memorials Mother's Day Proclamation Nobel Peace Prize Concert Museums Peace & Love (festival) Peace journalism Peace News Promoting Enduring Peace Peace One Day Plays Promoting Enduring Peace Show of Peace Concert Songs Symbols The Non-Violence Project University for Peace World Peace Bell Association Japanese Peace Bell Women in Black World March for Peace and Nonviolence Slogans and tactics Bed-in Central Park be-ins Civil disobedience Conflict resolution Counter-recruitment De-escalation Demilitarisation Department of Peace Desertion Draft evasion Die-in Economic sanctions Flower power Global Day of Action on Military Spending Human Be-In Lesson of Munich " Make love, not war " Non-aggression principle Nonviolent resistance Non Violent Resistance (psychological intervention) Peace walk Peacebuilding Refusal to serve in the Israel Defense Forces " Soldiers are murderers " Swords to ploughshares Teach-in " The whole world is watching " Third Party Non-violent Intervention " Turn the other cheek " " Violence begets violence " War tax resisters Opposition to specific wars or their aspects War of 1812 ( UK ; US ) American Civil War Second Boer War World War I World War II Vietnam War list of protests War on Terror Iraq War Criticism Protests Afghanistan War Military action in Iran Sri Lankan Civil War 2011 intervention in Libya Anti-war protests in Russia (2014) 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine in Russia in Russian Far East Gaza War in the U.S.

Calls for a ceasefire Landmines Military taxation Nuclear disarmament International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons Nuclear weapons convention Countries Canada Costa Rica Germany Israel Japan Netherlands Spain Sudan Switzerland United Kingdom United States Peacebuilding in Jammu and Kashmir Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX ^ Holmes, Robert L. (14 July 2014).

On War and Morality . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4008-6014-2 .

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐9xq98
Cached time: 20250814215219
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.919 seconds
Real time usage: 1.091 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5379/1000000
Revision size: 58702/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 237717/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5311/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 265328/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.552/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19410028/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  903.356      1 -total
 41.35%  373.517      1 Template:Reflist
 19.35%  174.757     25 Template:Cite_book
 10.22%   92.329     22 Template:Cite_web
  8.87%   80.171      1 Template:Langx
  8.69%   78.500      1 Template:War
  8.46%   76.432      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.75%   60.938     12 Template:Cite_journal
  6.16%   55.660      1 Template:Short_description
  5.43%   49.018      2 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:173505:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215219 and revision id 1296211934. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Just_war_theory&oldid=1296211934 " Categories : Military ethics Catholic social teaching Catholic theology and doctrine Just war theory Thomas Aquinas Christianity and violence Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2025 Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia spam cleanup from April 2024 Wikipedia further reading cleanup Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 18 June 2025, at 15:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Just war theory 29 languages Add topic

