Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In the Western world Toggle In the Western world subsection 1.1 Paganism in Europe 1.2 Ancient Greece 1.3 Native American traditions 2 In the Eastern world Toggle In the Eastern world subsection 2.1 Hinduism 2.2 Shintoism in Japan 2.3 Buddhism and Taoism 3 Criticism 4 Forms and aspects of nature worship 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Nature worship 20 languages বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Malagasy 日本語 Português Русский Shqip Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Worship of the nature spirits This article is about religions which worship nature. For other uses, see Naturism (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Naturalism (disambiguation) or Naturism .

Detail from Religion by Charles Sprague Pearce depicting nature worship (1896) Nature worship , also called naturism [ 1 ] or physiolatry , [ 2 ] is any of a variety of religious, spiritual and devotional practices that focus on the worship of a nature deity , considered to be behind the natural phenomena visible throughout nature .

[ 3 ] A nature deity can be in charge of nature, a place, a biotope , the biosphere , the cosmos , or the universe . Nature worship is often considered the primitive source of modern religious beliefs [ 4 ] [ 5 ] and can be found in animism , pantheism , panentheism , polytheism , deism , totemism , shamanism , Taoism , [ 6 ] Hinduism , some theism and paganism including Wicca .

[ 7 ] Common to most forms of nature worship is a spiritual focus on the individual's connection and influence on some aspects of the natural world and reverence towards it.

[ 8 ] Due to their admiration of nature, the works of Edmund Spenser , Anthony Ashley-Cooper and Carl Linnaeus were viewed as nature worship.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] In the Western world [ edit ] Paganism in Europe [ edit ] In ancient European paganism, the deification of natural forces was central to religious life.

[ 13 ] The Celts and Germanic tribes believed that gods and spirits resided in natural elements such as trees, rivers, and mountains. For example, Thor was associated with thunder, and his hammer, Mjolnir , was believed to control storms and lightning. Similarly, the goddess Nerthus was linked to fertility and the earth, with rituals involving plowing sacred fields to ensure a bountiful harvest.

Manannán mac Lir , the Celtic sea god, sculpture by John Sutton at Gortmore The reverence for these deified natural forces was expressed through various rituals, including food offerings, sacrifices, and festivals. Sacred groves were considered the dwelling places of these deities, and entering such spaces was often restricted to priests or those performing rituals.

Ancient Greece [ edit ] In ancient Greece, many natural forces were personified and worshipped as gods and goddesses.

[ 14 ] For example, Poseidon was the god of the sea, controlling storms, earthquakes, and horses.

Demeter , the goddess of agriculture, was believed to be responsible for the fertility of the earth and the changing seasons. Rituals dedicated to these deities often included offerings, sacrifices, and festivals like the Eleusinian Mysteries , which celebrated the cyclical nature of life, death, and rebirth in alignment with the agricultural calendar.

The deification of natural forces in Greek religion reflects the deep connection between humans and the environment, where natural phenomena were seen as manifestations of divine power that needed to be respected and honored through ritual practices.

Sun god Helios in Altes Museum , an example of Heliolatry Native American traditions [ edit ] Among Native American tribes , natural forces were often deified and revered as powerful spiritual beings. The Great Spirit , a central figure in many Native American belief systems, was considered the creator and sustainer of all life, with control over the natural world. Specific tribes also worshipped particular natural forces, such as the Iroquois' reverence for Thunder Beings, who were believed to bring rain and fertility to the land.

Rituals to honor these deities included dances, songs, and offerings. The Sun Dance , practiced by several Plains tribes, was a key ritual that involved fasting, dancing, and other ceremonies to seek the favor of the sun, considered a powerful life-giving force.

In the Eastern world [ edit ] Hinduism [ edit ] In Hinduism, the deification of natural forces is evident in the worship of gods and goddesses associated with various elements of nature. Agni, the god of fire, is one of the most ancient and revered deities, representing the vital force of life and the medium through which offerings are made to other gods. Indra, the god of rain and thunderstorms, is another example of a natural force personified as a deity, with rituals performed to invoke his blessings for rainfall and agricultural prosperity.

Agni , Hindu God of Fire, Stone statue from Pratihara,10th Century, A.D., Uttar Pradesh. Presently kept at the National Museum of India , India The concept of Prakriti , or nature, in Hindu philosophy further emphasizes the divine nature of the natural world. Rituals often involve offerings to rivers, trees, and mountains, which are seen as embodiments of the divine feminine energy, or Shakti .

Shintoism in Japan [ edit ] Shinto, the indigenous religion of Japan, is fundamentally a form of nature worship where natural forces are deified as kami (spirits). The sun goddess Amaterasu is the most revered kami in Shinto, symbolizing life, growth, and the continuity of the Japanese nation. Mountains like Mount Fuji are also considered sacred, believed to be the dwelling places of powerful kami .

Shinto rituals often involve purification rites, offerings of food and sake, and festivals like Matsuri that celebrate the natural forces and ensure their continued favor.

Buddhism and Taoism [ edit ] In Mahayana Buddhism , nature worship is reflected in the reverence for sacred mountains and trees, such as the Bodhi tree , under which the Buddha attained enlightenment.

Taoism , with its focus on harmony with the Tao (the natural way), venerates natural landscapes and elements as expressions of the divine.

Laozi , the founder of Taoism, taught that the natural world and its forces should be revered as manifestations of the Tao, leading to the deification of mountains, rivers, and other natural elements.

Criticism [ edit ] English historian, Ronald Hutton , has been critical of the antiquity of Nature Worship since at least 1998 until the present.  He has argued that the gods of Ancient Mediterranean were not Nature Deities of any sort; rather, they were gods of "civilization and human activity," meanwhile the "Earth-Mother goddesses" are characterized by him as mere literary figures as opposed to deities, because he believes they lack any temples dedicated to them or a priesthood to serve them.  He strongly juxtaposes this view by differentiating ancient pagans from Neopagans and Wiccans who profess to be nature worshippers as an essential component of their faith, which he believes is unlike any other in recorded history.

[ 15 ] Despite having been charged by New Zealand Wiccan, Ben Whitmore, with having disenfranchised those Neopagans "who feel kinship and connection" with the gods and pagans of the Ancient World, [ 16 ] Prof. Hutton has reprised these views, virtually verbatim, in the second edition of his book, Triumph of the Moon .

[ 17 ] Forms and aspects of nature worship [ edit ] Animal worship – Glorification of animal deities Fire worship – Worship or deification of fire Gaia philosophy – Broadly inclusive term Gavari – 40-day long festival held in the Mewar region of Rajasthan, India Green Man – Architectural motif Heliolatry – Sky deity who represents the Sun Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Holy well – Well or spring revered in a religious context Megalith – Large stone used to build a structure or monument Mountain worship – Faiths which regard mountains as objects of worship Naturalistic pantheism – Form of pantheism Naturalistic spirituality – Combined philosophy of spirituality and naturalism Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Sacred groves – Grove of trees of special religious importance to a particular culture Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Sacred herbs Sacred mountains – Mountains central to certain religions Selenolatry – Deity that represents the Moon Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Sky deity – Deity associated with the sky Standing stone – Large upright standing stone Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Star worship – Worship of stars and other heavenly bodies as deities Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Stone circle – Ring of standing stones Thunder god Totem – Emblem of a group of people Tree worship – Significance of trees in religion and folklore Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Water deity See also [ edit ] See also: List of nature deities Ecospirituality – Spirituality expressed through ecology and environmental activism Earth religion – Religion venerating the Earth and nature Hinduism – Indian religion Faunus – Roman deity of the countryside Folk religion – Expressions of religion distinct from the doctrines of organized religion Goddess worship (disambiguation) Natural religion – Concept in religious anthropology Neopaganism – Religions shaped by historical paganism Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Pan (god) – Ancient Greek god of the wilds, shepherds, and flocks Pantheism – Belief that God and reality are identical Panentheism – Belief that the divine pervades all of space and time and also extends beyond it Shamanism – Religious practice Taoism – Religious and philosophical tradition White magic – Magic used for selfless purposes Wildlife totemization – Emblem of a group of people Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets References [ edit ] ^ Oxford English Dictionary ^ "Definition of PHYSIOLATRY" .

Merriam-Webster . 2022-10-13 . Retrieved 2022-10-13 .

^ A Dictionary of Religion and Ethics edited by Shailer Mathews, Gerald Birney Smith, p 305 ^ Uversa Press (2003).

The Urantia Book . New York: Fifth Epochal Fellowship. pp.

805– 810.

ISBN 0965197220 .

^ Weir, James (16 July 2008).

"Lust and Religion" (eBook) .

^ Tzu, Chuang Tzu (2010).

The Tao of Nature (1st ed.). United kingdom: Penguin UK. pp.

25– 100.

ISBN 9780141192741 .

^ Sanders, C. (2009).

Wicca's Charm: Understanding the Spiritual Hunger Behind the Rise of Modern Witchcraft and Pagan Spirituality . Crown Publishing Group. p. 13.

ISBN 978-0-307-55109-2 . Retrieved 2023-02-27 .

^ The New International Encyclopædia , Volume 14 edited by Daniel Coit Gilman, Harry Thurston Peck, Frank Moore Colby, pp 288–289 ^ Wesleyan-Methodist Magazine: Being a Continuation of the Arminian Or Methodist Magazine First Publ. by John Wesley . 1778. p. 914 . Retrieved 2022-10-13 .

^ Gill, S. (2006).

William Wordsworth's The Prelude: A Casebook . Casebooks in Criticism. OUP USA. p. 181.

ISBN 978-0-19-518091-6 . Retrieved 2022-10-13 .

^ Glickman, S. (2000).

The Picturesque and the Sublime: A Poetics of the Canadian Landscape . McGill-Queen's University Press. p. 8.

ISBN 978-0-7735-2135-3 . Retrieved 2023-02-26 .

^ Test, E.M.L. (2019).

Sacred Seeds: New World Plants in Early Modern English Literature . Early Modern Cultural Studies. University of Nebraska Press. p. 111.

ISBN 978-1-4962-1289-4 . Retrieved 2023-02-26 .

^ M, York (2003).

Pagan Theology: Paganism as a World Religion . New York University Press.

^ Burkert, W (1985).

Greek Religion: Archaic and Classical . Harvard University Press.

^ Hutton, Ronald.  "The Discovery of the Modern Goddess." Nature Religion Today: Paganism in the Modern World .  Eds. Joanne Pearson, Richard H. Roberts and Geoffrey Samuel.  Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1998: p.89.

^ Whitmore, Ben.

Trials of the Moon: Reopening the Case for Historical Witchcraft .  Aukland: Briar Books, 2010: p. 2-3.

^ Hutton, Ronald.

The Triumph of the Moon: A History of Modern Pagan Witchcraft .  Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2019: p. 33.

v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐s445b
Cached time: 20250818075758
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.678 seconds
Real time usage: 0.990 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6987/1000000
Revision size: 12317/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 232138/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1884/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 56441/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.418/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26113467/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  778.911      1 -total
 50.06%  389.893     37 Template:Anli
 17.49%  136.250      1 Template:Reflist
 13.65%  106.343      1 Template:Religion_topics
 13.25%  103.215      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.90%   69.322      2 Template:Cite_web
  7.60%   59.220      1 Template:Short_description
  6.49%   50.538      9 Template:Cite_book
  4.60%   35.843      1 Template:Authority_control
  4.50%   35.067      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1548703:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818075758 and revision id 1293782093. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nature_worship&oldid=1293782093 " Categories : Nature and religion Spirituality Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 16:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nature worship 20 languages Add topic

