Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Usages in different Communions Toggle Usages in different Communions subsection 1.1 Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox 1.1.1 Assembly 1.2 Catholic 1.2.1 Synod of Bishops 1.2.2 Councils 1.2.3 Synods 1.2.4 Episcopal conferences 1.3 Anglican 1.4 Lutheran 1.5 Presbyterian 1.6 Reformed 1.7 Church of Christ in Congo 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References 5 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 5.1 Collections of synodal decrees 5.2 Other 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Synod 53 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Council of a church, convened to resolve issues of doctrine or administration For the recurring astronomical alignments of celestial bodies, or "synodic period", see Orbital period . For the consensus algorithm for fault tolerant distributed systems, see Paxos (computer science) .

Diocesan synod in Kraków in 1643 presided by Bishop Piotr Gembicki Part of a series on Christianity Jesus Christ Nativity Baptism Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Ascension Bible Foundations Old Testament New Testament Gospel Canon Church Creed New Covenant Theology God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Apologetics Baptism Christology History of theology Mission Salvation Universalism History Tradition Apostles Peter Paul Mary Early Christianity Church Fathers Constantine Councils Augustine Ignatius East–West Schism Crusades Aquinas Reformation Luther Denominations (full list) Nicene Catholic Latin Eastern Old Catholic Palmarian Catholic Independent Catholic Sedevacantism Eastern Orthodox Oriental Orthodox Church of the East Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Free Evangelical Lutheran Methodist Moravian [Hussite] Pentecostal Plymouth Brethren Quaker Reformed United Protestant Waldensian Non-denominational Christianity Restorationist Christadelphians Iglesia ni Cristo Irvingians Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saints The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Members Church of God International The New Church (Swedenborgian) Unitarians and Universalists Related topics Civilization Criticism Culture Ecumenism Glossary Index Liturgy Other religions Prayer Sermon Symbolism Worship Glossary Index Outline Christianity portal v t e A synod ( / ˈ s ɪ n ə d / ) is a council of a Christian denomination , usually convened to decide an issue of doctrine, administration or application. The word synod comes from the Ancient Greek σύνοδος ( synodos ) ' assembly, meeting ' ; the term is analogous with the Latin word concilium ' council ' . Originally, synods were meetings of bishops , and the word is still used in that sense in Catholicism , [ citation needed ] Oriental Orthodoxy and Eastern Orthodoxy . In modern usage, the word often refers to the governing body of a particular church, whether its members are meeting or not. It is also sometimes used to refer to a church that is governed by a synod.

Sometimes the phrase "general synod" or "general council" refers to an ecumenical council . The word synod also refers to the standing council of high-ranking bishops governing some of the autocephalous Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches. Similarly, the day-to-day governance of patriarchal and major archiepiscopal Eastern Catholic Churches is entrusted to a permanent synod.

Usages in different Communions [ edit ] Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox [ edit ] Holy Sobor of 1917, following the election of Saint Tikhon as Patriarch of Moscow In Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches, synods of bishops are meetings of bishops within each autonomous Church and are the primary vehicle for the election of bishops and the establishment of inter-diocesan ecclesiastical laws.

A sobor ( Church Slavonic : съборъ , romanized: sŭborŭ , lit.

'assembly') is a formal gathering or council of bishops together with other clerical and lay delegates representing the church to deal with matters of faith, morality, rite, and canonical and cultural life.

[ 1 ] The synod in the Western churches is similar, but it is distinguished by being usually limited to an assembly of bishops.

[ 1 ] The term is found among those Eastern Orthodox Churches that use Slavic languages (the Russian , Ukrainian , Bulgarian , Serbian and Macedonian Orthodox Churches ), along with the Romanian Orthodox Church .

Assembly [ edit ] The presence of clerical and lay delegates is for the purpose of discerning the consensus of the church on important matters; however, the bishops form an upper house of the sobor, and the laity cannot overrule their decisions.

[ citation needed ] Kievan Rus' chronicles record the first known East Slavic church sobor as having taken place in Kiev in 1051. Sobors were convened periodically from then on; one notable assembly held in 1415 formed a separate metropoly for the church in the Grand Duchy of Lithuanian lands.

[ 1 ] Important sobors in the history of the Russian Orthodox Church are: Vladimir's Sobor in 1276 The Stoglavy Sobor ( Sobor of a Hundred Chapters ) in 1551 The Moscow Sobor of 1666–1667 , to deal with disputes surrounding the ecclesiastical reforms of Patriarch Nikon The All-Russian Sobor of 1917, which restored the Moscow Patriarchate and elected Saint Tikhon as the first modern Patriarch of Moscow The All-Russian Sobor of 1988, called on the 1000th anniversary of the Baptism of Rus' to guide the church in the wake of glasnost and the loosening of the Soviet grip over the church A bishop may also call a sobor for his diocese , which again would have delegates from the clergy, monasteries and parishes of his diocese, to discuss important matters. Such diocesan sobors may be held annually or only occasionally.

[ citation needed ] Catholic [ edit ] See also: Synodality In Roman Catholic usage, synod and council are theoretically synonymous as they are of Greek and Latin origins, respectively, both meaning an authoritative meeting of bishops for the purpose of church administration in the areas of teaching (faith and morals) or governance (church discipline or law). However, in modern use, synod and council are applied to specific categories of such meetings and so do not really overlap.  A synod generally meets every three years and is thus designated an "Ordinary General Assembly". However, "Extraordinary" synods can be called to deal with specific situations. There are also "Special" synods for the Church in a specific geographic area such as the one held November 16 – December 12, 1997, for the Church in America.

Synod of Bishops [ edit ] Main article: Synod of Bishops (Catholic) While the words "synod" and "council" usually refer to a transitory meeting, the term "Synod of Bishops" or "Synod of the Bishops", [ note 1 ] is also applied to a permanent [ 2 ] [ 3 ] body established in 1965 as an advisory body of the pope. It holds assemblies at which bishops and religious superiors, elected by bishops conferences or the Union of Superiors General or appointed by the Pope vote on proposals (" propositiones ") to present for the pope's consideration, and which in practice the pope uses as the basis of "post-synodal apostolic exhortations" on the themes discussed. While an assembly of the Synod of Bishops thus expresses its collective wishes, it does not issue decrees, unless in certain cases the pope authorizes it to do so, and even then an assembly's decision requires ratification by the pope.

[ 4 ] The pope serves as president of an assembly or appoints the president, determines the agenda, and summons, suspends, and dissolves the assembly.

Modern Catholic synod themes: X "The Bishop: Servant of the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST for the hope of the world" 1998 XI "The Eucharist: Source and Summit of the Life and Mission of the Church" 2005 XII "The Word of God in the Life and Mission of the Church" 2008 XIII "New Evangelisation for the Transmission of the Christian Faith" 2012 Extraordinary General "The Pastoral Challenges of the Family in the Context of Evangelization" 2014 Councils [ edit ] Meetings of bishops in the Roman empire are known from the mid-third century and already numbered twenty by the time of the First Council of Nicaea (325). Thereafter they continued by the hundreds into the sixth century. Those authorized by an emperor and often attended by him came to be called ecumenical, meaning throughout the world (as the world was thought of in Western terms).

[ 5 ] Today, Council in Roman Catholic canon law typically refers to an irregular meeting of the entire episcopate of a nation, region, or the world for the purpose of legislation with binding force.  Those contemplated in canon law are the following: An ecumenical council is an irregular meeting of the entire episcopate in communion with the pope and is, along with the pope, the highest legislative authority of the universal Church (can. 336).  The pope alone has the right to convoke, suspend, and dissolve an ecumenical council; he also presides over it or chooses someone else to do so and determines the agenda (can. 338).  The vacancy of the Holy See automatically suspends an ecumenical council.  Laws or teachings issued by an ecumenical council require the confirmation of the pope, who alone has the right to promulgate them (can. 341).  The role of the pope in an ecumenical council is a distinct feature of the Catholic Church.

Plenary councils , which are meetings of the entire episcopate of a nation (including a nation that is only one ecclesiastical province ), are convoked by the national episcopal conference .

Provincial councils , which consist of the bishops of an ecclesiastical province smaller than a nation, are convoked by the metropolitan with consent of a majority of the suffragan bishops .

Plenary and provincial councils are categorized as particular councils.  A particular council is composed of all the bishops of the territory (including coadjutors and auxiliaries) as well as other ecclesiastical ordinaries who head particular churches in the territory (such as territorial abbots and vicars apostolic ). Each of these members has a vote on council legislation.  Additionally, the following persons by law are part of particular councils but only participate in an advisory capacity: vicars general and episcopal , presidents of Catholic universities, deans of Catholic departments of theology and canon law, some major superiors elected by all the major superiors in the territory, some rectors of seminaries elected by the rectors of seminaries in the territory, and two members from each cathedral chapter, presbyterial council, or pastoral council in the territory (can. 443).  The convoking authority can also select other members of the faithful (including the laity) to participate in the council in an advisory capacity.

Meetings of the entire episcopate of a supra-national region have historically been called councils as well, such as the various Councils of Carthage in which all the bishops of North Africa were to attend.

During the Middle Ages, some councils were legatine , called by a papal legate rather than the pope or bishop.

[ 6 ] Synods [ edit ] Synods in Eastern Catholic Churches are similar to synods in Orthodox churches in that they are the primary vehicle for election of bishops and establishment of inter-diocesan ecclesiastical laws.  The term synod in Latin Church canon law, however, refers to meetings of a representative, thematic, non-legislative (advisory) or mixed nature or in some other way do not meet the qualifications of a "council". There are various types.

Diocesan synods are irregular meetings of the clergy and laity of a particular church summoned by the diocesan bishop (or other prelate if the particular church is not a diocese) to deliberate on legislative matters.  Only the diocesan bishop holds legislative authority; the other members of the diocesan synod act only in an advisory capacity.  Those who must be invited to a diocesan synod by law are any coadjutor or auxiliary bishops , the vicars general and episcopal , the officialis , the vicars forane plus an additional priest from each vicariate forane, the presbyterial council, canons of the cathedral chapter (if there is one), the rector of the seminary, some of the superiors of religious houses in the diocese, and members of the laity chosen by the diocesan pastoral council, though the diocesan bishop can invite others to attend at his own initiative. (can. 463) Episcopal conferences [ edit ] National episcopal conferences are another development of the Second Vatican Council.  They are permanent bodies consisting of all the Latin Church bishops of a nation and those equivalent to diocesan bishops in law (i.e.

territorial abbots ). Bishops of other sui juris churches and papal nuncios are not members of episcopal conferences by law, though the conference itself may invite them in an advisory or voting capacity (can. 450).

While councils (can. 445) and diocesan synods (can. 391 & 466) have full legislative powers in their areas of competence, national episcopal conferences may only issue supplementary legislation when authorized to do so in canon law or by decree of the Holy See . Additionally, any such supplemental legislation requires a two-thirds vote of the conference and review by the Holy See (can. 455) to have the force of law. Without such authorization and review, episcopal conferences are deliberative only and exercise no authority over their member bishops or dioceses.

Anglican [ edit ] In the Anglican Communion , synods are elected by clergy and laity . In most Anglican churches, there is a geographical hierarchy of synods, with General Synod at the top; bishops, clergy and laity meet as "houses" within the synod.

Diocesan synods are convened by a bishop in his or her diocese, and consist of elected clergy and lay members.

Deanery synods are convened by the Rural Dean (or Area Dean ) and consist of all clergy licensed to a benefice within the deanery , plus elected lay members.

Lutheran [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( November 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In North America, a synod can be a local administrative region similar to a diocese in other denominations. An example of this is the Minneapolis Area Synod of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America . However, for some denominations such as the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod and the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod , it denotes an entire church body. The usage of synod as an administrative ecclesiastical region is also reflected by the German term Synodalverband (i.e. synodal federation), such as the Regional Synodal Federation of the Free City of Danzig .

EKHN 's 10th Church Synod (general assembly), 2009 In Europe, a synod can be a legislature comprising deputies elected by all enfranchised members of a church and competent for the entire church. It is similar to a general assembly in Presbyterianism, and found, in regional Protestant church bodies (Landeskirche) in Germany; examples include Landessynode (i.e. regional or land synod) or Generalsynode (general synod). A synod can also be used by an administrative subunit of a church body, such as a city synod ( Stadtsynode ; comprising synodal deputies of congregations of one denomination within one city) or provincial synod ( Provinzialsynode ; comprising synodal deputies of congregations within an ecclesiastical province ). The use of the term synod to describe a small gathering is now obsolete, the term used instead is Kirchenkreis .

Presbyterian [ edit ] Members of a Reformed Synod in Amsterdam by Bernard Picart (1741) In the Presbyterian system of church governance the synod is a level of administration between the local presbytery and the national general assembly . Some denominations use the synod, such as the Presbyterian Church in Canada , Uniting Church in Australia , and the Presbyterian Church USA . However some other churches do not use the synod at all, and the Church of Scotland dissolved its synods in 1993, see List of Church of Scotland synods and presbyteries . The Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church is considered a Synod since there is no national church in the United States. (see establishment principle ) Reformed [ edit ] In Swiss and southern German Reformed churches , where the Reformed churches are organized as regionally defined independent churches (such as Evangelical Reformed Church of Zurich or Reformed Church of Berne ), the synod corresponds to the general assembly of Presbyterian churches. In Reformed churches, the synod can denote a regional meeting of representatives of various classes ( regional synod ), or the general denominational meeting of representatives from the regional synods ( general or national synod ). Some churches, especially the smaller denominations, do not have the regional synod tier (for example, the Reformed Church in the United States (RCUS)). Historically, these were meetings such as the Synod of Homberg .

Church of Christ in Congo [ edit ] In the Democratic Republic of the Congo , the vast majority of Protestant denominations have regrouped under a religious institution named the Church of Christ in Congo or CCC, often referred to – within the Congo – simply as The Protestant Church. In the CCC structure, the national synod is the general assembly of the various churches that constitutes the CCC. From the Synod is drawn an executive committee, and a secretariat. There are also synods of the CCC in every province of the Congo, known appropriately as provincial synods . The CCC regroups 62 Protestant denominations.

See also [ edit ] Ancient church councils (pre-ecumenical) – church councils before the First Council of Nicaea College of Bishops Conciliabulum , the diminutive used for an irregular council United Methodist Council of Bishops Council of Jerusalem Ecumenical council , representing the universal episcopate First seven ecumenical councils Great Moscow Synod General Conference (LDS Church) Sobor on the Blood Sobornost Station days Stoglavy Sobor Notes [ edit ] ^ In English "Synod of Bishops" is the usual expression for what in other languages is usually called the "Synod of the Bishops": " eo:Sinodo de la Episkopoj ", " es:Sínodo de los obispos ", " fr:Synode des évêques ", " it:Sinodo dei vescovi ".

References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Sobor" . Encyclopediaofukraine.com. 1990-06-06 . Retrieved 2023-08-22 .

^ "Motu proprio Apostolica sollicitudo , I" . Vatican.va. 1965-09-15 . Retrieved 2023-08-22 .

^ "Synodal Information" . Vatican.va . Retrieved 2023-08-22 .

^ "Code of Canon Law, canon 343" . Vatican.va . Retrieved 2023-08-22 .

^ MacMullen, Ramsay.

Voting About God in Early Church Councils , Yale University Press, New Haven, Connecticut, 2006.

ISBN 978-0-300-11596-3 ^ Robinson, I. S. (1990).

The Papacy 1073–1198: Continuity and Innovation . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. p. 150.

ISBN 0-521-31922-6 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Collections of synodal decrees [ edit ] The Canons of the first four general councils of Nicaea, Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon (in Ancient Greek). Oxford: Clarendon Press. 1880.

Benson (1893).

The six œcumenical councils of the undivided catholic church: Lectures delivered in 1893 under the auspices of the church club of New York . New York: E. & J.B. Young.

DuBose, William Porcher (1896).

The ecumenical councils . New York: Christian Literature Co.

Percival, Henry Robert (1900).

Schaff, P.

; Wace, H.

(eds.).

The Seven Ecumenical Councils of the Undivided Church: Their Canons and Dogmatic Decrees, Together with the Canons of All the Local Synods which Have Received Ecumenical Acceptance . Nicene and post-Nicene Fathers of the Christian Church. Parker.

Schwartz, E. (1914–1940), Acta conciliorum oecumenicorum [ The Acts of the Ecumenical Councils ] (See "Acta conciliorum oecumenicorum" (webpage) . Wisconsin Lutheran College . Retrieved 17 August 2017 .

) Schroeder, Henry Joseph (1937).

Disciplinary decrees of the general councils: Text, translation, and commentary . St. Louis, MO: B. Herder Book Co.

Straub, J. (1971), Acta conciliorum oecumenicorum [ The Acts of the Ecumenical Councils ] (See "Acta conciliorum oecumenicorum" (webpage) . Wisconsin Lutheran College . Retrieved 17 August 2017 .

) Alberigo, Giuseppe ; Ioannou, Periclīs-Petros; Leonardi, Claudio; Jedin, Hubert (1962).

Conciliorum Oecumenicorum Decreta . Basilae: Herder.

Alberigo, Giuseppe; Dossetti, Joseph A; Jedin, Hubert (1973).

Conciliorum Oecumenicorum Decreta . Bologna: Bologna Institute for Religious Sciences.

Tanner, Norman P. (1990).

Decrees of the ecumenical councils . Vol. 2 Volumes. Sheed & Ward; Georgetown University Press.

ISBN 978-0-87840-490-2 .

Alberigo, Giuseppe; Melloni, Alberto, eds. (2000–2017).

Conciliorum Oecumenicorum Generaliumque Decreta: Editio critica . Corpus Christianorum. Vol. 4 Volumes. Turnhout: Brepols Publishers.

Other [ edit ] The synod of Constantinople in Byzantine times (in German) Calculating the Synod? A network analysis of the synod of Constantinople in Late Byzantine times External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Synods .

Look up synod in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

"Synod" at the Catholic Encyclopedia Sobor in Encyclopedia of Ukraine v t e Christian theology Systematic Scripture Inspiration Preservation Canonics Biblical studies Exegesis Law and Gospel Hermeneutics God Attributes Paterology Christology Pneumatology Theocentricism Theology proper Immutability Impassibility Perichoresis Social trinitarianism Trinity Father Son ( Hypostatic union Jesus Logos Christocentric Incarnation Resurrection Ascension ) Holy Spirit Cosmology Creation Angels Angelic hierarchy Humanity Fallen angels Satan Theodicy Soteriology Absolution Adoption Assurance Atonement Baptism Calling Conditional security Conversion Divinization Election Eternal life extra Ecclesiam nulla salus Faith Forgiveness Glorification Grace Irresistible Prevenient Imputation Justification Means of grace Monergism Mortification Ordo salutis Perseverance Predestination Recapitulation Reconciliation Redemption Regeneration Repentance Resurrection Salvation Sanctification Synergism Theosis Union with Christ Worship Blessing Hamartiology Adam Anthropology The Fall Incurvatus in se Occasion of sin Original sin Sin Theodicy Total depravity Ecclesiology Church Free National Sacrament Confession Eucharist Missiology Polity ( Congregational Episcopal Presbyterian ) Bishop Historical Minister Synod Conciliarity Koinonia Full communion Church discipline Shunning Eschatology Historicism Idealism Dispensationalism Futurism Preterism Millenarianism ( Pre- / Post- / A-millennialism ) Adventism Antichrist Apocalypse Apocalypticism Covenant / New Covenant theology End times Four last things Heaven Hell Last Judgment Millennialism New Jerusalem Rapture Second Coming Soul sleep Tribulation War in Heaven Historical History of Christian theology Orthodoxy Calvinist–Arminian debate Apostolic Age Canon Patristics Caesaropapism Semipelagianism Iconoclasm Scholasticism Thomism Conciliarism Renaissance Reformation Counter-Reformation Pietism Great Awakenings Practical Apologetics Biblical law Education Ethics Homiletics Liturgics Missiology Moral Pastoral Polemics Political Public By tradition Catholic Church Absolution Apostolic succession Assumption of Mary Dogmatic Christian humanism Traditionalism Ecumenical Councils Filioque Immaculate Conception Indulgences Infant baptism Josephology Liturgy Mariology Mass Modernism Natural law Papal infallibility Priesthood Purgatory Quartodecimanism Real presence Sacerdotalism Sacrament Sainthood Scotism Thomism Transubstantiation Ultramontanism Veneration Eastern Orthodox Church Apophatic theology Cataphatic theology Economy Essence–energies Gnomic will Metousiosis Phronema Phyletism Proskynesis Sobornost Symphonia Tabor Light Theoria Theosis Theotokos Oriental Orthodoxy Miaphysitism Monophysitism Monoenergism Monothelitism Aphthartodocetism Protestantism General Adiaphora Christian views on the Old Covenant Covenant theology Dispensationalism Supersessionism Evangelicalism Evangelical theology Five solae ( Sola fide Sola gratia Sola scriptura Soli Deo gloria Solus Christus ) Fundamentalism Protestant ecclesiology Priesthood of all believers Church covenant Protestant Soteriology Assurance Conditional election Conditional preservation of the saints Prevenient grace Total depravity Unlimited atonement Anglican Anglo-Catholicism Branch theory Broad church Center church High church Low church Baptist Believer's baptism Immersion baptism Separation of church and state Lutheran Confessional Lutheranism Evangelical Catholic Haugean Loci Theologici Lutheran orthodoxy Lutheran scholasticism Neo-Lutheranism Pietism Theology of the Cross Two kingdoms Pentecostal Baptism with the Holy Spirit Faith healing Glossolalia Prosperity theology Reformed (Calvinist) Christian reconstructionism TULIP Lordship salvation Predestination Wesleyan Christian perfection Imparted righteousness Second work of grace Wesleyan Quadrilateral Other Adventism Anabaptism Arminianism Free Grace Messianic Judaism Restorationism See also Attributes of God in Christianity Christian universalism Divine mercy Grace in Christianity Love of God in Christianity Love of God Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Problem of evil Problem of Hell Sacred mysteries Unlimited atonement Lists of Christian theologians Outline of Christian theology Christianity portal Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Synod&oldid=1305046802 " Categories : Church councils Christian terminology Governing assemblies of religious organizations Episcopacy in Eastern Orthodoxy Episcopacy in Oriental Orthodoxy Episcopacy in the Catholic Church Religious law Types of Christian organization Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 Articles containing Church Slavonic-language text Articles with unsourced statements from November 2012 Articles needing additional references from November 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles containing German-language text CS1 foreign language sources (ISO 639-2) CS1: long volume value Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 19:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Synod 53 languages Add topic

