Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Inuit identity: hunting and reindeer Toggle Inuit identity: hunting and reindeer subsection 2.1 Cultural status of the hunting experience 2.2 Inuit welfare and hunting culture 2.3 Reindeer welfare, sustainability, and quotas 3 Reindeer Toggle Reindeer subsection 3.1 Three subspecies in Greenland 4 Reindeer hunting Toggle Reindeer hunting subsection 4.1 Practical details 4.2 Regulations and hunting licenses 4.3 Game preparation and transport 4.4 Hunting methods 5 Hunting conditions in Greenland 6 See also 7 Notes and references Toggle Notes and references subsection 7.1 Notes 7.2 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Reindeer hunting in Greenland 1 language Ænglisc Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article contains instructions or advice .

Wikipedia is not a guidebook; please help rewrite the content to make it more encyclopedic or move it to Wikiversity , Wikibooks , or Wikivoyage .

( September 2024 ) This article contains weasel words : vague phrasing that often accompanies biased or unverifiable information .

Such statements should be clarified or removed .

( September 2024 ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Reindeer hunting in Greenland" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A hunting campsite in Nuup Kangerlua fjord Reindeer hunting in Greenland is of great importance to the Greenlandic Inuit and sports hunters, both residents and tourists.

[ 1 ] Reindeer (caribou) [ 2 ] are an important source of meat, and harvesting them has always played an important role in the history, culture, and traditions of the Greenlandic Inuit. Controlled hunting is important for the welfare of reindeer, the quality of life for Inuit , both as food, and part of their culture and Greenlandic culture in general, and the preservation of tundra grazing areas. Therefore, scientific research is regularly performed to determine the quotas needed to maintain a proper ecological balance .

Background [ edit ] A large bull reindeer Reindeer hunting by humans has a very long history and caribou/wild reindeer "may well be the species of single greatest importance in the entire anthropological literature on hunting." [ 3 ] In Greenland, wild reindeer have been hunted as a source of food, clothing, shelter, and tools by the Inuit - the indigenous peoples that populate the Arctic and colder regions. Methods that they have employed include crossbow , bow and arrow , snares , driving , trapping pits , driving them off cliffs or into lakes and then spearing them from kayaks , and now using modern firearms. The entire reindeer, including fur, skin , antlers , and bones have been used. Their meat, viscera , internal organs, and even stomach contents, have all been utilized as food, both raw, dried , smoked , and cooked. Today reindeer are primarily hunted by residents and tourists for their meat, but mature animals may also be the objects of trophy hunting because of the often large size of their antlers. They have the largest antlers relative to body size among deer.

[ 4 ] In Greenland more reindeer are harvested than any other big game land mammal species.

Reindeer meat is an important staple in most households, and the populace waits with great anticipation for the autumn hunting season to begin. It is an opportunity to stock up the kitchen pantry and freezer with meat for the coming season and to enjoy the adventure of the hunt.

Game harvesting conditions in Greenland can be extreme, and the unpredictable forces of nature can be hazardous to hunters. Greenland is large and long with differing hunting customs and regulations , as well as weather patterns, depending on the region and season. The Greenland wilderness is sensitive and hunters are expected to respect it and " leave nothing but footprints ." Inuit identity: hunting and reindeer [ edit ] Cultural status of the hunting experience [ edit ] Hunting has always been an extremely important aspect of the Greenland Inuit culture: "The Inuit culture is the most pure hunting culture in existence. Having adapted to the extreme living conditions in the High Arctic of the North American continent for at least four thousand years, Inuit are not even hunter-gatherers . Inuit are hunters, pure and simple." ( Henriette Rasmussen , Minister in Greenland Home Rule Government ) [ 5 ] Even today hunting's importance is confirmed by the Greenland Home Rule Government: "Hunting is the heart and soul of Greenlandic culture.... Hunting is also very important from a cultural perspective. In a society such as Greenland, which for centuries was based on subsistence hunting (until about fifty years ago), hunting is still of great cultural importance. Irrespective of the fact that most live like wage-earners in a modern industrial society, many Greenlanders identity is still deeply rooted in the hunting." [ 6 ] Reindeer hunting has a special status in the populace. Shooting a muskox provides four times as much meat as a reindeer, but "Greenlanders would much rather have caribou or reindeer meat than musk ox meat," says Josefine Nymand.

[ 7 ] "... the experience is just as important [as the meat]. It is simply the most wonderful part of the year. The trips in for the caribou hunt in the beautiful autumn weather have a great social and physical meaning for people's wellbeing. It has many functions." (Peter Nielsen, Head of Office at the Ministry of Environment and Nature) [ 7 ] Inuit welfare and hunting culture [ edit ] An Inuit family (1917) The long history of mutual dependence between humans and reindeer [ 3 ] necessitates continuing efforts to safeguard their relationship and the welfare of both parties. Reindeer hunting – which is also commonplace in many other parts of the world – is considered so vital to the cultural heritage of certain groups that there is an attempt [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] being made to get it placed on UNESCO 's World Heritage List .

[ 11 ] The identity of the Inuit is closely tied to the geography, history and the attitudes toward hunting – "For Inuit, ecology , hunting and culture are synonymous." [ 12 ] – and their identity as hunters is under attack. Those attacks are "... viewed in the Arctic as a direct assault on culture, identity as well as sustainable use," [ 13 ] and Inuit are reacting: "... for the Inuit, animal rights campaigns are just the latest in a long litany of religious, industry, and government policies imposed by outsiders – policies which ignore Inuit values and realities, and threaten the survival of one of the world's last remaining aboriginal hunting cultures." [ 14 ] Therefore, the circumpolar peoples and their organizations are actively engaged in attempts to protect their welfare, identity, interests, and culture, including their hunting culture. The " Kuujjuaq Declaration" [ 15 ] addressed perceived attacks on their autonomy and rights , and recommended that the Inuit Circumpolar Conference (now the Inuit Circumpolar Council ) "undertake a comprehensive study on how best to address global forces, such as the 'animal rights' and other destructive movements that aim to destroy Inuit sustainable use of living resources, and to report back to the next General Assembly on its findings." [ 16 ] The International Arctic Science Committee shares these viewpoints and therefore one of its objectives is to study the "sustainable use of living resources of high value to Arctic residents." [ 17 ] Reindeer welfare, sustainability, and quotas [ edit ] Biologists and other research scientists constantly monitor the welfare, living conditions, and health of reindeer, as well as the ecological health of their habitat, and they make recommendations and set quotas designed to ensure that game resources and natural biodiversity are protected, managed, and maintained.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Many factors, some of them difficult to measure or predict, are analyzed including natural cycles, parasites , disease, short-term weather conditions (relative harshness of winter or summer), long-term climate changes , and condition of food sources. Hunting is not the only factor affecting reindeer welfare, but it is one area that can be managed to some degree.

Since reindeer in southwestern Greenland have no naturally occurring non-human predators , [ 21 ] [ 22 ] harvesting quotas are established to help regulate the number of reindeer in an area and prevent overgrazing and death from starvation. During the winter, the great effort of pawing down (known as "cratering") [ 23 ] [ 24 ] through the snow to their favorite food, a lichen known as reindeer moss , can cost them too many calories in expended energy, causing them to lose strength and die.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Without human monitoring and regulation, mass starvation of reindeer would be a recurring problem.

Harvesting recommendations are also based on other prognostic factors, among them estimates of reindeer population density, total population in various regions, and availability of adequate food sources.

[ 28 ] Since these estimates are difficult to make and can vary over time for each region, the recommendations and quotas are constantly adapted to the local needs, [ 20 ] sometimes quite radically. Historically, Greenland's reindeer population has fluctuated widely. For example, it numbered around 100,000 in the early 1970s and then was believed to have dropped to about 9,000 in 1993.

[ 29 ] Hunting regulations reflected these mistaken and hotly debated estimates and harvesting was suspended from the summer of 1993 until the autumn of 1995, whereupon hunting was once again allowed.

[ 7 ] [ 22 ] [ 30 ] The controversial suspension of hunting in 1993-1995 "created much public anger." Hunters' local knowledge contradicted the official estimates and a survey in 2000-2001 confirmed the hunters' claims that there were far more animals to be harvested. Quotas were then radically increased and the hunting season was lengthened: "In an effort to reduce caribou number and density, open harvests were continued in 2003, 2004 and 2005." [ 22 ] In 2005, improved counting methods revealed that the previous estimates had indeed been misleading and that the population density was far too high, with 3-4 caribou per km 2 , rather than the preferred 1.2 per km 2 . In 2006 the number of reindeer was estimated to be more than 100,000, which was still too many animals.

[ 31 ] A constant concern is that overpopulation can lead to increased mortality of calves, damage to feeding grounds, and a population crash: "Independent of climate and genetics, caribou calf mortality increases with high population density and grazing pressure.... [O]ver-abundance of caribou on the range may be a current problem, which may soon become an acute problem. Unfortunately, it is unknown how much longer the present range can continue to support the current caribou numbers. If the herds are allowed to continue status quo or increase further there is a clear risk of lasting damage to ranges. If the ranges are destroyed, caribou stocks can be expected to crash.

[ 22 ] Scientists and hunters continue to work together for the best good of all concerned parties: the reindeer, the hunters, the general populace of Greenland, and the very sensitive and vulnerable range grounds, since Greenland's tundra is more sensitive than elsewhere in the Arctic due to the ever-present inland ice sheet . This ice sheet acts like an open refrigerator door, stunting the growth of vegetation along the coastal regions and making recovery a slow process.

Reindeer [ edit ] Main article: Reindeer Running reindeer Reindeer (or caribou) [ 32 ] (also called tuttu by the Greenlandic Inuit [ 33 ] and rensdyr or rener by Danes ) are the only deer species in which both sexes have antlers . Greenland animals can vary considerably in size, with females weighing up to 90 kg (198 lb) and the males ("bulls") 150 kg (331 lb). Other species of reindeer can be larger or smaller. In Greenland both sexes may be hunted. Although they have antlers, they rarely use them against humans, even when backed into a corner by the Sami people who herd, milk, and slaughter them for food in other lands. Their usual defense against humans is to pull away or flee, often uphill. Males use their antlers when sparring against each other, and reindeer may use them as a last resort to defend themselves and their young against predators such as wolves , [ 34 ] although wolves present no threat in southwestern Greenland.

[ 21 ] Although rarely aggressive toward humans, when in rut bulls will defend their harems from other bulls, and when humans come between a bull and his harem, attacks have been recorded.

[ 35 ] Tame reindeer are known to be curious, but even wild reindeer can be curious in some situations.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] The wild reindeer is a shy animal and it reacts very quickly to sudden sounds or movements as well as the smell of strangers.

[ 40 ] In spite of this, inexperienced animals may even approach quite closely to a hunter and curiously observe while the hunter is field dressing a downed animal. They have good hearing and a good sense of smell, but have poor eyesight. They may react to a hunter's movements, but not necessarily to his form if he doesn't move.

[ 41 ] Under the right conditions, a stealthy hunter may be able to approach surprisingly close to a reindeer, even when the hunter is in full sight of the animal. Many animals are shot at relatively close range (10–50 meters).

Three subspecies in Greenland [ edit ] Isortoq Reindeer Station in Summer 2011 Three subspecies [ 30 ] of reindeer live in western Greenland where some interbreeding has occurred: The most common variety of reindeer in Greenland is the native wild barren-ground caribou ( Rangifer tarandus groenlandicus ), which is a medium-sized race of reindeer also found in Canada .

The second type are the feral (semi- domestic ) mountain reindeer ( Rangifer tarandus tarandus ), brought from Norway in 1952. They are larger and were first introduced at a game reserve in the Kapisillit region of Godthåb's fjord . Their care was the responsibility of Sami herders [ 42 ] who also controlled their harvesting and the meat preparation in a now-abandoned slaughterhouse at Itinnera.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] "Later animals from Kapisillit were released at several more locations to establish feral populations, which might support a hunting harvest. There is evidence for genetic mixing of native caribou and feral reindeer at some of the locations where reindeer were released." [ 19 ] [ 45 ] The Isortoq Reindeer Station received Norwegian Reindeer from the Itinnera breeding stock in 1973 and located a 2000 head herd on a 1500 km square concession area. The company had its own abattoir and processing plant (now closed) and annually exported meat to the EU and N. America.

A third type of reindeer may possibly belong to the Peary caribou subspecies ( Rangifer tarandus pearyi ). They are smaller and fewer in number and live in northwestern Greenland.

[ 46 ] Reindeer hunting [ edit ] Practical details [ edit ] Bolt action rifle with scope Hollow point bullet Two main types of hunters are involved in harvesting reindeer: licensed commercial hunters and private resident sporting hunters, with tourists, trophy hunters , and research scientists harvesting a few more animals.

Transportation to and from hunting areas is nearly always done by boat. The rest of the transportation is by foot . If the hunting area is far inland, it may involve carrying equipment to a lake, and then transporting it across the lake to a campsite using a smaller type of boat, such as a rowboat , canoe (including collapsible models), or a rubber inflatable boat . Some lakes have boats permanently left (or hidden in the bushes) near the shores, and they are sometimes used by hunters (not necessarily the owners) who frequent the area.

In 2006 the only hunting weapons allowed for reindeer harvesting were bolt action , non- automatic rifles, using .222 Remington caliber cartridges or larger.

[ 47 ] A good, large rifle scope is important, as shots at longer distances may be necessary, and visibility may be poor because of snowfall, fog, or limited lighting levels. Folding or fixed-blade hunting knives are necessary for many purposes.

Binoculars with large objective diameter are used to spot prey at great distances, sometimes in waning light.

Rifles (both bolt action and semi-automatic) of other calibers, shotguns , and other types of weapons may be used for other game such as ptarmigan , Arctic hares , and Arctic foxes , which are often encountered during a reindeer hunt.

Regulations and hunting licenses [ edit ] Harvesting is governed by regulations and requires a hunting license indicating the number of animals to be harvested, as well as post-hunting reporting of results (a jawbone with teeth). Such licenses can be obtained by those who have established two years of residency. Special arrangements are made for tourists and trophy hunters. Information can be sought and licenses obtained (by application and payment) from the local municipality .

Airplanes, helicopters, and other motorized vehicles (such as snowmobiles ), [ 48 ] are not allowed to be used for hunting or land transport of animals or hunters. Boats are allowed for transport to and from hunting areas. A lead identification tag must be attached to the carcass until it is sold or used. The meat is owned by the hunter and no extra fees are charged for it.

In 2006 the open season extended from August 10 - September 15.

[ 47 ] In exceptional cases the dates can be changed, for example periods of bad weather and too much ice, resulting in a lengthening of the season.

[ 49 ] Winter hunting is an option for those specially licensed as commercial hunters (normally reserved for Inuit residents).

Game preparation and transport [ edit ] Hunter using a headband to drag a reindeer on snow Once downed, a reindeer is quickly field dressed by removing the viscera . The skin, head, and viscera are often discarded and left for consumption by foxes, ravens , and other birds . The meat is kept cool to minimize decomposition and protected from blow-flies by the use of mesh game bags, and any fly eggs (very visible) and maggots are removed immediately.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] The cool climate makes it possible for the meat to be kept out in the open longer than in warmer climates, therefore a hunting expedition can last several days without a serious loss of meat quality. Once home again, the meat can be hung and aged for a few days before further processing.

[ 52 ] Carrying a reindeer over a long distance in rugged mountainous terrain can be difficult and very strenuous. More than five kilometers each way is not uncommon.

[ 27 ] If the animal is very large, it may only be possible to transport one half at a time. In Greenland, reindeer meat is commonly carried over the shoulders, [ 53 ] possibly tied to a backpack frame, or carried on the back with support from a headband , the last being a method preferred by the Inuit. Unskinned game may also be dragged on snow, or allowed to slide down steep, snow-covered hillsides, thus saving much work and freeing the hands for support while climbing downhill.

Hunting methods [ edit ] Hunter carrying reindeer meat There are several hunting strategies that can be used for harvesting reindeer: Asking is seeking the advice of an experienced reindeer hunter.

Scouting is a variety of tasks and techniques for finding reindeer to hunt.

Glassing is the use of optical instruments (such as binoculars) to locate animals more easily.

Blind or stand hunting is waiting where reindeer are likely to travel.

Camouflage hunting is concealing oneself visually to blend in with the environment, for example using a white anorak in snowy weather.

Still hunting is the practice of walking stealthily in search of animals.

Stalking is the practice of walking stealthily in pursuit of identified animals.

Tracking is interpreting and following physical evidence in the pursuit of animals.

Drive hunting is flushing reindeer toward other hunters.

Note : Loose dogs, dog driving, and coursing are not allowed in Greenland.

Hunting conditions in Greenland [ edit ] Further information: Survival skills A reindeer hunt can be a short afternoon outing without much equipment, or a week-long affair with all the equipment that such an endeavor requires. New hunters may experience a form of culture shock [ 54 ] the first time they enter the wilderness, and may require mental acclimatization when returning to civilization. It may feel like a fleeting period of mental confusion , similar to the "sea legs" felt by inexperienced boaters.

Reindeer harvesting can be done in groups or alone, with lone hunting generally requiring extra safety precautions. While reindeer harvesting is usually a pleasant experience and the following problems may never be encountered, it can also be exhausting and does entail some degree of safety risk. Good hygiene and adequate hydration can protect against infections , diarrhea , and gastroenteritis . A small first aid kit should be carried when away from the campsite or boat, and preparations should be made for the various hazards of outdoor recreation . The terrain can be hilly, mountainous, uneven, and stony, with hidden crevices or holes. It may also be marshy , muddy, and wet. It may be necessary to cross streams and rivers, and slippery rocks present a hazard. If there is snow and ice, there can be cornices , crevasses , and avalanches , although snow can make it easier to spot and track reindeer.

The weather during the beginning of the autumn hunting season is often pleasant, relatively warm, and mild, but it can change very quickly. Hunters may encounter fog, rain, wind, and winter conditions. Occasionally the situation can quickly approach a worst-case scenario with events such as katabatic winds , storms, snow, hail , sleet , freezing rain , blizzards , and polar cyclones , even in the late summer. Lack of preparation can have fatal consequences.

Using a compass in Greenland involves accounting for a very extreme [ 55 ] magnetic declination . Failure to calculate correctly can send a hunter in the wrong direction, leading to complete loss of bearings . Getting lost in bad weather can waste precious time, forcing the hunter to overnight in very wet, cold, and unpleasant conditions.

Hypothermia can further complicate matters and decrease the hunter's ability to think clearly, causing them to lose their bearings even more. A fight for survival may then ensue. Deaths are relatively rare, but they do happen.

See also [ edit ] Arctic Council Deer hunting International Council for Game and Wildlife Conservation Nujalik , the Inuit goddess of hunting on land Polar bear hunting Tekkeitsertok , an Inuit god of hunting and the master of caribou Notes and references [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Trophy hunting in Greenland , Greenland Tourist Bureau. Retrieved 2010-17-12 ^ "Rangifer tarandus (Caribou, Peary Caribou, Reindeer)" .

The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species . December 24, 2015 . Retrieved July 11, 2018 .

The world#s Caribou and Reindeer are classified as a single species Rangifer tarandus . Reindeer is the European name for the species while in North America, the species is known as Caribou.

^ a b "In North America and Eurasia the species has long been an important resource–in many areas the most important resource–for peoples inhabiting the northern boreal forest and tundra regions. Known human dependence on caribou/wild reindeer has a long history, beginning in the Middle Pleistocene (Banfield 1961:170; Kurtén 1968:170) and continuing to the present....The caribou/wild reindeer is thus an animal that has been a major resource for humans throughout a tremendous geographic area and across a time span of tens of thousands of years." Ernest S. Burch, Jr.

The Caribou/Wild Reindeer as a Human Resource.

American Antiquity , Vol. 37, No. 3 (Jul., 1972), pp. 339-368. Retrieved 2010-17-12 ^ New World Deer (Capriolinae) Retrieved 2010-17-12 Archived July 7, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ Rasmussen H.

Sustainable Greenland and Indigenous Ideals.

Henriette Rasmussen, Minister of Culture, Education, Science and Church of the Government of Greenland. Retrieved 2010-17-12 ^ Hunting in Greenland.

- Greenland Home Rule Government.

Archived July 15, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c Caribou and muskoxen are meat and adventure.

- The Danish-Greenlandic Environmental Cooperation.

Archived September 27, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ Reindeer hunting as world heritage: A ten-thousand-year-long heritage.

- Reindeer hunting as world heritage. Retrieved 2010-17-12 ^ About the project.

- Reindeer hunting as world heritage. Retrieved 2010-17-12 ^ Børge Brende to chair the World Heritage.

- Reindeer hunting as world heritage. Retrieved 2010-17-12 ^ UNESCO's World Heritage List.

- UNESCO Retrieved 2010-17-12 ^ Wenzel G. " Animal Rights, Human Rights: Ecology, Economy and Ideology in the Canadian Arctic " (1991).

^ Ethics and morality.

Archived 2007-05-06 at the Wayback Machine - Dept. of Economic Development and Transportation, Nunavut Territory ^ Alan Herscovici.

Forgotten Story: The impact of "animal-rights" campaigns on the Inuit.

Archived 2007-04-16 at the Wayback Machine - National Council for Science and the Environment ^ The Kuujjuaq Declaration.

Archived 2007-08-21 at the Wayback Machine - Inuit Circumpolar Conference ^ Kuujjuaq Declaration: Archived 2007-09-28 at the Wayback Machine Proceedings of ICC's 9th General Assembly, 11–16 August 2002. Inuit Circumpolar Conference (Canada) ^ Objectives of International Arctic Science Committee.

Archived 2002-08-29 at the Wayback Machine - ProClim: Forum for Climate and Global Change; Forum of the Swiss Academy of Sciences ^ Scientists elsewhere do the same thing: "To guarantee rational use of this population and meet interests of both Taimyr and Evenki Autonomous Areas, federal bodies are responsible for fixing science-substantiated quotas for wild reindeer hunting." [1] [ usurped ] ^ a b Christine Cuyler.

Appendix B: Greenland Caribou / Reindeer.

Archived 2005-04-30 at the Wayback Machine - Greenland Institute of Natural Resources ^ a b L. Christine Cuyler & Lars Witting.

Caribou harvest advice 2006.

Archived 2007-05-10 at the Wayback Machine - Greenland Institute of Natural Resources ^ a b Christine Cuyler.

Appendix B: Greenland Caribou / Reindeer.

Archived 2005-04-30 at the Wayback Machine "The primary distribution, 74 percent of total abundance, is in West Greenland (61°-69°N), which may by roughly identified as the southern half of Greenland's west coast. No wolves ( Canis lupus ) or other potential predators (non-human) have existed in West Greenland for at least the last few hundred years." - Greenland Institute of Natural Resources ^ a b c d Cuyler, et al .

Status of two West Greenland Caribou populations 2005.

Archived 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine "Caribou ( Rangifer tarandus groenlandicus ) have no natural predators in WestGreenland, and none have existed for several hundred years (Dawes et al. 1986). When combined with their high fertility (Cuyler & Østegaard 2005) and recruitment (Cuyler et al. 2002, 2003, 2004), this would suggest that overabundance may be their greatest threat. Several boom and crash cycles of caribou in West Greenland have been noted since the 1700s (Vibe 1967, Meldgaard 1986), and recent population estimates are the highest ever documented, indicating that a new crash might be expected in the near future." - Technical Report No. 61, 2005. Greenland Institute of Natural Resources ^ "In the winter, the fleshy pads on these toes grow longer and form a tough, hornlike rim. Caribou use these large, sharp-edged hooves to dig through the snow and uncover the lichens that sustain them in winter months. Biologists call this activity "cratering" because of the crater-like cavity the caribou's hooves leave in the snow." All About Caribou.

[ usurped ] - Project Caribou ^ Image of reindeer cratering in snow ^ Bror Saitton.

Sammendrag av foredrag ved NORs 12. nordiske forskningskonferanse om rein og reindrift.

- Nordic Council for Reindeer Husbandry Research (NOR) ^ Overpopulation of reindeer in Greenland, 2005.

- UPI , Dec. 9, 2005. PhysOrg.com ^ a b Reindeer hunting in Greenland.

- PITU, no. 1, September 2002, pp. 15-16. Grønlands Naturinstitut (Nature Institute of Greenland).

^ Interesting demo programs for estimating populations.

Porcupine Caribou Population Model: Demo Versions.

[ usurped ] - Taiga Net, operated by the Arctic Borderlands Ecological Knowledge Society ^ Baldursson S.

Living Terrestrial Resources of the Arctic and Their Use.

Archived 2007-10-07 at the Wayback Machine - Snorri Baldursson, Assistant Director General, Icelandic Institute of Natural History, University of the Arctic ^ a b Grønlandske fugle, havpattedyr og landpattedyr - en status over vigtige ressourcer Archived 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine 1. oktober 1998. Teknisk rapport nr. 16, oktober 1998. Pinngortitaleriffik, Grønlands Naturinstitut ^ The propagation of reindeer in Greenland.

- Greenland Tourism and Business Council ^ Identity card for Rangifer (Reindeer/Caribou).

One species, 9 subspecies (three of which are in Greenland).

^ Jerry McCarthy.

Greenlandic word list.

Reindeer are called tuttu (pl tuttut ) by Greenland Inuit.

^ Dawes, Elander, Ericson The Wolf (Canis lupus) in Greenland: A Historical Review and Present Status.

Peter R. Dawes, Magnus Elander and Mats Ericson.

Arctic , vol. 39, no. 2 (June 1986) p. 119-132 ^ Attack reindeer loses antlers.

BBC News , 29 September 2002 ^ Jeremy Schmidt.

Reindeer round-up - life of nomads who herd reindeer in Mongolia.

- Ranger Rick , March, 1995 ^ Svalbard part 14 Images and descriptions of curious wild reindeer ^ "A yearling, or one-year-old, in the fall still has a rather small body compared to the adults and can be exceptionally curious." Porcupine Caribou Teachers' Manual [ usurped ] , Unit 1: Awareness and Appreciation ^ Image of a curious (tame) reindeer calf ^ The Greenlandic reindeer.

- Greenland Tourism and Business Council ^ "Sight and sound are less important senses for caribou when assessing danger. Sometimes caribou appear not to be disturbed by people who are standing still. However, caribou are very good at detecting movement, even in poor light...Caribou are more curious than other North American deer species. If they haven't been able to verify something as having the scent of danger, they will often move closer to investigate it." All About Caribou.

[ usurped ] - Project Caribou ^ Fakta om Grønland (facts about Greenland) Erhverv og næringsliv: Fiskeri, fangst og jagt.

Archived 2003-06-11 at the Wayback Machine - Nordens Institut i Grønland ^ Images from Itinnera: Renavlsstation nær bygden Kapisillit Archived 2007-03-03 at the Wayback Machine - Arktiske Billeder: Siulleq ^ Ole Holbech.

Itinnera images, 1976 ^ Jepsen B.I.; Siegismund H.R.; Fredholm M.

Population genetics of the native caribou ( Rangifer tarandus groenlandicus ) and the semi-domestic reindeer ( Rangifer tarandus tarandus ) in Southwestern Greenland: Evidence of introgression.

- Conservation Genetics , Volume 3, Number 4, 2002, pp. 401-409(9) ^ Greffard MC.

Peary Caribou ( Rangifer tarandus pearyi ) Archived 2007-05-10 at the Wayback Machine - McGill University, December 2000 ^ a b Lars Bjørknæs.

Grønlands lovsamling 2006.

Archived 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine - Hjemmestyrets bekendtgørelse nr. 18 af 18. juli 1995 om fredning af og jagt på rensdyr.

^ Rensdyrjagt fra snescooter er forbudt.

Kalaallit Nunaata Radioa, Greenland National Broadcasting Company, 11. February 2007 ^ Forlængelse af jagtperiode ^ Willy Zimmer.

The tough stuff.

- Casper Star-Tribune , September 23, 2004, Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation ^ Marty Prokop.

How to Field Dress a Deer ^ E. Dan Klepper.

Hang'em High.

- Texas Parks and Wildlife Magazine, November 2005 ^ Meat for transport Carrying meat Images showing transportation of meat Archived 2007-10-13 at the Wayback Machine ^ Colin Fletcher , in The Complete Walker ^ On October 11, 2015, the magnetic declination between the North Pole and Nuuk was "27° 49' W  ± 0° 33'  changing by  0° 22' E per year", calculated with NOAA 's Magnetic Field Calculators , National Geophysical Data Center .

References [ edit ] Muus, B., F. Salomonsen and C. Vibe, 1990.

Grønlands fauna (Fisk, Fugle, Pattedyr ). Gyldendalske Boghandel, Nordisk Forlag A/S København, 464 p. (in Danish).

Dr. Christine Cuyler - Research scientist, reindeer expert, extensive list of publications Peoples of the Reindeer.

- Michel Bouchard, University of the Arctic. (.pdf file) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cervidae .

Hunting, Herding, Fishing, and Gathering: Indigenous Peoples and Renewable Resource Use in the Arctic - Mark Nuttall, et al.

Human Role in Reindeer Systems - Rangifer.net ( University of Alaska Fairbanks ) Monitoring program: Rangifer as an indicator of change in the circumpolar arctic - Rangifer.net (U. of Alaska, Fairbanks) English articles on reindeer - Greenland Tourism and Business Council website search Dr. Christine Cuyler describes how she equips a reindeer while driving a snowmobile.

Project Caribou: An educator's guide [ usurped ] - Yukon Department of Environment v t e Greenland articles Greenland is an autonomous constituent country of the Kingdom of Denmark History Timeline Paleo-Eskimo Dorset culture Thule people Norse Colonization Eastern Settlement Western Settlement Language Skræling Hans Egede Treaty of Kiel Erik the Red's Land Fridtjof Nansen Land World War II Thule accident County of Greenland Home rule Autonomy (self-rule) Cartographic expeditions Geography Climate change Fjords Geology Glaciers Ice sheet Islands by area Mountains National park Rivers Straits Towns and villages Wildlife Politics Administrative divisions Elections Independence movement Foreign relations High Commissioner Parliament Law enforcement LGBT rights Military Political parties Ruling monarchs Political leader Governor (1728–1730, 1925–1979) Inspector (1782–1924) Prime Minister (1979–current) Economy Bank Companies Krone (currency) Fishing industry Mining National Bank Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Demographics Inuit Inughuit Kalaallit Tunumiit Danes Danish Greenlander Notable individuals artists Inuit Suicide Culture Art Cuisine Hunting Jante Law Mythology Language Music Public holidays Religion Sports Symbols Coat of arms Flag National (civic) anthem Royal anthem Outline Index Category v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐847s2
Cached time: 20250817132117
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.636 seconds
Real time usage: 0.810 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3379/1000000
Revision size: 42962/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 129928/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 23013/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 26/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 72502/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.352/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6976375/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  638.929      1 -total
 34.02%  217.344      1 Template:Reflist
 24.97%  159.525      1 Template:Greenland_topics
 24.60%  157.170      1 Template:Territory_topics
 14.67%   93.742      6 Template:Usurped
 14.35%   91.672      6 Template:Fix
 13.25%   84.670      1 Template:Cite_web
 12.95%   82.772      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 10.99%   70.198      6 Template:Delink
 10.29%   65.764      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10926596:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817132117 and revision id 1304495797. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reindeer_hunting_in_Greenland&oldid=1304495797 " Categories : Reindeer Deer hunting Nature conservation in Greenland Biota of Greenland Hunting in Greenland Culture of Greenland Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from September 2024 All pages needing cleanup Articles containing how-to sections Articles with weasel words from September 2024 Articles needing additional references from September 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Commons link is locally defined This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 10:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reindeer hunting in Greenland 1 language Add topic

