Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Socioeconomic polder model 2 Other uses 3 Historical background 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Polder model 7 languages العربية Deutsch 한국어 Magyar Nederlands Português Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dutch method of consensus decision-making Part of a series on Economic systems Major types Capitalism Socialism By ideology Associative Capitalist Corporate Democratic Laissez-faire Mercantilist Neo- Neoliberal Social market State Welfare Democratic Developmentalism Distributist Fascist Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgist Green Nationalist Protectionist Religious Buddhist economics Christian Sabbath economics Islamic Socialist Communist Market socialist Mutualist Participatory Socialist market Socialist-oriented market State Syndicalist Social credit Traditionalist Corporatist Feudalism By coordination Closed (autarky) Decentralized Digital Dirigist Dual Gift Informal Market Mixed Natural Open Planned Robinson Crusoe Sharing Subsistence Underground Vertical archipelago Virtual By regional model Asian East Asian Chinese Singaporean Keralan European Anglo-Saxon German Nordic Dutch Rhenish Soviet Latin America Socialism of the 21st century Sectors Common ownership Private Public Voluntary Property types Collective ownership Commons ( Common ownership ) Private property State ownership Social ownership Transition Collectivization Communization Corporatization Demutualization Deregulation Expropriation Financialization Liberalization Marketization Municipalization Mutualization Nationalization Privatization Socialization Marxist Coordination Barter Market Free Open Regulated Planning In kind Cybernetics Indicative Material balancing Price Self-managed Peer-to-peer Sharing Open access Other types Attention Commons-based peer production Expeditionary Hunter-gatherer Inclusive Democracy Information Manorialism Newly industrialized Palace Plantation Plutonomy Post-capitalist Post-industrial Post-scarcity Resource-based Token Traditional Transition World Business portal Economics portal v t e The polder model ( Dutch : poldermodel ) is a method of consensus decision-making , based on the Dutch version of consensus-based economic and social policymaking in the 1980s and 1990s.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It gets its name from the Dutch word ( polder ) for tracts of land enclosed by dikes.

The polder model has been described as "a pragmatic recognition of pluriformity" and "cooperation despite differences". It is thought that the Dutch politician Ina Brouwer was the first to use the term poldermodel , in her 1990 article " Het socialisme als poldermodel?

" (" Socialism as Polder Model?"), although it is uncertain whether she coined the term or simply seems to have been the first to write it down.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] Socioeconomic polder model [ edit ] Wim Kok , former Prime Minister of the Netherlands , supported the polder model.

The Dutch polder model is characterised by the tripartist cooperation between employers' organisations such as VNO-NCW , labour unions such as the Federation Dutch Labour Movement , and the government . These talks are embodied in the Social-Economic Council ( Dutch : Sociaal-Economische Raad , SER). The SER serves as the central forum to discuss labour issues and has a long tradition of consensus, often defusing labour conflicts and avoiding strike actions . Similar models are in use in Finland , namely the Comprehensive Income Policy Agreement and universal validity of collective labour agreements .

The current Dutch polder model is said to have begun with the Wassenaar Agreement of 1982, when unions, employers, and government decided on a comprehensive plan to revitalise the economy involving shorter working times and less pay on the one hand, and more employment on the other, [ 4 ] has increasingly steered in the direction of a neoliberal economic policy of privatisation and budget cuts.

An important role in this process was played by the Dutch Central Planning Bureau (CPB), founded by Jan Tinbergen . The CPB's policy advice since 1976, in particular with the Den Hartog and Tjan model, in favour of wage restraint , was an important argument, supportive for government and employers, that the unions could not easily counter. Many authors and researchers have argued that the importance of the Wassenaar Agreement has been largely overrated.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Most of these writers have argued that considerable continuity can be seen from the 1950s onwards. Historian Stijn Kuipers, goes even further. In an article reliant on the work of Coen Helderman, [ 9 ] Kuipers argues that the modern socioeconomic polder model already manifested itself in 1920 with the Dutch High Council of Labour. It follows that the polder model is therefore much older and could have had a larger influence on Dutch society and economy than previously thought.

[ 8 ] Other uses [ edit ] The term polder model and especially the verb polderen ("to polder") has been used pejoratively by some politicians to describe the slow decision-making process where all parties have to be heard. The model flourished under the purple coalition governments of Prime Minister Wim Kok , a coalition including the traditional rivals the Labour Party (a social-democratic party, whose colour is red) and the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( conservative liberals , whose colour is blue). In the declining economic climate of the early 21st century, the model came under fierce attack particularly from right-wing politicians and Pim Fortuyn in his book entitled De puinhopen van acht jaar Paars ( The Wreckage of Eight Years Purple ).

Historical background [ edit ] There is no consensus about the exact historical background of the polder model. In general, there are three views on this subject. One explanation points to the rebuilding of the Netherlands after World War II .

Corporatism was an important feature of Christian democracy and particularly Catholic political thought. During the postwar period, the Catholic, Protestant, Christian, social-democratic, and liberal parties decided to work together to reconstruct the Netherlands, as did labour unions and employers' organizations . Important institutions of the polder model like the SER were founded in this period. No single political party has ever had anything approaching an overall majority in parliament, so a coalition government is inevitable. This makes parties extremely cautious, since today's enemy may be tomorrow's ally, all the more so in present times when the perceived death of ideology has made it possible for almost all the parties to work together.

[ citation needed ] Another explanation points to the dependency of the Netherlands on international trade and the world economy . The Dutch cannot afford protectionism against the unpredictable tides of the international economy because the Netherlands is not an autarkic economy. To cushion against the international economy, they set up the Social-Economic Council , which oversaw an extensive welfare state .

[ citation needed ] A third explanation refers to a unique aspect of the Netherlands, that it consists in large part of polders , land reclaimed from the sea, which requires constant pumping and maintenance of the dykes . Ever since the Middle Ages , when the process of land reclamation began, different societies living in the same polder have been forced to cooperate because without unanimous agreement on shared responsibility for maintenance of the dykes and pumping stations, the polders would have flooded and everyone would have suffered. Crucially, even when different cities in the same polder were at war, they still had to cooperate in this respect. This is thought to have taught the Dutch to set aside differences for a greater purpose.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Bipartisanship Trasformismo References [ edit ] ^ a b Ewoud Sanders , Woorden met een verhaal (Amsterdam / Rotterdam, 2004), 104–06.

^ Stijn Kuipers, Het begin van het moderne Nederlandse poldermodel; De Hoge Raad van Arbeid van 1920 als eerste manifestatie van het Nederlandse tripartiete sociaaleconomische overlegmodel?

(Nijmegen, 2015), 3.

^ Ewoud Sanders, "Poldermodel" , NRC Handelsblad , 22 April 2002.

^ Elke van Riel, "Akkoord van Wassenaar keerpunt in relatie regering en sociale partners", SER Magazine , 2010 (versie 9) ( archived 15 April 2015).

^ Agnes Akkerman, "Zo historisch was het Akkoord van Wassenaar niet" Archived 2015-09-24 at the Wayback Machine , Radboud University Nijmegen , 2007 (retrieved 25 February 2015).

^ Jaap Woldendorp, The Polder Model: From Disease to Miracle? Dutch Neo-corporatism 1965–2000 (Amsterdam, 2005), 267–69.

^ Piet de Rooy, Republiek van rivaliteiten; Nederland sinds 1813 (2nd printing Amsterdam, 2005), 216–17.

^ a b Stijn Kuipers, "Het begin van het moderne Nederlandse poldermodel; De Hoge Raad van Arbeid van 1920 als eerste manifestatie van het Nederlandse tripartiete sociaaleconomische overlegmodel?" , Radboud University Nijmegen, 2015.

^ Coen Helderman, "De Hoge Raad van Arbeid, 1919–1940(–1950)" , Tijdschrift voor Sociale en Economische Geschiedenis I:2 (2004).

Further reading [ edit ] "Same old Dutch" , The Economist , 3 November 2012 "Model makers" , The Economist , 2 May 2002 "Economic illusions" , The Economist , 2 May 2002 "A fine place to be" , The Economist , 2 May 2002 Mark Kranenburg, "The political branch of the polder model" , NRC Handelsblad , 1 July 1999 v t e Netherlands articles Part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands History Germanic tribes Roman Era Frisii , Chamavi , Batavi , Cananefates Migration Period Saxons , Frisians , Franks Dorestad , Utrecht Development urban centers Frisian Kingdom Frankish Kingdom Middle Francia Lower Lorraine Flanders , Holland , Frisian Freedom Brabant , Guelders Holy Roman Empire Burgundian Netherlands Habsburg Netherlands Renaissance Seventeen Provinces Spanish Netherlands Eighty Years' War Dutch Republic Golden Age Batavian Revolution Batavian Republic Kingdom of Holland Incorporation Principality United Kingdom World War II Nazi invasion Dutch Liberation Day Proclamation of Indonesian Independence Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands Same-sex marriage Great Recession European debt crisis Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17 Coronavirus pandemic Geography Birds Cities Delta Works Earthquakes Extreme points Flood control Gas field Islands Lakes Mammals Mountains and hills Regions Rivers Rhine–Meuse–Scheldt delta Volcanoes World Heritage Sites Zuiderzee Works Politics Abortion Cabinet Climate change Constitution Corruption Demographics Drug policy Education Elections Euthanasia Health care Homelessness Foreign relations Human rights LGBT Immigration Law Enforcement Law Firms Monarch Municipalities Provinces Republicanism Parliament Political parties Prime Minister Military Water boards Economy AEX index Central bank Energy Euronext Polder model Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport Cycling Public transport Rail transport Road transport Culture Architecture Art Cannabis Cinema Cuisine Wine Customs and etiquette Decorations and medals Irreligion Languages Literature Media Music Orders of knighthood People Pornography Prostitution Public holidays Religion Sport Symbols Anthem Coat of arms Flag Lion Terminology Outline Category Portal v t e Economic and financial history of the Netherlands General Economic history of the Netherlands (1500–1815) Dutch guilder Amsterdam Entrepôt Tulip mania Dutch disease Whaling in the Netherlands Polder model Main institutions Pre-1815 Amsterdam Stock Exchange Bank of Amsterdam Brabantsche Compagnie Compagnie van Verre Dutch East India Company Dutch West India Company New Netherland Company Noordsche Compagnie Post-1815 De Nederlandsche Bank Philips Fokker KLM Stichting Max Havelaar Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Polder_model&oldid=1290426320 " Categories : Dispute resolution Dutch words and phrases Economy of the Netherlands Power sharing Economic systems Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Dutch-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 This page was last edited on 14 May 2025, at 18:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Polder model 7 languages Add topic

