Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of model Toggle Types of model subsection 1.1 Model in specific contexts 1.2 Physical model 1.3 Conceptual model 1.4 Examples 2 Properties of models, according to general model theory 3 Uses of models 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Model 23 languages العربية Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Français Gaeilge IsiZulu ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Magyar Bahasa Melayu Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Qaraqalpaqsha Русский کوردی Тоҷикӣ Українська 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Physical model ) Informative representation of an entity For fashion model, see Model (person) . For other uses, see Model (disambiguation) .

"Modelling" redirects here. For the MDPI journal, see Modelling (journal) .

Model of a molecule, with coloured balls representing different atoms A model is an informative representation of an object, person, or system. The term originally denoted the plans of a building in late 16th-century English, and derived via French and Italian ultimately from Latin modulus , ' a measure ' .

[ 1 ] Models can be divided into physical models (e.g. a ship model or a fashion model) and abstract models (e.g. a set of mathematical equations describing the workings of the atmosphere for the purpose of weather forecasting). Abstract or conceptual models are central to philosophy of science .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In scholarly research and applied science , a model should not be confused with a theory : while a model seeks only to represent reality with the purpose of better understanding or predicting the world, a theory is more ambitious in that it claims to be an explanation of reality.

[ 4 ] Types of model [ edit ] Model in specific contexts [ edit ] As a noun, model has specific meanings in certain fields, derived from its original meaning of "structural design or layout ": Model (art) , a person posing for an artist, e.g. a 15th-century criminal representing the biblical Judas in Leonardo da Vinci's painting The Last Supper Model (person) , a person who serves as a template for others to copy, as in a role model , often in the context of advertising commercial products; e.g. the first fashion model , Marie Vernet Worth in 1853, wife of designer Charles Frederick Worth .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Model (product) , a particular design of a product as displayed in a catalogue or show room (e.g.

Ford Model T , an early car model ) Model (organism) a non-human species that is studied to understand biological phenomena in other organisms, e.g. a guinea pig starved of vitamin C to study scurvy, an experiment that would be immoral to conduct on a person Model (mimicry) , a species that is mimicked by another species Model (logic) , a structure (a set of items, such as natural numbers 1, 2, 3,..., along with mathematical operations such as addition and multiplication, and relations, such as < {\displaystyle <} ) that satisfies a given system of axioms (basic truisms), i.e. that satisfies the statements of a given theory [ 7 ] Model (CGI) , a mathematical representation of any surface of an object in three dimensions via specialized software Model (MVC) , the information-representing internal component of a software, as distinct from its user interface Physical model [ edit ] Part of the one-ninth scale model of Bourton-on-the-Water at Bourton-on-the-Water, Gloucestershire , England A physical model (most commonly referred to simply as a model but in this context distinguished from a conceptual model ) is a smaller or larger physical representation of an object , person or system . The object being modelled may be small (e.g., an atom ) or large (e.g., the Solar System ) or life-size (e.g., a fashion model displaying clothes for similarly-built potential customers).

The geometry of the model and the object it represents are often similar in the sense that one is a rescaling of the other. However, in many cases the similarity is only approximate or even intentionally distorted. Sometimes the distortion is systematic, e.g., a fixed scale horizontally and a larger fixed scale vertically when modelling topography to enhance a region's mountains.

An architectural model permits visualization of internal relationships within the structure or external relationships of the structure to the environment.  Another use is as a toy .

Instrumented physical models are an effective way of investigating fluid flows for engineering design.  Physical models are often coupled with computational fluid dynamics models to optimize the design of equipment and processes.  This includes external flow such as around buildings, vehicles, people, or hydraulic structures .

Wind tunnel and water tunnel testing is often used for these design efforts.  Instrumented physical models can also examine internal flows, for the design of ductwork systems, pollution control equipment, food processing machines, and mixing vessels.  Transparent flow models are used in this case to observe the detailed flow phenomenon. These models are scaled in terms of both geometry and important forces, for example, using Froude number or Reynolds number scaling (see Similitude ). In the pre-computer era, the UK economy was modelled with the hydraulic model MONIAC , to predict for example the effect of tax rises on employment.

Water-powered model of the UK economy – MONIAC in the Science Museum, London Female model demonstrating brassiere for similarly-built potential buyers Model of a war scene — Australian War Memorial , Canberra Guinea pig used as animal model for studying human leptospirosis NASA wind tunnel with the scale model of an aeroplane Conceptual model [ edit ] Weather models use differential equations based on the laws of physics , and a coordinate system which divides the planet into a 3D grid.

A conceptual model is a theoretical representation of a system, e.g. a set of mathematical equations attempting to describe the workings of the atmosphere for the purpose of weather forecasting.

[ 8 ] It consists of concepts used to help understand or simulate a subject the model represents.

Abstract or conceptual models are central to philosophy of science , [ 2 ] [ 3 ] as almost every scientific theory effectively embeds some kind of model of the physical or human sphere . In some sense, a physical model "is always the reification of some conceptual model; the conceptual model is conceived ahead as the blueprint of the physical one", which is then constructed as conceived.

[ 9 ] Thus, the term refers to models that are formed after a conceptualization or generalization process.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Examples [ edit ] Conceptual model (computer science) , an agreed representation of entities and their relationships, to assist in developing software Economic model , a theoretical construct representing economic processes Language model , a probabilistic model of a natural language, used for speech recognition, language generation, and information retrieval Large language models are artificial neural networks used for generative artificial intelligence (AI), e.g. ChatGPT Mathematical model , a description of a system using mathematical concepts and language Statistical model , a mathematical model that usually specifies the relationship between one or more random variables and other non-random variables Model (CGI) , a mathematical representation of any surface of an object in three dimensions via specialized software Medical model , a proposed "set of procedures in which all doctors are trained" Mental model , in psychology, an internal representation of external reality Model (logic) , a set along with a collection of finitary operations, and relations that are defined on it, satisfying a given collection of axioms Model (MVC) , information-representing component of a software, distinct from the user interface (the "view"), both linked by the "controller" component, in the context of the model–view–controller software design Model act , a law drafted centrally to be disseminated and proposed for enactment in multiple independent legislatures Standard model (disambiguation) Properties of models, according to general model theory [ edit ] According to Herbert Stachowiak , a model is characterized by at least three properties: [ 10 ] 1. Mapping A model always is a model of something —it is an image or representation of some natural or artificial, existing or imagined original, [ 11 ] where this original itself could be a model.

2. Reduction In general, a model will not include all attributes that describe the original but only those that appear relevant to the model's creator or user.

3. Pragmatism A model does not relate unambiguously to its original. It is intended to work as a replacement for the original a) for certain subjects (for whom?) b) within a certain time range (when?) c) restricted to certain conceptual or physical actions (what for?) .

For example, a street map is a model of the actual streets in a city (mapping), showing the course of the streets while leaving out, say, traffic signs and road markings (reduction), made for pedestrians and vehicle drivers for the purpose of finding one's way in the city (pragmatism).

Additional properties have been proposed, like extension and distortion [ 12 ] as well as validity .

[ 13 ] The American philosopher Michael Weisberg differentiates between concrete and mathematical models and proposes computer simulations (computational models) as their own class of models.

[ 14 ] Uses of models [ edit ] According to Bruce Edmonds, there are at least 5 general uses for models: [ 15 ] Prediction : reliably anticipating unknown data, including data within the domain of the training data ( interpolation ), and outside the domain ( extrapolation ) Explanation : establishing plausible chains of causality by proposing mechanisms that can explain patterns seen in data Theoretical exposition : discovering or proposing new hypotheses, or refuting existing hypotheses about the behaviour of the system being modelled Description : representing important aspects of the system being modelled Illustration : communicating an idea or explanation See also [ edit ] Conceptual framework Metamodeling Model aircraft Model car Model house Model railway Model rocket Rail transport modelling Scale model Scientific model References [ edit ] ^ Oxford English Dictionary , Oxford University Press, doi : 10.1093/OED/3984201854 , retrieved 1 July 2023 ^ a b c Merriam-Webster, Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary , Merriam-Webster.

^ a b c Tatomir, A.; et al. (2018).

"Conceptual model development using a generic Features, Events, and Processes (FEP) database for assessing the potential impact of hydraulic fracturing on groundwater aquifers" .

Advances in Geosciences .

45 : 185– 192.

Bibcode : 2018AdG....45..185T .

doi : 10.5194/adgeo-45-185-2018 .

hdl : 20.500.11820/b83437b4-6791-4c4c-8f45-744a116c6ead .

^ Wunsch, G. (1994). "Theories, models, and data".

Demografie .

36 (1): 20– 29.

PMID 12346076 .

^ "modelworker.com" . Archived from the original on 2007-10-17.

^ Walker, Harriet (4 May 2009).

"Fabulous faces of fashion: A century of modelling" .

The Independent . Archived from the original on 2011-05-28 . Retrieved 2017-09-05 .

^ Chang and Keisler, p. 1 ^ Forecast models , Met Office.

^ Ibrahim A. Halloun, Modeling Theory in Science Education (2007), p. 36.

^ Herbert Stachowiak: Allgemeine Modelltheorie , 1973, S. 131–133.

^ "TRICK: An Easy Acronym to Conceptualize Digital Twin" .

automation.com . Retrieved 2024-11-05 .

^ Thalheim: Towards a Theory of Conceptual Modelling . In: Journal of Universal Computer Science , vol. 16, 2010, no. 20, S. 3120 ^ Dietrich Dörner: Thought and Design – Research Strategies, Single-case Approach and Methods of Validation . In: E. Frankenberger et al. (eds.): Designers. The Key to Successful Product Development . Springer-Verlag, Berlin et al. 1998, S. 3–11.

^ M. Weisberg: Simulation and Similarity - using models to understand the world.

Oxford University Press, New York 2013 ^ Edmonds, Bruce (2017).

"Different Modelling Purposes" . In Bruce Edmonds; Ruth Meyer (eds.).

Simulating Social Complexity: A Handbook . Understanding Complex Systems. Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp.

39– 58.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-66948-9_4 .

ISBN 978-3-319-66948-9 . Retrieved 2025-03-26 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Physical models at Wikimedia Commons Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX Index of articles associated with the same name This set index article includes a list of related items that share the same name (or similar names).

If an internal link incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Model&oldid=1292214610#Physical_model " Categories : Set index articles Simulation Knowledge representation Physical models Scale modeling Copying Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is locally defined All set index articles Broad-concept articles This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 20:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Model 23 languages Add topic

