Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Legislation in Scotland 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Croft (land) 4 languages Español Français Gàidhlig 한국어 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Small area of agricultural land This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Shetland Crofthouse Museum at Dunrossness , Shetland , with peat stacked outside A croft is a traditional Scottish term for a fenced or enclosed area of land, usually small and arable , and usually, but not always, with a crofter's dwelling thereon. A crofter is one who has tenure and use of the land, typically as a tenant farmer , especially in rural areas.

In Northern England, crofter was a term connected with tenant farming and rural employment. For example in the textiles industry; someone who bleached cloth prior to dyeing, laying it out in fields or 'crofts'.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Etymology [ edit ] The word croft is West Germanic in etymology, derived from the Dutch term kroft or krocht and the Old English croft (itself of debated origin), meaning an enclosed field.

[ 4 ] Today, the term is used most frequently in Scotland , most crofts being in the Highlands and Islands area. Elsewhere the expression is generally archaic . In Scottish Gaelic , it is rendered croit ( pronounced [kʰɾɔʰtʲ] , plural croitean [ˈkʰɾɔʰtʲən] ).

Legislation in Scotland [ edit ] The Scottish croft is a small agricultural landholding of a type that has been subject to special legislation applying to the Scottish Highlands since 1886.

[ 5 ] The legislation was largely a response to the complaints and demands of tenant families who were victims of the Highland Clearances . The modern crofters or tenants appear very little in evidence before the beginning of the 18th century. They were tenants at will underneath the tacksman and wadsetters , but practically their tenure was secure enough. The first evidence that can be found of small tenants holding directly of the proprietor is in a rental of the estates of Sir D. MacDonald in Skye and North Uist in 1715.

[ 6 ] The first planned crofting townships in the Outer Hebrides were Barragloum and Kirkibost (Great Bernera) which were laid out into 32 large "lots" of between 14 and 30 acres in the uniform rectangular pattern that would become very familiar in later decades. This work was carried out in 1805 by James Chapman for the Earl of Seaforth.

The first edition of the Ordnance Survey in 1850 clearly highlights the division of this land and the turf and stone boundaries built by the first tenants in 1805 are still in use today as croft boundaries. Kirkibost was 'cleared' of its tenants in 1823 and the 1850 mapping clearly shows roofless ruins on each parcel of land. The township was however re-settled in 1878 following the Bernera Riot four years earlier using exactly the same division boundaries set out in 1805.

[ 6 ] The Parliament of the United Kingdom created the Crofters' Act 1886 , after the Highland Land League had gained seats in that parliament. The government was then Liberal , with William Ewart Gladstone as Prime minister. Another Crofters' Act was created in 1993 (the Crofters' (Scotland) Act 1993). The earlier Act established the first Crofting Commission , but its responsibilities were quite different from those of the newer Crofters Commission created in 1955. The Commission is based in Inverness .

[ 6 ] Crofts held subject to the provisions of the Crofters' Acts are in the administrative counties of Shetland , Orkney, Caithness , Sutherland, Ross-shire , Inverness-shire and Argyll , in the north and west of Scotland. Under the 1886 legislation (the Crofters' Holdings (Scotland) Act ) protected crofters are members of a crofters' township , consisting of tenants of neighbouring crofts with a shared right to use common pasture . Since 1976 it has been legally possible for a crofter to acquire title to his croft, thus becoming an owner-occupier .

[ 6 ] The Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 gives crofters the right to buy their land.

See also [ edit ] Crofting Torp (architecture) References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from Dwelly's [Scottish] Gaelic Dictionary (1911) . (Croitear) ^ McBain, Gayle (15 June 2016).

"Horwich and Wallsuches' history revealed" .

The Bolton News .

^ Cakebread, Dennis William.

"Early Bleaching Methods" . Retrieved 8 December 2024 .

^ "Old occupations" .

Hall geneaology . 16 September 2018 . Retrieved 8 December 2024 .

^ Simpson, J.A.; Weiner, Edmund S.C., eds. (1989). "Croft".

Oxford English Dictionary (2nd ed.). Oxford: Clarendon.

ISBN 9780198611868 .

^ Chambers, W.R., ed. (1901).

"Crofter" .

Chambers's Encyclopaedia . Vol. 3 (revised ed.). p. 575 . Retrieved 25 February 2023 .

^ a b c d MacDonald, L. (1886).

The Past and Present Position of the Skye Crofters . Glasgow: Bell and Bain Printers.

JSTOR 60245142 .

External links [ edit ] Crofters Commission Scottish Crofting Federation v t e Gaels General history Gaelic Ireland Pre-Norman invasion Irish Celtic kinship groups High King of Ireland Irish kingdoms Dál Riata Alba Nine Years' War Statutes of Iona Flight of the Earls Plantation of Ulster 1641 Rebellion Act for the Settlement of Ireland 1652 Jacobitism Jacobite rising of 1745 Penal Laws Great Hunger Irish diaspora Highland Clearances Gaelic Revival Gaeltacht Gàidhealtachd Gaelic culture Ogham Brehon law Gaelic mythology Lebor Gabála Érenn Gaelic warfare Gaelic astrology Gaelic kinship Bardic poetry Gaelic literature ( Early Irish , Modern Irish , Scottish Gaelic & Manx ) Gaelic type Insular script Fáinne Gaelic folk music Sean-nós singing Oireachtas na Gaeilge Am Mòd Gaelic games Highland games Túath Insular Christianity Gaelic Christian mission Language Primitive Irish Old Irish Middle Irish Classical Gaelic Irish Manx Scottish Gaelic Clans Irish Royal families Kings Medical families Nobility Genealogy List Connachta (incl.

Uí Néill , Clan Colla , Clan Donald , Uí Mháine , etc) Dalcassians (incl.

Déisi ) Eóganachta Érainn (incl.

Dál Riata , Corcu Loígde , Dál Fiatach , etc) Laigin Ulaid (incl.

Dál nAraidi , Conmaicne , and Cíarraige ) Ulster Scottish List Related organisations Údarás na Gaeltachta Foras na Gaeilge Bòrd na Gàidhlig Culture Vannin Conradh na Gaeilge An Comunn Gàidhealach Yn Çheshaght Ghailckagh Seachtain na Gaeilge Gael Linn ULTACH Trust Comunn na Gàidhlig Columba Project Clans of Ireland An Coimisinéir Teanga Related subjects Haplogroup R-M269 ( human genetics ) Celts Norse–Gaels (incl.

Uí Ímair and Clan MacLeod ) Kingdom of Munster Kingdom of the Isles Gaelicisation Category v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Croft_(land)&oldid=1270029846 " Categories : Crofting Property Society of Scotland Farms Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2021 Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2022 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles containing Scottish Gaelic-language text Pages with Scottish Gaelic IPA Wikipedia articles incorporating text from Dwelly's Gaelic Dictionary This page was last edited on 17 January 2025, at 15:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Croft (land) 4 languages Add topic

