Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Education 1.2 Opposition to Arianism 1.3 Patriarch 1.3.1 First exile 1.3.2 Second exile 1.3.3 Third exile 1.3.4 Fourth exile 1.3.5 Fifth exile 1.3.6 Final years and death 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Polemical and theological works 2.2 Biographical and ascetic works 2.3 Misattributed works 3 Eschatology 4 Veneration 5 Legacy 6 Historical significance and controversies Toggle Historical significance and controversies subsection 6.1 New Testament canon 6.2 Supporters 6.3 Critics 7 Selected works 8 See also 9 Explanatory notes 10 Citations 11 General and cited sources 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Athanasius of Alexandria 67 languages Afrikaans العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Boarisch Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Walon West-Vlams 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pope of Alexandria from 328 to 373 "Athanasius" redirects here. For other people named Athanasius or Athanasios, see Athanasius (given name) .

Saint Athanasius of Alexandria Pope and Patriarch of Alexandria Icon of St Athanasius Church Early Church See Alexandria Predecessor Alexander Successor Peter II Personal details Born c.

296–298 Alexandria , Roman Egypt Died 2 May 373 (aged 75–77) Alexandria, Roman Egypt Occupation Pope of Alexandria Philosophical work Era Patristic Age School Nicene Christianity Trinitarianism Language Coptic , Greek Main interests Theology Notable works First Letters to Serapion Life of Antony On the Incarnation Notable ideas Consubstantiality , Trinity , divinity of Jesus , Theotokos [ 1 ] Sainthood Feast day 7 Pashons ( Coptic Christianity ) 2 May ( Western Christianity ) 18 January ( Byzantine Christianity ) Venerated in Catholic Church Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox Church Assyrian Church of the East Anglican Communion Lutheranism Attributes Bishop arguing with a pagan ; bishop holding an open book; bishop standing over a defeated heretic ( Arius ) Shrines Church of San Zaccaria in Venice , Italy, and Saint Mark's Coptic Orthodox Cathedral in Cairo , Egypt Part of a series on the Eastern Orthodox Church Mosaic of Christ Pantocrator , Hagia Sophia Overview Structure Theology ( History of theology ) Liturgy Church history Holy Mysteries View of Salvation View of Mary View of icons Background Crucifixion / Resurrection / Ascension of Jesus Christianity Christian Church Apostolic succession Four Marks of the Church Orthodoxy Organization Autonomy Autocephaly Patriarchate Ecumenical Patriarch Episcopal polity Canon law Clergy Bishops Priests Deacons Monasticism Degrees Bratstvo Autocephalous jurisdictions Autocephalous Churches who are officially part of the communion: Constantinople Alexandria Antioch Jerusalem Russia Serbia Romania Bulgaria Georgia Cyprus Greece Poland Albania Czech Lands and Slovakia Autocephaly recognized by some autocephalous Churches de jure : America North Macedonia Autocephaly and canonicity recognized by Constantinople and 3 other autocephalous Churches: Ukraine (OCU) Spiritual independence recognized by Georgian Orthodox Church: Ukraine (UOC) Autonomous jurisdictions Sinai (JP) Finland (EP) Estonia (EP) Japan (MP) China (MP) Americas (RP) Bessarabia (RP) Moldova (MP) Semi-Autonomous: Crete (EP) Estonia (MP) ROCOR (MP) Episcopal assemblies Australia, New Zealand, and Oceania Austria Belgium, Holland, and Luxembourg Canada France Germany Great Britain and Ireland Italy and Malta Latin America Scandinavia Spain and Portugal Switzerland and Liechtenstein United States of America Noncanonical jurisdictions Old Believers Spiritual Christianity True Orthodoxy Catacomb Church Old Calendarists American Orthodox Catholic Church American World Patriarchs National churches: Abkhazia Belarus Italy Latvia Montenegro Turkey UOC–KP Evangelical Orthodox Ecumenical councils First Seven Ecumenical Councils : Nicaea I Constantinople I Ephesus Chalcedon Constantinople II Constantinople III Nicaea II Other possible ecumenical councils: Constantinople IV Constantinople V Other important councils: Quinisext Council Jassy Moscow Jerusalem Constantinople (1872) History Church Fathers Pentarchy Byzantine Empire Christianization of Georgia Christianization of Bulgaria Christianization of Kievan Rus' Great Schism Russia Ottoman Empire North America Moscow–Constantinople schism 15th–16th c.

1996 2018 Theology History of Eastern Orthodox theology ( 20th century (Neo-Palamism) ) Apophaticism Chrismation Contemplative prayer Essence vs. Energies Hesychasm Holy Trinity Hypostatic union Icons Metousiosis Mystical theology Nicene Creed Nepsis Oikonomia vs Akribeia Ousia Palamism Philokalia Phronema Sin Theosis Theotokos Differences from the Catholic Church Opposition to the Filioque Opposition to papal supremacy Liturgy and worship Divine Liturgy Divine Services Akathist Apolytikion Artos Ectenia Euchologion Holy Water Iconostasis Jesus Prayer Aprakos Kontakion Liturgical entrances Liturgical fans Lity Memorial service Memory Eternal Omophorion Eastern Orthodox bowing Eastern Orthodox marriage Praxis Paraklesis Paschal greeting Paschal Homily Paschal troparion Prayer rope Prosphora Russian bell ringing Semantron Sign of the cross Sticheron Troparion Vestments Use of incense Liturgical calendar Paschal cycle 12 Great Feasts Other feasts: Feast of Orthodoxy Intercession of the Theotokos The four fasting periods: Nativity Fast Great Lent Apostles' Fast Dormition Fast Major figures Saints ( Russian (until 15th century) , Russian (post-15th century) , Serbian , American ) Justin Martyr Athanasius of Alexandria Ephraim the Syrian Basil of Caesarea Cyril of Jerusalem Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa John Chrysostom Cyril of Alexandria John Climacus Maximus the Confessor John of Damascus Theodore the Studite Kassia Cyril and Methodius Photius I of Constantinople Vladimir the Great Sava I of Serbia Gregory Palamas Innocent of Alaska Other topics Architecture Folk Encyclical of the Eastern Patriarchs Cross Saint titles Statistics by country v t e Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Part of a series on Oriental Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodox churches Coptic Syriac Armenian Indian Cilicia Orthodox Tewahedo Ethiopian Eritrean Independent churches Coptic : British Orthodox Tewahedo : Tigrayan Syriac : Malabar Independent Autonomous churches Coptic : French Coptic Orthodox Church Armenian : Constantinople , Jerusalem Syriac : Jacobite Syrian Christian Church History and theology History of Oriental Orthodoxy : Coptic history Tewahedo history Syriac history Saint Thomas Christians Ecumenical Councils: Nicaea I Constantinople I Ephesus I Ephesus II Ephesus III Dvin I Dvin II Dvin III Dvin IV Manzikert Capharthutha Shirakavan Hromkla Theology: Miaphysitism Oriental Orthodox theology Non-Chalcedonian Christianity Liturgy and practices Anaphora & Rites: Alexandrian Rite Anaphora of Saint Gregory Armenian Rite West Syriac Rite Liturgy of Saint James Liturgy of Saint Basil Liturgy of Saint Cyril Malankara Rite Holy Qurobo Calendars: Armenian Coptic Ethiopian Julian Gregorian Bible: Peshitta Coptic Bible Armenian Bible Orthodox Tewahedo Bible Cross: Coptic cross Armenian Cross St. Thomas Cross Ethiopian cross Major figures Cyril of Alexandria Mor Addai Abgar V Gregory the Illuminator Nine Saints of Ethiopia Tiridates III Mar Awgin Athanasius of Alexandria Ephrem the Syrian Ezana of Axum Frumentius Shenoute Mesrop Mashtots Dioscorus of Alexandria Severus of Antioch Abraham of Farshut Yared Simon the Tanner Gregory of Narek Nerses IV Michael the Syrian Bar Hebraeus Tekle Haymanot Giyorgis of Segla Mar Thoma I Gregorios Abdal Jaleel Geevarghese Gregorios Related topics Abuna Catholicos Catholicos of India Patriarch of Antioch Maphrian Ethiopian titles Apostolic Church-Ordinance Coptic monasticism Coptic saints Debtera Coonan Cross Oath Ethiopian chant Fast of Nineveh Coptic fasting Tewahedo fasting Timkat Links and resources Category Media Templates WikiProject Christianity portal v t e Athanasius I of Alexandria [ note 1 ] ( c.

296–298 – 2 May 373), also called Athanasius the Great , Athanasius the Confessor , or, among Coptic Christians , Athanasius the Apostolic , was a Christian theologian and the 20th patriarch of Alexandria (as Athanasius I ). His intermittent episcopacy spanned 45 years ( c.

8 June 328 – 2 May 373), of which over 17 encompassed five exiles, when he was replaced on the order of four different Roman emperors . Athanasius was a Church Father , [ 3 ] the chief proponent of Trinitarianism against Arianism , and a noted Egyptian Christian leader of the fourth century.

Conflict with Arius and Arianism, as well as with successive Roman emperors, shaped Athanasius' career. In 325, at age 27, Athanasius began his leading role against the Arians as a deacon and assistant to Bishop Alexander of Alexandria during the First Council of Nicaea . Roman Emperor Constantine the Great had convened the council in May–August 325 to address the Arian position that the Son of God , Jesus of Nazareth , is of a distinct substance from the Father .

[ 4 ] Three years after that council, Athanasius succeeded his mentor as Patriarch of Alexandria. In addition to the conflict with the Arians (including powerful and influential Arian churchmen led by Eusebius of Nicomedia ), he struggled against the Emperors Constantine, Constantius II , Julian the Apostate and Valens . He was known as Athanasius Contra Mundum (Latin for 'Athanasius Against the World').

Nonetheless, within a few years of his death, Gregory of Nazianzus called him the "Pillar of the Church". His writings were well regarded by subsequent Church fathers in the West and the East, who noted their devotion to the Word-become-man , pastoral concern and interest in monasticism . Athanasius is considered one of the four great Eastern Doctors of the Church in the Catholic Church .

[ 5 ] Some argue that, in his Easter letter of 367, Athanasius was the first person to list the 27 books of the New Testament canon that are in use today.

[ 6 ] Others argue that Origen of Alexandria was the first to list the twenty-seven books of the New Testament in his Homilies on Joshua (only there is a textual variant as to whether or not he included Revelation ).

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Athanasius is venerated as a saint in the Catholic Church , [ 9 ] Eastern Orthodox Church , [ 10 ] Oriental Orthodox Church , Church of the East , the Anglican Communion , and Lutheranism .

Biography [ edit ] A statue of Athanasius in Catania , Sicily Athanasius was born to a Christian family in Alexandria , [ 11 ] or possibly the nearby Nile Delta town of Damanhur , sometime between 293 and 298. The earlier date is sometimes assigned because of the maturity revealed in his two earliest treatises Contra Gentes ( Against the Heathens ) and De Incarnatione ( On the Incarnation ), which were likely written circa 318 before Arianism had begun to make itself felt, as those writings do not show an awareness of Arianism.

[ 12 ] However, Cornelius Clifford places his birth no earlier than 296 and no later than 298, based on the fact that Athanasius indicates no first-hand recollection of the Maximian persecution of 303, which he suggests Athanasius would have remembered if he had been ten years old at the time. Secondly, the Festal Epistles state that the Arians had accused Athanasius, among other charges, of not having yet attained the canonical age (35) and thus could not have been properly ordained as patriarch of Alexandria in 328. The accusation must have seemed plausible.

[ 12 ] The Orthodox Church places his year of birth around 297.

[ 11 ] Education [ edit ] His parents were wealthy enough to give him a fine secular education.

[ 12 ] He was, nevertheless, clearly not a member of the Egyptian aristocracy.

[ 13 ] Some Western scholars consider his command of Greek , in which he wrote most (if not all) of his surviving works, evidence that he may have been a Greek born in Alexandria . Historical evidence, however, indicates that he was fluent in Coptic as well, given the regions of Egypt where he preached.

[ 13 ] Some surviving copies of his writings are in fact in Coptic, though scholars differ as to whether he wrote them in Coptic originally (which would make him the first patriarch to do so) or whether these were translations of writings originally in Greek.

[ 14 ] [ 13 ] Rufinus relates a story that as Bishop Alexander stood by a window, he watched boys playing on the seashore below, imitating the ritual of Christian baptism. He sent for the children and discovered that one of the boys (Athanasius) had acted as bishop. After questioning Athanasius, Bishop Alexander informed him that the baptisms were genuine, as both the form and matter of the sacrament had been performed through the recitation of the correct words and the administration of water, and that he must not continue to do this as those baptized had not been properly catechized . He invited Athanasius and his playfellows to prepare for clerical careers.

[ 15 ] Alexandria was the most important trade centre in the empire during Athanasius's boyhood. Intellectually, morally, and politically—it epitomized the ethnically diverse Graeco-Roman world, even more than Rome or Constantinople, Antioch or Marseilles.

[ 15 ] Its famous catechetical school, while sacrificing none of its famous passion for orthodoxy since the days of Pantaenus , Clement of Alexandria , Origen , Dionysius and Theognostus , had begun to take on an almost secular character in the comprehensiveness of its interests and had counted influential pagans among its serious auditors.

[ 16 ] Peter of Alexandria , the 17th archbishop of Alexandria, was martyred in 311 in the closing days of the Great Persecution and may have been one of Athanasius's teachers. His successor as bishop of Alexandria was Alexander of Alexandria . According to Sozomen ; "the Bishop Alexander 'invited Athanasius to be his commensal and secretary. He had been well educated, and was versed in grammar and rhetoric, and had already, while still a young man, and before reaching the episcopate, given proof to those who dwelt with him of his wisdom and acumen ' " (Soz., II, xvii).

[ 12 ] Athanasius' earliest work, Against the Heathen – On the Incarnation (written before 319), bears traces of Origenist Alexandrian thought but in an orthodox way.

[ 12 ] Athanasius was also familiar with the theories of various philosophical schools and in particular with the developments of neoplatonism . Ultimately, Athanasius would modify the philosophical thought of the School of Alexandria away from the Origenist principles such as the "entirely allegorical interpretation of the text". Still, in later works, Athanasius quotes Homer more than once ( Hist. Ar. 68, Orat. iv. 29 ).

St. Athanasius (1883–84), by Carl Rohl-Smith , Frederik's Church , Copenhagen, Denmark Athanasius knew Greek and admitted not knowing Hebrew [see, e.g., the 39th Festal Letter of St. Athan]. The Old Testament passages he quotes frequently come from the Septuagint Greek translation. Only rarely did he use other Greek versions (to Aquila once in the Ecthesis , to other versions once or twice on the Psalms), and his knowledge of the Old Testament was limited to the Septuagint.

[ 17 ] [ full citation needed ] Bishop (or Patriarch, the highest ecclesial rank in the Centre of the Church, in Alexandria) Alexander ordained Athanasius a deacon in 319.

[ 18 ] [ page needed ] In 325, Athanasius served as Alexander's secretary at the First Council of Nicaea . Already a recognized theologian and ascetic , he was the obvious choice to replace his ageing mentor Alexander as the Pope of Alexandria , [ 19 ] despite the opposition of the followers of Arius and Meletius of Lycopolis .

[ 18 ] At length, in the Council of Nicaea, the term "consubstantial" ( homoousion ) was adopted, and a formulary of faith embodying it was drawn up by Hosius of Córdoba . From this time to the end of the Arian controversies, the word "consubstantial" continued to be the test of orthodoxy. The formulary of faith drawn up by Hosius is known as the Nicene Creed .

[ 20 ] : 232 However, "he was not the originator of the famous 'homoousion' ( ACC of homoousios ). The term had been proposed in a non-obvious and illegitimate sense by Paul of Samosata to the Fathers at Antioch, and had been rejected by them as savouring of materialistic conceptions of the Godhead." [ 12 ] While still a deacon under Alexander's care (or early in his patriarchate as discussed below) Athanasius may have also become acquainted with some of the solitaries of the Egyptian desert, and in particular Anthony the Great , whose life he is said to have written.

[ 15 ] Opposition to Arianism [ edit ] Further information: Arian controversy In about 319, when Athanasius was a deacon, a presbyter named Arius came into a direct conflict with Alexander of Alexandria. It appears that Arius reproached Alexander for what he felt were misguided or heretical teachings being taught by the bishop.

[ 21 ] Arius embraced a subordinationist Christology which taught that Christ was the divine Son ( Logos ) of God, made, not begotten. Arius had support from a powerful bishop named Eusebius of Nicomedia (not to be confused with Eusebius of Caesarea), [ 22 ] illustrating how Arius's subordinationist Christology was shared by other Christians in the empire. Arius was subsequently excommunicated by Alexander, and Arius began to elicit the support of many bishops who agreed with his position.

[ 18 ] : 297 Patriarch [ edit ] Papal styles of Pope Athanasius I Reference style His Holiness Spoken style Your Holiness Religious style Pope and Patriarch Posthumous style Saint Frances A. M. Forbes writes that when Patriarch Alexander was on his death-bed he called Athanasius, who fled fearing he would be constrained to be made bishop. "When the Bishops of the Church assembled to elect their new Patriarch, the whole Catholic population surrounded the church, holding up their hands to Heaven and crying; "Give us Athanasius!" The Bishops had nothing better. Athanasius was thus elected, as Gregory tells us..." ( Pope Gregory I had full access to the Vatican Archives ).

[ 23 ] : Chapter 4 Alban Butler writes on the subject: "Five months after this great Council, Nicae, St Alexander lying on his deathbed, recommended to his clergy and people the choice of Athanasius for his successor, thrice repeating his name. In consequence of his recommendation, the bishops of all Egypt assembled at Alexandria, and finding the people and clergy unanimous in their choice of Athanasius for patriarch, they confirmed the election about the middle of year 326. He seems, then, to have been about thirty years of age." [ 24 ] Icon of Saint Athanasios, Antivouniotissa Museum, Kerkyra.

T. Gilmartin (Professor of History, Maynooth , 1890) writes: "On the death of Alexander, five months after the termination of the Council of Nicaea, Athanasius was unanimously elected to fill the vacant see. He was most unwilling to accept the dignity, for he clearly foresaw the difficulties in which it would involve him. The clergy and people were determined to have him as their bishop, Patriarch of Alexandria, and refused to accept any excuses. He at length consented to accept a responsibility that he sought in vain to escape, and was consecrated in 326, when he was about thirty years of age." [ 20 ] : 244–248 Athanasius' episcopate began on 9 May 328 as the Alexandrian Council elected Athanasius to succeed after the death of Alexander.

[ 20 ] : 245 Patriarch Athanasius spent over 17 years in five exiles ordered by four different Roman Emperors, not counting approximately six more incidents in which Athanasius fled Alexandria to escape people seeking to take his life.

[ 19 ] During his first years as bishop, Athanasius visited the churches of his territory, which at that time included all of Egypt and Libya . He established contacts with the hermits and monks of the desert, including Pachomius , which proved very valuable to him over the years.

[ 19 ] "During the forty-eight years of his episcopate, his history is told in the history of the controversies in which he was constantly engaged with the Arians, and of the sufferings he had to endure in defence of the Nicene faith. 
We have seen that when Arius was allowed to return from exile in 328, Athanasius refused to remove the sentence of excommunication." [ 20 ] : 245 First exile [ edit ] Athanasius' first problem lay with Meletius of Lycopolis and his followers, who had failed to abide by the First Council of Nicaea. That council also anathematized Arius. Accused of mistreating Arians and Meletians, Athanasius answered those charges at a gathering of bishops at the First Synod of Tyre in 335. There, Eusebius of Nicomedia and other supporters of Arius deposed Athanasius.

[ 18 ] [ page needed ] On 6 November, both sides of the dispute met with Emperor Constantine I in Constantinople .

[ 25 ] At that meeting, the Arians claimed Athanasius would try to cut off essential Egyptian grain supplies to Constantinople. He was found guilty and sent into exile to Augusta Treverorum in Gaul (now Trier in Germany).

[ 18 ] [ page needed ] [ 19 ] When Athanasius reached his destination in exile in 336, Maximin of Trier received him, but not as a disgraced person. Athanasius stayed with him for two years.

[ 24 ] Constantine died in 337 and was succeeded by his three sons, Constantine II , Constantius , and Constans .

Paul I of Constantinople had cautioned Emperor Constans against the Arians, revealing their plots, and he also had been banished and found shelter with Maximin.

[ 26 ] Second exile [ edit ] Fresco at Hosios Loukas , Greece (11th century) Statue of the saint in St Athanasius's Catholic Church in Evanston, Illinois When Emperor Constantine I died, Athanasius was allowed to return to his See of Alexandria. Shortly thereafter, however, Constantius II renewed the order for Athanasius's banishment in 338. "Within a few weeks he set out for Rome to lay his case before the Church at large. He had made his appeal to Pope Julius , who took up his cause with whole-heartedness that never wavered down to the day of that holy pontiff's death. The pope summoned a synod of bishops to meet in Rome. After a careful and detailed examination of the entire case, the primate's innocence was proclaimed to the Christian world." [ 12 ] During this time, Gregory of Cappadocia , an Arian bishop, was installed as the patriarch of Alexandria, usurping the absent Athanasius. Athanasius did, however, remain in contact with his people through his annual Festal Letters , in which he also announced on which date Easter would be celebrated that year.

[ 19 ] In 339 or 340, nearly one hundred bishops met at Alexandria, declared in favour of Athanasius, [ 27 ] and vigorously rejected the criticisms of the Eusebian faction at Tyre. Plus, Pope Julius wrote to the supporters of Arius strongly urging Athanasius's reinstatement, but that effort proved in vain. Julius called a synod in Rome in 340 to address the matter, which proclaimed Athanasius the rightful bishop of Alexandria.

[ 28 ] Early in 343 Athanasius met with Hosius of Córdoba, and together they set out for Serdica . A full council of the Church was summoned there in deference to the Roman pontiff's wishes. At this great gathering of prelates, leaders of the Church, the case of Athanasius was taken up once more, that is, Athanasius was formally questioned over misdemeanours and even murder, (a bishop in Egypt named Arsenius had turned up missing, and they blamed his death on Athanasius, even supposedly producing Arsenius' severed hand.) [ 29 ] The council was convoked for the purpose of inquiring into the charges against Athanasius and other bishops, on account of which they were deposed from their sees by the semi-Arian Synod of Antioch in 341 and went into exile. Eusebian bishops objected to the admission of Athanasius and other deposed bishops to the council, except as accused persons to answer the charges brought against them. Their objections were overridden by the orthodox bishops. The Eusebians, seeing they had no chance of having their views carried, retired to Philippopolis in Thrace where they held an opposition council under the presidency of the Patriarch of Antioch and confirmed the decrees of the Synod of Antioch .

[ 20 ] : 233–234 Athanasius' innocence was reaffirmed at the Council of Serdica . Two conciliar letters were prepared, one to the clergy and faithful of Alexandria, the other to the bishops of Egypt and Libya, in which the will of the council was made known. Meanwhile, the Eusebians issued an anathema against Athanasius and his supporters. The persecution against the orthodox party broke out with renewed vigour, and Constantius was induced to prepare drastic measures against Athanasius and the priests who were devoted to him. Orders were given that if Athanasius attempted to re-enter his see, he should be put to death. Athanasius, accordingly, withdrew from Serdica to Naissus in Mysia , where he celebrated the Easter festival of the year 344.

[ 12 ] Hosius presided over the Council of Serdica, as he did for the First Council of Nicaea, which like the 341 synod found Athanasius innocent.

[ 30 ] He celebrated his last Easter in exile in Aquileia in April 345, received by Bishop Fortunatianus .

[ 31 ] The Council of Serdica sent an emissary to report their finding to Constantius. Constantius reconsidered his decision, owing to a threatening letter from his brother Constans and the uncertain conditions of affairs on the Persian border, and he accordingly made up his mind to yield. But three separate letters were needed to overcome the natural hesitation of Athanasius. When he finally acquiesced to meet with Constantius, he was accorded a gracious interview by the emperor and sent back to his see in triumph and began ten years of peace.

[ 12 ] Pope Julius died in April 352 and was succeeded by Liberius . For two years Liberius had been favourable to the cause of Athanasius; but driven at last into exile, he was induced to sign an ambiguous formula, from which the great Nicene text, the "homoousion", had been studiously omitted. In 355 a council was held at Milan , where in spite of the vigorous opposition of a handful of loyal prelates among the Western bishops, a fourth condemnation of Athanasius was announced to the world. With his friends scattered, Hosius in exile, and Pope Liberius denounced as acquiescing in Arian formularies, Athanasius could hardly hope to escape. On the night of 8 February 356, while engaged in services in the Church of St. Thomas, a band of armed men burst in to secure his arrest. It was the beginning of his third exile.

[ 12 ] Gilmartin writes: "By Constantius' order, the sole ruler of The Roman Empire at the death of his brother Constans, the Council of Arles in 353 , was held, which was presided over by Vincent, Bishop of Capua , in the name of Pope Liberius. The fathers terrified of the threats of the Emperor, an avowed Arian, they consented to the condemnation of Athanasius. The Pope refused to accept their decision, and requested the Emperor to hold another Council, in which the charges against Athanasius could be freely investigated. To this Constantius consented, for he felt able to control the Council in Milan." [ 20 ] : 234 In 355, three hundred bishops assembled in Milan, most from the West and only a few from the East. They met in the Church of Milan. Shortly, the emperor ordered them to a hall in the Imperial Palace, thus ending any free debate. He presented an Arian formula of faith for their acceptance. He threatened any who refused with exile and death. All, with the exception of Dionysius (bishop of Milan) , and the two Papal Legates, viz., Eusebius of Vercelli and Lucifer of Cagliari , consented to the Arian Creed and the condemnation of Athanasius. Those who refused were sent into exile. The decrees were forwarded to the pope for approval but were rejected because of the violence to which the bishops were subjected.

[ 20 ] : 235 Third exile [ edit ] Athanasius at the Council of Nicea, William of Tyre manuscripts Through the influence of the Eusebian faction at Constantinople, an Arian bishop, George of Cappadocia , was appointed to rule the see of Alexandria in 356. Athanasius, after remaining some days in the neighbourhood of the city, finally withdrew into the desert of Upper Egypt where he remained for a period of six years, living the life of the monks and devoting himself to the composition of a group of writings, such as his Letter to the Monks and Four Orations against the Arians .

[ 12 ] He also defended his own recent conduct in the Apology to Constantius and Apology for His Flight . Constantius' persistence in his opposition to Athanasius, combined with reports Athanasius received about the persecution of non-Arians by the Arian bishop George of Laodicea , prompted Athanasius to write his more emotional History of the Arians , in which he described Constantius as a precursor of the Antichrist .

[ 19 ] Constantius died on 4 November 361 and was succeeded by Julian . The proclamation of the new prince's accession was the signal for a pagan outbreak against the still dominant Arian faction in Alexandria. George, the usurping bishop, was imprisoned and murdered. An obscure presbyter named Pistus was chosen by the Arians to succeed him, when news arrived that filled the orthodox party with hope. An edict had been put forth by Julian permitting the exiled bishops of the "Galileans" to return to their "towns and provinces". Athanasius accordingly returned to Alexandria on 22 February 362.

[ 12 ] In 362 Athanasius convened a council at Alexandria and presided over it with Eusebius of Vercelli . Athanasius appealed for unity among all those who had faith in Christianity, even if they differed on matters of terminology. This prepared the groundwork for his definition of the orthodox doctrine of the Trinity . However, the council also was directed against those who denied the divinity of the Holy Spirit, the human soul of Christ, and Christ's divinity. Mild measures were agreed on for those heretic bishops who repented, but severe penance was decreed for the chief leaders of the major heresies.

[ 32 ] With characteristic energy he set to work to re-establish the somewhat shattered fortunes of the orthodox party and to purge the theological atmosphere of uncertainty. To clear up the misunderstandings that had arisen in the course of the previous years, an attempt was made to determine still further the significance of the Nicene formularies. In the meanwhile, Julian, who seems to have become suddenly jealous of the influence that Athanasius was exercising at Alexandria, addressed an order to Ecdicius, the Prefect of Egypt, peremptorily commanding the expulsion of the restored primate on the ground that he had not been included in the imperial act of clemency. The edict was communicated to the bishop by Pythicodorus Trico, who, though described in the "Chronicon Athanasianum" (XXXV) as a "philosopher", seems to have behaved with brutal insolence. On 23 October the people gathered about the proscribed bishop to protest against the emperor's decree; but Athanasius urged them to submit, consoling them with the promise that his absence would be of short duration.

[ 12 ] Fourth exile [ edit ] In 362 Julian, noted for his opposition to Christianity, ordered Athanasius to leave Alexandria once again. Athanasius left for Upper Egypt, remaining there with the Desert Fathers until Julian's death on 26 June 363. Athanasius returned in secret to Alexandria, where he received a document from the new emperor, Jovian , reinstating him once more in his episcopal functions. 
His first act was to convene a council which reaffirmed the terms of the Nicene Creed. Early in September 363 he set out for Antioch on the Orontes , bearing a synodal letter, in which the pronouncements of this council had been embodied. At Antioch he had an interview with Jovian, who received him graciously and even asked him to prepare an exposition of the orthodox faith. In February 364 Jovian died.

[ 12 ] Fifth exile [ edit ] The accession of Emperor Valens gave a fresh lease of life to the Arian party. He issued a decree banishing the bishops who had been deposed by Constantius but who had been permitted by Jovian to return to their sees. The news created the greatest consternation in Alexandria, and the prefect, in order to prevent a serious outbreak, gave public assurance that the very special case of Athanasius would be laid before the emperor. But Athanasius seems to have divined what was preparing in secret against him. He quietly withdrew from Alexandria in October 364 and took up his abode in a country house outside the city. Valens, who seems to have sincerely dreaded the possible consequences of another popular outbreak, within a few weeks issued orders allowing Athanasius to return to his episcopal see .

[ 19 ] Some early reports state that Athanasius spent this period of exile at his family's ancestral tomb [ 18 ] in a Christian cemetery.

Final years and death [ edit ] After returning to Alexandria, Athanasius spent his final years repairing all the damage done during the earlier years of violence, dissent, and exile. He resumed writing and preaching undisturbed, and characteristically re-emphasized the view of the Incarnation which had been defined at Nicaea. On 2 May 373, having consecrated Peter II , one of his presbyters as his successor, Athanasius died peacefully in his own bed, surrounded by his clergy and faithful supporters.

[ 15 ] Works [ edit ] Polemical and theological works [ edit ] Athanasius was not a speculative theologian. As he states in his First Letters to Serapion , he held on to "the tradition, teaching, and faith proclaimed by the apostles and guarded by the fathers." [ 18 ] He held that both the Son of God and the Holy Spirit are consubstantial with the Father, which had a great deal of influence in the development of later doctrines regarding the Trinity.

[ 18 ] Athanasius' "Letter Concerning the Decrees of the Council of Nicaea" ( De Decretis ), is an important historical as well as theological account of the proceedings of that council.

Athanasius' apologetics are primarily represented in the two-part work: Against the Heathen ( Orations Against the Arians ) and The Incarnation of the Word of God .

[ 19 ] Completed probably early in his life, before the Arian controversy, [ 33 ] they constitute the first classic work of developed Orthodox theology. In the first part, Athanasius attacks several pagan practices and beliefs. The second part presents teachings on the redemption.

[ 18 ] Also in these books, Athanasius put forward the belief, referencing John 1:1–4 , that the Son of God, the eternal Word (Logos) through whom God created the world, entered that world in human form to lead men back into the harmony from which they had earlier fallen away.

[ 34 ] Other examples of Athanasius' polemical writings against his theological opponents include his defence of the divinity of the Holy Spirit Letters to Serapion [ 19 ] in the 360s and On the Holy Spirit against Macedonianism . In a letter to Epictetus of Corinth, Athanasius anticipates future controversies in his defence of the humanity of Christ. In a letter addressed to the monk Dracontius, Athanasius urges him to leave the desert for the more active duties of a bishop.

[ 19 ] Athanasius also wrote several works of Biblical exegesis , primarily on Old Testament materials. The most important of these is his Epistle to Marcellinus (PG 27:12–45) on how to incorporate psalm-saying into one's spiritual practice.

Perhaps his most notable letter was his Festal Letter, written to his Church in Alexandria when he was in exile, as he could not be in their presence. This letter clearly shows his stand that accepting Jesus as the Divine Son of God is not optional but necessary: I know moreover that not only this thing saddens you, but also the fact that while others have obtained the churches by violence, you are meanwhile cast out from your places. For they hold the places, but you the Apostolic Faith. They are, it is true, in the places, but outside of the true Faith; while you are outside the places indeed, but the Faith, within you. Let us consider whether is the greater, the place or the Faith. Clearly the true Faith. Who then has lost more, or who possesses more? He who holds the place, or he who holds the Faith?

[ 35 ] Athanasius was the first patriarch of Alexandria to use Coptic and Greek for didactic homilies .

[ 14 ] Biographical and ascetic works [ edit ] Part of a series on Christian mysticism Theology and philosophy Apophatic Ascetical Cataphatic Catholic spirituality Hellenistic Mystical theology Neoplatonic Henosis Practices Monasticism Monasticism New Silence Asceticism Mendicant Spiritual direction Meditation Meditation Lectio Divina Invoking of Mystic Saints Active asceticism Contemplation Hesychasm Jesus Prayer Quietism Stages of Christian perfection Hesychia Divinization Catharsis Theosis Kenosis Spiritual dryness Religious ecstasy Passive asceticism Abstinence Esoteric Charismatic Esoteric People (by era or century) Antiquity Ancient African Origen Thomasines Gregory of Nyssa Pseudo-Dionysius Desert Fathers Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Moses the Black Syncletica Athanasius John Chrysostom Hilarion John Cassian 11th · 12th Bernard of Clairvaux Guigo II Hildegard of Bingen Symeon the New Theologian Saint Sava of Serbia 13th · 14th Dominican Dominic de Guzmán Franciscan Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Bonaventure Jacopone da Todi Angela of Foligno English Richard Rolle Walter Hilton Julian of Norwich Margery Kempe Flemish Beatrice of Nazareth Lutgardis Hadewijch John van Ruysbroeck German Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Henry Suso Female Beatrice of Nazareth Bridget of Sweden Catherine of Siena Mechthild of Magdeburg Marguerite Porete 15th · 16th Spanish Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Others Catherine of Genoa 17th · 18th French Margaret Mary Alacoque Pierre de Bérulle Jean-Jacques Olier Louis de Montfort Charles de Condren John Eudes John of St. Samson Others Mary of Jesus of Ágreda Anne Catherine Emmerich Veronica Giuliani Francis de Sales 19th Dina Bélanger Catherine Labouré Mélanie Calvat Maximin Giraud Bernadette Soubirous Conchita de Armida Luisa Piccarreta Mary of the Divine Heart Thérèse of Lisieux Gemma Galgani 20th Padre Pio Therese Neumann Marthe Robin Alexandrina of Balazar Faustina Kowalska Sister Lúcia of Fátima Edgar Cayce Simone Weil Alfred Delp Thomas Merton Charles de Foucauld Edvige Carboni Elena Aiello Contemporary papal views Aspects of meditation ( Orationis Formas , 1989) Reflection on the New Age (2003) Literature and media Lingua ignota Ordo Virtutum Scivias Ascent of Mount Carmel Dark Night of the Soul Spiritual Canticle Way of Perfection Book of the First Monks The Interior Castle Abbey of the Holy Ghost A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart The Glories of Mary The Imitation of Christ The Ladder of Divine Ascent Philokalia Revelations of Divine Love The Story of a Soul Theologia Germanica Devotio Moderna Fatima in Lucia's Own Words Calls from the Message of Fatima The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima Sol de Fátima The Cloud of Unknowing On the Consolation of Philosophy The Mirror of Simple Souls Sister Catherine Treatise Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii The Vision of Adamnán Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio Paradiso Fatima v t e His biography of Anthony the Great entitled Life of Antony [ 36 ] (Βίος καὶ Πολιτεία Πατρὸς Ἀντωνίου, Vita Antonii ) became his most widely read work. Translated into several languages, it became something of a best seller in its day and played an important role in the spreading of the ascetic ideal in Eastern and Western Christianity.

[ 19 ] It depicts Anthony as an illiterate yet holy man who continuously engages in spiritual exercises in the Egyptian desert and struggles against demonic powers. It later served as an inspiration to Christian monastics in both the East and the West.

[ 37 ] Misattributed works [ edit ] See also: Apocalypse of Pseudo-Athanasius There are several other works ascribed to him, although not necessarily generally accepted as being his own. These include the so-called Athanasian Creed (which is today generally seen as being of 5th-century Galician origin), and a complete Expositions on the Psalms .

[ 18 ] Eschatology [ edit ] Based on his understanding of the prophecies of Daniel and the Book of Revelation , Athanasius described Jesus’ Second Coming in the clouds of heaven and pleads with his readers to be ready for that day, at which time Jesus would judge the earth , raise the dead , cast out the wicked, and establish his kingdom . Athanasius also argued that the date of Jesus’ earthly sojourn was divinely foretold beyond refutation by the seventy weeks prophecy of Daniel 9.

[ 38 ] Veneration [ edit ] Athanasius was originally buried in Alexandria, but his remains were later transferred to the Chiesa di San Zaccaria in Venice , Italy. During Pope Shenouda III 's visit to Rome (4–10 May 1973), Pope Paul VI gave the Coptic Patriarch a relic of Athanasius, [ 39 ] which he brought back to Egypt on 15 May.

[ 40 ] [ self-published source ] The relic is currently preserved under the new Saint Mark's Coptic Orthodox Cathedral in Cairo . However, the majority of Athanasius's corpse remains in the Venetian church.

[ 41 ] [ self-published source ] All major Christian denominations which officially recognize saints venerate Athanasius. Western Christians observe his feast day on 2 May, the anniversary of his death. The Catholic Church considers Athanasius a Doctor of the Church .

[ 5 ] For Coptic Christians, his feast day is Pashons 7 (now circa 15 May). Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendars remember Athanasius on 18 January.

[ 42 ] Athanasius is honored on the liturgical calendars of the Church of England and the Episcopal Church on 2 May.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Gregory of Nazianzus (330–390, also a Doctor of the Church), said: "When I praise Athanasius, virtue itself is my theme: for I name every virtue as often as I mention him who was possessed of all virtues. He was the true pillar of the Church. His life and conduct were the rule of bishops, and his doctrine the rule of the orthodox faith." [ 15 ] Tomb of Saint Zaccaria and Saint Athanasius in Venice Athanasius's Shrine (where a portion of his relics are preserved) under St. Mark's Cathedral , Cairo Procession of a statue at Bellante Legacy [ edit ] Coptic icon of St. Athanasius the Apostolic Historian Cornelius Clifford says in his account: "Athanasius was the greatest champion of Catholic belief on the subject of the Incarnation that the Church has ever known and in his lifetime earned the characteristic title of 'Father of Orthodoxy', by which he has been distinguished ever since." [ 12 ] Clifford also says: "His career almost personifies a crisis in the history of Christianity; and he may be said rather to have shaped the events in which he took part than to have been shaped by them." [ 12 ] St.

John Henry Newman describes him as a "principal instrument, after the Apostles, by which the sacred truths of Christianity have been conveyed and secured to the world".

[ 45 ] The greater majority of Church leaders and the emperors fell into support for Arianism, so much so that Jerome (340–420) wrote of the period: "The whole world groaned and was amazed to find itself Arian".

[ 20 ] He, Athanasius, even suffered an unjust excommunication from Pope Liberius who was exiled and leant towards compromise, until he was allowed back to the See of Rome. Athanasius stood virtually alone against the world.

[ 24 ] Athanasius' biography of Anthony is foundational to Christian monasticism.

[ 46 ] Historical significance and controversies [ edit ] New Testament canon [ edit ] See also: Biblical canon It was the custom of the bishops of Alexandria to circulate a letter after Epiphany each year confirming the date of Easter and therefore other moveable feasts. They also took the occasion to discuss other matters. Athanasius wrote forty-five festal letters.

[ 47 ] Athanasius' 39th Festal Letter , written in 367, is widely regarded as a milestone in the evolution of the canon of New Testament books .

[ 48 ] Some claim that Athanasius is the first person to identify the same 27 books of the New Testament that are in use today. Up until then, various similar lists of works to be read in churches were in use. Others argue that Origen of Alexandria was the first to list the twenty-seven books of the New Testament in his Homilies on Joshua (only there is a textual variant as to whether or not he included Revelation).

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Athanasius includes the Book of Baruch and the Letter of Jeremiah and places the Book of Esther among the "7 books not in the canon but to be read" along with the Wisdom of Solomon , Book of Sirach , Book of Judith , Book of Tobit , the Didache , and The Shepherd of Hermas .

[ 49 ] Athanasius' list is similar to the Codex Vaticanus in the Vatican Library. The establishment of the canon was not a unilateral decision by a bishop in Alexandria but the result of a process of careful investigation and deliberation, as documented in a codex of the Greek Bible and, twenty-seven years later, in his festal letter.

[ 47 ] Pope Damasus I , the bishop of Rome in 382, promulgated a list of books which contained a New Testament canon identical to that of Athanasius. A synod in Hippo in 393 repeated Athanasius' and Damasus' New Testament list, and the Council of Carthage (397) repeated Athanasius' and Damasus' complete New Testament list.

[ 50 ] Scholars debate whether Athanasius' list in 367 formed the basis for later lists. Because Athanasius' canon is the closest canon of any of the Church Fathers to the one used by Protestant churches today, many Protestants point to Athanasius as the Father of the Canon.

[ 49 ] [ 51 ] Supporters [ edit ] Athanasius (left) and his supporter Cyril of Alexandria . 17th-century depiction.

Christian denominations worldwide revere Athanasius as a saint and teacher. They cite his defence of the Christology described in the first chapter of the Gospel of St. John [ 52 ] and his significant theological works ( C. S. Lewis calls On the Incarnation of the Word of God a "masterpiece") [ 53 ] as evidence of his righteousness. They also emphasize his close relationship with Anthony the Great, the ancient monk who was one of the founders of the Christian monastic movement.

The Gospel of St. John, and particularly the first chapter, demonstrates the Divinity of Jesus. This Gospel is the greatest support of Athanasius' stand. The Gospel of St. John's first chapter began to be said at the end of Mass, we believe as a result of Athanasius and his life's stand.

[ 54 ] The beginning of John's Gospel was much used as an object of special devotion throughout the Middle Ages ; the practice of saying it at the altar grew, and eventually Pope Pius V made this practice universal for the Roman Rite in his 1570 edition of the Missal .

[ 55 ] It became a firm custom with exceptions in using another Gospel in use from 1920.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] Cyril of Alexandria (370–444) in the first letter says: "Athanasius is one who can be trusted: he would not say anything that is not in accord with sacred scripture." (Ep 1).

Critics [ edit ] Throughout most of his career, Athanasius had many detractors. Classics scholar Timothy Barnes recounts ancient allegations against Athanasius: from defiling an altar, to selling Church grain that had been meant to feed the poor for his own personal gain, and even violence and murder to suppress dissent.

[ 58 ] According to Sir Isaac Newton , Athanasius lied about the death of Arius , feigned other men's letters and denied his own, murdered the bishop Arsenius, broke a communion cup, overthrew an altar, was made bishop by violence and sedition against the canons of his own church, and was seditious and immoral.

[ 59 ] Athanasius used "Arian" to describe both followers of Arius and as a derogatory polemical term for Christians who disagreed with his formulation of the Trinity.

[ 60 ] Athanasius called many of his opponents "Arian", except for Meletius .

[ 61 ] Scholars now believe that the Arian party was not monolithic [ 62 ] but held drastically different theological views that spanned the early Christian theological spectrum.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] They supported the tenets of Origenist thought and subordinationist theology [ 66 ] but had little else in common. Moreover, many labelled "Arian" did not consider themselves followers of Arius.

[ 67 ] In addition, non-homoousian bishops disagreed with being labeled as followers of Arius, since Arius was merely a presbyter, while they were fully ordained bishops.

[ 68 ] [ page needed ] The old allegations continue to be made against Athanasius, however, many centuries later. For example, Richard E. Rubenstein suggests that Athanasius ascended to the rank of bishop in Alexandria under questionable circumstances because some questioned whether he had reached the minimum age of 30 years, and further that Athanasius employed force when it suited his cause or personal interests. Thus, he argues that a small number of bishops who supported Athanasius held a private consecration to make him bishop.

[ 69 ] Selected works [ edit ] Athanasius. Contra Gentes – De Incarnatione (translated by Thompson, Robert W.), text and ET (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971).

On the Incarnation [ usurped ] at theologynetwork.org [ usurped ] Letters to Serapion (on the Holy Spirit) at archive.org See also [ edit ] Arabic Homily of Pseudo-Theophilus of Alexandria Orthodox Christianity Eastern Catholic Church Eugenius of Carthage Homoousian Pontifical Greek College of Saint Athanasius Saint Athanasius of Alexandria, patron saint archive Explanatory notes [ edit ] ^ / ˌ æ θ ə ˈ n eɪ ʃ ə s / ⓘ ; Ancient Greek : Ἀθανάσιος Ἀλεξανδρείας , Athanásios Alexandrías ; Coptic : ⲡⲓⲁⲅⲓⲟⲥ ⲁⲑⲁⲛⲁⲥⲓⲟⲩ ⲡⲓⲁⲡⲟⲥⲧⲟⲗⲓⲕⲟⲥ or Ⲡⲁⲡⲁ ⲁⲑⲁⲛⲁⲥⲓⲟⲩ ⲁ̅ ; [ 2 ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "The rejection of the term Theotokos by Nestorius Constantinople and the refutation of his teaching by Cyril of Alexandria" . Egolpion.com. 24 June 2012. Archived from the original on 8 October 2012 . Retrieved 4 October 2012 .

^ "St. Takla Haymanout Coptic Orthodox Website" .

^ Laos, Nicolas (2016).

Methexiology: Philosophical Theology and Theological Philosophy for the Deification of Humanity . Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 217.

ISBN 978-1-4982-3385-9 .

^ "First Council of Nicaea" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ a b Chapman, John (1909). " Doctors of the Church ". In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 5. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Livingstone, E. A.; Sparkes, M. W. D.; Peacocke, R. W., eds. (2013).

The Concise Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . Oxford University Press. pp.

91– 92.

ISBN 978-0-19965962-3 .

OCLC 1023248322 .

^ a b Gallagher, Edmon L. "Origen via Rufinus on the New Testament Canon." New Testament Studies 62.3 (2016): 461-476.

^ a b Michael J. Kruger (19 October 2015).

"What is the Earliest Complete List of the Canon of the New Testament?" .

^ Online, Catholic.

"St. Athanasius – Saints & Angels" .

Catholic Online .

^ "Online Chapel – Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America" .

www.goarch.org .

^ a b "St. Athanasius the Great the Patriarch of Alexandria" .

oca.org . Retrieved 14 March 2018 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Clifford, Cornelius (1907). " St. Athanasius ". In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 2. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ a b c Barnes, Timothy David (2001).

Athanasius and Constantius: Theology and Politics in the Constantinian Empire . Harvard University Press. p.

13 .

^ a b "Coptic literature" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 9 May 2017 .

^ a b c d e Clifford, Cornelius, Catholic Encyclopedia 1930 , Volume 2, pp. 35–40 "Athanasius".

^ Eusebius , Hist. Eccl., VI, xix ^ Ἀλεξανδρεὺς τῷ γένει, ἀνὴρ λόγιος, δυνατὸς ὢν ἐν ταῖς γραφαῖς ^ a b c d e f g h i j Encyclopedia Americana , vol. 2 Danbury, Connecticut : Grolier Incorporated, 1997.

ISBN 0-7172-0129-5 .

[ page needed ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Hardy, Edward R.

"Saint Athanasius" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ a b c d e f g h T. Gilmartin, Manual of Church History , Vol. 1. Ch XVII, 1890.

^ Kannengiesser, Charles, "Alexander and Arius of Alexandria: The last Ante-Nicene theologians", Miscelanea En Homenaje Al P. Antonio Orbe Compostellanum Vol. XXXV, no. 1–2. (Santiago de Compostela, 1990), 398 ^ Alexander of Alexandria's Catholic Epistle ^ Forbes, F. A. (1919).

Saint Athanasius: The Father of Orthodoxy . Standard-bearers of the Faith: A Series of Lives of the Saints for Young and Old. London: R. & T. Washbourne, Ltd.

^ a b c Butler, Alban (1894).

Lives of the Saints . Benziger Bros., Inc. pp.

164– 165.

^ Barnes, Timothy D., Athanasius and Constantius: Theology and Politics in the Constantinian Empire (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1993), 23 ^ Ott, Michael (1911). " St. Maximinus ". In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 10. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Clark, William R. (2007).

A History of the Councils of the Church: from the Original Documents, to the close of the Second Council of Nicaea A.D. 787 . Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 47.

ISBN 9781556352478 .

^ Davis, Leo Donald (1983).

The First Seven Ecumenical Councils (325–787): Their History and Theology . Liturgical Press. p. 82.

ISBN 9780814656167 .

^ Milman, Henry Hart (1881).

The History of Christianity, from the Birth of Christ to the Abolition of Paganism in the Roman Empire . T. Y. Crowell. p. 382.

^ "St. Athanasius – Christian Classics Ethereal Library" .

www.ccel.org . Retrieved 14 March 2018 .

^ Barnes, Timothy David, Athanasius and Constantius , Harvard 2001, p. 66 ^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Councils of Alexandria" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Justo L. Gonzalez in A History of Christian Thought notes (p. 292) that E. Schwartz places this work later, around 335, but "his arguments have not been generally accepted". The introduction to the CSMV translation of On the Incarnation places the work in 318, around the time Athanasius was ordained to the diaconate ( St Athanasius On the Incarnation , Mowbray, England 1953) ^ "Church Fathers: On the Incarnation of the Word (Athanasius)" .

www.newadvent.org . Retrieved 8 July 2021 .

^ "fragment conjectured to belong to a festal letter" .

^ "Athanasius of Alexandria: Vita S. Antoni [Life of St. Antony] (written bwtween 356 and 362)" . Fordham University . Retrieved 14 July 2016 .

^ "Athanasius" .

Christian History . Retrieved 14 March 2018 .

^ Froom 1950 , p. 393.

^ "Metropolitan Bishoy of Damiette" . Archived from the original on 20 February 2012 . Retrieved 25 September 2012 .

^ "Saint Athanasius" . Avarewase.org. Archived from the original on 25 June 2013 . Retrieved 25 September 2012 .

[ self-published source ] ^ "The Incorrupt Relics of Saint Athanasios the Great" . Johnsanidopoulos.com . Retrieved 2 May 2014 .

[ self-published source ] ^ January 18/January 31 . Orthodox Calendar (Pravoslavie.ru).

^ "The Calendar" .

The Church of England . Retrieved 27 March 2021 .

^ Lesser Feasts and Fasts 2018 . Church Publishing, Inc. 2019.

ISBN 978-1-64065-234-7 .

^ "Letter of St. Athanasius" .

Society of Saint Pius X . 5 November 2014. Archived from the original on 22 May 2022 . Retrieved 8 May 2022 .

^ "St. Anthony of Egypt's monastic legacy remembered Jan. 17" .

Catholic News Agency .

^ a b "367 Athanasius Defines the New Testament" .

Christian History . Retrieved 14 March 2018 .

^ Gwynn, David M. (16 February 2012).

Athanasius of Alexandria: Bishop, Theologian, Ascetic, Father . OUP Oxford.

ISBN 978-0-19-921095-4 – via Google Books.

^ a b Bediako, Gillian Mary; Quarshie, Bernhardt; Asamoah-Gyadu, J. Kwabena (14 January 2015).

Seeing New Facets of the Diamond: Christianity as a Universal Faith - Essays in Honor of Kwame Bediako . Wipf & Stock Publishers.

ISBN 9781498217293 – via Google Books.

^ Von Dehsen, Christian.

"St. Athanasius" , Philosophers and Religious Leaders , Routledge, 2013 ISBN 9781135951023 ^ "Excerpt from Letter 39" . Ccel.org. 13 July 2005 . Retrieved 25 September 2012 .

^ 1:1–4 ^ Introduction to St. Athanasius on the Incarnation. Translated and edited by Sister Penelope Lawson, published by Mowbray 1944. p. 9 ^ 1:1–14 ^ Fortescue, Adrian, Catholic Encyclopedia 1907, Volume 6, pp. 662–663 "Gospel" ^ Pope Benedict XV, Missale Romanum, IX Additions & Variations of the Rubrics of The Missal ^ See also: Jungmann, El Sacrificio de la Misa, No. 659, 660 ^ Barnes, Timothy D., Athanasius and Constantius: Theology and Politics in the Constantinian Empire (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1993), 37 ^ Sir Isaac Newton.

"Paradoxical Questions Concerning the Morals and Actions of Athanasius and His Followers" .

The Newton Project .

^ Barnes, Timothy D., Athanasius and Constantius: Theology and Politics in the Constantinian Empire (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1993), 14, 128 ^ Barnes "Athanasius and Constantius", 135 ^ Haas, Christopher, "The Arians of Alexandria", Vigiliae Christianae Vol. 47, no. 3 (1993), 239 ^ Chadwick, Henry, "Faith and Order at the Council of Nicaea", Harvard Theological Review LIII (Cambridge Mass: 1960), 173 ^ Williams, 63 ^ Kannengiesser "Alexander and Arius", 403 ^ Kannengiesser, "Athanasius of Alexandria vs. Arius: The Alexandrian Crisis", in The Roots of Egyptian Christianity (Studies in Antiquity and Christianity), ed. Birger A. Pearson and James E. Goehring (1986), 208 ^ Williams, 82 ^ Rubinstein, Richard, When Jesus Became God, The Struggle to Define Christianity during the Last Days of Rome , 1999 [ page needed ] ^ Rubenstein, Richard E., When Jesus Became God: The Epic Fight over Christ's Divinity in the Last Days of Rome (New York: Harcourt Brace & Company, 1999), 105–106 General and cited sources [ edit ] Alexander of Alexandria, "Catholic Epistle", The Ecole Initiative , ecole.evansville.edu [ usurped ] Anatolios, Khaled, Athanasius: The Coherence of His Thought (New York: Routledge, 1998).

Arnold, Duane W.-H., The Early Episcopal Career of Athanasius of Alexandria (Notre Dame, Indiana: University of Notre Dame, 1991).

Arius, "Arius's letter to Eusebius of Nicomedia", Ecclesiastical History , ed. Theodoret. Ser. 2, Vol. 3, 41, The Ecole Initiative , ecole.evansville.edu [ usurped ] Attwater, Donald and Catherine Rachel John.

The Penguin Dictionary of Saints . 3rd edition. (New York: Penguin, 1993).

ISBN 0-14-051312-4 .

Barnes, Timothy D.

, Athanasius and Constantius: Theology and Politics in the Constantinian Empire (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1993).

Barnes, Timothy D., Constantine and Eusebius (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1981) Bouter, P.F. (2010).

Athanasius (in Dutch). Kampen: Kok.

Brakke, David.

Athanasius and the Politics of Asceticism (1995) Clifford, Cornelius, "Athanasius", Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 2 (1907), 35–40 Chadwick, Henry , "Faith and Order at the Council of Nicaea", Harvard Theological Review LIII (Cambridge Mass: Harvard University Press, 1960), 171–195.

Ernest, James D., The Bible in Athanasius of Alexandria (Leiden: Brill, 2004).

Froom, Le Roy Edwin (1950).

The prophetic faith of our fathers : the historical development of prophetic interpretation (PDF) . Vol. I. Washington, D.C.: Review and Herald.

ISBN 9780828024563 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Freeman, Charles, The Closing of the Western Mind: The Rise of Faith and the Fall of Reason (Alfred A. Knopf, 2003).

Haas, Christopher. "The Arians of Alexandria", Vigiliae Christianae Vol. 47, no. 3 (1993), 234–245.

Hanson, R.P.C., The Search for the Christian Doctrine of God: The Arian Controversy, 318–381 (T.&T. Clark, 1988).

Kannengiesser, Charles, "Alexander and Arius of Alexandria: The last Ante-Nicene theologians", Miscelanea En Homenaje Al P. Antonio Orbe Compostellanum Vol. XXXV, no. 1–2. (Santiago de Compostela, 1990), 391–403.

Kannengiesser, Charles "Athanasius of Alexandria vs. Arius: The Alexandrian Crisis", in The Roots of Egyptian Christianity (Studies in Antiquity and Christianity) , ed. Birger A. Pearson and James E. Goehring (1986), 204–215.

Ng, Nathan K. K., The Spirituality of Athanasius (1991).

Pettersen, Alvyn (1995).

Athanasius . Harrisburg, Pennsylvania: Morehouse.

Rubenstein, Richard E., When Jesus Became God: The Epic Fight over Christ's Divinity in the Last Days of Rome (New York: Harcourt Brace & Company, 1999).

Williams, Rowan, Arius: Heresy and Tradition (London: Darton, Longman and Todd, 1987).

Further reading [ edit ] Anatolios, Khaled.

Athanasius (London: Routledge, 2004). [Contains selections from the Orations against the Arians (pp. 87–175) and Letters to Serapion on the Holy Spirit (pp. 212–233), together with the full texts of On the Council of Nicaea (pp. 176–211) and Letter 40: To Adelphius (pp. 234–242)] Gregg, Robert C.

Athanasius: The Life of Antony and the Letter to Marcellinus , Classics of Western Spirituality (New York: Paulist Press, 1980).

Schaff, Philip (1867).

History of the Christian Church: Nicene and Post-Nicene Christianity, AD 311–600 . Vol. 3rd. Peabody, Massachusetts: Hendrickson.

Schaff, Philip; Henry Wace (1903).

A Select Library of Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers of the Christian Church: St. Athanasius: Select Works and Letters . Vol. 4th. New York: Scribner.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Athanasius of Alexandria .

Wikisource has the text of the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia article St. Athanasius .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Athanasius of Alexandria .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: Athanasius Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article: Ἀθανάσιος Ἀλεξανδρείας Official web site of the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria and All Africa Works by Patriarch of Alexandria Saint Athanasius at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Athanasius of Alexandria at the Internet Archive Works by Athanasius of Alexandria at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Archibald Robinson, Athanasius: Select Letters and Works (Edinburgh 1885) The so-called Athanasian Creed [ usurped ] (not written by Athanasius, see Athanasian Creed above) Athanasius Select Resources, Bilingual Anthology (in Greek original and English) Two audio lectures about Athanasius on the Deity of Christ [ usurped ] , Dr N Needham Concorida Cyclopedia : Athanasius [ usurped ] Christian Cyclopedia : Athanasius Opera Omnia by Migne Patrologia Graeca with analytical indexes St Athanasius the Great the Archbishop of Alexandria , Orthodox icon and synaxarion English Key to Athanasius Werke [ usurped ] The Writings of Athanasius in Chronological Order [ usurped ] Introducing...Athanasius [ usurped ] audio resource by Dr. Michael Reeves. Two lectures on theologynetwork.org [ usurped ] Letter of Saint Athanasius to His Flock Archived 5 June 2014 at the Wayback Machine at the Our Lady of the Rosary Library St. Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria at the Christian Classics Ethereal Library Colonnade Statue in St Peter's Square Titles of the Great Christian Church Preceded by Alexander I Patriarch of Alexandria 328–373 or 328–339 346–373 Succeeded by Peter II Gregory of Cappadocia (Anti-patriarch) Peter II v t e Patriarchs of Alexandria Patriarchs prior to the Chalcedonian schism (43–451) Mark I the Evangelist (founder) Anianus Avilius Kedronos Primus Justus Eumenius Markianos * Celadion Agrippinus Julian Demetrius I Heraclas Dionysius Maximus Theonas Peter I Achillas Alexander I Athanasius I Peter II Timothy I Theophilus I Cyril I Dioscorus I Coptic Orthodox Popes and Patriarchs (451–present) Timothy II Peter III Athanasius II John I John II Dioscorus II Timothy III Theodosius I Peter IV Damian Anastasius Andronicus Benjamin I Agathon John III Isaac Simeon I Alexander II Cosmas I Theodore I Michael I Mina I John IV Mark II James Simeon II Joseph I Michael II Cosmas II Shenouda I Michael III Gabriel I Cosmas III Macarius I Theophilus II Mina II Abraham Philotheos Zacharias Shenouda II Christodoulos Cyril II Michael IV Macarius II Gabriel II Michael V John V Mark III John VI Cyril III Athanasius III John VII Gabriel III John VII Theodosius III John VIII John IX Benjamin II Peter V Mark IV John X Gabriel IV Matthew I Gabriel V John XI Matthew II Gabriel VI Michael VI John XII John XIII Gabriel VII John XIV Gabriel VIII Mark V John XV Matthew III Mark VI Matthew IV John XVI Peter VI John XVII Mark VII John XVIII Mark VIII Peter VII Cyril IV Demetrius II Cyril V John XIX Macarius III Joseph II Cyril VI Shenouda III Tawadros II (current) Greek Orthodox Popes and Patriarchs (451–present) Proterius Timothy II Timothy III John I Peter III Athanasius II John II John III Dioscorus II Timothy IV Theodosius I Gaianus Paul Zoilus Apollinarius John IV Eulogius Theodore I John V George I Cyrus Peter IV Peter V Peter VI Cosmas I Politianus Eustatius Christopher I Sophronius I Michael I Michael II Christodoulos Eutychius Sophronius II Isaac Job Elias I Arsenius Theophilus II George II Leontius Alexander II John VI Cyril II Sabbas Sophronius III Elias II Eleutherius Mark III * Nicholas I Gregory I Nicholas II Athanasius III Gregory II Gregory III Niphon Mark IV Nicholas III Gregory IV Nicholas IV Athanasius IV Mark V Philotheus Mark VI Gregory V Joachim I Silvester Meletius I Pegas Cyril III Gerasimus I Metrophanes Nicephorus Joannicius Paisius Parthenius I Gerasimus II Samuel Cosmas II Cosmas III Matthew Cyprian Gerasimus III Parthenius II Theophilus III Hierotheus I Artemius Hierotheus II Callinicus Jacob Nicanor Nilus Sophronius IV Photius Meletius II Nicholas V Christopher II Nicholas VI Parthenius III Peter VII Theodore II (current) Latin Catholic (1276–1954) Atanasio (Athanasius) Egidio da Ferrara (Giles) ?

Humbert II, Dauphin of Vienne Juan (John) Guillaume de Chanac Arnaud Bernard du Pouget ( Arnaldo Bernardi ) uncanonical Jean de Cardaillac Pietro Amely di Brunac ?

Johannes Walteri von Sinten uncanonical Simon of Cramaud Pietro Amely di Brunac Leonardo Dolfin Ugo Roberti Pietro Amaury di Lordat Lancelotus de Navarra Giovanni Contarini Pietro Vitalis di Mauléon Giovanni Vitelleschi Marco Condulmer Jean d'Harcourt Arnaldo Rogerii de Palas Pedro de Urrea Pedro González de Mendoza Diego Hurtado de Mendoza Alonso de Fonseca y Acevedo Bernardino Carafa Cesare Riario Guido Ascanio Sforza di Santa Fiora Ottaviano Maria Sforza Julius Gonzaga Cristoforo Guidalotti Ciocchi del Monte Jacques Cortès Tommaso Alessandro Riario Enrico Caetani Giovanni Battista Albani Camillo Caetani Séraphin Olivier-Razali Alessandro di Sangro Honoratus Caetani Federico Borromeo Allesandro Crescenzi Aloysius Bevilacqua Petrus Draghi Bartoli Gregorio Giuseppe Gaetani de Aragonia Carlo Ambrosio Mezzabarba Filippo Carlo Spada Girolamo Crispi Giuseppe Antonio Davanzati Lodovico Agnello Anastasi Francisco Mattei Augustus Foscolo Paolo Angelo Ballerini Domenico Marinangeli Paolo de Huyn Luca Ermenegildo Pasetto Melkite Catholic (1724–present) Cyril VI Tanas Athanasius IV Jawhar Maximos II Hakim Theodosius V Dahan Athanasius IV Jawhar Cyril VII Siaj Agapius II Matar Ignatius IV Sarrouf Athanasius V Matar Macarius IV Tawil Ignatius V Qattan Maximos III Mazloum Clement Bahouth Gregory II Youssef-Sayur Peter IV Geraigiry Cyril VIII Geha Demetrius I Qadi Cyril IX Moghabghab Maximos IV Sayegh Maximos V Hakim Gregory III Laham Youssef I Absi Coptic Catholic (1824–present) Maximos Jouwed Kyrillos Makarios Stéphanos I Sidarouss Stéphanos II Ghattas Antonios I Naguib Ibrahim Isaac Sidrak *Markianos is considered Mark II on the Greek side of the subsequent schism, hence this numbering of Mark III.

Category Commons Links to related articles v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal v t e Saints in the Coptic Church Patriarchs Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Prophets Moses Job Samuel David Hosea Amos Micah Joel Obadiah Jonah Nahum Noah Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi Isaiah Jeremiah Baruch Ezekiel Daniel John the Baptist Theotokos Mary, Our Lady of Assiut Warraq Zeitoun Seven Archangels Michael Gabriel Raphael Suriel Zedekiel Sarathiel Ananiel Apostles Andrew Bartholomew James, son of Alphaeus James, son of Zebedee John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Disciples Apollos Barnabas Mary Magdalene Phoebe the Deaconess Philemon Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Martyrs 21 Martyrs of Libya Abāmūn Abāmūn Abanoub Abaskhiron Alexandrian Martyrs Arianus Apollonia Barbara Bashnouna Basilides and Potamiana Catherine Chrysanthus and Daria Chiaffredo Colluthus Cosmas and Damian Cyprian and Justina Cyrus and John Dasya Demiana Dismas the Good Thief Dorothea Elias and Companions Epimachus Faustus, Abibus and Dionysius Felix and Regula Gabriel Abdel El-Metgaly Gallicanus George George Bishop of Assiut George El Mozahem Gereon Hor, Besoy, and Daydara Holy Innocents Imbaba Martyrs Isaac of Dafra John of Senhout Kosheh Martyrs Malati Marina the Martyr Maspero Martyrs Maurice Memnon Menas Mohrael Moura Nag Hammadi Otimus Philomena Philotheos Rais Sarah Sidhom Bishay Theban Legion Thecla Theoclia Theodora and Didymus Theodore Stratelates Varus Veronica Wadamoun Wanas Church Fathers Clement of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Papias of Hierapolis Justin Martyr Irenaeus Clement of Alexandria Athanasius of Alexandria Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nyssa Gregory of Nazianzus John Chrysostom Cyprian Hilary of Poitiers Ambrose Jerome Augustine of Hippo Aphrahat Ephrem the Syrian Isaac of Antioch Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Pachomius the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Syncletica of Alexandria John Cassian Alexander of Jerusalem Porphyrius of Gaza Alexander I of Alexandria Dionysius of Alexandria Epiphanius of Salamis Nichola of Myra Popes Mark I Anianus Avilius Kedron Justus Eumenes Markianos Celadion Agrippinus Julian Demetrius I Heraclas Dionysius Theonas Felix of Rome Peter I Alexander I Athanasius I Peter II Timothy I Theophilus I Cyril I Dioscorus I Timothy II Peter III Dioscorus II Timothy III Theodosius I Peter IV Damian Anastasius Andronicus Benjamin I Agathon Simeon I Alexander II Theodore I Michael I John IV Mark II James Simeon II Joseph I Michael II Cosmas II Michael III Gabriel I Cosmas III Abraham Zacharias Cyril II Macarius II Matthew I Gabriel VII John XIV Cyril V Macarius III Cyril VI Patriarchs and Bishops Abadiu of Antinoe Abraam of Faiyum Alexander of Jerusalem Amun of Scetis Basil of Caesarea Bar Hebraeus Cyril of Jerusalem Epiphanius of Cyprus Eusebius of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Gregory of Neocaesarea Ignatius of Antioch Jacob of Nisibis James of Jerusalem John of Nikiû John of Jerusalem Karas of California Mikhaeil of Asyut Narcissus of Jerusalem Nicholas of Myra Paphnutius of Scetis Paphnutius of Thebes Polycarp of Smyrna Porphyrius of Gaza Psote of Ebsay Serapion of Thmuis Severus of Antioch Severian of Gabala Yousab el-Abah of Girga Monks and nuns Abdel Messih El-Makari Abib and Apollo Abraham of Farshut Abraham of Scetis Amun Anthony the Great Awgin Bashnouna Hilarion Horsiesius Hospitius Mother Irini Isaac of Nineveh Isidore of Pelusium John Climacus John the Dwarf Macarius of Alexandria Macarius of Egypt Marina the Monk Moses the Black Nilus of Sinai Pachomius the Great Pambo Parsoma Patapios Paul of Thebes Paul of Tammah Paul the Simple Petronius Pishoy Poemen Samuel the Confessor Sisoes the Great Tekle Haymanot Theodorus of Tabennese Theodora of Alexandria Anchorites Karas Mary Misael Onuphrius Paphnutius Paul Pijimi Shenouda Thomas Zosimas Missionaries Gregory the Illuminator Maurice Nino Frumentius Nine Saints Other saints Ambrose Clement of Alexandria Didymus the Blind Euphrosyne Habib Girgis Candidus Simon the Tanner Three Holy Children Maximus and Domatius Verena Christianity portal Saints portal Portals : Saints Biography Christianity Egypt Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Athanasius_of_Alexandria&oldid=1305117962 " Categories : 290s births 373 deaths 4th-century Byzantine writers 4th-century Christian saints 4th-century Christian theologians 4th-century philosophers Anglican saints Catholic philosophers Christologists Church Fathers Doctors of the Church Eastern Orthodox saints Egyptian Roman Catholic writers Egyptian theologians Nature of Jesus Christ Opponents of Arianism Participants in the First Council of Nicaea Philosophers in ancient Alexandria Saints from Roman Egypt Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Coptic-language text CS1: unfit URL Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2022 All accuracy disputes Accuracy disputes from May 2022 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2022 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from May 2021 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2021 CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) CS1 errors: ISBN date Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 04:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Athanasius of Alexandria 67 languages Add topic

