Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 As post-philosophy 3 See also 4 Notes 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Postanalytic philosophy 10 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Nederlands 日本語 Suomi Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Area of philosophy Postanalytic philosophy describes a detachment from the mainstream philosophical movement of analytic philosophy , which is the predominant school of thought in English-speaking countries . The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy defines the movement as denoting "philosophers who owe much to Analytic philosophy but who think that they have made some significant departure from it." [ 1 ] The movement cannot be unified into a single positive project as it is defined in terms of what it stands against, although it has generally been seen as bridging the gap between analytic and continental philosophy .

[ 2 ] : 7 Overview [ edit ] Postanalytic philosophy derives mainly from contemporary American thought, especially from the works of philosophers Richard Rorty , Donald Davidson , Hilary Putnam , Thomas Nagel , and Stanley Cavell . The term is closely associated with the much broader movement of contemporary American pragmatism , which advocates a detachment from the context-invariant variety of 'objective truth' promulgated by early modern philosophers such as Descartes. All or almost all philosophers associated with this detachment from analytic philosophy have been in some way influenced by the thought of the later Wittgenstein , who is often seen as pre-emptively dissolving the analytical approach from within.

[ 3 ] Postanalytic philosophers emphasize the contingency of human thought, convention , utility , social progress , and are generally hesitant to develop and defend positive theses.

A relatively recent resurgence of interest in ordinary language philosophy , particularly due to the literature and teachings of Cavell, has also become a mainstay of postanalytic philosophy. Seeking to avoid the increasingly metaphysical and abstruse language found in mainstream analytic philosophy, posthumanism , and post-structuralism , a number of feminist philosophers have adopted the methods of ordinary language philosophy.

[ 4 ] Many of these philosophers were students or colleagues of Cavell. This approach may be compared and contrasted with neopragmatism , [ 5 ] a tradition which owes much to Rorty, although W. V. O. Quine and Wilfrid Sellars may be thought of as precursors of this development.

[ 6 ] As post-philosophy [ edit ] The term "postanalytic philosophy" itself has been used in a vaguely descriptive sense and not in the sense of a concrete philosophical movement.

[ by whom?

] Many postanalytic philosophers write along an analytic vein and on traditionally analytic topics. Richard Rorty said: "I think that analytic philosophy can keep its highly professional methods, the insistence on detail and mechanics, and just drop its transcendental project. I'm not out to criticize analytic philosophy as a style. It's a good style. I think the years of superprofessionalism were beneficial." [ 7 ] Rorty says the goal of postanalytic philosophy is not to oppose analytic philosophy or its methods, but to dispute its hope to make philosophy the penultimate form of knowledge from which every other knowledge claim must be derived.

[ citation needed ] Postanalytic philosophy may also be known as post-philosophy , [ 8 ] a term used by Rorty, to emphasize the notion that the project of philosophy as conceived by Enlightenment philosophers no longer serves the role it used to in society and that this role has been replaced by other media.

See also [ edit ] Post-analytic phenomenology Post-Continental philosophy Notes [ edit ] ^ Joll, Nicholas.

"Metaphilosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2022-09-12 .

^ Reynolds, Jack; Chase, James; Williams, James; Mares, Edwin, eds. (2010).

Postanalytic and Metacontinental: Crossing Philosophical Divides .

Bloomsbury Publishing .

ISBN 9780826445582 .

^ "Rupert Read" .

^ "Project Muse - Introduction" (PDF) .

New Literary History .

46 (2). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2022-10-23.

.

^ 1.08 Norris-Mahon (2018-11-29).

"The Ironist and the Romantic: Reading Richard Rorty and Stanley Cavell | Reviews | Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews | University of Notre Dame" . Ndpr.nd.edu . Retrieved 2022-04-11 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Pragmatism (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)" . Plato.stanford.edu . Retrieved 2022-04-11 .

^ Eduardo Mendieta, Take Care of Freedom and Truth Will Take Care of Itself , 2005, p. 23.

^ Christopher J. Voparil, Richard J. Bernstein, The Rorty Reader , John Wiley & Sons, 2010, p. 493.

Further reading [ edit ] John Rajchman & Cornel West , Post-Analytic Philosophy , Columbia University Press, 1985.

Bernard Williams , 'What Might Philosophy Become?', in Philosophy as a Humanistic Discipline , Princeton University Press, 2006.

v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Postanalytic_philosophy&oldid=1293673766 " Categories : Analytic philosophy Philosophical theories Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 02:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Postanalytic philosophy 10 languages Add topic

