Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Groupings 2 Movements and ideologies Toggle Movements and ideologies subsection 2.1 Mainstream feminism 2.2 Liberal 2.3 Libertarian 2.4 Multiracial 2.5 Post-structural 2.6 Postcolonial 2.7 Postmodern 2.8 Radical 2.9 Separatist 2.10 Socialist and Marxist 2.11 Anarchist 2.12 Black and womanist 2.13 Cultural 2.14 Difference 2.15 Ecofeminism 2.16 French 2.17 Mexican 2.18 Standpoint 2.19 Third-world 2.20 Transfeminism 2.21 Religion 3 Women and feminism in the United States Toggle Women and feminism in the United States subsection 3.1 Asian American feminism 3.1.1 History 3.1.2 Important figures and movements 3.1.3 Modern Asian American feminism 3.2 Native American feminism 3.2.1 History 3.2.2 Important figures and movements 3.2.3 Modern Native American feminism 3.3 Chicana feminism 3.3.1 History 3.3.2 Important figures and movements 3.3.3 Modern Chicana feminism 4 Women and feminism in South America Toggle Women and feminism in South America subsection 4.1 Colombian feminism 4.1.1 Modern Colombian feminism movements: 5 Causes of diversity 6 Shared perspectives Toggle Shared perspectives subsection 6.1 Men as oppressed with women 6.2 Men as oppressors of women 7 Criticism 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Feminist movements and ideologies 16 languages العربية Cymraeg Esperanto فارسی 한국어 Italiano മലയാളം ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Română தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e This collection of feminist buttons from a women's museum shows some messages from feminist movements.

A variety of movements of feminist ideology have developed over the years. They vary in goals , strategies, and affiliations. They often overlap , and some feminists identify themselves with several branches of feminist thought.

Groupings [ edit ] Traditionally feminism is often divided into three main traditions, sometimes known as the "Big Three" schools of feminist thought: liberal/mainstream feminism , radical feminism and socialist or Marxist feminism . Since the late 20th century, a variety of newer forms of feminisms have also emerged, many of which are viewed as branches of the three main traditions.

[ 1 ] Many of these forms of feminism have developed due to intersectionality. Women regardless of race have faced challenges, but more often than not women of color have faced greater challenges because of their intersectionality. The article "Intersectional power struggles in feminist movements: An analysis of resistance and counter-resistance to intersectionality" by Mariana Munoz-Puig describes intersectionality as important because in order to create a movement based on solidarity, it is necessary to include other women's issues and experiences to create true solidarity amongst all groups. Despite the aim for inclusivity the group who often leads the feminist movement are white, middle-class, cisgender, heterosexual, and able-bodied women which leaves out other women who may not fall into any of these categories and their goals for the movements (Munoz-Puig, 2023.) Although simply discussing the different identities of women is not enough as women view their intersectionality separately, so it is important for feminist to engage in thoughtful discussions to engage intersectionality into their movement.

Judith Lorber separates three main categories of feminist discourses: gender revolution, gender resistance, and gender reform feminisms. According to her typology, liberalism—a political philosophy that strongly emphasizes individual rights—is the foundation of gender reform feminisms. Gender-resistant feminisms concentrate on particular actions and group dynamics that maintain women's subordination even within subcultures that profess to be pro-equality. Gender revolution feminisms aim to upend the social order by dissecting its categories and concepts and examining how inequality is reproduced in culture.

Movements and ideologies [ edit ] Mainstream feminism [ edit ] Main article: Mainstream feminism " Mainstream feminism " as a general term identifies feminist ideologies and movements which do not fall into either the socialist or radical feminist camps. The mainstream feminist movement traditionally focused on political and legal reform, and has its roots in first-wave liberal feminism of the 19th and early-20th centuries. Liberal feminism in this broad traditional sense is also called "mainstream feminism", "reformist feminism", "egalitarian feminism" or historically "bourgeois feminism", [ 2 ] and is one of the "Big Three" schools of feminist thought alongside socialist and radical feminism.

[ 1 ] In the context of third-wave and fourth-wave feminism , the term is today often used by essayists [ 3 ] and cultural analysts [ 4 ] in reference to a movement made palatable to a general audience.

[ 5 ] Mainstream feminism is often derisively referred to as "white feminism", [ 6 ] a term implying that mainstream feminists do not fight for intersectionality with race, class, and sexuality .

Some parts of third-wave and fourth-wave mainstream feminism has also been accused of being commercialized, [ 7 ] and of focusing exclusively on issues that are less contentious in the western world today [update] , such as women's political participation or female education access. Radical feminists sometimes criticize mainstream feminists for not articulating the depth to which the state is part of "a system of patriarchy".

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Nevertheless, some argue that major milestones of the feminist struggle—such as the right to vote and the right to education—came about mainly as a result of the work of the mainstream feminist movement, which emphasized building far-reaching support for feminist causes among both men and women.

Liberal [ edit ] Liberal feminism asserts the equality of men and women through political and legal reform. Traditionally, during the 19th and early 20th century, liberal feminism had the same meaning as "bourgeois feminism" or "mainstream feminism", and its broadest sense, the term liberal feminism overlaps strongly with mainstream feminism. Liberal feminists sought to abolish political, legal and other forms of discrimination against women to allow them the same opportunities as men since their autonomy has deficits. Discriminations of gender, either in the workplace or in the home, and the patriarchal mentality in inherited traditions constitutes some cause for the liberals women's movement. Liberal feminists sought to alter the structure of society to ensure the equal treatment of women. The first and the second feminist [ 10 ] [ 11 ] waves were led by liberal feminists and they managed to formally and legally obtain many of equal right for women, including the right to vote, right to be educated, as well as the elimination of many other patriarchal paternalistic and moralistic laws.

One of the earliest well-known liberal feminist, who had a huge influence with her writings was Mary Wollstonecraft . In her book 'A Vindication of the Rights of Woman", she encouraged women to use their voices in making  their own decisions and ignore the choices which previously others had made for them.

Liberal feminism includes many, often diverging branches.

Individualist feminism or libertarian feminism emphasises women's ability to show and maintain their equality through their own actions and choices and uses the personal interactions between men and women as the place from which to transform society. This use of the term differs from liberal feminism in the historical sense, which emphasized political and legal reforms and held that women's own actions and choices alone were not sufficient to bring about gender equality. For example, "libertarian feminism does not require social measures to reduce material inequality; in fact, it opposes such measures ... in contrast, liberal feminism may support such requirements and egalitarian versions of feminism insist on them." [ 12 ] Issues important to modern liberal feminists include reproductive and abortion rights, sexual harassment, voting, education, " equal pay for equal work ", affordable childcare, affordable health care, elimination of prejudices and stereotypes and bringing to light the frequency of sexual and domestic violence against women.

[ 13 ] Libertarian [ edit ] See also: Individualist feminism According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , " Classical liberal or libertarian feminism conceives of freedom as freedom from coercive interference. It holds that women, as well as men, have a right to such freedom due to their status as self-owners ." [ 14 ] There are several categories under the theory of libertarian feminism, or kinds of feminism that are linked to libertarian ideologies.

Anarcha-feminism combines feminist and anarchist beliefs, embodying classical libertarianism rather than contemporary minarchist libertarianism.

Wendy McElroy has defined a position, which she labels "ifeminism" or "individualist feminism", that combines feminism with anarcho-capitalism or contemporary minarchist libertarianism, and she argued that a pro- capitalist and anti-state position is compatible with an emphasis on equal rights and empowerment for women.

[ 15 ] Individualist anarchist-feminism has grown from the United States-based individualist anarchism movement.

[ 16 ] Individualist feminism is typically defined as a feminism in opposition to what writers such as Wendy McElroy and Christina Hoff Sommers term political or gender feminism .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] However, there are some differences within the discussion of individualist feminism. While some individualist feminists like McElroy oppose government interference into the choices women make with their bodies because such interference creates a coercive hierarchy (such as patriarchy), [ 20 ] [ 21 ] other feminists such as Christina Hoff Sommers hold that the political role of feminism is simply to ensure that everyone's, including women's right against coercive interference is respected.

[ 14 ] Sommers is described as a "socially conservative equity feminist" by the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

[ 14 ] Some critics have called her an anti-feminist .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Multiracial [ edit ] Multiracial feminism (also known as "women of color" feminism) offers a standpoint theory and analysis of the lives and experiences of women of color.

[ 24 ] The theory emerged in the 1990s and was developed by Dr.

Maxine Baca Zinn , a Chicana feminist , and Dr. Bonnie Thornton Dill, a sociology expert on African American women and family.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Though often ignored in the history of the second wave of feminism, multiracial feminists were organizing at the same time as white feminists. Not only did they work alongside other women of color and white feminists, but multiracial feminists also organized themselves outside of women only spaces. In the 1970s women of color worked mainly on three fronts, "working with white dominated feminist groups; forming women's caucuses in existing mixed-gender organizations; and forming autonomous Black, Latina, Native American, and Asian feminist organizations" [ 26 ] The perspective of Multiracial Feminism attempts to go beyond a mere recognition of diversity and difference among women, to examine structures of domination, specifically the importance of race in understanding the social construction of gender.

[ 27 ] Post-structural [ edit ] Post-structural feminism , also referred to as French feminism , uses the insights of various epistemological movements, including psychoanalysis, linguistics, political theory (Marxist and post-Marxist theory), race theory, literary theory, and other intellectual currents for feminist concerns.

[ 28 ] Many post-structural feminists maintain that difference is one of the most powerful tools that women possess in their struggle with patriarchal domination, and that to equate the feminist movement only with equality is to deny women a plethora of options because equality is still defined from the masculine or patriarchal perspective.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Postcolonial [ edit ] Postcolonial feminism , sometimes also known as Third World feminism , partly draws on postcolonialism , which discusses experiences endured during colonialism, including "migration, slavery, suppression, resistance, representation, difference, race, gender, place and responses to the influential discourses of imperial Europe." [ 30 ] Postcolonial feminism centers on racism , ethnic issues , and the long-lasting economic, political, and cultural effects of colonialism , inextricably bound up with the unique gendered realities of non-White non-Western women.

[ 31 ] It sees the parallels between recently decolonized nations and the state of women within patriarchy—both postcolonialism and postcolonial feminism take the "perspective of a socially marginalized subgroup in their relationship to the dominant culture".

[ 30 ] Western feminists universalize women's issues, thereby excluding social classes and ethnic identities, [ 32 ] reinforcing homophobia , [ 33 ] and ignoring the activity and voices of non-White non-Western women, [ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] as under one application of Orientalism . Some postcolonial feminists criticize radical and liberal feminism and some, such as Chandra Talpade Mohanty , are critical of Western feminism for being ethnocentric .

[ 33 ] Black feminists , such as Angela Davis and Alice Walker , share this view.

[ 36 ] Another critic of Western perspectives is Sarojini Sahoo . Postcolonial feminists can be described as feminists who have reacted against both universalizing tendencies in Western feminist thought and a lack of attention to gender issues in mainstream postcolonial thought.

[ 37 ] Through this enterprise, postcolonial feminists spotlight how globalized ideologies that promise women's "emancipation" through universal standards may themselves produce false dichotomies between women's self-realization and local cultural practices.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Colonialism has a gendered history. Colonial powers often imposed Western norms on colonized regions, as seen by the prevalence of imperial feminist attitudes and ideology among colonial powers. Postcolonial feminists argue that cultures impacted by colonialism are often vastly different and should be treated as such. In the 1940s and '50s, after the formation of the United Nations , former colonies were monitored by the West for what was considered "social progress". Since then, the status of women in the developing world has been monitored by organizations such as the United Nations. Traditional practices and roles taken up by women—sometimes seen as distasteful by Western standards—could be considered a form of rebellion against colonial oppression.

[ 40 ] That oppression may result in the glorification of pre-colonial culture, which, in cultures with traditions of power stratification along gender lines, could mean the acceptance of, or refusal to deal with, issues of gender inequality.

[ 41 ] Postcolonial feminists today struggle to fight gender oppression within their own cultural models of society rather than through those imposed by the Western colonizers.

[ 42 ] Postcolonial feminism is closely related to transnational feminism and to the phenomenon of imperial feminism . The former has strong overlaps and ties with Black feminism because both respond to racism and seek recognition by men in their own cultures and by Western feminists.

[ 31 ] Postmodern [ edit ] Judith Butler at a lecture at the University of Hamburg .

Postmodern feminism is an approach to feminist theory that incorporates postmodern and post-structuralist theory .

Judith Butler argues that sex, not just gender, is constructed through language .

[ 43 ] In their 1990 book, Gender Trouble , they draw on and critique the work of Simone de Beauvoir , Michel Foucault , and Jacques Lacan . Butler criticizes the distinction drawn by previous feminisms between biological sex and socially constructed gender. They say that the sex/gender distinction does not allow for a sufficient criticism of essentialism . For Butler, "woman" is a debatable category, complicated by class, ethnicity , sexuality, and other facets of identity. They state that gender is performative . This argument leads to the conclusion that there is no single cause for women's subordination and no single approach towards dealing with the issue.

[ 43 ] Donna Haraway, author of A Cyborg Manifesto , with her dog Cayenne.

In A Cyborg Manifesto , Donna Haraway criticizes traditional notions of feminism, particularly its emphasis on identity, rather than affinity. She uses the metaphor of a cyborg in order to construct a postmodern feminism that moves beyond dualisms and the limitations of traditional gender, feminism, and politics.

[ 44 ] Haraway's cyborg is an attempt to break away from Oedipal narratives and Christian origin myths like Genesis . She writes, "The cyborg does not dream of community on the model of the organic family, this time without the oedipal project. The cyborg would not recognize the Garden of Eden; it is not made of mud and cannot dream of returning to dust." [ 44 ] A major branch in postmodern feminist thought has emerged from contemporary psychoanalytic French feminism . Other postmodern feminist works highlight stereotypical gender roles , only to portray them as parodies of the original beliefs. The history of feminism is not important in these writings—only what is going to be done about it. The history is dismissed and used to depict how ridiculous past beliefs were. Modern feminist theory has been extensively criticized as being predominantly, though not exclusively, associated with Western middle class academia . Mary Joe Frug, a postmodernist feminist, criticized mainstream feminism as being too narrowly focused and inattentive to related issues of race and class.

[ 45 ] Radical [ edit ] Radical feminists tend to be more militant in their approach when compared to other feminist movements and ideologies. It considers the male-controlled capitalist hierarchy, which it describes as sexist , as the defining feature of women's oppression. Radical feminists [ 46 ] believe that women can free themselves only when they have done away with what they consider an inherently oppressive and dominating patriarchal system.  They feel that this male-based authority and power structure and that it is responsible for oppression and inequality, and that, as long as the system and its values are in place, society will not be able to be reformed in any significant way.

[ 9 ] Radical feminists see no alternatives other than the total uprooting and reconstruction of society in order to achieve their goals.

[ 47 ] Over time a number of sub-types of radical feminism have emerged, such as cultural feminism .

[ 48 ] Other forms  rooted in, but not exclusively, radical in nature include separatist feminism [ 49 ] and anti-pornography feminism (and opposed by sex-positive feminism ).

[ 50 ] Separatist [ edit ] Separatist feminism is a form of radical feminism that does not support heterosexual relationships. Separatist feminism's proponents argue that the sexual disparities between men and women are unresolvable. Separatist feminists generally do not feel that men can make positive contributions to the feminist movement and that even well-intentioned men replicate patriarchal dynamics.

[ 51 ] Author Marilyn Frye describes separatist feminism as "separation of various sorts or modes from men and from institutions, relationships, roles and activities that are male-defined, male-dominated, and operating for the benefit of males and the maintenance of male privilege—this separation being initiated or maintained, at will, by women ".

[ 52 ] Socialist and Marxist [ edit ] Clara Zetkin and Rosa Luxemburg , 1910.

Socialist feminism connects the oppression of women to Marxist ideas about exploitation, oppression and labor. Socialist feminists think unequal standing in both the workplace and the domestic sphere holds women down.

[ 53 ] Socialist feminists see prostitution, domestic work, childcare, and marriage as ways in which women are exploited by a patriarchal system that devalues women and the substantial work they do. Socialist feminists focus their energies on far-reaching change that affects society as a whole, rather than on an individual basis. They see the need to work alongside not just men but all other groups, as they see the oppression of women as a part of a larger pattern that affects everyone involved in the capitalist system.

[ 54 ] Although Marx may have prioritised class oppression as the subject of his study and did not talk about female emancipation often, he did treat it as an issue in its own right. One place that this is shown is in his third Parisian manuscript of 1844, where he states that "marriage is a form of exclusive private property", [ 55 ] and condones treating women "as the prey and servant of social lust". Despite some claims, he has never been found to argue that the creation of a classless society would lead to gender oppression vanishing; instead evidence exists which suggest that he viewed female struggles as something independent.

[ 56 ] However due to his writing on women being scarce, the tradition and works of Marxist Feminism is one constructed through the works of the many feminist Marxist's that came after; either through reinterpreting his original writings or providing their own theories to the foundation he provided. Some socialist feminists, many of the Radical Women and the Freedom Socialist Party , point to the classic Marxist writings of Frederick Engels [ 57 ] and August Bebel [ 58 ] as a powerful explanation of the link between gender oppression and class exploitation. To some other socialist feminists, this view of gender oppression is naive and much of the work of socialist feminists has gone towards separating gender phenomena from class phenomena. Some contributors to socialist feminism have criticized these traditional Marxist ideas for being largely silent on gender oppression except to subsume it underneath broader class oppression.

[ 59 ] In the late nineteenth century and early twentieth century, both Clara Zetkin and Eleanor Marx were against the demonization of men and supported a proletarian revolution that would overcome as many male–female inequalities as possible.

[ 60 ] As their movement already had the most radical demands of women's equality, [ according to whom?

] most Marxist leaders, including Clara Zetkin [ 61 ] [ 62 ] and Alexandra Kollontai [ 63 ] [ 64 ] counterposed Marxism against feminism, rather than trying to combine them.

Anarchist [ edit ] Emma Goldman , pioneer anarcha-feminist author and activist.

Anarcha-feminism (also called anarchist feminism and anarcho-feminism) combines anarchism with feminism. It generally views patriarchy as a manifestation of involuntary hierarchy. Anarcha-feminists believe that the struggle against patriarchy is an essential part of class struggle and of the anarchist struggle against the state .

[ 65 ] In essence, the philosophy sees anarchist struggle as a necessary component of feminist struggle and vice versa. As L. Susan Brown puts it, "as anarchism is a political philosophy that opposes all relationships of power, it is inherently feminist".

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Important historic anarcha-feminists include Emma Goldman , Federica Montseny , Voltairine de Cleyre , Maria Lacerda de Moura , and Lucy Parsons . In the Spanish Civil War , an anarcha-feminist group, Mujeres Libres ("Free Women"), linked to the Federación Anarquista Ibérica , organized to defend both anarchist and feminist ideas.

Contemporary anarcha-feminist writers/theorists include Lucy Friedland , L. Susan Brown , and the eco-feminist Starhawk . Contemporary anarcha-feminist groups include Bolivia 's Mujeres Creando , Radical Cheerleaders , the Spanish anarcha-feminist squat La Eskalera Karakola , and the annual La Rivolta!

conference in Boston .

Black and womanist [ edit ] Angela Davis speaking at the University of Alberta on 28 March 2006 Black feminism argues that sexism , class oppression, and racism are inextricably bound together.

[ 68 ] Forms of feminism that strive to overcome sexism and class oppression but ignore race can discriminate against many people, including women, through racial bias. The National Black Feminist Organization (NBFO) was founded in 1973 by Florynce Kennedy , Margaret Sloan, and Doris Wright, and according to Wright it, "more than any other organization in the century launched a frontal assault on sexism and racism". The NBFO also helped inspire the founding of the Boston-based organization the Combahee River Collective in 1974 which not only led the way for crucial antiracist activism in Boston through the decade, but also provided a blueprint for Black feminism that still stands a quarter of a century later. Combahee member Barbara Smith 's definition of feminism that still remains a model today states that, "feminism is the political theory and practice to free all women: women of color, working-class women, poor women, physically challenged women, lesbians, old women, as well as white economically privileged heterosexual women. Anything less than this is not feminism, but merely female self-aggrandizement." [ 26 ] The Combahee River Collective argued in 1974 that the liberation of black women entails freedom for all people, since it would require the end of racism, sexism , and class oppression.

[ 69 ] One of the theories that evolved out of this movement was Alice Walker 's womanism . It emerged after the early feminist movements that were led specifically by white women, were largely white middle-class movements, and had generally ignored oppression based on racism and classism. Alice Walker and other womanists pointed out that black women experienced a different and more intense kind of oppression from that of white women.

[ 36 ] Angela Davis was one of the first people who articulated an argument centered around the intersection of race, gender, and class in her book, Women, Race and Class (1981) .

[ 70 ] Kimberlé Crenshaw , a prominent feminist law theorist, gave the idea the name intersectionality in the late 1980s as part of her work in anti-discrimination law , as part of describing the effects of compound discrimination against black women.

[ 71 ] A related form of feminism is African feminism .

Along with this idea of intersectionality, Black Feminist Thought as discussed by Patricia Hill Collins provides additional conceptualization of how Black Feminism can be identified.

Collins (1991) offers the perspective that women of color are likely to be faced with the matrix of domination. While all members of a given society are likely to face their own unique set of standpoint and experiences, Black women in particular, will be faced with a unique construct of these identities often in the form of oppression.

Cultural [ edit ] Cultural feminism is the ideology of a "female nature" or "female essence" that attempts to revalidate what they consider undervalued female attributes.

[ 72 ] It emphasizes the difference between women and men but considers that difference to be psychological, and to be culturally constructed rather than biologically innate.

[ 73 ] Its critics assert that, because it is based on an essentialist view of the differences between women and men and advocates independence and institution building, it has led feminists to retreat from politics to "life-style".

[ 74 ] One such critic, Alice Echols (a feminist historian and cultural theorist), credits Redstockings member Brooke Williams with introducing the term cultural feminism in 1975 to describe the depoliticisation of radical feminism .

[ 74 ] Difference [ edit ] Difference feminism was developed by feminists in the 1980s, in part as a reaction to " equality feminism ". Although difference feminism still aimed for equality, it emphasized the differences between men and women and argued that identicality or sameness are not necessary in order for men and women, and masculine and feminine values, to be treated equally.

[ 75 ] Some strains of difference feminism, for example Mary Daly 's, argue not just that women and men were different, and had different values or different ways of knowing, but that women and their values were superior to men's.

[ 76 ] Ecofeminism [ edit ] Ecofeminism links ecology with feminism. Ecofeminists see the domination of women as stemming from the same ideologies that bring about the domination of the environment. Western patriarchal systems, where men own and control the land, are seen as responsible for the oppression of women and destruction of the natural environment. Ecofeminists argue that the men in power control the land, and therefore are able to exploit it for their own profit and success. In this situation, ecofeminists consider women to be exploited by men in power for their own profit, success, and pleasure. Thus ecofeminists argue that women and the environment are both exploited as passive pawns in the race to domination. Ecofeminists argue that those people in power are able to take advantage of them distinctly because they are seen as passive and rather helpless.

[ 77 ] Ecofeminism connects the exploitation and domination of women with that of the environment. As a way of repairing social and ecological injustices, ecofeminists feel that women must work towards creating a healthy environment and ending the destruction of the lands that most women rely on to provide for their families.

[ 77 ] Ecofeminism argues that there is a connection between women and nature that comes from their shared history of oppression by a patriarchal Western society. Vandana Shiva claims that women have a special connection to the environment through their daily interactions with it that has been ignored. She says that "women in subsistence economies, producing and reproducing wealth in partnership with nature, have been experts in their own right of holistic and ecological knowledge of nature's processes. But these alternative modes of knowing, which are oriented to the social benefits and sustenance needs are not recognized by the capitalist reductionist paradigm, because it fails to perceive the interconnectedness of nature, or the connection of women's lives, work and knowledge with the creation of wealth." [ 78 ] However, feminist and social ecologist Janet Biehl has criticized ecofeminism for focusing too much on a mystical connection between women and nature and not enough on the actual conditions of women.

[ 79 ] French [ edit ] French feminism is a branch of feminist thought from a group of feminists in France from the 1970s to the 1990s. It is distinguished from Anglophone feminism by an approach which is more philosophical and literary. Its writings tend to be effusive and metaphorical, being less concerned with political doctrine and generally focused on theories of "the body".

[ 80 ] The term includes writers who are not French, but who have worked substantially in France and the French tradition, [ 81 ] such as Julia Kristeva and Bracha Ettinger .

In the 1970s, French feminists approached feminism with the concept of Écriture féminine , which translates as 'feminine writing'.

[ 82 ] Hélène Cixous argues that writing and philosophy are phallocentric and along with other French feminists such as Luce Irigaray emphasizes "writing from the body" as a subversive exercise.

[ 82 ] The work of the feminist psychoanalyst and philosopher, Julia Kristeva , has influenced feminist theory in general and feminist literary criticism in particular. From the 1980s onwards, the work of artist and psychoanalyst Bracha Ettinger has influenced literary criticism, art history, and film theory.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] Bracha Ettinger conceived of a feminine-maternal dimension she has named the matrixial, and she works toward changing the definition of the human subject to include it, as well as on the "matrixial" space, object and gaze (in art) [ 85 ] and on the importance of the matrixial feminine dimension for the fields of psychoanalysis and ethics.

[ 86 ] However, as the scholar Elizabeth Wright pointed out, "none of these French feminists align themselves with the feminist movement as it appeared in the Anglophone world." [ 82 ] [ 87 ] Mexican [ edit ] Main article: Feminism in Mexico Possibilities for gender equality have increased due to political and cultural movements of the 20th century, which can be referred to as the "women's century" because of the successes from women's political activism in this time period.

[ 88 ] The dramatic shift in Mexican women's roles was seen in multiple sectors which included education, labor, political, and cultural, all caused by the feminist movement.

[ 88 ] Feminism in Mexico first began with the formation of the first liberal feminist association at the Normal de Profesoras in 1904, although women began fighting earlier the school featured the first generation of feminist women, writers, and teachers (Jimenez, 2012.) Feminism later on made waves in the late 20th century around 1988 in Mexico City. Courses at universities such as Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM) began incorporating the topic of feminism and other gendered discourse, although it was not a full course it began the discussion about feminism amongst Mexican college students. It was not until the year 2009 a course was created specifically for the Geography of Gender with the help of two geographers who were widely recognized feminist Veronica Ibarra Garcia and Irma Escamilla Herrera ( Villagran, 2019) Despite the waves of feminism in the late 1900s feminism the work began in the early 1900s where other women who are recognized to be a part of the first wave of feminism are Laureana Wright, Rita Cetina Gutierrez, Dolores Jimenez y Muro, Dolores Correa Zapata, and Mateana Murguia de Aveleyra began laying down the ground work for feminism in Mexico. These women were pioneers of the moment they were writers during a time when it was not common for women to write ( Jimenez, 2012.) These women were very atypical in many aspects as in a mostly catholic country they freemasons, protestants, revolutionist, and spiritualist (Jimenez, 2012.) These women were determined to make change and given women equal opportunities, an achievement for the movement was in 1883 the ability to gain women the access to attend schools which allowed them to get advanced careers such as lawyers and medical professions (Jimenez, 2012.) Standpoint [ edit ] Since the 1980s, standpoint feminists have argued that feminism should examine how women's experience of inequality relates to that of racism , homophobia , classism and colonization .

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] In the late 1980s and the 1990s, postmodern feminists argued that gender roles are socially constructed , [ 91 ] [ 43 ] [ 92 ] and that it is impossible to generalize women's experiences across cultures and histories.

[ 93 ] Third-world [ edit ] Third-world feminism has been described as a group of feminist theories developed by feminists who acquired their views and took part in feminist politics in so-called third-world countries.

[ 94 ] Although women from the third world have been engaged in the feminist movement, Chandra Talpade Mohanty and Sarojini Sahoo criticize Western feminism on the grounds that it is ethnocentric and does not take into account the unique experiences of women from third-world countries or the existence of feminist movements indigenous to third-world countries. According to Mohanty, women in the third world feel that Western feminism bases its understanding of women on "internal racism, classism and homophobia", [ 33 ] a phenomenon which has been referred to by others as imperial feminism . This discourse is strongly related to African feminism and postcolonial feminism . Its development is also associated with black feminism, womanism , [ 36 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] " Africana womanism ", [ 97 ] "motherism", [ 98 ] "Stiwanism", [ 99 ] "negofeminism", [ 100 ] chicana feminism , and "femalism".

Transfeminism [ edit ] Transfeminism (or trans feminism) is, a movement by and for trans women , was defined by Robert Hill, "a category of feminism, most often known for the application of transgender discourses to feminist discourses, and of feminist beliefs to transgender discourse".

[ 101 ] Hill says that transfeminism also concerns its integration within mainstream feminism. He defines transfeminism in this context as a type of feminism "having specific content that applies to transgender people, but the thinking and theory of which is also applicable to all women".

[ citation needed ] Transfeminism includes many of the major themes of other third-wave feminism , including diversity, body image, oppression, misogyny, and women's agency. It is not merely about merging trans concerns with feminism, but often applies feminist analysis and critiques to social issues facing trans women and trans people more broadly.

[ citation needed ] Transfeminism also includes critical analysis of second-wave feminism from the perspective of the third wave.

[ 102 ] Early voices in the movement include Kate Bornstein and Sandy Stone , whose essay The Empire Strikes Back was a direct response to Janice Raymond .

[ 103 ] In the 21st century, Susan Stryker [ 104 ] [ 105 ] and Julia Serano [ 106 ] have contributed work in the field of transgender women.

[ relevant?

] Religion [ edit ] Main articles: Feminist theology , Goddess movement , and Islamic feminism Feminist historians have begun to focus on the contributions of religion to the development of feminist thought and protest. Miriam Cooke highlighted the importance of Islam to Muslim women in the post-colonial Arab world to navigate the interconnectivity of their faith and gender. Cooke argues that Islamic feminism encourages the re-examination of religious texts to offer a culturally legitimate path to gender equality. She argues that the representation and acknowledgement of Islamic Feminism is needed to diversify the wider feminist tradition.

[ 107 ] Women and feminism in the United States [ edit ] Asian American feminism [ edit ] The first wave of Asian women's organizing formed out of the Asian American movement of the 1960s, which in turn was inspired by the civil rights movement and the anti-Vietnam War movement .

[ 108 ] During the Second Wave of feminism, Asian American women provided services for battered women, worked as advocates for refugees and recent immigrants, produced events spotlighting Asian women's cultural and political diversity, and organized with other women of color. Asian Sisters, which emerged in 1971 out of the Asian American Political Alliance, is an early Asian American women's group based out of Los Angeles that focused on drug abuse intervention for young women. Networking between Asian American and other women during this period also included participation by a contingent of 150 Third World and white women from North America at the historic Vancouver Indochinese Women's Conference (1971) to work with the Indochinese women against U.S. imperialism.

[ 26 ] History [ edit ] After World War II when immigration laws began to change, an increasing number of Asian women began to migrate to the United States and joined the workforce. Asian women who worked in the textile and garment industry faced gender discrimination as well as racism.

[ 109 ] Following the African American and Chicana feminist movements of the 1960s, Asian American women activists began to organize and participated in protests with Asian American men to fight racism and classism.

[ 110 ] The first organized movement formed by Asian American women followed the Asian American movement in the 1960s, which was influenced by the Civil Rights Movement and anti- Vietnam War sentiment.

[ 109 ] However, as Asian American women's participation became increasingly active, they faced sexism and realized that many of the organizations did not recognize their needs and struggles as women.

[ 110 ] While Asian American women believed that they face the same social and equality issues as Asian American men, many Asian American men did not share the same sentiment.

[ 109 ] Important figures and movements [ edit ] In the mid-1960s when more and more Asian women began immigrating to the United States, they faced gender discrimination and racism in the workforce. Au Quon McElrath, who was a Chinese labor activist and social workers, began organizing and advocating for increased wages, improved working environments, additional health benefits, and maternity leaves for women workers.

[ 109 ] When Asian American women activists started to recognize a need for a separate movement from the sexism that they faced, they began to develop a feminist consciousness and initialized organizations to fight for women's rights and to fight against sexism. Some groups developed caucuses within organizations like the Organization of Chinese American Women, which was an already existing Asian American organization.

[ 110 ] Within the Asian American cultural arts movement, many artists such as poet Janice Mirikitani rose to fame within the Asian American community.

[ 109 ] Modern Asian American feminism [ edit ] Though recent decades, Asian American feminism and feminist identity continues to struggle with the perception of Asian Americans as part of the Model minority , which has affected and shaped the political identity of Asian American women as women of color in the United States.

[ 111 ] Additionally, globalized trade agreements like the North American Free Trade Agreement and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade have changed the dynamics of the labor force and work environments in the United States.

[ 109 ] In the free-trade capitalist global economy, protection of workers' rights and working environment has weakened dramatically, disproportionately disadvantaging women workers, especially women of color.

[ 109 ] Native American feminism [ edit ] Women of All Red Nations (WARN) was initiated in 1974, and is one of the best known Native American women's organizations whose activism included fighting sterilization in public health service hospitals, suing the U.S. government for attempts to sell Pine Ridge water in South Dakota to corporations, and networking with indigenous people in Guatemala and Nicaragua.

[ 26 ] WARN reflected a whole generation of Native American women activists who had been leaders in the takeover of Wounded Knee in South Dakota in 1973, on the Pine Ridge reservation (1973–76), and elsewhere.

[ 26 ] WARN as well as other Native American women's organizations, grew out of—and often worked with—mixed-gender nationalist organizations.

The American Indian Movement was founded in 1968 by Dennis Banks, George Mitchell, and Mary Jane Wilson, an Anishinabe activist.

[ 26 ] History [ edit ] Native American feminist ideology is founded upon addressing two often overlooked issues: one, that the United States as well as other Western nations are settler colonial nation states, and second, colonialism is gendered.

[ 112 ] United States colonialism and patriarchy disproportionately impact the experiences of Native American women who face this "double burden" of both racism and sexism and the resulting discrimination.

[ 113 ] Thus, the history of Native American feminism has always been entwined with the processes of colonialism and imperialism.

Important figures and movements [ edit ] Because of strong anti-colonial sentiments and the unique experience of Native Americans as a society that was colonized by American settlers, Native American feminist ideology is characterized by the rejection of feminist politics and their background as indigenous women. In the early 1990s, Annete Jaime, in "American Indian Women: At the Center of Indigenous Resistance in North America," argues that only Native women who have assimilated consider themselves as feminists.

[ 114 ] Jaime states that supporting the equality and political freedom of Native American women activists means the rejection of feminist politics as feminist politics is tied to the colonial history of the United States.

[ 114 ] The indigenous movement of Native American women also involves the preservation of Native spirituality by organizations such as Women of All Red Nations and the Indigenous Women's Network.

[ 113 ] Native spirituality includes the cultural contextualization of kinship roles through cultural beliefs, rituals, and ceremonies, strengthening and preserving the fluid bond between the individual and the "indigenous homeland".

[ 113 ] The expectation of indigenous spirituality manifested in the "feminine organic archetypes" such as images like the Corn Mother and Daughter, Spider Woman, and Changing Woman of Southwest Pueblo lore found in Native creation myths.

[ 113 ] Modern Native American feminism [ edit ] In the United States, more Native American women die from domestic violence than any other women.

[ 115 ] The issue of domestic violence has caused many Native American feminists to reject the assumption and notion that women in Native American communities must continue to defend the ideal of tribal nationalism when certain aspects of tribal nationalism ignore very pertinent problems of sexism and women's liberation from colonization.

[ 115 ] Andrea Smith , an activist for women of color and especially Native American women, organized the first "Color of Violence: Violence against Women of Color Conference." [ 115 ] During this conference, notable African American scholar and activist Angela Davis spoke on the continual colonial domination and oppression of indigenous nations, highlighting and emphasizing the experience of violence towards Native women.

[ 115 ] Davis also pointed out the gendered nature of the legislative and judicial process in nation-states as well as the inextricable link between the federal government and male dominance, racism, classism, and homophobia.

[ 115 ] In modern Native American feminism, there has been an emergence of politically significant art forms and media. The art combines past and current history, addresses racism and sexism, and breaks down the social and media representation and stigmas of persons of color.

[ 116 ] Chicana feminism [ edit ] Chicana feminism focuses on Mexican American, Chicana, and Hispanic women in the United States.

Hijas de Cuauhtemoc was one of the earliest Chicana feminist organizations in the Second-wave of feminism founded in 1971, and named after a Mexican women's underground newspaper that was published during the 1910 Mexican Revolution .

[ 26 ] The Comisión Femenil Mexicana Nacional was founded in October 1970. The Comisión Femenil Mexicana Nacional is an organization of women who enhance and promote the image of Chicana/Latina women in all levels of society.

[ 117 ] History [ edit ] The movement highlighting the struggles and issues experienced by Chicanas, as women of color in the United States, emerged primarily as a result of the politics and dynamics of the national Chicano movement .

[ 118 ] During the 1960s, the Chicano movement, characterized by a nature of protest, fought for equality, social justice, and political and economic freedoms, and during this period in time, many other struggles and organizations were sparked by the movement.

[ 118 ] The Chicano movements and protests also saw the participation of Chicanas, who through the movement, became aware of the potential rewards as well as their own roles within the movement and society. As a result, Chicana feminism developed towards the end of the 1960s and early 1970s.

[ 118 ] Through the subsequent movement, Chicanas publicized their struggle for equality with Chicano men and questioned and challenged their traditional cultural, societal, and familial roles.

[ 118 ] Important figures and movements [ edit ] The primary movement which saw the emergence of Chicana feminism in the United States began in the 1960s and 1970s following the Chicano movement. Chicana feminism, built upon and transformed the ideologies of the Chicano movement, was one of the United States' "second wave" of feminist protests.

[ 119 ] Like many prominent movements during the 1960s-1970s error, "second wave" Chicana feminism arose through protests across many college campuses in addition to other regional organizations.

[ 119 ] Youth participation in the movements was more aggressive due to influence from active civil rights and black liberation protests occurring nationally.

[ 119 ] Modern Chicana feminism [ edit ] Since the "second wave" Chicana feminist movement, many organizations have developed in order to properly address the unique struggles and challenges that Chicanas face. In addition, Chicana feminism continues to recognize the life conditions and experiences that are very different from those that white feminists face. As women of color, Chicanas continue to fight for educational, economic, and political equality.

[ 119 ] Women and feminism in South America [ edit ] Colombian feminism [ edit ] Feminism in Colombia In the twentieth century, the firsts feminism organizations appeared in Colombia. Women who fight for the basic rights of other women. The history of feminism in Colombia is divided into two moments; the first one that went from the thirties to the sixties- where the main purpose of those moments was to criticize the inequality of civil rights that women and minorities were victims. The second one from the sixties to the present; that denounce the inequality in aspects like sexuality and reproductive rights.

History At the beginning of the last century the creation and the organization of social and feminist movements start in Colombia. Until the 1930s, under the mandate of the Liberal political parties the women's movements managed to consolidate and create a feminism movement, that fought and defend civil and political rights for women. In 1944, the "Union Femenina de Colombia" (the Colombian Women's Union), " Alianza Femenina" (Women's Alliance) and "Agitacion Femenina" (Women's Agitation) emerged. those organizations focused their efforts on achieving the right to vote for all women, which would arrive almost 10 years later.

In 1948 during XI Conference of the OAS (Organization of American States) it was approved the Convention about the political and civil rights for women. Thus, under the government of the president Gustavo Rojas Pinilla, three thousand women, led by Esmeralda Arboleda, Magdalena Feti, and Isable Lleras. Demand to the government the compliance of the convention. under the pressure of women movements allows them to be include in the constitutional reform of 1954, and with that win the right to vote.

Important figures and movements: Juana Julia Guzmán [ es ] in 1917, she created "El Centro de Emancipacion Femenina" (Women Emancipation center), also in 1919, she was one of the main founders of the "Sociedad de Obreros y Artesanos de Córdoba" (Workers and artisans society of Córdoba). her fights for women and minorities rights was ended because she was victim of political persecution.

María Cano was the leader of the "Movimiento Obrero" (Workers movement). she worked on the diffusion of the socialist ideas in Colombia and she consolidate movement that demand civil rights for the working and peasant population.

Modern Colombian feminism movements: [ edit ] With the process of peace in effect in the whole country, new feminists movements have emerged and this is the case of "Viejas Verdes," "Siete Polas," and "Estamos Listas" movements that use the technology and the social media to have a more significant social impact. Their primary purpose is to obtain political, social, sexual, educational, economic, and labor equality among people.

Although women can vote for the first time around 62 years ago, their participation in the national politic is still minimum and unequal compare to men. An example of that is that in congress, women are just the 19.7% of members.

Causes of diversity [ edit ] Some argue that every feminist has an altered standpoint on the movement due to the varying hurdles women of different backgrounds come across.

[ 120 ] Depending on class some women will have different experiences of the patriarchy and experienced oppression to different degrees.
Others may argue that Western feminism has been responsible for creating an atmosphere of 'me, not you', [ 121 ] upholding the oppressive Western state in order to prioritize the security of white women and consequently leaving women who belong to trans or minority ethnic communities behind. Another division has been caused by the increased call for trans rights in the West; issues surrounding the blurred line that exists between the feminist movement and the trans-rights movement and whether trans women should be included in mainstream feminist discourse or be seen as a movement in its own right. Issues have also arisen over how 'masculine' and 'feminine' have been defined and whether previously gendered values are nature or nurture.

[ 122 ] Shared perspectives [ edit ] Movements share some perspectives while disagreeing on others.

Men as oppressed with women [ edit ] Some movements differ on whether discrimination against women adversely affects men. Movements represented by writers Betty Friedan and Gloria Steinem consider men oppressed by gender roles . Friedan argued that feminism would benefit both genders and was part of the human rights movement.

[ 123 ] Steinem suggested that liberation was for both genders, as men's burdens would be shared.

[ 124 ] Susan Faludi wrote, in Stiffed , that men, while not currently rebelling, can rebel on a scale with women and liberate both genders toward a more humane world.

[ 125 ] Ellen Willis , weighing economics and feminism, considered an alliance with men necessary to women's liberation.

[ 126 ] Florynce Kennedy wrote, "Men are outraged, turned off, and wigged out, by threats that women might withdraw consent to oppression, because they—men—subconsciously (and often consciously) know that they—men—are oppressed." [ 127 ] Mary Wollstonecraft wrote, "From the respect paid to property flow ... most of the evils and vices which render this world such a dreary scene to the contemplative mind.... One class presses on another; for all are aiming to procure respect on account of their property .... [M]en wonder that the world is almost, literally speaking, a den of sharpers or oppressors." [ 128 ] She argued for the usefulness of men "feel[ing] for" men; [ 129 ] while she objected to men wanting of women only that they be "pleasing" to men.

[ 130 ] She said, "To say the truth, I not only tremble for the souls of women, but for the good natured man, whom everyone loves." [ 131 ] According to Kristin Kaisem, a common interest in the upward mobilization of women as a whole has prompted a desire for a more inclusive and universal feminist movement.

[ 132 ] Men as oppressors of women [ edit ] Other movements consider men primarily the causative agents of sexism.

Mary Daly wrote, "The courage to be logical—the courage to name—would require that we admit to ourselves that males and males only are the originators, planners, controllers, and legitimators of patriarchy. Patriarchy is the homeland of males; it is Father Land; and men are its agents." [ 133 ] The Redstockings declared that men, especially a few leading men, oppress women and that, " All men receive economic, sexual, and psychological benefits from male supremacy.

All men have oppressed women." [ 134 ] In a somewhat less clear-cut position, Kate Millett wrote in Sexual Politics that our society, like others in the past, is a patriarchy, with older men generally being in charge of younger men and all females.

[ 135 ] Criticism [ edit ] Some have argued that the wide diversity in feminist ideologies has hindered the collaboration of some feminist subdivisions.

[ 132 ] [ verification needed ] On the other hand, Linda M.G. Zerilli and Donna Haraway assert that different discourses within feminism can be artificially separated through taxonomies, and it is this separation rather than ideological incompatibility that has impeded constructive conversation on subjectivity.

[ 136 ] Critics have argued that "same" means "equal" and that women can never be the same as men. Feminism would respond by claiming that women might not be physically the same as men but they still have the right to be equal.

[ 137 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Maynard, Mary (1995).

"Beyond the 'big three': the development of feminist theory into the 1990s" .

Women's History Review .

4 (3): 259– 281.

doi : 10.1080/09612029500200089 .

^ Voet, Rian (1998). "Categorizations of feminism".

Feminism and Citizenship . Sage. p. 25.

ISBN 1446228045 .

^ Crispin, Jessa (13 February 2017).

"The Failures of Mainstream Feminism" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 31 March 2018 .

The fault here lies with mainstream feminism itself.

^ Weiss, Samantha (4 May 2016).

"Is Mainstream Feminism Bad for Women's Rights?" .

Broadly . Retrieved 31 March 2018 .

^ Thompson, Eliza (26 January 2017).

"TCelebrity Feminism Has No Place in Trump's America" .

Cosmopolitan . Retrieved 26 January 2017 .

Nude selfies have their uses (I guess?), but in this increasingly dark political landscape, this kind of celebrity feminism feels hollow, tone-deaf, and irrelevant.

^ Desmond-Harris, Jenee (25 January 2017).

"Doubts about inclusive feminism have little to do with the Women's March. They're rooted in history" .

Vox . Retrieved 31 March 2018 .

^ Kenny, Kath (1 September 2017).

"Popular feminism in the digital age: How the personal has been made commercial" .

ABC News Australia . Retrieved 31 March 2018 .

^ Njoki Wane, Jennifer Jagire, Zahra Murad, Ruptures: Anti-colonial & Anti-racist Feminist Theorizing , p. 54, 2014 [ ISBN missing ] ^ a b Connell, R. W. (1990). "The State, Gender, and Sexual Politics: Theory and Appraisal".

Theory and Society .

19 (5): 507– 544.

doi : 10.1007/BF00147025 .

ISSN 0304-2421 .

JSTOR 657562 .

^ Moynagh, Maureen Anne (2014).

Documenting first wave feminisms . Vol. II, Canada – national and transnational contexts.

ISBN 9780802091352 .

^ Nicholson, Linda (1997).

The second wave : a reader in feminist theory . Routledge.

ISBN 0415917603 .

^ Mahowald, Mary Briody (1999).

Genes, Women, Equality . Oxford University Press. p. 145.

^ hooks, bell. "Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center" Cambridge, Massachusetts: South End Press 1984.

[ page needed ] [ ISBN missing ] ^ a b c Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ "XXX: A Woman's Right to Pornography" . Retrieved 2008-07-08 .

^ Greenway, Judy (2000). "Feminism: Anarchist". In Kramarae, Cheris (ed.).

Routledge international encyclopedia of women: global women's issues and knowledge . Spender, Dale. New York: Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-92088-4 .

^ McElroy, Wendy (2002).

Liberty for Women: Freedom and Feminism in the 21st century . Ivan R. Dee, Publisher.

ISBN 978-1-56663-435-9 .

^ Sommers, Christina Hoff (1995).

Who Stole Feminism? How Women Have Betrayed Women . New York: Simon & Schuster. p.

320 .

ISBN 0-684-80156-6 .

^ "Mary Wollstonecraft by Wendy McElroy" . Archived from the original on 2010-06-12.

^ "ifeminists.net" . Retrieved 2007-08-22 .

^ McElroy, Wendy, ed. (2002).

Liberty for Women: Freedom and Feminism in the 21st century . Ivan R. Dee, Publisher.

ISBN 978-1-56663-435-9 .

^ Female Anti-Feminism for Fame and Profit Archived July 13, 2007, at the Wayback Machine by Jennifer Pozner.

^ LaFramboise, LaFramboise (1996).

The Princess at the Window: A New Gender Morality . Toronto, Canada: Penguin.

ISBN 0-14-025690-3 . Retrieved 2006-10-19 .

Over the past few years, a growing number of women have written books critical of mainstream feminism. Among them ... Christina Hoff Sommers.

^ a b Zinn, Maxine Baca ; Dill, Bonnie Thornton (2002). "Theorizing Difference from Multiracial Feminism.". In Carole R. McCann & Seung-Kyung Kim (ed.).

Feminist Theory Reader: Local and Global Perspectives . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-93152-5 .

^ Zinn, Maxine Baca; Dill, Bonnie Thornton (1994).

Women of Color in U.S. Society (Women in the Political Economy) . Temple University Press.

ISBN 978-1-56639-106-1 .

^ a b c d e f g Thompson, Becky. "Multiracial Feminism: Recasting the Chronology of Second Wave Feminism." 2002.

[ ISBN missing ] [ page needed ] ^ Zinn, Maxine Baca , and Bonnie Thorton Dill.

Theorizing Difference from Multiracial Feminism . Academic Room: 321–31. Print.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ a b Johnson, Barbara (2002).

The Feminist Difference: Literature, Psychoanalysis, Race and Gender . Harvard University Press. p. 224.

ISBN 0-674-00191-5 .

^ Irigaray, Luce (1999). "When Our Lips Speak Together". In Price, Janet; Shildrick, Margrit (eds.).

Feminist theory and the body: a reader . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-92566-5 .

^ a b Kramarae and Spender: Routledge International Encyclopedia of Women , vol. 3 (2000).

[ ISBN missing ] [ page needed ] ^ a b Weedon, C, Key Issues in Postcolonial Feminism: A Western Perspective, (2002).

[ ISBN missing ] [ page needed ] ^ Narayan, Uma, Essence of Culture and a Sense of History: A Feminist Critique of Cultural Essentialism.

Ed. Narayan and Harding, Decentering the Center (Bloomington: Indiana UP, 2000), 80–100.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ a b c d Mohanty, Chandra Talpade (1991).

"Introduction" . In Mohanty, Chandra Talpade; Russo, Ann; Torres, Lourdes (eds.).

Third World Women and the Politics of Feminism . Bloomington: Indiana University Press. p.

49 .

ISBN 0-253-20632-4 .

^ McEwan, C, Postcolonialism, Feminism and Development: Intersections and Dilemmas, (2001).

[ ISBN missing ] [ page needed ] ^ Mills, S. (1998). "Postcolonial Feminist Theory". In Jackson, Stevi (ed.).

Contemporary Feminist Theories . Jones, Jackie. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 0-7486-0689-0 .

[ page needed ] ^ a b c Walker, Alice (1983).

In Search of Our Mothers' Gardens: Womanist Prose . San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. p.

397 .

ISBN 0-15-144525-7 .

^ Mills, S (1998): "Postcolonial Feminist Theory", p. 98 in S. Jackson and J. Jones, eds., Contemporary Feminist Theories (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press), pp. 98–112.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Mahmood, Saba (2005) Politics of Piety: The Islamic Revival and the Feminist Subject . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691149806 .

^ Hizi, Gil (2018).

"Gendered Self-Improvement: Autonomous Personhood and the Marriage Predicament of Young Women in Urban China" .

The Asia Pacific Journal of Anthropology .

19 (4): 298– 315.

doi : 10.1080/14442213.2018.1481881 .

S2CID 149953461 .

^ Mohanty, Chandra Talpade (1988). "Under Western Eyes".

Feminist Review (30, Autumn): 61– 88.

doi : 10.2307/1395054 .

JSTOR 1395054 .

^ Greenwald, A: "Postcolonial Feminism in Anthills of the Savannah" Archived 2008-05-17 at the Wayback Machine (2002).

^ Bulbeck, Chilla (1998), "The international traffic in women", in Bulbeck, Chilla (ed.), Re-orienting western feminisms: women's diversity in a postcolonial world , Cambridge New York: Cambridge University Press, p. 282, ISBN 9780521589758 .

^ a b c Butler, Judith (1999).

Gender trouble: feminism and the subversion of identity . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415924993 .

^ a b Haraway, Donna (1991).

"Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century" .

Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature . New York: Routledge. pp.

149– 181.

ISBN 1-85343-138-9 .

^ Frug, Mary Joe (March 1992). "Postmodern Feminist Legal Manifesto (An Unfinished Draft)".

Harvard Law Review .

105 (5): 1045– 1075.

doi : 10.2307/1341520 .

JSTOR 1341520 .

S2CID 150334489 .

^ Geoghegan, Vincent (2014).

Political ideologies : an introduction (4th ed.). Routledge. p. 200.

ISBN 9781317804338 .

^ Echols, Alice (1989).

Daring to be bad: radical feminism in America, 1967–1975 . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. p.

416 .

ISBN 0-8166-1787-2 .

^ Alcoff, Linda (1988). "Cultural Feminism versus Post-Structuralism: The Identity Crisis in Feminist Theory".

Signs .

13 (3): 405– 436.

doi : 10.1086/494426 .

JSTOR 3174166 .

S2CID 143799462 .

^ Rudy, Kathy (2001-03-22).

"Radical Feminism, Lesbian Separatism, and Queer Theory" .

Feminist Studies .

27 (1): 191.

doi : 10.2307/3178457 .

hdl : 2027/spo.0499697.0027.114 .

JSTOR 3178457 .

^ Bracewell, Lorna Norman (2016).

"Beyond Barnard: Liberalism, Antipornography Feminism, and the Sex Wars" .

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

42 (1): 23– 48.

doi : 10.1086/686752 .

ISSN 0097-9740 .

^ Hoagland, Sarah (1997).

Lesbian Ethics . Venice, California: LE publications.

^ Frye, Marilyn (1997). "Some Reflections on Separatism and Power". In Meyers, Diana T. (ed.).

Feminist social thought: a reader . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-91537-6 .

^ "Monstrous Domesticity by Faith Wilding" . Retrieved May 31, 2007 .

^ Ehrenreich, Barbara.

What is Socialist Feminism , in WIN Magazine , 1976.

^ Chattopadhyay, Paresh (2001).

"Marx on Women's Question" .

Economic and Political Weekly .

36 (26): 2455– 2457.

ISSN 0012-9976 .

JSTOR 4410809 .

^ Socialism, International (2020-03-29).

"How Marx and Engels fought for women's liberation" .

International Socialism . Retrieved 2024-09-28 .

^ Engels, Friedrich (1972).

The origin of the family, private property, and the state, in the light of the researches of Lewis H. Morgan . New York: International Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-85315-260-6 .

^ Bebel, August (2004).

Woman Under Socialism . University Press of the Pacific.

ISBN 978-1-4102-1564-2 .

[ page needed ] ^ Connolly, Clara; Segal, Lynne; Barrett, Michele; Campbell, Beatrix; Phillips, Anne; Weir, Angela; Wilson, Elizabeth (Summer 1986). "Feminism and Class Politics: A Round-Table Discussion".

Feminist Review . Socialist–Feminism: Out of the Blue (23): 17.

doi : 10.2307/1394718 .

JSTOR 1394718 .

^ Stokes, John (2000).

Eleanor Marx (1855–1898): life, work, contacts . Aldershot: Ashgate.

ISBN 978-0-7546-0113-5 .

^ Zetkin, Clara On a Bourgeois Feminist Petition (1895).

^ Zetkin, Clara Lenin on the Women's Question .

^ Kollontai, Alexandra The Social Basis of the Woman Question (1909).

^ Kollontai, Alexandra Women Workers Struggle For Their Rights (1919).

^ Dunbar-Ortiz, Roxanne (2002).

Quiet Rumours . AK Press.

ISBN 978-1-902593-40-1 .

^ Brown, Susan (1990). "Beyond Feminism: Anarchism and Human Freedom". In Roussopoulos, Dimitrios I. (ed.).

The Anarchist papers, 3 . Montreal: Black Rose Books.

ISBN 0-921689-53-5 .

^ Brown, p. 208.

^ "Defining Black Feminist Thought" . Retrieved May 31, 2007 .

^ "Combahee River Collective: A Black Feminist Statement" . 1974. Archived from the original on March 26, 2016 . Retrieved May 31, 2007 .

^ Smith, Sharon (2013).

"Black feminism and intersectionality" .

International Socialist Review . Retrieved 2016-03-23 .

^ Adewunmi, Bim (2014-04-02).

"Kimberlé Crenshaw on intersectionality: 'I wanted to come up with an everyday metaphor that anyone could use' " .

New Statesman . Retrieved 2016-03-23 .

^ Alcoff, Linda (Spring 1998). "Cultural Feminism Versus Post-Structuralism: the Identity Crisis in Feminist Theory".

Signs .

13 (3). The University of Chicago Press: 405– 436.

doi : 10.1086/494426 .

JSTOR 3174166 .

S2CID 143799462 .

^ Kramarae, Cheris ; Spender, Dale (2000).

Routledge international encyclopedia of women: global women's issues and knowledge . New York: Routledge. p. 746.

ISBN 0415920906 .

^ a b Taylor, Verta; Rupp, Leila J. (October 1993). "Women's Culture and Lesbian Feminist Activism: A Reconsideration of Cultural Feminism".

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

19 (1): 32– 61.

doi : 10.1086/494861 .

JSTOR 3174744 .

S2CID 144322836 .

^ Voet, Rian (1998).

Feminism and Citizenship . Sage Publications Ltd.

^ Tandon, Neeru.

Feminism: A Paradigm Shift . p. 68.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ a b MacGregor, Sherilyn (2006).

Beyond mothering earth: ecological citizenship and the politics of care . Vancouver: UBC Press. p. 286.

ISBN 0-7748-1201-X .

^ Shiva, Vandana (1988).

Staying alive: women, ecology and development . London: Zed Books.

ISBN 978-0-86232-823-8 .

[ page needed ] ^ Biehl, Janet (1991).

Rethinking eco-feminist politics . Boston, Massachusetts: South End Press .

ISBN 978-0-89608-392-9 .

^ Moi, T. (1987).

French feminist thought: a reader . Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0-631-14973-6 .

^ Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty (1981).

"French Feminism in an International Frame" .

Yale French Studies (62): 154– 184.

doi : 10.2307/2929898 .

JSTOR 2929898 .

^ a b c Wright, Elizabeth (2000).

Lacan and Postfeminism (Postmodern Encounters) . Totem Books.

ISBN 1-84046-182-9 .

[ page needed ] ^ Vanda Zajko and Miriam Leonard (eds.), 'Laughing with Medusa' (Oxford University Press, 2006). 87–117.

ISBN 0-19-927438-X .

^ Carol Armstrong and Catherine de Zegher , 'Women Artists as the Millennium'. (Cambridge, Mass.: October Books, MIT Press, 2006). 35–83.

ISBN 978-0-262-01226-3 .

^ The Matrixial Borderspace . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2006 ^ Ettinger, Bracha L. (2007).

"From Proto-Ethical Compassion To Responsibility: Besideness and The Three Primal Mother-Phantasies of Not-enoughness, Devouring and Abandonment" (PDF) .

Athena (2): 100– 145.

^ Kristeva, Julia ; Moi, Toril (1986).

The Kristeva reader . New York: Columbia University Press. p. 328.

ISBN 0-231-06325-3 .

^ a b Kral, Karla K.; Covarrubias, Sara G. Martinez; Iturribarria, Sara Lourdes Cruz (22 March 2012). "Feminism, gender, and education in the Mexican context".

Resources for Feminist Research .

34 ( 1– 2): 9– 24.

Gale A349721091 ProQuest 1444427259 .

^ Hill Collins, Patricia (2009).

Black feminist thought: knowledge, consciousness, and the politics of empowerment . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415964722 .

^ Harding, Sandra (2004).

The feminist standpoint theory reader: intellectual and political controversies . New York: Routledge. pp.

35– 54.

ISBN 9780415945011 .

^ de Beauvoir, Simone de (1997).

The second sex . Translated by Parshley, Howard Madison . London: Vintage.

ISBN 9780099744214 .

^ West, Candace; Zimmerman, Don H. (June 1987). "Doing gender".

Gender & Society .

1 (2).

Sage : 125– 151.

doi : 10.1177/0891243287001002002 .

JSTOR 189945 .

S2CID 220519301 .

Pdf.

^ Benhabib, Seyla (1995).

"From identity politics to social feminism: a plea for the nineties" .

Philosophy of Education Yearbook 1995 .

1 (2). Urbana: Philosophy Education Society: 14. Archived from the original on 2015-01-05 . Retrieved 2015-01-16 .

^ Narayan, Uma (1997).

Dislocating cultures: identities, traditions, and Third-World feminism . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-91418-3 .

[ page needed ] ^ Ogunyemi, C. O. (1985). "Womanism: The Dynamics of the Black Female Novel in English".

Signs .

11 (1): 17.

doi : 10.1086/494200 .

S2CID 143836306 .

^ Kolawole, Mary Ebun Modupe (1997).

Womanism and African consciousness . Trenton, N.J.: Africa World Press. p. 216.

ISBN 0-86543-540-5 .

^ Hudson-Weems, Clenora (1994).

Africana womanism: reclaiming ourselves . Troy, Mich.: Bedford Publishers. p. 158.

ISBN 0-911557-11-3 .

^ Obianuju Acholonu, Catherine (1995).

Motherism: The Afrocentric Alternative to Feminism . Afa Publ. p. 144.

ISBN 978-31997-1-4 .

^ Ogundipe-Leslie, Molara (1994).

Re-creating Ourselves: African Women & Critical Transformations . Africa World Press. p.

262 .

ISBN 0-86543-412-3 .

^ Nnaemeka, O. (1970). "Feminism, Rebellious Women, and Cultural Boundaries".

Research in African Literatures .

^ Hill, Robert, R. J. Childers, A. P. Childs, G. Cowie, A. Hatton, J. B. Lewis, N. McNair, S. Oswalt, et al.

, In the Shadows of the Arch: Safety and Acceptance of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgendered and Queer Students at the University of Georgia (Report) (Athens, Georgia: University of Georgia Department of Adult Education, April 17, 2002) [ page needed ] (coauthor Childers report chair).

^ Hill, R. J. (2001), Menacing Feminism, Educating Sisters , archived from the original on 2008-03-08.

^ Stone, Sandy, The Empire Strikes Back: A Posttranssexual Manifesto (1991) Archived 2011-09-28 at the Wayback Machine , in Body Guards: The Cultural Politics of Gender Ambiguity.

^ Stryker, Susan, & Stephen Whittle, The Transgender Studies Reader (New York: Routledge, 2006) ( ISBN 9780415947084 , OCLC 62782200 .) ^ Aizura, Aren, & Susan Stryker, The Transgender Studies Reader 2 (N.Y.: Routledge, 2013 ISBN 9780415947084 ).

^ Serano, Julia, Whipping Girl, A Transsexual Woman on Sexism and the Scapegoating of Femininity.

(Seal Press, 2007).

[ ISBN missing ] [ page needed ] ^ Cooke, Miriam (2000).

"Women, Religion, and the Postcolonial Arab World" .

Cultural Critique (45): 150– 184.

doi : 10.2307/1354370 .

JSTOR 1354370 .

^ Shah, Sonia. "Women and Gender Issues." Asian-Nation: The Landscape of Asian America. N.p., 1997.

^ a b c d e f g Shah, Sonia (1997).

Dragon Ladies: Asian American Feminists Breathe Fire . Boston, MA: Sound End Press.

ISBN 0-89608-576-7 .

^ a b c Chow, Esther Ngan-Ling Chow (September 1987). "The Development of Feminist Consciousness Among Asian-American Women".

Gender & Society .

1 (3): 284– 299.

doi : 10.1177/089124387001003004 .

S2CID 144476359 .

^ Roshanravan, Shireen M. (April 2010). "Passing-as-if: Model-Minority Subjectivity and Women of color Identification".

Meridians: Feminism, Race, Transnationalism .

10 : 1– 31.

doi : 10.2979/mer.2009.10.1.1 .

S2CID 144268409 .

^ Arvin, Maile (2013). "Decolonizing Feminism: Challenging Connections between Settler Colonialism and Heteropatriarchy".

Feminist Formations .

25 : 8– 34.

doi : 10.1353/ff.2013.0006 .

S2CID 145588292 .

^ a b c d Guerrero, Jaimes (Spring 2003). " 'Patriarchal Colonialism' and Indigenism: Implications for Native Feminist Spirituality and Native Womanism".

Hypatia .

18 (2): 58– 69.

doi : 10.1111/j.1527-2001.2003.tb00801.x .

S2CID 143331242 .

^ a b Smith, Andrea (Spring 2005). "Native American Feminism, Sovereignty, and Social Change".

Feminist Studies .

31 (1): 116– 132.

doi : 10.2307/20459010 .

hdl : 2027/spo.0499697.0031.107 .

JSTOR 20459010 .

^ a b c d e Ramirez, Renya K. (2007). "Race, Tribal Nation, and Gender: A Native Feminist Approach to Belonging".

Meridians: Feminism, Race, Transnationalism .

7 : 22– 40.

doi : 10.2979/mer.2007.7.2.22 .

S2CID 146691825 .

^ Farris, Phoebe (2005-04-01). "Contemporary Native American Women Artists: Visual Expressions of Feminism, the Environment, and Identity".

Feminist Studies .

31 (1): 95– 109.

doi : 10.2307/20459008 .

hdl : 2027/spo.0499697.0031.105 .

JSTOR 20459008 .

S2CID 149948760 .

^ "Comisión Femenil Mexicana Nacional, Inc." UC Santa Barbara Library. N.p., n.d. Web. 28 Mar. 2014 ^ a b c d Garcia, Alma M. (June 1989). "The Development of Chicana Feminist Discourse, 1970-1980".

Gender & Society .

3 (2): 217– 238.

doi : 10.1177/089124389003002004 .

S2CID 144240422 .

^ a b c d Roth, Benita (July 2007). "A Dialogical View of the Emergence of Chicana Feminist Discourse1".

Critical Sociology .

33 (4): 709– 730.

doi : 10.1163/156916307X211008 .

S2CID 145653487 .

^ Anthias, Floya; Yuval-Davis, Nira (Winter 1983). "Contextualizing feminism: gender, ethnic and class divisions".

Feminist Review .

15 (15).

Palgrave Macmillan : 23– 38.

doi : 10.2307/1394792 .

JSTOR 1394792 .

^ Philips, Alison (6 April 2020).

Me, not you . Manchester: Manchester University Press.

^ Butler, Judith (2006).

Gender Trouble . New York City: Routledge.

[ ISBN missing ] [ page needed ] ^ Echols, Alice, Daring to be Bad: Radical Feminism in America 1967–1975 (Minneapolis, Minn.: Univ. of Minnesota Press (American Culture ser.), 1989 ( ISBN 0-8166-1787-2 )), p. 199 ( oral history ) (author was a visiting asst. prof. of history at Univ. of Ariz.

at Tucson) (citing in id.

, p. 199 n. 318, Eisenstein, Zillah, The Radical Future of Liberal Feminism (N.Y.: Longman, 1981), p. 182 (quoting)).

^ Echols, Alice, Daring to be Bad , op. cit.

, pp. 199–200 (citing in id.

, p. 200 n. 319, Steinem, Gloria , What It Would Be Like If Women Win , in Time , Aug. 31, 1970, p. 22).

^ Faludi, Susan, Stiffed: The Betrayal of the American Man (N.Y.: William Morrow, 1st ed. 1999 ( ISBN 0-688-12299-X ) (pbk. 2000)), hardcover pp. 607–608 & see also pp. 9–16 & 604 (book portions also published 1994–1996).

^ Echols, Alice, Daring to be Bad , p. 199 (citing in id.

, p. 199 n. 316, Willis, Ellen, Economic Reality and the Limits of Feminism , in Ms.

, Jun., 1973, p. 111 (Ellen Willis also author of the book's Foreword)).

^ Kennedy, Florynce, Institutionalized Oppression vs.

the Female , in Morgan, Robin , ed., Sisterhood is Powerful: An Anthology of Writings From the Women's Liberation Movement (N.Y.: Random House, 1st ed. 1970), p. 439 (§ Historical Documents ) (article title except "vs" in double capitals).

^ Wollstonecraft, Mary, A Vindication of the Rights of Woman , in ed. Deidre Shauna Lynch, Mary Wollstonecraft: A Vindication of the Rights of Woman: An Authoritative Text Backgrounds and Contexts Criticism (N.Y.: W.W. Norton (Norton Critical Ed. ser.), pbk.  2009 ( ISBN 978-0-393-92974-4 )), pp. 148–149 (§ The Text of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman: with Strictures on Political and Moral Subjects ; in Vindication , ch. IX, Of the Pernicious Effects Which Arise from the Unnatural Distinctions Established in Society ) (title per id.

, p. [iii]; title A Vindication of the Rights of Woman: Mary Wollstonecraft , per id.

, cover I; subsubtitle not punctuated in original) (ed. prof. & assoc. prof. Eng., Univ. of Toronto, id.

, p. [i] ( The Editor )).

^ Wollstonecraft, Mary, A Vindication of the Rights of Woman , (ed. Deidre Shauna Lynch) (2009), op. cit.

, p. 158.

^ Wollstonecraft, Mary, A Vindication of the Rights of Woman , (ed. Deidre Shauna Lynch) (2009), op. cit.

, p. 150.

^ Wollstonecraft, Mary, A Vindication of the Rights of Men (Amherst, N.Y.: Prometheus Books (Great Books in Philosophy ser.), pbk. 1996 (originally published London 1790) () ISBN 1-57392-106-8 ), p. 74.

^ a b Kalsem, Kristin (Brandser); Williams, Verna L. (Fall 2010).

"Social justice feminism" .

UCLA Women's Law Journal .

18 .

UCLA School of Law : 131– 194.

doi : 10.5070/L3181017819 .

Pdf.

^ Daly, Mary, Gyn/Ecology: The Metaethics of Radical Feminism (Boston, Mass.: Beacon Press, pbk. [1st printing? printing of [19]90?] 1978 & 1990 (prob. all content except New Intergalactic Introduction 1978 & prob.

New Intergalactic Introduction 1990) ( ISBN 0-8070-1413-3 )), p. 28 & see also pp. 27–29 & 35–105 ( New Intergalactic Introduction is separate from Introduction: The Metapatriarchal Journey of Exorcism and Ecstasy ).

^ Redstockings Manifesto , in Morgan, Robin, ed., Sisterhood is Powerful: An Anthology of Writings From the Women's Liberation Movement (N.Y.: Random House, 1st ed. 1970), p. 533 (book § Historical Documents ; document § III) (document title in double capitals; emphases so in original).

^ Millett, Kate, Sexual Politics (Urbana: Univ. of Ill. Press, 1969, 1970, 1990, 2000, 1st Ill. Pbk. ( ISBN 0-252-06889-0 )), pp. 24–25.

^ Zerilli, Linda M. G., The Trojan Horse of Universalism: Language As a 'War Machine' in the Writings of Monique Wittig , in Robbins, Bruce, ed., The Phantom Public Sphere (Minneapolis, Minn.: Univ. of Minn. Press, 1993 ( ISBN 0-8166-2124-1 )), p. 150 (n. 21 (citing Haraway, Donna, A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, Technology, and Socialist Feminism in the 1980s, in Weed, Elizabeth, Coming to Terms (N.Y.: Routledge, Chapman & Hall, 1989), p. 181) omitted) (author asst. prof., poli. sci. dep't, Rutgers Univ.).

^ Caprino, Kathy.

"What Is Feminism, And Why Do So Many Women And Men Hate It?" .

Forbes . Retrieved 10 December 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Feminist movements and ideologies at Wikimedia Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminist_movements_and_ideologies&oldid=1299773400 " Category : Feminist movements and ideologies Hidden categories: Pages with missing ISBNs CS1: long volume value Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2025 Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2013 Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2017 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2013 All articles that may have off-topic sections Wikipedia articles that may have off-topic sections from October 2013 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from March 2018 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 08:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminist movements and ideologies 16 languages Add topic

