Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Work Toggle Work subsection 2.1 Essai d’une table poléométrique, 1782 3 Selected publications 4 References Toggle the table of contents Charles-René de Fourcroy 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French mathematician Charles-René de Fourcroy Charles-René de Fourcroy by Remi-Fursy Descarsin , in 1781 Charles-René de Fourcroy de Ramecourt (1715–1791) was a French officer of the Royal Engineers Corps. He is known for having published the first synthetic map of urban geography in his Essai d'une table poléométrique (1782).

Biography [ edit ] Grandson of Nicolas de Fourcroy, King's Councillor at the Bailiwick and Royal Provost of the town of Clermont , and son of Charles de Fourcroy, lawyer, Charles-René de Fourcroy was born in Paris on 19 January 1715. He entered the Corps du Génie in 1735 or 1737, became a member in 1740 and then captain in 1744. He became director of fortifications for the Minister of War in December 1774, then maréchal de camp on 1 March 1780.

He married Marie Marguerite Lemaistre (1732-1772) on 6 November 1755 in Andonville and they had two daughters: Charlotte Marie Louise Cornélie (1758-?) and Charlotte Marie Françoise (1762-1765).

He was a member of the Royal Academy of Sciences , appointed correspondent of Abbé Nollet on 25 November 1767, then of Pingré on 20 June 1770.

[ 1 ] He was created Grand Cross of the Order of Saint-Louis in 1781.

[ 2 ] A bust portrait was made in 1781 by René Descarsin (now the property of the Conservatoire du portrait du dix-huitième siècle, CPDHS).

[ 3 ] In 1835, an engraving was made by L. Lorin and lithographed by Langlumé.

Work [ edit ] Fourcroy was the author of Essai d'une table poléométrique, a treatise on engineering and civil construction, published in 1782, which is remarkable for its period in its use of graphs to list the achievements of civil engineers of bridges and roads from 1740 to 1780 and its cross-sectional and mathematical analysis of the growth of urban areas.

Essai d’une table poléométrique, 1782 [ edit ] In 1782 Fourcroy published his Essai d'une table poléométrique, ou amusement d'un amateur de plans sur les grandeurs de quelques villes; Avec une Carte, ou Tableau qui offre la comparaison de ces Villes par une même échelle.

This book gives an analysis of the urban growth of European cities, which are graphically compared in a diagram, called Table poléométrique or Poleometric Table.

Tableau poléometrique, 1782, by Charles-René de Fourcroy In his work Fourcroy (1782) explained: "If we have the surfaces (i.e., areas) of all the cities/villages in the table, or the proportions representing these cities, transformed into cross-sections, each of equal extension, and each on the same scale; then if we successively put one on the other, from the largest to the smallest, and joined all by one of their angles; these squares would overlap relative to their size, and the whole would form a kind of table that visually represents an idea of the actual proportion that can be found between the surfaces of these different cities. We could as well find in this table two cities of equal size, cut their squares diagonally, and have the table represent only half of each; which essentially means the same. Such is the attached figure, which requires no further explanation." [ 4 ] A 1782 review of this work by Élie Catherine Fréron noticed that the Table poléométrique is plausible for 230 cities, foreign and domestic.

[ 5 ] More recently Jacques Bertin in his Semiology of Graphics (1983) further explained the work, which was first published anonymously. In the French National library the work is still listed by its publisher.

[ 6 ] Bertin wrote "The 'Poleometric Table' (see figure), published in 1782 by Dupain-Triel, is one of the oldest proportional representations of human phenomena which is currently known.

François de Dainville has demonstrated... that the author was Charles de Fourcroy, a Director of Fortification. [in the diagram] each city is represented by a square whose area is proportional to the geographic area occupied by the city (and for the smallest cities, by a half square only, divided by the diagonal line.

When superimposed, the squares are classed automatically. This results in visual groupings which lead the author to propose an 'urban classification.' This example allows us to appreciate the evolution of graphic representation and the efficiency of more recent solutions, based on the standard construction." [ 7 ] Following Fourcroy's map, a not so far comparison diagram was published in 1785 by the German economist and statistician August Friedrich Wilhelm Crome , was entitled "Groessen Karte von Europa." This map made a comparison of European states, instead of a comparison of cities in the Poleometric Table.

Palsky (1996) concluded, that "the Table established by Fourcroy signals a fundamental moment in the evolution of the graphical method. We see the passage to the abstract, to fictitious features. By these proportional triangles, the author constructs an image that does not return/relate to its original existence." [ 8 ] The attribution of authorship of the manuscript was carried out in 1958 by François de Dainville with the help of internal validations (choice of towns, often places of battle; access to the Galerie des plans en relief du Roi) or external validations (an annotated copy of the work preserved in the Bibliothèque de l'Inspection du Génie bears the handwritten inscription at the bottom of the frontispiece: "made by Mr de Fourcroy, chief of the Génie, and given by him").

[ 9 ] Selected publications [ edit ] Fourcroy, Charles de.

Essai d’une table poléométrique, ou amusement d’un amateur de plans sur la grandeur de quelques villes.

Dupain-Triel, Paris (1782) References [ edit ] ^ "Les membres du passé dont le nom commence par F" .

www.academie-sciences.fr . Retrieved 20 December 2022 .

^ Bunel, Arnaud.

"Armorial de l'Ordre de Saint-Louis: Charles-René de Fourcroy de Ramecourt" .

Armorial de l'Ordre de Saint-Louis . Retrieved 20 December 2022 .

^ Cent portraits pour un siècle . Snoeck. 2019. pp.

128– 129.

^ De Fourcroy (1782), cited in: Gilles Palsky (1996): Des Chiffres et des Cartes, p.51-52; Translated by Daniel J. Denis. " Des Cartes Generates Aux Cartes Spectates " at euclid.psych.yorku.ca, 7 April 2002.

^ Élie Catherine Fréron (1782) L'année littéraire ou Suite des lettres sur quelques écrits de ce temps , Vol. 5-6. p. 71 ^ See also: worldcat.org , and google books accessed 14.01.2015.

^ Jacques Bertin .

Semiology of Graphics , 1983. p. 203 ^ Gilles Palsky (1996): Des Chiffres et des Cartes, p.51-52; Translated by Daniel J. Denis. " Des Cartes Generates Aux Cartes Spectates " at euclid.psych.yorku.ca, 7 April 2002.

^ Dainville, François de (1958).

"Grandeur et population des villes au XVIIIe siècle" .

Population .

13 (3): 459– 480.

doi : 10.2307/1525420 .

JSTOR 1525420 .

v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Netherlands Poland People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Charles-René_de_Fourcroy&oldid=1296018030 " Categories : 1715 births 1791 deaths French mathematicians Data and information visualization experts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2022 Articles using infobox templates with no data rows This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 08:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Charles-René de Fourcroy 1 language Add topic

