Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Alternative meanings 3 Criticism 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Propertarianism 4 languages Español Italiano Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Propertarian ) Legal theory of property rights Not to be confused with Prioritarianism , Proletarianization , or Praetorianism .

This article is part of a series on Libertarianism in the United States Schools Agorism Anarcho-capitalism Austro Authoritarian Autarchism Bleeding-heart Christian Conservative Consequentialist Feminist Fusionism Geo Green Market anarchism Minarchism Natural-rights Neo Paleo Panarchism Paternalist Propertarianism Socialist Techno Transhumanist Voluntaryism Principles Anti-imperialism Civil libertarianism Constitutionalism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Economic freedom Evictionism Free banking Free market Free-market environmentalism Free migration Free trade Free will Freedom of association Freedom of contract Freedom of speech Homestead principle Individuality Individualism Liberty Limited government Localism Marriage privatization Natural rights and legal rights Non-aggression principle Non-interventionism Non-politics Non-voting Open border Polycentric law Private defense agency Private property Public choice theory Restorative justice Right to bear arms Right to privacy Rugged Individualism Self-ownership Single tax Small government Spoiled ballot Spontaneous order Stateless society Tax resistance Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntary association Voluntary society History Age of Enlightenment Abolitionism in the United States Classical liberalism Anti-Federalists Transcendentalism Individualist anarchism in the United States Old Right New Left New Right Freedom School Economics Austrian School Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Georgism Laissez-faire Neoliberalism Supply-side economics Intellectuals Andrews Barnett Block Boudreaux Brennan Caplan Carson Chamberlain Chartier Chodorov Cowen Ebeling Epstein Franklin D. Friedman M. Friedman P. Friedman R. Friedman Galambos Garrett George Griffin Gordon Harper Hazlitt Heinlein Hess Hoppe Hospers Huemer Jefferson Kinsella Konkin R. Lane Liggio LeFevre Machan Mencken Menger Mises Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Raico Read Robertson Rockwell Rothbard Samuels Schulman Sciabarra Scott Skousen Smith Spooner Somin Sowell Sumner Sutton Stephenson Szasz Taleb Thoreau Tuccille Tucker Volokh Wilder Williams Wilson (Clyde) Wilson (Robert) Politicians Amash Barr Brakey Burt Chafee Cleveland Flake Goldwater Jacobs Johnson Jorgensen Lee Massie McAfee Nolan Oliver Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Polis Sanford Sarwark Sununu Ventura Weld Wu Commentators Chamberlain Gillespie Gutfeld Jones Kauffman McElroy Miller Napolitano Postrel Pugsley Rogan Smith Soave Stone Stossel Welch Will Woods Activists Ben Garrison Jillette Koch (Charles) Koch (David) Reitman Kubrick Smith Prince Teller Thiel Literature The Anarchist Cookbook Anarchy, State, and Utopia The Betrayal of the American Right The Case Against Education Civil Disobedience Conceived in Liberty The Creature from Jekyll Island Defending the Undefendable The Discovery of Freedom End the Fed The Ethics of Liberty For a New Liberty Free to Choose The Future and Its Enemies The God of the Machine It Usually Begins with Ayn Rand Liberty The Machinery of Freedom Man, Economy and State The Moon is a Harsh Mistress The Mainspring of Human Progress The Market for Liberty The Myth of the Rational Voter No, They Can't No Treason New Libertarian Manifesto Our Enemy, the State The Problem of Political Authority Progress and Poverty Protection or Free Trade Radicals for Capitalism Seeing Like a State To Serve and Protect The Unconstitutionality of Slavery Issues Abortion Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political parties Politics State Theories of law Symbols Come and take it Gadsden flag Idols Ron Swanson Patrick Bateman Walter White Organizations Cato Institute Federalist Society Free State Project Foundation for Economic Education International Alliance of Libertarian Parties Libertarian Party Liberty International Mises Institute Reason Foundation Reason (magazine) Students for a Democratic Society Students for Liberty Young Americans for Liberty Movements American militia movement Boogaloo movement Dark Enlightenment Objectivist movement Objectivism Sovereign citizen movement Comparable Libertarianism in Hong Kong Libertarianism in the United Kingdom ( England ) Related Conservatism in the United States Left-libertarianism Liberalism in the United States Libertarian Democrat Libertarian Republican Libertarian science fiction On Democracy in America Outline of libertarianism Right-libertarianism Liberalism portal Conservatism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e Part of a series on Anarcho-capitalism Origins Aristotelianism Austrian school of economics Marginalism School of Salamanca Subjective theory of value Objectivism Classical liberalism French liberal school Homestead principle Labor theory of property Physiocracy Individualist anarchism Concepts Anti-statism Civil rights Corporate governance Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Deregulation Economic liberalism Evictionism Free market Free-market roads Free trade Freedom of contract Individualism Jurisdictional arbitrage Laissez-faire Land tenure Market anarchism Natural law Non-aggression principle Polycentric law Private defense ( Army ( Company / list ), Intelligence , Investigator , Police , Security ) Private property Privatization Propertarianism Property rights Right to property Self-ownership Spontaneous order Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntaryism People Benson Block Caplan Casey de Jasay Friedman Hoppe Huemer Kinsella Land Malice Milei Murphy McElroy Rockwell Rothbard Salerno Tucker Woods Works The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty (1973) The Machinery of Freedom (1973) Defending the Undefendable (1976) The Ethics of Liberty (1982) To Serve and Protect (1998) Democracy: The God That Failed (2001) The Myth of the Rational Voter (2007) The Voluntary City (2002) The Problem of Political Authority (2012) Issues Abortion Anarchism Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Inheritance Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Minarchism Objectivism Political parties Politics Theories of law Related topics Accelerationism Agorism Dark Enlightenment Paleo-libertarianism Right-libertarianism Libertarianism in the United States Left-libertarianism Ultraliberalism Anarchism portal Capitalism portal Politics portal v t e Propertarianism , or proprietarianism , is a political philosophy that reduces all questions of law to the right to own property .

[ 1 ] On property rights , it advocates private property on the basis of Lockean sticky property norms , where an owner keeps their property more or less until they consent to gift or sell it, rejecting the Lockean proviso . Propertarianism is often described by its advocates as either synonymous with capitalism or its logical conclusion.

[ 2 ] Closely related to and overlapping with right-libertarianism , it is also often accompanied with the idea that state monopoly law should be replaced by market-generated law centered on contractual relationships. Propertarian ideals are most commonly cited to advocate for an anarcho-capitalist or minarchist society, with governance systems either limited to enforcing contracts and private property or abolished through total privatization of its basic functions.

History [ edit ] The term appears to have been coined by Edward Cain in 1963: Since their use of the word "liberty" refers almost exclusively to property, it would be helpful if we had some other word, such as "propertarian," to describe them. [...] Novelist Ayn Rand is not a conservative at all but claims to be very relevant. She is a radical capitalist, and is the closest to what I mean by a propertarian.

[ 3 ] Marcus Cunliffe defined propertarianism in his 1973 lectures as "characteristic values of American history" in regard to property.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Philosopher Robert Nozick formalized Locke's approach in his book "Anarchy, State, and Utopia" with the Entitlement Theory of Justice, specifying criteria for just original acquisition, just transfer, and rectification.

David Boaz writes that the "propertarian approach to privacy", both morally and legally, has ensured Americans' privacy rights.

[ 8 ] Markus Verhaegh states that Rothbardian anarcho-capitalism advocates the neo- Lockean idea that property only legitimately originates from labor and may then only legitimately change hands by trade or gift.

[ 9 ] Brian Doherty describes Murray Rothbard 's form of libertarianism as propertarian because he "reduced all human rights to rights of property, beginning with the natural right of self-ownership".

[ 10 ] L. Neil Smith describes propertarianism as a positive libertarian philosophy in his alternate history novels The Probability Broach (1980) and The American Zone (2002).

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Alternative meanings [ edit ] Hans Morgenthau used propertarianism to characterize the connection between property and suffrage.

[ 13 ] Criticism [ edit ] In the science fiction novel The Dispossessed (1974), author Ursula K. Le Guin contrasted a propertarian statist society with an anarchist anti-propertarian society [ 14 ] [ 15 ] in an attempt to show that property and state objectified human beings.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Murray Bookchin objected to propertarians calling themselves libertarians , arguing: We have permitted cynical political reactionaries and the spokesmen of large corporations to pre-empt these basic libertarian American ideals. We have permitted them not only to become the specious voice of these ideals such that individualism has been used to justify egotism; the pursuit of happiness to justify greed, and even our emphasis on local and regional autonomy has been used to justify parochialism, insularism, and exclusivity – often against ethnic minorities and so-called deviant individuals. We have even permitted these reactionaries to stake out a claim to the word libertarian, a word, in fact, that was literally devised in the 1890s in France by Elisée Reclus as a substitute for the word anarchist, which the government had rendered an illegal expression for identifying one's views. The propertarians, in effect – acolytes of Ayn Rand, the earth mother of greed, egotism, and the virtues of property – have appropriated expressions and traditions that should have been expressed by radicals but were willfully neglected because of the lure of European and Asian traditions of socialism, socialisms that are now entering into decline in the very countries in which they originated.

[ 18 ] Bookchin described three concepts of possession: property itself; possession; and usufruct (i.e. appropriation of resources by virtue of use.

[ 19 ] ) Some critics charge that this prevents freedom from making sense as an independent value in anarcho capitalist theory: [ 20 ] Looking at Rothbard’s definition of "liberty" quoted above, we can see that freedom is actually no longer considered to be a fundamental, independent concept. Instead, freedom is a derivative of something more fundamental, namely the "legitimate rights" of an individual, which are identified as property rights. In other words, given that "anarcho"-capitalists and right libertarians in general consider the right to property as "absolute," it follows that freedom and property become one and the same. This suggests an alternative name for the right Libertarian, namely "Propertarian." And, needless to say, if we do not accept the right-libertarians’ view of what constitutes "legitimate" "rights," then their claim to be defenders of liberty is weak.

— Iain Mckay.(2008/2012), Appendix: Anarchism and "Anarcho"-capitalism.

Matt Zwolinski has argued that scholars influenced by Rothbard could be called "propertarians" because the concept that really plays a central role in their research is property rather than liberty.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Anarchism portal Libertarianism portal Politics portal Anarcho-capitalism Capitalism Creative disruption Entitlement theory Outline of libertarianism Private law society Private property Privatism Privatization Producerism Right-libertarianism Sovereign citizen movement References [ edit ] ^ Ralf M. Bader, John Meadowcroft, eds. (2011), The Cambridge Companion to Nozick's Anarchy, State, and Utopia , Cambridge University Press, p. 151.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Ayn Rand, Nathaniel Branden, Alan Greenspan, Robert Hessen (1967).

Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal . New York City: Signet.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Edward Cain (1963).

They'd Rather Be Right: Youth and the Conservative Movement . Macmillan. pp.

32– 36.

ASIN B0000CLYF9 .

OCLC 979693144 .

^ Hans Joachim Morgenthau, (Kenneth W. Thompson, Robert John Myers, Editors), Truth and tragedy: a tribute to Hans J. Morgenthau , Transaction Publishers, p. 165 , 1984 ISBN 0878558667 .

^ Marcus Cunliffe (1974), The right to property: a theme in American history, Sir George Watson lecture delivered in the University of Leicester, 4 May 1973 , Leicester University Press, ISBN 978-0718511296 ^ Rob Kroes, Them and us: questions of citizenship in a globalizing world , University of Illinois Press, p. 208 , 2000 ISBN 0252069099 ^ Marcus Cunliffe, In search of America: transatlantic essays, 1951–1990 , p. 307, 1991.

^ David Boaz, Cato Institute, Toward liberty: the idea that is changing the world : 25 years of public policy from the Cato Institute , Cato Institute, p. 386 , 2002 ISBN 1930865279 ^ Verhaegh, Marcus (2006).

"Rothbard as a Political Philosopher" (PDF) .

Journal of Libertarian Studies .

20 (4): 3.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2013-09-11 . Retrieved 2009-09-01 .

^ Doherty, Brian (2008).

"Rothbard, Murray (1926–1995)" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

442– 445.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n271 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Archived from the original on 2023-01-09 . Retrieved 2016-10-12 .

^ L. Neil Smith (2002), The American Zone , p. 167.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ John J. Pierce, When world views collide: a study in imagination and evolution , p. 163, 1989.

^ Hans Morgenthua, p. 174 Archived 2024-02-09 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Ursela K. Le Guin, The Dispossessed , HarperCollins, various pages Archived 2024-02-09 at the Wayback Machine , 2003 ISBN 006051275X .

^ John P. Reeder, Source, sanction, and salvation: religion and morality in Judaic and Christian traditions , p. 113 , 1988. Reeder uses phrase "nonpropertarian" to describe Le Guin's views.

^ Laurence Davis, Peter G. Stillman, The new utopian politics of Ursula K. Le Guin's The dispossessed , Lexington Books, p. xvii Archived 2024-02-09 at the Wayback Machine , 2005.

^ On Triton and Other Matters: An Interview with Samuel R. Delany Archived 2021-07-19 at the Wayback Machine ,  Science Fiction Studies, November 1990.

^ Murray Bookchin, The Greening of Politics: Toward a New Kind of Political Practice, Green Perspectives: Newsletter of the Green Program Project, No. 1 January 1986 [1] Archived 2019-10-01 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Ellie Clement and Charles Oppenheim, Department of Information Science, Loughborough University, Loughborough, Leics Great Britain, Anarchism, Alternative Publishers and Copyright Archived 2018-02-16 at the Wayback Machine , Journal of Anarchist Studies Archived 2020-10-30 at the Wayback Machine , undated.

^ McKay, Iain (2012) [2008].

"An Anarchist FAQ – Appendix: Anarchism and "Anarcho"-capitalism – 2 What do "anarcho"-capitalists mean by "freedom"?" . Edinburgh and Oakland: AK Press.

Archived from the original on 27 January 2025 . Retrieved 30 April 2025 .

^ Zwolinski, Matt (4 February 2013).

"Liberty and Property" .

Libertarianism.org . Cato Institute.

Archived from the original on 29 August 2023 . Retrieved 21 May 2025 .

^ Zwolinski, Matt (11 February 2013).

"Against Moralized Freedom" .

Libertarianism.org . Cato Institute.

Archived from the original on 4 May 2025 . Retrieved 6 May 2025 .

v t e Anarcho-capitalism Origins Aristotelianism Austrian school of economics Marginalism School of Salamanca Subjective theory of value Objectivism Classical liberalism French liberal school Homestead principle Labor theory of property Physiocracy Individualist anarchism Concepts Anti-statism Civil rights Corporate governance Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Deregulation Economic liberalism Evictionism Free market Free-market roads Free trade Freedom of contract Individualism Jurisdictional arbitrage Laissez-faire Land tenure Market anarchism Natural law Non-aggression principle Polycentric law Private defense ( Army ( Company / list ), Intelligence , Investigator , Police , Security ) Private property Privatization Propertarianism Property rights Right to property Self-ownership Spontaneous order Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntaryism People Bruce L. Benson Walter Block Bryan Caplan Gerard Casey Anthony de Jasay David D. Friedman Hans-Hermann Hoppe Michael Huemer Stephan Kinsella Nick Land Michael Malice Javier Milei Robert P. Murphy Wendy McElroy Lew Rockwell Murray Rothbard Joseph Salerno Jeffrey Tucker Tom Woods Works The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty (1973) The Machinery of Freedom (1973) Defending the Undefendable (1976) The Ethics of Liberty (1982) To Serve and Protect (1998) Democracy: The God That Failed (2001) The Myth of the Rational Voter (2007) The Voluntary City (2002) The Problem of Political Authority (2012) Issues Abortion Anarchism Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Inheritance Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Minarchism Objectivism Political parties Politics Theories of law Related topics Accelerationism Agorism Paleo-libertarianism Right-libertarianism Libertarianism in the United States Left-libertarianism Ultraliberalism Category v t e Libertarianism Origins Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Schools Libertarian capitalism ( Right-libertarianism ) Anarcho-capitalism Autarchism Fusionism Libertarianism bleeding-heart christian consequentialist conservative feminism geo green natural-rights neo paleo paternalism techno crypto transhumanism Libertarian authoritarianism neo-reactionary Minarchism Neo-classical liberalism Objectivism Propertarianism Voluntaryism Libertarian socialism ( Left-libertarianism ) Anarchism black collectivist communist feminism free-market agorism green individualist egoist insurrectionary libertarian communism mutualism pacifist philosophical queer social syndicalist Autonomism Communalism Guild socialism Libertarian Marxism communization mao-spontex Syndicalism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Philosophers Left-wing Bakunin Bookchin Camus Chomsky Cleyre Déjacque Fourier Godwin Goldman Guérin Hodgskin Kropotkin Marcuse Öcalan Proudhon Warren Tucker Right-wing Bastiat Block Brennan Emerson D. Friedman M. Friedman R. Friedman Goldwater Hayek Herbert Hoppe Jillette Kinsella Korwin-Mikke Lane Locke von Mises de Molinari Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Read Rothbard Simon Spencer Stossel Other George Hess Konkin de La Boétie McElroy Paine Spooner Stirner Szasz Thoreau Politicians Cleveland Coolidge Farage Gandhi Johnson Jorgensen Korwin-Mikke Milei Paul Sarwark Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Works Atlas Shrugged (1957) The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto (1973) Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973–1979) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974) Free to Choose (1980) Related Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Outline of libertarianism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Propertarianism&oldid=1295539976 " Categories : Anarcho-capitalism Libertarian theory Political theories Hidden categories: Pages with missing ISBNs Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 11:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Propertarianism 4 languages Add topic

