Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Legacy 3 Works 4 Quotations 5 See also 6 References 7 Publications 8 External links Toggle the table of contents António Vieira 22 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego Ido Italiano Latina مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Runa Simi Русский Sardu Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 17th-century Portuguese diplomat and missionary For other people named Antonio Vieira, see Antonio Vieira (disambiguation) .

This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( January 2021 ) The Reverend António Vieira SJ Vieira, c.

early 18th century Born ( 1608-02-06 ) 6 February 1608 Lisbon , Kingdom of Portugal Died 18 July 1697 (1697-07-18) (aged 89) Bahia , Portuguese Colony of Brazil Occupation(s) Diplomat, Philosopher, Jesuit Priest, Orator and Writer Known for Diplomacy as member of the Royal Council to King John IV António (or Antônio ) Vieira [ 1 ] SJ ( Portuguese pronunciation: [ɐ̃ˈtɔniu viˈɐjɾɐ] ; 6 February 1608 – 18 July 1697) was a Portuguese Jesuit priest , diplomat , orator , preacher , philosopher , writer , and member of the Royal Council to the King of Portugal .

Biography [ edit ] In the book 'History of Brazil, Volume 2 – 1817' By Robert Southey, Antonio Vieira advised the King of Portugal and later became a member of the Royal Council.

Vieira was born in Lisbon to Cristóvão Vieira Ravasco, the son of a mulatto woman, Maria de Azevedo.

[ 2 ] In 1614 he accompanied his parents to the colony of Brazil , where his father had been posted as a registrar.

[ 3 ] He received his education at the Jesuit college at Bahia . He entered the Jesuit novitiate in 1625, under Father Fernão Cardim, and two years later pronounced his first vows . At the age of eighteen he was teaching rhetoric, and a little later dogmatic theology, at the college of Olinda , besides writing the "annual letters" of the province.

[ 4 ] In 1635 he was ordained to the priesthood. He soon began to distinguish himself as an orator, and the three patriotic sermons he delivered at Bahia (1638–40) are remarkable for their imaginative power and dignity of language. The Sermon for the Good Success of the Arms of Portugal Against Those of Holland was considered by the Abbé Raynal to be "perhaps the most extraordinary discourse ever heard from a Christian pulpit.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Fr. António Vieira, preaching When the revolution of 1640 placed John IV on the throne of Portugal, Brazil gave him her allegiance, and Vieira was chosen to accompany the viceroy's son to Lisbon to congratulate the new king.

[ 4 ] His talents and aptitude for affairs impressed John IV so favorably that he appointed him tutor to the Infante Dom Pedro, royal preacher, and a member of the Royal Council.

[ 5 ] Vieira did efficient work in the War and Navy Departments, revived commerce, urged the foundation of a national bank and the organization of the Brazilian Trade Company.

[ 5 ] Vieira used the pulpit to propound measures for improving the general and particularly the economic condition of Portugal. His pen was as busy as his voice, and in four notable pamphlets he advocated the creation of companies of commerce, denounced as unchristian a society which discriminated against New Christians (Muslim and Jewish converts), [ 3 ] called for the reform of the procedure of the Inquisition and the admission of Jewish and foreign traders, with guarantees for their security from religious persecution. He argued to the king that Jewish merchants would benefit the kingdom, remedying its current "miserable state." [ 6 ] He did not spare his own estate, for in his Sexagesimalsermon he boldly attacked the current style of preaching, its subtleties, affectation, obscurity and abuse of metaphor, and declared the ideal of a sermon to be one which sent men away " not contented with the preacher, but discontented with themselves." [ 4 ] In 1647 Vieira began his career as a diplomat, in the course of which he visited England, France, the Netherlands and Italy. In his Papel Forte he urged the cession of Pernambuco to the Dutch as the price of peace, while his mission to Rome in 1650 was undertaken in the hope of arranging a marriage between the heir to the throne of Portugal and the only daughter of King Philip IV of Spain . His success, freedom of speech and reforming zeal had made him enemies on all sides, and only the intervention of the king prevented his expulsion from the Society of Jesus , so that prudence counselled his return to Brazil.

[ 4 ] In his youth he had vowed to consecrate his life to the conversion of the African slaves and native Indians of his adopted country , and arriving in Maranhão early in 1653 he recommenced his apostolic labors, which had been interrupted during his stay of fourteen years in the Old World. Starting from Pará , he penetrated to the banks of the Tocantins , making numerous converts to Christianity and European civilization among the most violent tribes; but after two years of unceasing labour, during which every difficulty was placed in his way by the colonial authorities, he saw that the Indians must be withdrawn from the jurisdiction of the governors, to prevent their exploitation, and placed under the control of the members of a single religious society.

[ 4 ] Accordingly, in June 1654 he set sail for Lisbon to plead the cause of the Indians, and in April 1655 he obtained from the king a series of decrees which placed the missions under the Society of Jesus, with himself as their superior, and prohibited the enslavement of the natives, except in certain specified cases. Returning with this charter of freedom, he organized the missions over a territory having a coast-line of 400 leagues, and a population of 200,000 souls, and in the next six years (1655–61) the indefatigable missionary set the crown on his work. In August 1659, he signed the Treaty of the Mapuá with various indigenous groups on the Marajó Archipelago . After a time, however, the colonists, attributing the shortage of slaves and the consequent diminution in their profits to the Jesuits, began actively to oppose Vieira, and they were joined by members of the secular clergy and the other Orders who were jealous of the monopoly enjoyed by the company in the government of the Indians.

[ 4 ] Vieira was accused of want of patriotism and usurpation of jurisdiction, and in 1661, after a popular revolt, the authorities sent him with thirty-one other Jesuit missionaries back to Portugal. He found his friend King John IV dead and the court a prey to faction, but, dauntless as ever in the pursuit of his ambition, he resorted to his favorite arm of preaching, and on Epiphany Day, 1662, in the royal chapel, he replied to his persecutors in a famous rhetorical effort, and called for the execution of the royal decrees in favor of the Indians.

[ 4 ] Circumstances were against him, however, and the Count of Castelo Melhor , fearing his influence at court, had him exiled first to Porto and then to Coimbra ; but in both these places he continued his work of preaching, and the reform of the Inquisition also occupied his attention. To silence him his enemies then denounced him to that tribunal, and he was cited to appear before the Holy Office at Coimbra to answer points smacking of heresy in his sermons, conversations and writings. He had believed in the prophecies of a 16th-century shoemaker poet, Bandarra , dealing with the coming of a ruler who would inaugurate an epoch of unparalleled prosperity for the church and for Portugal, these new prosperous times were to be called the Quinto Império or " Fifth Empire " (also called "Sebastianism"). In Vieira's famous opus, Clavis Prophetarum , he had endeavoured to prove the truth of his dreams from passages of Scripture. As he refused to submit, the Inquisitors kept him in prison in Coimbra from October 1665 to December 1667, and finally imposed a sentence which prohibited him from teaching, writing or preaching.

[ 4 ] It was a heavy blow for the Jesuits, and though Vieira recovered his freedom and much of his prestige shortly afterwards on the accession of King Pedro II , for example it is known that, in 1669, in Lisbon, Cosimo III de Médici had the opportunity to talk several times with Antònio Vieira and to attend his famous masses .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] However, it was soon determined that he should go to Rome to procure revision of the sentence, which still hung over him though the penalties had been removed. During a six years' residence in the Eternal City, Vieira won his greatest triumphs.

Pope Clement X invited him to preach before the College of Cardinals, and he became confessor to Queen Christina of Sweden and a member of her literary academy.

[ 4 ] At the request of the pope he drew up a report of two hundred pages on the Inquisition in Portugal , with the result that after a judicial inquiry Pope Innocent XI suspended it in Portugal for seven years (1674–81). Ultimately, Vieira returned to Portugal with a papal bull exempting him from the jurisdiction of the grand inquisitor, and in January 1681 he embarked for Brazil. He resided in Bahia and occupied himself in revising his sermons for publication, and in 1687 he became superior of the province. A false accusation of complicity in an assassination, and the intrigues of members of his own Company, clouded his last months, and on 18 July 1697 he died in Salvador, Bahia .

[ 4 ] Legacy [ edit ] António Vieira is considered one of the literary greats of the Portuguese-speaking world.

[ 3 ] The Padre António Vieira Chair in Portuguese Studies, at the Pontifícia Universidade Católica-Rio de Janeiro was created on 7 October 1994, to train teachers and researchers in the social sciences. Promoting academic exchanges between Brazil and Portugal, the Chair's main aim has been to deepen the cultural dialog that already exists between the two countries within the university context. The Chair is involved in the training of teachers in the areas of Portuguese Literature and Culture, Portuguese Language, and Lusophone Literatures.

[ 9 ] In 1997 Portugal issued a commemorative coin to mark the 300th anniversary of the death of Father Vieira.

[ 10 ] Portugal issued a stamp in 2008, celebrating the 400th anniversary of Vieira's birth (1608). Brasil has issued already two Vieira stamps, in 1941 [ 11 ] and 1997.

A statue of Father António Vieira by the sculptor Marco Fidalgo, was unveiled on the Largo Trindade Coelho near the church of São Roque in 2017, on the initiative of the Holy House of Mercy of Lisbon, Portugal.

In the book 'History of Brazil, Volume 2 – 1817' By Robert Southey, Antonio Vieira compares Holland and Brazil to Milk and Honey.

Works [ edit ] The first page of "Historia do Futuro", first edition His works form perhaps the greatest monument of Portuguese prose. Two hundred discourses exist to prove his fecundity, while his versatility is shown by the fact that he could treat the same subject differently on half a dozen occasions. His letters, simple and conversational in style, have a deep historical and political interest, and form documents of the first value for the history of the period.

[ 4 ] His principal works are: Sermões (Sermons) (15 vols., Lisbon, 1679–1748); there are many subsequent editions, but none complete; translations exist in Spanish, Italian, German and French, which have gone through several editions Archive História do Futuro (History of the Future) (Lisbon, 1718; 2nd ed., ibid., 1755); this and the Quinto Império and this Clavis Prophetarum seem to be in essence one and the same book in different redactions Cartas (Letters) (3 vols., Lisbon, 1735–46) Notícias recônditas do modo de proceder a Inquisição de Portugal com os seus presos (News on how the Portuguese Inquisition proceeds with its prisoners) (Lisbon, 1821) Arte de Furtar (The Art of Stealing) published under Vieira's name in many editions; is now known not to be a work by him Sermoens do P. Antonio Vieyra da Companhia de Jesu, prègador de Sua Magestade, Septima Parte A badly edited edition of the works of Vieira in 27 volumes appeared in Lisbon, 1854–58. There are unpublished manuscripts of his in the British Museum in London, and in the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris. A bibliography of Vieira will be found in Sommervogel , Bibliothèque de la compagnie de Jesus, viii. 653–85.

[ 4 ] The Complete Works of Father António Vieira , [ 12 ] annotated and updated, began publication in 2013, nearly four centuries after his birth. The 30 volumes of this publication comprise his complete letters, sermons, prophetic works, political writings, writings on Jews and Indians, as well as his poetry and theatrical works; it is the first complete and carefully edited publication of all of Vieira's many writings. One of the largest editorial projects of its kind, it was the result of international cooperation among various Luso-Brazilian research institutions and scientific, cultural and literary academies, under the aegis of the Rectory of the University of Lisbon . More than 20 thousand folios [ 13 ] of manuscripts and printed pages attributed to Vieira were analyzed and compared, in dozens of libraries and archives in Portugal, Brazil, Spain, France, Italy, England, Holland, Mexico and in the United States of America. About one quarter of The Complete Works are made of previously undiscovered and unreleased texts. The project, directed by José Eduardo Franco and Pedro Calafate , was developed by CLEPUL in partnership with Santa Casa da Misericórdia , and published by Círculo de Leitores , with the final volume to be released in 2014. Although this is a Portuguese edition, a selection of his works will be made available in 12 languages as part of the project.

Quotations [ edit ] "We are what we do. What we don't do, doesn't exist. Therefore, we only exist on days when we do. On the days when we don't do, we simply endure".

[ 3 ] "The end for which men invented books was to preserve the memory of past things against the tyranny of time and against the forgetfulness of man, which is an even greater tyranny." [ 14 ] "Holland, is the land which flows with milk, and Brazil is the land which flows with honey; and when the one is joined to the other, they become wholly and properly the Land of Promise, a land flowing with milk and honey." [ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Sermon of Saint Anthony to the Fish References [ edit ] ^ Contemporaneously also rendered as Vieyra ; the modern Brazilian Portuguese spelling is Antônio Vieira .

^ RevelarLX Archived 10 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine based on CARDOSO, Maria Manuela Lopes – António Vieira: pioneiro e paradigma de Interculturalidade. Lisboa: Chaves Ferreira Publicações S.A., 2001. p. 37–57; DOMINGUES, Agostinho – O Padre António Vieira: um património a comunicar. Porto: Edição Artes Gráficas, Lda., 1997. p. 6–37; DOMINGUES, Mário – O drama e a glória do Padre António Vieira. 2ª edição. Lisboa: Livraria Romano Torres, 1961. p. 9–31.
MENDES, João, S.J. – Padre António Vieira. Lisboa: Editorial Verbo, imp. 1972. p. 9–23.

^ a b c d "Up Magazine – TAP Portugal " Padre António Vieira, Brazil" .

upmagazine-tap.com . Archived from the original on 9 July 2017 . Retrieved 12 September 2014 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Prestage, Edgar (1911). " Vieira, Antonio ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 28 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

49– 50.

^ a b c "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Antonio Vieira" .

newadvent.org .

^ J. Lúcio de Azevedo, História de António Vieira, Segundo Ediçao. Tomo Primero . Lisbon: livraria Clássica Editora 1931, 88-92 ^ Radulet, Carmen M. (2003).

"Cósimo III Medici and the Portuguese Restoration: A Voyage to Portugal in 1668-1669" .

e-Journal of Portuguese History .

University of Porto (Portugal); Brown University (USA).

1 (2).

^ Cabeleira, João (30 June 2021).

"Visão da paisagem seiscentista portuguesa através das vedute de Pier Maria Baldi e da Relazione ufficiale de Lorenzo Magalotti" .

RiMe. Rivista dell'Istituto di Storia dell'Europa Mediterranea (ISSN 2035-794X) : 113–144.

doi :10.7410/1479.

ISSN 2035-794X.

^ "Margato, Izabel. "The Padre António Vieira Chair:Teaching, Research and Cultural Action", Pontifícia Universidade Católica-Rio de Janeiro" (PDF) .

^ "500 Escudos, Portugal" .

en.numista.com .

^ Antonio Vieira, SJ Archived 7 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine "Father Antonio Vieira, SJ", Jesuit Stamps ^ "CÍRCULO de leitores" .

circuloleitores.pt .

^ "Google Tradutor" .

translate.google.pt .

^ "O fim para que os homens inventaram os livros ... – António Vieira – Frases" .

Citador .

^ Southey, Robert (5 February 1817).

"History of Brazil" . Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown – via Google Books.

Publications [ edit ] Robert Southey, History of Brazil (Volume Two, London, 1817) Luiz Cabral, Vieira, biographie, caractère, éloquence , (Paris, 1900) Luiz Cabral, Vieira pregador (two volumes, Porto, 1901) External links [ edit ] History of Brazil (Volume Two) Longman – 1817 Works by or about António Vieira at the Internet Archive Works by António Vieira at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Manuscripts versions of Clavis Prophetarum (XVIII) in the Historical Archive of the Pontifical Gregorian University António Vieira in the Historical Archives of the Pontifical Gregorian University Dramatic episodes of the Portuguese Inquisition, v. 1, the case of Father Antonio Vieira, page 205 onwards, author Antonio Baião v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain 2 Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Chile Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=António_Vieira&oldid=1287967810 " Categories : 1608 births 1697 deaths Clergy from Lisbon Portuguese philosophers Portuguese diplomats Portuguese Roman Catholic missionaries Sermon writers Portuguese colonization of the Americas 17th-century Portuguese Jesuits 17th-century philosophers Jesuit missionaries in Brazil Jesuit philosophers Baroque writers Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from January 2021 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from January 2021 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Use dmy dates from October 2019 Articles with hCards Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking Pages with Portuguese IPA Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 29 April 2025, at 15:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents António Vieira 22 languages Add topic

