Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Ancient 1.2 Modern 1.2.1 Thomas Hobbes 1.2.2 John Locke 1.2.3 Thomas Paine 1.3 American individualist anarchists 1.4 Leo Strauss: Critique & Defense of Natural Right 2 Contemporary Toggle Contemporary subsection 2.1 Catholic Church 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Natural rights and legal rights 25 languages العربية تۆرکجه বাংলা Български Dansk فارسی 한국어 Hausa हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית ქართული Kiswahili Kurdî Македонски Bahasa Melayu پښتو Simple English کوردی தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Inalienable rights ) Philosophical and political rights This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The neutrality of this article is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Rights Theoretical distinctions Claim rights and liberty Individual and group Natural rights and legal Negative and positive Human rights Civil and political Economic, social and cultural Three generations Rights by beneficiary Accused Animals Autistic Children Consumers Creditors Deaf Disabled Elders Family Fetus Farmers Humans Indigenous Intersex Kings LGBTQ Transgender Life Men Minorities Parents Fathers Mothers Patients Peasants Plants Prisoners Robots States Students Victims Effective remedy Women Workers Youth Other groups of rights Assembly Association Asylum Civil liberties Clothing Development Digital Education Environment Fair trial Food Free migration Guns Health Housing Linguistic Movement Property Public participation Repair Resist Rest and leisure Revolution Security Sexual and Reproductive Abortion Reproductive Sexuality Self defense Self-determination Speech Water and sanitation v t e Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Some philosophers distinguish two types of rights , natural rights and legal rights .

[ 1 ] Natural rights are those that are not dependent on the laws or customs of any particular culture or government, and so are universal , fundamental and inalienable (they cannot be repealed by human laws, though one can forfeit their enjoyment through one's actions, such as by violating someone else's rights).

Natural law is the law of natural rights.

Legal rights are those bestowed onto a person by a given legal system (they can be modified, repealed, and restrained by human laws). The concept of positive law is related to the concept of legal rights.

Natural law first appeared in ancient Greek philosophy , [ 2 ] and was referred to by Roman philosopher Cicero . It was subsequently alluded to by Saint Paul , [ 3 ] and then developed in the Middle Ages by Catholic philosophers such as Albert the Great , his pupil Thomas Aquinas , and Jean Gerson in his 1402 work " De Vita Spirituali Animae." [ 4 ] During the Age of Enlightenment , the concept of natural laws was used to challenge the divine right of kings , and became an alternative justification for the establishment of a social contract , positive law , and government – and thus legal rights – in the form of classical republicanism . Conversely, the concept of natural rights is used by others to challenge the legitimacy of all such establishments.

The idea of human rights derives from theories of natural rights.

[ 5 ] Those rejecting a distinction between human rights and natural rights view human rights as the successor that is not dependent on natural law , natural theology , or Christian theological doctrine .

[ 5 ] Natural rights, in particular, are considered beyond the authority of any government or international body to dismiss. The 1948 United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights is an important statement of natural rights, but not legally binding on any member state unless its provisions are adopted into that state's laws.

Natural rights were traditionally viewed as exclusively negative rights , [ 6 ] whereas human rights also comprise positive rights.

[ 7 ] Even on a natural rights conception of human rights, the two terms may not be synonymous.

The concept of natural rights is not universally accepted, partly due to its religious associations and perceived incoherence.

[ further explanation needed ] Some philosophers argue that natural rights do not exist and that legal rights are the only rights; for instance, Jeremy Bentham called natural rights "simple nonsense".

[ 8 ] Iusnaturalism , particularly, holds that legal norms follow a human universal knowledge. Thus, it views enacted laws that contradict such universal knowledge as unjust and illegitimate, but some jusnaturalists might attribute the source of natural law to a natural order instead of a divine mandate.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] History [ edit ] The idea that certain rights are natural or inalienable also has a history dating back at least to the Stoics of late Antiquity , through Catholic law of the early Middle Ages , [ 11 ] and descending through the Protestant Reformation and the Age of Enlightenment to today.

[ 12 ] The existence of natural rights has been asserted by different individuals on different premises, such as a priori philosophical reasoning or religious principles. For example, Immanuel Kant claimed to derive natural rights through reason alone. The United States Declaration of Independence , meanwhile, is based upon the " self-evident " truth that "all men are ... endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights".

[ 13 ] Likewise, different philosophers and statesmen have designed different lists of what they believe to be natural rights; almost all include the right to life and liberty as the two highest priorities.

H. L. A. Hart argued that if there are any rights at all, there must be the right to liberty, for all the others would depend upon this.

T. H. Green argued that "if there are such things as rights at all, then, there must be a right to life and liberty, or, to put it more properly to free life." [ 14 ] John Locke emphasized "life, liberty and property" as primary. However, despite Locke's influential defense of the right of revolution , Thomas Jefferson substituted " pursuit of happiness " in place of "property" in the United States Declaration of Independence .

[ 15 ] Ancient [ edit ] Stephen Kinzer , a veteran journalist for The New York Times and the author of the book All The Shah's Men , writes in the latter that: The Zoroastrian religion taught Iranians that citizens have an inalienable right to enlightened leadership and that the duty of subjects is not simply to obey wise kings but also to rise up against those who are wicked. Leaders are seen as representative of God on earth, but they deserve allegiance only as long as they have farr , a kind of divine blessing that they must earn by moral behavior.

[ 16 ] The 40 Principal Doctrines of the Epicureans taught that "in order to obtain protection from other men, any means for attaining this end is a natural good" (PD 6). They believed in a contractarian ethics where mortals agree to not harm or be harmed, and the rules that govern their agreements are not absolute (PD 33), but must change with circumstances (PD 37–38). The Epicurean doctrines imply that humans in their natural state enjoy personal sovereignty and that they must consent to the laws that govern them, and that this consent (and the laws) can be revisited periodically when circumstances change.

[ 17 ] The Stoics held that no one was a slave by nature; slavery was an external condition juxtaposed to the internal freedom of the soul ( sui juris ).

Seneca the Younger wrote: It is a mistake to imagine that slavery pervades a man's whole being; the better part of him is exempt from it: the body indeed is subjected and in the power of a master, but the mind is independent, and indeed is so free and wild, that it cannot be restrained even by this prison of the body, wherein it is confined.

[ 18 ] Of fundamental importance to the development of the idea of natural rights was the emergence of the idea of natural human equality. As the historian A.J. Carlyle notes: "There is no change in political theory so startling in its completeness as the change from the theory of Aristotle to the later philosophical view represented by Cicero and Seneca. ... We think that this cannot be better exemplified than with regard to the theory of the equality of human nature." [ 19 ] Charles H. McIlwain likewise observes that "the idea of the equality of men is the profoundest contribution of the Stoics to political thought" and that "its greatest influence is in the changed conception of law that in part resulted from it." [ 20 ] Cicero argues in De Legibus that "we are born for Justice, and that right is based, not upon opinions, but upon Nature." [ 21 ] Modern [ edit ] One of the first Western thinkers to develop the contemporary idea of natural rights was French theologian Jean Gerson , whose 1402 treatise De Vita Spirituali Animae is considered one of the first attempts to develop what would come to be called modern natural rights theory.

[ 22 ] The Polish-Lithuanian union made a natural rights case at the Council of Constance (1414–1418), led by Paulus Vladimiri , rector of the Jagiellonian University . He challenged legality of the Teutonic Order 's crusade against Lithuania , arguing that the Order could only wage a defensive war if pagans violated the natural rights of the Christians. Vladimiri further stipulated that infidels had rights which had to be respected, and neither the Pope nor the Holy Roman Emperor had the authority to violate them. Lithuanians also brought a group of Samogitian representatives to testify to atrocities committed by the Order.

[ 23 ] The Stoic doctrine that the "inner part cannot be delivered into bondage" [ 24 ] re-emerged centuries later in the Reformation doctrine of liberty of conscience. In 1523, Martin Luther wrote: Furthermore, every man is responsible for his own faith, and he must see it for himself that he believes rightly. As little as another can go to hell or heaven for me, so little can he believe or disbelieve for me; and as little as he can open or shut heaven or hell for me, so little can he drive me to faith or unbelief. Since, then, belief or unbelief is a matter of everyone's conscience, and since this is no lessening of the secular power, the latter should be content and attend to its own affairs and permit men to believe one thing or another, as they are able and willing, and constrain no one by force.

[ 25 ] 17th-century English philosopher John Locke discussed natural rights in his work, identifying them as being "life, liberty, and estate (property)", and argued that such fundamental rights could not be surrendered in the social contract . Preservation of the natural rights to life, liberty, and property was claimed as justification for the rebellion of the American colonies. As George Mason stated in his draft for the Virginia Declaration of Rights , "all men are born equally free", and hold "certain inherent natural rights, of which they cannot, by any compact, deprive or divest their posterity." [ 26 ] Another 17th-century Englishman, John Lilburne (known as Freeborn John ), who came into conflict with both the monarchy of King Charles I and the military dictatorship of Oliver Cromwell , argued for level human basic rights he called " freeborn rights " which he defined as being rights that every human being is born with, as opposed to rights bestowed by government or by human law [ citation needed ] .

The distinction between alienable and unalienable rights was introduced by Francis Hutcheson . In his Inquiry into the Original of Our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue (1725), Hutcheson foreshadowed the Declaration of Independence, stating: "For wherever any Invasion is made upon unalienable Rights, there must arise either a perfect, or external Right to Resistance. ... Unalienable Rights are essential Limitations in all Governments." Hutcheson, however, placed clear limits on his notion of unalienable rights, declaring that "there can be no Right, or Limitation of Right, inconsistent with, or opposite to the greatest public Good." [ 27 ] Hutcheson elaborated on this idea of unalienable rights in his A System of Moral Philosophy (1755), based on the Reformation principle of the liberty of conscience. One could not in fact give up the capacity for private judgment (e.g., about religious questions) regardless of any external contracts or oaths to religious or secular authorities so that right is "unalienable". Hutcheson wrote: "Thus no man can really change his sentiments, judgments, and inward affections, at the pleasure of another; nor can it tend to any good to make him profess what is contrary to his heart. The right of private judgment is therefore unalienable." [ 28 ] In the German Enlightenment , Hegel gave a highly developed treatment of this inalienability argument. Like Hutcheson, Hegel based the theory of inalienable rights on the de facto inalienability of those aspects of personhood that distinguish persons from things. A thing, like a piece of property, can in fact be transferred from one person to another. According to Hegel, the same would not apply to those aspects that make one a person: The right to what is in essence inalienable is imprescriptible, since the act whereby I take possession of my personality, of my substantive essence, and make myself a responsible being, capable of possessing rights and with a moral and religious life, takes away from these characteristics of mine just that externality which alone made them capable of passing into the possession of someone else. When I have thus annulled their externality, I cannot lose them through lapse of time or from any other reason drawn from my prior consent or willingness to alienate them.

[ 29 ] In discussion of social contract theory, "inalienable rights" were said to be those rights that could not be surrendered by citizens to the sovereign. Such rights were thought to be natural rights , independent of positive law. Some social contract theorists reasoned, however, that in the natural state only the strongest could benefit from their rights. Thus, people form an implicit social contract, ceding their natural rights to the authority to protect the people from abuse, and living henceforth under the legal rights of that authority [ citation needed ] .

Many historical apologies for slavery and illiberal government were based on explicit or implicit voluntary contracts to alienate any "natural rights" to freedom and self-determination .

[ 30 ] The de facto inalienability arguments of Hutcheson and his predecessors provided the basis for the anti-slavery movement to argue not simply against involuntary slavery but against any explicit or implied contractual forms of slavery. Any contract that tried to legally alienate such a right would be inherently invalid. Similarly, the argument was used by the democratic movement to argue against any explicit or implied social contracts of subjection ( pactum subjectionis ) by which a people would supposedly alienate their right of self-government to a sovereign as, for example, in Leviathan by Thomas Hobbes . According to Ernst Cassirer , There is, at least, one right that cannot be ceded or abandoned: the right to personality...They charged the great logician [Hobbes] with a contradiction in terms. If a man could give up his personality he would cease being a moral being. ... There is no pactum subjectionis , no act of submission by which man can give up the state of free agent and enslave himself. For by such an act of renunciation he would give up that very character which constitutes his nature and essence: he would lose his humanity.

[ 31 ] These themes converged in the debate about American independence. While Jefferson was writing the Declaration of Independence, Welsh nonconformist Richard Price sided with the colonists' claim that King George III was "attempting to rob them of that liberty to which every member of society and all civil communities have a natural and unalienable title." [ 32 ] : 67 Price again based the argument on the de facto inalienability of "that principle of spontaneity or self-determination which constitutes us agents or which gives us a command over our actions, rendering them properly ours, and not effects of the operation of any foreign cause." [ 32 ] : 67–68 Any social contract or compact allegedly alienating these rights would be non-binding and void, wrote Price: Neither can any state acquire such an authority over other states in virtue of any compacts or cessions. This is a case in which compacts are not binding. Civil liberty is, in this respect, on the same footing with religious liberty. As no people can lawfully surrender their religious liberty by giving up their right of judging for themselves in religion, or by allowing any human beings to prescribe to them what faith they shall embrace, or what mode of worship they shall practise, so neither can any civil societies lawfully surrender their civil liberty by giving up to any extraneous jurisdiction their power of legislating for themselves and disposing their property.

[ 32 ] : 78–79 Price raised a furor of opposition so in 1777 he wrote another tract that clarified his position and again restated the de facto basis for the argument that the "liberty of men as agents is that power of self-determination which all agents, as such, possess." [ 33 ] In Intellectual Origins of American Radicalism , Staughton Lynd pulled together these themes and related them to the slavery debate: Then it turned out to make considerable difference whether one said slavery was wrong because every man has a natural right to the possession of his own body, or because every man has a natural right freely to determine his own destiny. The first kind of right was alienable: thus Locke neatly derived slavery from capture in war, whereby a man forfeited his labor to the conqueror who might lawfully have killed him; and thus Dred Scott was judged permanently to have given up his freedom. But the second kind of right, what Price called "that power of self-determination which all agents, as such, possess," was inalienable as long man remained man. Like the mind's quest for religious truth from which it was derived, self-determination was not a claim to ownership which might be both acquired and surrendered, but an inextricable aspect of the activity of being human.

[ 34 ] Meanwhile, in America, Thomas Jefferson "took his division of rights into alienable and unalienable from Hutcheson, who made the distinction popular and important", [ 35 ] and in the 1776 United States Declaration of Independence , famously condensed this to: We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights...

In the 19th century, the movement to abolish slavery seized this passage as a statement of constitutional principle, although the U.S. constitution recognized and protected the institution of slavery . As a lawyer, future Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase argued before the Supreme Court in the case of John Van Zandt , who had been charged with violating the Fugitive Slave Act , that: The law of the Creator, which invests every human being with an inalienable title to freedom, cannot be repealed by any interior law which asserts that man is property.

The concept of inalienable rights was criticized by Jeremy Bentham and Edmund Burke as groundless. Bentham and Burke claimed that rights arise from the actions of government, or evolve from tradition, and that neither of these can provide anything inalienable . (See Bentham's "Critique of the Doctrine of Inalienable, Natural Rights", and Burke's Reflections on the Revolution in France ). Presaging the shift in thinking in the 19th century, Bentham famously dismissed the idea of natural rights as "nonsense on stilts". By way of contrast to the views of Burke and Bentham, Patriot scholar and justice James Wilson criticized Burke's view as "tyranny".

[ 36 ] The signers of the Declaration of Independence deemed it a "self-evident truth" that all men "are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights".
In The Social Contract , Jean-Jacques Rousseau claims that the existence of inalienable rights is unnecessary for the existence of a constitution or a set of laws and rights. This idea of a social contract – that rights and responsibilities are derived from a consensual contract between the government and the people – is the most widely recognized alternative.

One criticism of natural rights theory is that one cannot draw norms from facts.

[ 37 ] This objection is variously expressed as the is-ought problem , the naturalistic fallacy , or the appeal to nature .

G.E. Moore , for example, said that ethical naturalism falls prey to the naturalistic fallacy.

[ citation needed ] Some defenders of natural rights theory, however, counter that the term "natural" in "natural rights" is contrasted with "artificial" rather than referring to nature .

John Finnis , for example, contends that natural law and natural rights are derived from self-evident principles, not from speculative principles or from facts.

[ 37 ] There is also debate as to whether all rights are either natural or legal. Fourth president of the United States James Madison , while representing Virginia in the House of Representatives, believed that there are rights, such as trial by jury , that are social rights , arising neither from natural law nor from positive law (which are the basis of natural and legal rights respectively) but from the social contract from which a government derives its authority.

[ 38 ] Thomas Hobbes [ edit ] Main article: Thomas Hobbes This section relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this section by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Natural rights and legal rights" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Thomas Hobbes Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679) included a discussion of natural rights in his moral and political philosophy . Hobbes' conception of natural rights extended from his conception of man in a "state of nature". Thus he argued that the essential natural (human) right was "to use his own power, as he will himself, for the preservation of his own Nature; that is to say, of his own Life; and consequently, of doing any thing, which in his own judgement, and Reason, he shall conceive to be the aptest means thereunto." ( Leviathan . 1, XIV) Hobbes sharply distinguished this natural "liberty", from natural "laws", described generally as "a precept, or general rule, found out by reason, by which a man is forbidden to do, that, which is destructive of his life, or taketh away the means of preserving his life; and to omit, that, by which he thinketh it may best be preserved." ( Leviathan . 1, XIV) In his natural state, according to Hobbes, man's life consisted entirely of liberties and not at all of laws – "It followeth, that in such a condition, every man has the right to every thing; even to one another's body. And therefore, as long as this natural Right of every man to every thing endureth, there can be no security to any man... of living out the time, which Nature ordinarily allow men to live." ( Leviathan . 1, XIV) This would lead inevitably to a situation known as the " war of all against all ", in which human beings kill, steal and enslave others to stay alive, and due to their natural lust for "Gain", "Safety" and "Reputation". Hobbes reasoned that this world of chaos created by unlimited rights was highly undesirable, since it would cause human life to be "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short". As such, if humans wish to live peacefully they must give up most of their natural rights and create moral obligations to establish political and civil society . This is one of the earliest formulations of the theory of government known as the social contract .

Hobbes objected to the attempt to derive rights from " natural law ", arguing that law ("lex") and right ("jus") though often confused, signify opposites, with law referring to obligations, while rights refer to the absence of obligations. Since by our (human) nature, we seek to maximize our well being, rights are prior to law, natural or institutional, and people will not follow the laws of nature without first being subjected to a sovereign power, without which all ideas of right and wrong are meaningless – "Therefore before the names of Just and Unjust can have place, there must be some coercive Power, to compel men equally to the performance of their Covenants..., to make good that Propriety, which by mutual contract men acquire, in recompense of the universal Right they abandon: and such power there is none before the erection of the Commonwealth." ( Leviathan . 1, XV) This marked an important departure from medieval natural law theories which gave precedence to obligations over rights.

John Locke [ edit ] Main article: John Locke John Locke , "Life, Liberty , Estate ( property )" John Locke (1632–1704) was another prominent Western philosopher who conceptualized rights as natural and inalienable. Like Hobbes, Locke believed in a natural right to life, liberty , and property . It was once conventional wisdom that Locke greatly influenced the American Revolution with his writings of natural rights, but this claim has been the subject of protracted dispute in recent decades. For example, the historian Ray Forrest Harvey declared that Jefferson and Locke were at "two opposite poles" in their political philosophy, as evidenced by Jefferson's use in the Declaration of Independence of the phrase "pursuit of happiness" instead of "property".

[ 39 ] More recently, the eminent [ 40 ] legal historian John Phillip Reid has deplored contemporary scholars' "misplaced emphasis on John Locke", arguing that American revolutionary leaders saw Locke as a commentator on established constitutional principles.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Thomas Pangle has defended Locke's influence on the Founding, claiming that historians who argue to the contrary either misrepresent the classical republican alternative to which they say the revolutionary leaders adhered, do not understand Locke, or point to someone else who was decisively influenced by Locke.

[ 43 ] This position has also been sustained by Michael Zuckert .

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] According to Locke, there are three natural rights: Life: everyone is entitled to live.

[ 47 ] Liberty: everyone is entitled to do anything they want to so long as it does not conflict with the first right.

Estate: everyone is entitled to own all they create or gain through gift or trade so long as it does not conflict with the first two rights.

In developing his concept of natural rights, Locke was influenced by reports of society among Native Americans , whom he regarded as natural peoples who lived in a "state of liberty" and perfect freedom, but "not a state of license".

[ 48 ] It also informed his conception of social contract . Although he does not say so explicitly, his position implies that even in light of our unique characteristics we should not be treated differently by our neighbors or our rulers. "Locke is arguing that there is no natural characteristic sufficient to distinguish one person from another... of course, there are plenty of natural differences between us" (Haworth 103).

[ 49 ] What Haworth takes from Locke is that John Locke was obsessed with supporting equality in society, treating everyone as an equal. He does though highlight our differences with his philosophy showing that we are all unique and important to society. In his philosophy, it is highlighted that the ideal government should also protect everyone, and provide rights and freedom to everyone, because we are all important to society. His ideas then were developed into the movements for freedom from the British creating our government. However, his implied thought of freedom for all is applied most heavily in our culture today. Starting with the civil rights movement, and continuing through women's rights, Locke's call for a fair government can be seen as the influence in these movements. His ideas are typically just seen as the foundation for modern democracy; however, it is not unreasonable to credit Locke with the social activism throughout the history of America.

By founding this sense of freedom for all, Locke was laying the groundwork for the equality that occurs today. Despite the apparent misuse of his philosophy in early American democracy. The Civil Rights movement and the suffrage movement both called out the state of American democracy during their challenges to the government's view on equality. To them it was clear that when the designers of democracy said all, they meant all people shall receive those natural rights that John Locke cherished so deeply. "a state also of equality, wherein all the power and jurisdiction is reciprocal, no one having more than another" (Locke II,4).

[ 50 ] Locke in his papers on natural philosophy clearly states that he wants a government where all are treated equal in freedoms especially. "Locke's views on toleration were very progressive for the time" (Connolly).

[ 51 ] Authors such as Jacob Connolly confirm that to them Locke was highly ahead of his time with all this progressive thinking. That is that his thought fits our current state of democracy where we strive to make sure that everyone has a say in the government, and everyone has a chance at a good life. Regardless of race, gender, or social standing starting with Locke it was made clear not only that the government should provide rights, but rights to everyone through his social contract.

[ 52 ] The social contract is an agreement between members of a country to live within a shared system of laws. Specific forms of government are the result of the decisions made by these persons acting in their collective capacity. Government is instituted to make laws that protect the three natural rights. If a government does not properly protect these rights, it can be overthrown.

[ 53 ] Thomas Paine [ edit ] Main article: Thomas Paine Thomas Paine Thomas Paine (1731–1809) further elaborated on natural rights in his influential work Rights of Man (1791), [ 54 ] emphasizing that rights cannot be granted by any charter because this would legally imply they can also be revoked and under such circumstances, they would be reduced to privileges: It is a perversion of terms to say that a charter gives rights. It operates by a contrary effect – that of taking rights away. Rights are inherently in all the inhabitants; but charters, by annulling those rights, in the majority, leave the right, by exclusion, in the hands of a few. ... They ... consequently are instruments of injustice.
The fact therefore must be that the individuals themselves, each in his own personal and sovereign right, entered into a compact with each other to produce a government: and this is the only mode in which governments have a right to arise, and the only principle on which they have a right to exist.

American individualist anarchists [ edit ] Benjamin Tucker While at first American individualist anarchists adhered to natural rights positions, later in this era led by Benjamin Tucker , some abandoned natural rights positions and converted to Max Stirner 's Egoist anarchism . Rejecting the idea of moral rights, Tucker said there were only two rights: "the right of might" and "the right of contract".

[ 55 ] He also said, after converting to Egoist individualism, "In times past... it was my habit to talk glibly of the right of man to land. It was a bad habit, and I long ago sloughed it off. ... Man's only right to land is his might over it." [ 56 ] According to Wendy McElroy : In adopting Stirnerite egoism (1886), Tucker rejected natural rights which had long been considered the foundation of libertarianism. This rejection galvanized the movement into fierce debates, with the natural rights proponents accusing the egoists of destroying libertarianism itself. So bitter was the conflict that a number of natural rights proponents withdrew from the pages of Liberty in protest even though they had hitherto been among its frequent contributors. Thereafter, Liberty championed egoism although its general content did not change significantly.

[ 57 ] Several periodicals were "undoubtedly influenced by Liberty' s presentation of egoism, including I published by C.L. Swartz, edited by W.E. Gordak and J.W. Lloyd (all associates of Liberty ); The Ego and The Egoist , both of which were edited by Edward H. Fulton. Among the egoist papers that Tucker followed were the German Der Eigene , edited by Adolf Brand , and The Eagle and The Serpent , issued from London. The latter, the most prominent English-language egoist journal, was published from 1898 to 1900 with the subtitle 'A Journal of Egoistic Philosophy and Sociology ' ".

[ 57 ] Among those American anarchists who adhered to egoism include Benjamin Tucker , John Beverley Robinson , Steven T. Byington , Hutchins Hapgood , James L. Walker , Victor Yarros and E.H. Fulton.

[ 57 ] Leo Strauss: Critique & Defense of Natural Right [ edit ] Leo Strauss defends natural right against German critiques of a sort that pave the way to the Third Reich in his Walgreen lectures and in later works [ 58 ] also entering into a debate with the Nazi legal theorist Carl Schmitt on related issues.

[ 59 ] His concern echoes Locke’s fear of the war-of-all-against-all. His defense is multi-faceted and his primary thesis remains largely implicit—without an operative defense of Natural Right society will disintegrate and nihilisms of the sort that gave rise to the Third Reich will predominate.

[ 58 ] Effectively: Natural Right may be repealed in practice yet what remains will not transcend but rather fall short of any organization that could properly be considered ‘social,’ or 'human'--in which the notion of freedom would be rendered meaningless. Whether or not the argument for Natural Right is plausible in an absolutely decisive or purely formal sense it will nevertheless motivate a sufficiently popular self-defense of liberalism against the (equally false or contingent) transcendentalism of fascism, thought Leo Strauss .

[ 59 ] Incomplete according to its formal contingency or dependence on popular behavior, Strauss’s argument remains permanently open until such time as liberalism is impracticable or becomes indefensible—seemingly (arguably) supported by the supremacy of liberal republicanism (or representative democratic capitalism) in geopolitics in the later phases of the 20th century, but potentially falling with the failure of the same.

Contemporary [ edit ] Many documents now echo the phrase used in the United States Declaration of Independence . The preamble to the 1948 United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights asserts that rights are inalienable: "recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world." Article 1, § 1 of the California Constitution recognizes inalienable rights and articulated some (not all) of those rights as "defending life and liberty, acquiring, possessing, and protecting property, and pursuing and obtaining safety, happiness, and privacy ." However, there is still much dispute over which "rights" are truly natural rights and which are not, and the concept of natural or inalienable rights is still controversial to some.

[ citation needed ] Erich Fromm argued that some powers over human beings could be wielded only by God, and that if there were no God, no human beings could wield these powers.

[ 60 ] Contemporary political philosophies continuing the classical liberal tradition of natural rights include libertarianism , anarcho-capitalism and Objectivism , and include amongst their canon the works of authors such as Robert Nozick , Ayn Rand [ 61 ] and Murray Rothbard .

[ 62 ] A libertarian view of inalienable rights is laid out in Morris and Linda Tannehill's The Market for Liberty , which claims that a man has a right to ownership over his life and therefore also his property, because he has invested time (i.e. part of his life) in it and thereby made it an extension of his life. However, if he initiates force against and to the detriment of another man, he alienates himself from the right to that part of his life which is required to pay his debt: "Rights are not inalienable, but only the possessor of a right can alienate himself from that right – no one else can take a man's rights from him." [ 63 ] Various definitions of inalienability include non-relinquishability, non-salability, and non-transferability.

[ 64 ] This concept has been recognized by libertarians as being central to the question of voluntary slavery , which Murray Rothbard dismissed as illegitimate and even self-contradictory.

[ 65 ] Stephan Kinsella argues that "viewing rights as alienable is perfectly consistent with – indeed, implied by – the libertarian non-aggression principle . Under this principle, only the initiation of force is prohibited; defensive , restitutive , or retaliatory force is not." [ 66 ] Various philosophers have created different lists of rights they consider to be natural. Proponents of natural rights, in particular Hesselberg and Rothbard , have responded that reason can be applied to separate truly axiomatic rights from supposed rights, stating that any principle that requires itself to be disproved is an axiom. Critics have pointed to the lack of agreement between the proponents as evidence for the claim that the idea of natural rights is merely a political tool.

Hugh Gibbons has proposed a descriptive argument based on human biology. His contention is that human beings were other-regarding as a matter of necessity, to avoid the costs of conflict. Over time they developed expectations that individuals would act in certain ways which were then prescribed by society (duties of care etc.) and that eventually crystallized into actionable rights.

[ 67 ] Philosopher Alex Naileg argues that if biological parents have parental responsibility towards their born children, then abortion rights entail that persons capable of becoming pregnant have the right to relinquish their future parental responsibility; however, the biological fathers of their born children do not have the same right to relinquish their future parental responsibility, thereby violating equality of rights. Thus, under these premises biologically different people have different rights.

[ 68 ] The argument extends to natural rights if someone maintains that the right to bodily autonomy is a natural right.

Catholic Church [ edit ] The Catholic Church considers natural law a dogma . The Church considers that: "The natural law expresses the original moral sense which enables man to discern by reason the good and the evil, the truth and the lie: 'The natural law is written and engraved in the soul of each and every man, because it is human reason ordaining him to do good and forbidding him to sin . . . But this command of human reason would not have the force of law if it were not the voice and interpreter of a higher reason to which our spirit and our freedom must be submitted.

' " [ 69 ] The natural law consists, for the Catholic Church, of one supreme and universal principle from which are derived all our natural moral obligations or duties. Thomas Aquinas resumes the various ideas of Catholic moral thinkers about what this principle is: since good is what primarily falls under the apprehension of the practical reason, the supreme principle of moral action must have the good as its central idea, and therefore the supreme principle is that good is to be done and evil avoided.

[ 70 ] See also [ edit ] Constitutional economics Constitutionalism Dignity Need Legal positivism Natural-rights libertarianism Natural person in French law Ratchet effect Rule according to higher law Rule of law Special rights Substantive due process References [ edit ] ^ "Natural Rights | History of Western Civilization II" .

courses.lumenlearning.com .

Archived from the original on 17 October 2020 . Retrieved 14 October 2020 .

^ Rommen, Heinrich A.; Hanley, Thomas R. (1998).

The Natural Law: A Study in Legal and Social Philosophy . Liberty Publishing.

ISBN 978-0865971615 .

OCLC 1004487064 .

Archived from the original on 7 March 2022 . Retrieved 7 March 2022 .

Natural rights and legal rights at Google Books ^ Romans 2:14–15 ^ Grellard, Christophe (31 May 2022).

"Systèmes de pensées et de croyances médiévaux" .

École Pratique des Hautes Études. Section des Sciences Religieuses (in French).

129 (129): 383– 400.

doi : 10.4000/asr.4158 .

ISSN 0183-7478 .

^ a b Jones, Peter.

Rights . Palgrave Macmillan, 1994, pp. 72, 74.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ For example, the imperative "not to harm others" is said to be justified by natural law, but the same is not true when it comes to providing protection against harm ^ See James Nickel, Human Rights Archived 5 August 2019 at the Wayback Machine , 2010. The claim that "..all human rights are negative rights.." is rejected, therefore human rights also comprise positive rights.

^ "human rights – Natural law transformed into natural rights" .

Britannica .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2022 . Retrieved 3 August 2022 .

^ Vallejo, Catalina (2012).

Plurality of Peaces in Legal Action: Analyzing Constitutional Objections to Military Services in Colombia . Berlin: LIT Verlag. p. 62.

ISBN 9783643902825 .

^ Tella, María José Falcon y (2010).

A Three-Dimensional Theory of Law . Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. pp. 204, 326.

ISBN 9789004179325 .

^ Tierney, Brian (1997).

The Idea of Natural Rights . Eerdmans.

[ page needed ] [ ISBN missing ] ^ Siedentop, Larry (2014).

Inventing the Individual: The Origins of Western Liberalism . Belknap Press.

[ page needed ] [ ISBN missing ] ^ "America's Founding Documents | National Archives" .

Archives.gov . 12 October 2016.

Archived from the original on 12 October 2016 . Retrieved 10 March 2017 .

^ Green, T.H. (1883).

Lectures on the Principles of Political Obligation , p. 114.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ "American Enlightenment Thought | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2021 . Retrieved 19 May 2021 .

^ Kinzer, Stephen (2004).

All the Shah's Men: An American Coup and the Roots of Middle East Terror . Wiley.

ISBN 978-0470581032 .

[ page needed ] ^ "Principle Doctrines" .

epicurus.net .

Archived from the original on 27 June 2019 . Retrieved 27 June 2019 .

^ Seneca, De beneficiis , III, 20.

^ Carlyle, A.J. (1903).

A History of Medieval Political Theory in the West . Vol. 1. Edinburgh. pp. 8, 9.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ McIlwain, Charles H. (1932).

The Growth of Political Thought in the West: From the Greeks to the End of the Middle Ages . New York. pp.

114 –115.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Cicero, De Legibus (Keyes translation), book 1, section 28.

^ Tuck, Richard.

Philosophy and Government 1572–1651 (1993), pp. 25–27.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Christiansen, Eric (1997).

The Northern Crusades (2nd ed.). Penguin Books. p. 231.

ISBN 0-14-026653-4 .

^ Davis, David Brion (1966).

The Problem of Slavery in Western Culture.

Cornell University Press, p. 77.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Martin Luther, Concerning Secular Authority , 1523.

^ Maier, Pauline (1983).

American Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence.

New York: Alfred A. Knopf , 1993, p. 134.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Hutcheson, Francis (2004), An Inquiry into the Original of Our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue in Two Treatises (Indianapolis), pp. 192, 193.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Hutcheson, Francis.

A System of Moral Philosophy . London, 1755, pp. 261–262.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Georg W. F. Hegel, Hegel's Philosophy of Right , T.M. Knox, trans., New York: Oxford University Press, 1967 (1821), section 66.

^ Philmore, J. 1982. "The Libertarian Case for Slavery: A Note on Nozick".

Philosophical Forum . XIV (Fall 1982): 43–58.

^ Cassirer, Ernst (1963).

The Myth of the State . Yale University Press, p. 175 [ ISBN missing ] ^ a b c Price, Richard (1979).

Observations on the Nature of Civil Liberty . 1776, Part I. Reprinted in: Peach, Bernard, (Ed.) Richard Price and the Ethical Foundations of the American Revolution .

Duke University Press.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Price, Richard (1979).

Additional Observations on the Nature and Value of Civil Liberty.

Reprinted in: Peach, Bernard, (Ed.) Richard Price and the Ethical Foundations of the American Revolution . Duke University Press, p. 136.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Lynd, Staughton (1969).

Intellectual Origins of American Radicalism . Vintage Books, 1969, pp. 56–57.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Wills, Gary (1979).

Inventing America . New York: Vintage Books , p. 213 [ ISBN missing ] ^ Wilson, James.

Robert Green McCloskey (ed.).

The Works of James Wilson . Vol. 2. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. pp.

586– 589.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ a b Finnis, John (2011).

Natural Law & Natural Rights . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

23 –58.

^ Introduction of the Bill of Rights in Congress, 1789 Jun 8, 21 Jul, 13, 18–19 August; Annals 1:424–450, 661–665, 707–717, 757–759, 766.

^ Harvey, Ray Forrest (1937).

Jean Jacques Burlamaqui: A Liberal Tradition in American Constitutionalism . Chapel Hill, NC. p. 120.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) [ ISBN missing ] ^ Reid, J.P.; Hartog, H.; Bakken, G.M.; Nelson, W.E.; Bernstein, R.B.; Benedict, M.L.; Kern, B.W.; Flaherty, M.S.; Fritz, C.G.; Kalman, L. (2000).

Law as Culture and Culture as Law: Essays in Honor of John Phillip Reid . Madison House Publishers.

ISBN 978-0945612742 .

^ Reid, John Phillip (1987).

Constitutional History of the American Revolution: The Authority To Tax . Madison, Wis. pp.

135 –136.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Reid, John Phillip (1986).

Constitutional History of the American Revolution: The Authority of Rights . Madison, Wis. pp.

132 –133.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Pangle, Thomas L.

(1988).

The Spirit of Modern Republicanism: The Moral Vision of the American Founders and the Philosophy of John Locke . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Zuckert, Michael P. (1996).

The Natural Rights Republic: Studies in the Foundation of the American Political Tradition . South Bend, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.

[ page needed ] [ ISBN missing ] ^ Zuckert, Michael P. (1998).

Natural Rights and the New Republicanism . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

[ page needed ] [ ISBN missing ] ^ Zuckert, Michael P. (2002).

Launching Liberalism: On Lockean Political Philosophy . Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.

[ page needed ] [ ISBN missing ] ^ Kunze, Fred.

"A Biography of John Locke" .

American History from revolution to reconstruction and beyond . GMW – University of Groningen.

Archived from the original on 14 February 2019 . Retrieved 20 July 2015 .

^ John Locke, Two Treatises of Government – Of Civil Government , Bk.2, Chap 2, "On The State of Nature", §4,6,14, Chap 5, "Of Property", §26 (London : Whitmore & Fenn) 1821 pp. 189, 191, 199, 209.

^ Haworth, Alan (2014).

Understanding the Political Philosophers From Ancient to Modern Times . Taylor and Francis.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Locke, John (1999).

Two Treaties of Government . Cambridge University Press.

^ Connolly, Jacob.

"John Locke" . Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

Archived from the original on 27 February 2022 . Retrieved 27 February 2022 .

^ Broers, Adalei (2009).

"John Locke on Equality, Toleration, and the Atheist Exception" .

Inquiries Journal .

1 (12).

Archived from the original on 3 May 2021 . Retrieved 26 May 2021 .

^ Tuckness, Alex (2020).

"Locke's Political Philosophy" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 5 September 2018 . Retrieved 26 May 2021 .

^ "Thomas Paine's Rights of Man" .

bl.uk .

Archived from the original on 27 November 2020 . Retrieved 14 October 2020 .

^ Goodway, David (2004). "A cult of sensations: John Cowper Powys's life philosophy and individualist anarchism".

Powys Journal .

14 : 45– 80.

JSTOR 26106709 .

^ Tucker, Instead of a Book, p. 350 ^ a b c "Literature of Liberty, Autumn 1981, vol. 4, No. 3 – Online Library of Liberty" .

Oll.libertyfund.org .

Archived from the original on 24 May 2011 . Retrieved 10 March 2017 .

^ a b Strauss, Leo; Colen, José; Minkov, Svetozar (2018).

Toward Natural right and history: lectures and essays by Leo Strauss, 1937-1946 . Chicago ; London: The University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-51210-5 .

^ a b Meier, Heinrich.

Carl Schmitt and Leo Strauss: The Hidden Dialogue . Translated by Lomax, J. Harvey. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

^ Fromm, Eric (1973), The Revolution of Hope: Toward a Humanized Technology , New York: Bantam.

[ page needed ] [ ISBN missing ] ^ "Individual Rights" – Ayn Rand Lexicon .

Archived 1 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 29 July 2013.

^ "The Ethics of Liberty" .

Mises Institute . 20 July 2005.

Archived from the original on 9 November 2014 . Retrieved 10 March 2017 .

^ "Man and Society".

The Market for Liberty . p. 11.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Block, Walter (Spring 2003).

"A Libertarian Theory of Inalienability" (PDF) .

Journal of Libertarian Studies .

17 (2). Mises Institute: 39– 85.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 July 2014 . Retrieved 13 September 2014 .

^ Rothbard, Murray N. (9 February 2007).

"A Crusoe Social Philosophy" .

Mises Institute . Archived from the original on 17 November 2014 . Retrieved 10 March 2017 .

^ Kinsella, N. Stephan (Winter 1998–1999).

"Inalienability and Punishment: A Reply to George Smith" (PDF) .

Journal of Libertarian Studies .

14 (1).

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 August 2012 . Retrieved 10 March 2017 – via Mises Institute.

^ "De Sciuridae et Homo Sapiens: The Origin of Rights and Duties" (PDF) .

Bu.edu . Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 November 2013 . Retrieved 10 March 2017 .

^ Naileg, Alex (2024).

"My Future Parental Responsibility, My Choice" .

Elpis .

17 (2): 133– 146.

doi : 10.54310/Elpis.2024.2.11 .

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church – IntraText" .

vatican.va . Retrieved 17 November 2020 .

^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Natural Law" .

newadvent.org . Retrieved 17 November 2020 .

Further reading [ edit ] Ellerman, David, Neo-Abolitionism: Abolishing Human Rentals in Favor of Workplace Democracy , SpringerNature, 2021 ISBN 978-3-030-62676-1 Grotius, Hugo, The Rights Of War And Peace : Three Volume Set, 1625 Haakonssen, Knud, Grotius, Pufendorf and Modern Natural Law , 1999 [ ISBN missing ] Hutcheson, Francis.

A System of Moral Philosophy . 1755, London.

Locke, John.

Two Treatises of Government . 1690 (primarily the second treatise) Lloyd Thomas, D.A.

Locke on Government . 1995, Routledge.

ISBN 0415095336 Miller, Fred (2008).

"Rights, Natural" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

434– 436.

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

Pufendorf, Baron Samuel von, Law of Nature and Nations , 1625 Rasmussen, Douglas B.

(2008).

"Rights, Theory of" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

436– 438.

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

Siedentop, Larry, Inventing the Individual: The Origins of Western Liberalism , Belknap Press, 2014.

[ ISBN missing ] Tierney, Brian, The Idea of Natural Rights , Eerdmans, 1997.

[ ISBN missing ] Tuck, Richard, Natural Rights Theories: Their Origin and Development , 1982 [ ISBN missing ] Waldron, Jeremy [ed.] Theories of Rights 1984, Oxford University Press .

ISBN 0-19-875063-3 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Natural rights .

The U.S. Declaration of Independence and Natural Rights from Constitutional Rights Foundation v t e Rights theory Natural rights and legal rights Claim rights and liberty rights Negative and positive rights Individual and group rights Natural law Positive law Sovereign states Universal jurisdiction Equality before the law Social contract v t e Human rights Humans Children Intersex people Women Fundamental concepts and philosophies Natural law Positive law Sovereignty Universal jurisdiction Distinctions Claim rights and liberty rights Individual and group rights Natural rights and legal rights Negative and positive rights Aspects Corporal punishment Organizations List of human rights organisations National human rights institutions By continent Africa Middle East Asia Europe North America South America Oceania Human rights abuses Atrocity crime Crime of apartheid Crimes against humanity Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Enforced disappearances Forced migration Genocide Human rights abuses against Palestinians by Israel at Guantánamo Bay detention camp during the Battle of Mosul (2016–2017) during the Gaddafi regime during the Libyan civil war (2011) in Afghanistan in Algeria in Angola in Argentina in Armenia in Australia in Austria in Azad Kashmir in Azerbaijan in Bahrain in Balochistan in Bangladesh in Belarus in Bolivia in Botswana in Brazil in Burkina Faso in Burundi in Cambodia in Canada in Chile in Chile under Augusto Pinochet in China in Cuba in Egypt in El Salvador in Ethiopia in France in Gabon in Ghana in Germany in Guatemala in Hong Kong in Egypt in Haiti in India in Indonesia in Iran in Iraq in Ireland in Israel in Italy in Jammu and Kashmir in Japan in Kashmir in Kazakhstan in Kenya in Kuwait in Kyrgyzstan‎ in Lebanon in Libya in Lithuania in Malawi in Malaysia in Manipur in Mexico in Morocco in Myanmar in Nepal in New Zealand in Nigeria in North Korea in Pakistan in Palestine in Panama in Papua New Guinea in Peru in Poland in Punjab, India in Romania in the Russia in Saudi Arabia in Sierra Leone in Sindh in South Africa in South Korea in Sri Lanka in Sudan in Switzerland in Syria in Taiwan in Thailand in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the Dominican Republic in the Philippines in the Soviet Union in the United Arab Emirates in the United States in Turkey in Uganda in Ukraine in Uzbekistan in Venezuela in Vietnam in Yemen in Zimbabwe of the Marcos dictatorship of the military dictatorship in Brazil (1964–1985) Incitement to genocide List of human rights abuses by country Murder Persecution Rape Slavery Torture Victims War crimes Related History of human rights List of global issues List of human rights awards Three generations Universal Declaration of Human Rights United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐tldsp
Cached time: 20250816104915
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.990 seconds
Real time usage: 1.183 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8675/1000000
Revision size: 61188/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 296150/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 22617/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 241476/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.562/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9362284/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  944.374      1 -total
 45.01%  425.057      1 Template:Reflist
 13.65%  128.874     24 Template:Cite_book
 12.67%  119.612     14 Template:Cite_web
 10.81%  102.047     14 Template:Fix
  7.57%   71.491      7 Template:Page_needed
  7.42%   70.092     21 Template:Delink
  7.26%   68.590      1 Template:Rights
  7.08%   66.873      1 Template:Sidebar
  6.97%   65.797      6 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:327672:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816104915 and revision id 1303031701. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Natural_rights_and_legal_rights&oldid=1303031701 " Categories : Legal doctrines and principles Political terminology Libertarian terms Libertarian theory Rights Animal rights Human rights concepts Sovereignty Universalism Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Pages with missing ISBNs Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2022 CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from August 2024 Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from August 2022 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from September 2021 Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2013 Articles lacking reliable references from August 2020 All articles lacking reliable references This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 19:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Natural rights and legal rights 25 languages Add topic

