Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Hurricane Ike 1.2 Modern history 2 Facilities Toggle Facilities subsection 2.1 Hospitals and clinics 2.2 Schools 2.3 Science complex 2.4 Heliports 3 Notable alumni and faculty 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents University of Texas Medical Branch 8 languages العربية تۆرکجه Български Español فارسی Italiano مصرى اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 29°18′39″N 94°46′38″W ﻿ / ﻿ 29.3107°N 94.7771°W ﻿ / 29.3107; -94.7771 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medical school in Galveston, Texas, US The University of Texas Medical Branch Motto Disciplina praesidium civitatis ( Latin ) Motto in English Cultivated mind is the guardian genius of democracy.

[ 1 ] Type Public academic health science center Established 1891 Parent institution University of Texas System Endowment $560 million [ 2 ] President Jochen Reiser Administrative staff 12,000 Students 3,169 (2,826 full-time equivalent) (Fall 2015) [ 3 ] Location Galveston , Texas , United States 29°18′39″N 94°46′38″W ﻿ / ﻿ 29.3107°N 94.7771°W ﻿ / 29.3107; -94.7771 Campus Urban , 350 acres (140 ha) Colors Red, white, and gray [ 4 ] Website www.utmb.edu The University of Texas Medical Branch ( UTMB ) is a public academic health science center in Galveston, Texas , United States. It is part of the University of Texas System . UTMB includes the oldest medical school in Texas, [ 5 ] and has about 11,000 employees.

[ 6 ] As of April 2024, it had an endowment of $763 million.

[ 7 ] Established in 1891 as the University of Texas Medical Department, UTMB has grown from one building, 23 students and 13 faculty members to more than 70 buildings, more than 2,500 students and more than 1,000 faculty.

[ 8 ] It has five schools (Medicine, Nursing, Health Professions, Public and Population Health, and Graduate Biomedical Sciences), three institutes for advanced study, a comprehensive medical library, four on-site hospitals (including an affiliated Shriners Hospital for Children ), a network of clinics that provide primary and specialized medical care and numerous research facilities.

UTMB's primary missions are health sciences education, medical research (it is home to the Galveston National Laboratory ) and health care services.

[ 9 ] Its emergency department at John Sealy Hospital is certified as a Level I Trauma Center and serves as the lead trauma facility for a nine-county region in Southeast Texas ; it is one of only three Level I Trauma centers serving all ages in Southeast Texas.

[ 10 ] History [ edit ] "Old Red" , the medical school's original building The First John Sealy Hospital The Galveston National Laboratory at UTMB is the first full-size BSL-4 lab located on a university campus in the United States.

The location of the Medical Department of the University of Texas was decided between Galveston and Houston in a popular vote in 1881, but its opening was delayed due to the construction of the main university campus in Austin, Texas . The need for medical training in Texas was great: in 1891, 80 percent of doctors in the state had under a year of formal training in medicine, and so the "Texas Medical College" was formed in Galveston with the idea that it would become the medical department once state funding began.

[ citation needed ] The original building, the Ashbel Smith Building also called Old Red, was begun in 1890 under the supervision of the Galveston architect Nicholas J. Clayton .  Clayton toured several medical colleges in the North and East before drawing up his plans for the building.  The medical school campus also included the John Sealy Hospital , which provided charity care for any who claimed Galveston residence.

Upon opening, the Red Building had been starkly underfurnished, a problem which was not fully remedied until after the Hurricane of 1900 , when the state rallied around the ravaged city.

Dr. Thompson , professor of surgery, said that "The regents were so generous in repairing the damage to the building and restoring the equipment, that we were actually in better shape at the end of the year 1901 than we had been before."  In addition, the damage to the roof of Old Red allowed for the addition of skylights, which had always been wanted for the dissection room. Also in 1901, the school admitted their first woman faculty member, Marie Charlotte Schaefer .

[ 11 ] In 1915, the medical branch built the first hospital dedicated to children in Texas. By 1924, UTMB had established the first department of pediatrics in the state of Texas – which was also one of the first departments of pediatrics in the United States.

[ 12 ] UTMB's annual budget of approximately $1.4 billion includes grants, awards, and contracts from federal and private sources totaling more than $150 million, in addition to institutional allocations for research.

[ citation needed ] Construction on an emergency department began in 1989, and the Sealy & Smith Foundation spent $28 million to have it built.

[ 13 ] In 1996, UTMB purchased the adjacent 128-year-old St. Mary's Hospital , the first catholic hospital in Texas.

[ 14 ] The building was converted into the Rebecca Sealy Psychiatric Hospital.

Hurricane Ike [ edit ] In 2008, Hurricane Ike caused significant flood damage to nearly every building on campus, including the John Sealy Hospital. UTMB restored its educational programs within weeks after the Hurricane Ike and the research endeavor came back later. Most immediately, UTMB has about $1.4 billion to restore, harden and expand its campus. Much of the money was approved by the 81st Texas Legislative session, $450 million comes from FEMA, $130 million from insurance, $200 million from the Sealy and Smith Foundation , and $50 million from the Social Service Block Grant Funds. In 2010, the university was placed on a censure list issued by the American Association of University Professors for laying off 124 professors in the aftermath of the hurricane.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] In 2011 the foundation committed $170 million towards the construction of a new Jennie Sealy Hospital on the UTMB campus, an amount that represents the largest single gift ever to a Texas health institution.

[ 17 ] Modern history [ edit ] In 2003, UTMB received funding to construct a $150 million Galveston National Biocontainment Laboratory on its campus, one of the few non-military facilities of this level.  It houses several Biosafety Level 4 research laboratories, where studies on highly infectious materials can be carried out safely.

[ 18 ] It has schools of medicine , nursing , allied health professions, and a graduate school of biomedical sciences, as well as an institute for medical humanities. UTMB also has a major contract with the Texas Department of Criminal Justice to provide medical care to inmates at all TDC sites in the eastern and southern portions of Texas. UTMB also has similar contracts with local governments needing inmate medical care.

In fiscal year 2012, UTMB received 20 percent of its $1.5 billion budget from the State of Texas to help support its teaching mission, hospital operation and Level 1 Trauma Center; UTMB generates the rest of its budget through its research endeavors, clinical services and philanthropy. It provides a significant amount of charity care (almost $96 million in 2012), and treats complex cases such as transplants and burns.

[ 19 ] UTMB became a member of the Houston-based Texas Medical Center in 2010.

[ 20 ] On March 10, 2022, UTMB announced that the School of Medicine would be renamed to the John Sealy School of Medicine in honor of the over $1 billion donated to the university and medical school by the Sealy family and the Sealy & Smith Foundation over the last century.

[ 21 ] Facilities [ edit ] Hospitals and clinics [ edit ] UTMB's John Sealy Hospital The Shriner's Hospital for Children on UTMB's campus Jennie Sealy Hospital – a 12-story teaching hospital that is a $438 million facility featuring 310 patient rooms, including 60 dedicated ICU beds, a 28-bed day surgery unit and 20 state-of-the-art operating suites.  Completed in 2016.

John Sealy Hospital – a 12-story teaching hospital housing inpatient units for pediatrics, obstetrics/gynecology, and burns patients.  It is currently undergoing extensive renovation following construction of the new Jennie Sealy Hospital.

UTMB Health Clinics Building – a seven-story building housing numerous specialty and subspecialty clinics.

UTMB Pediatrics and Children's Hospital – located within John Sealy Hospital, including 50 inpatient beds, 12 PICU beds, 30 low-acuity newborn and 42 NICU beds. The hospital treats infants, children, teens, and young adults age 0-21.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] R. Waverley Smith Pavilion – formerly home to obstetrics services and the neonatal intensive care unit, the Waverley Smith Pavilion is undergoing significant renovations and has become the primary link between Jennie Sealy Hospital and the adjacent John Sealy Hospital and Clinical Sciences Wing.

Rebecca Sealy Hospital – formerly housed UTMB's day surgery and inpatient psychiatry services.  Following renovations after Hurricane Ike, Rebecca Sealy is now home to administrative and educational space for the university.

Shriners Burns Hospital for Children – A 30-bed children's hospital specializing care and treatment of acute burns, patients needing plastic reconstructive or restorative surgery as a result of "healed" burns, and scarring and deformity of the face. It has an Intensive Care Unit with 15 acute beds, a reconstruction and plastic surgery unit with 15 reconstruction beds, three operating rooms, a multi-bed recovery room, and numerous clinics. It is a Verified Burn Center by the American Burn Association .

[ 24 ] Texas Department of Criminal Justice – Hospital Galveston – operated in collaboration with the Texas Department of Criminal Justice , the prison hospital has 172 inpatient beds, a multi-service ambulatory care center, a minor operating room with a recovery room, a telemetry unit of 24 beds, a medical intensive care unit of 24 beds and a 56-bed overnight holding unit.

Schools [ edit ] UTMB includes five schools: John Sealy School of Medicine – The School of Medicine at UTMB has provided medical school or residency training to one in six Texas physicians. Opened in 1891, it has 20 departments and three institutes.

Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences – Biomedical graduate programs were started in 1952, and a separate graduate school was established in 1969, becoming the Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences in 1972. The GSBS and the UT Telecampus have created a concurrent enrollment program by which graduate students at UTMB can pursue both a PhD and an MBA in preparation for careers in biotechnology and the pharmaceutical industry, among other career opportunities.

School of Nursing – The UTMB School of Nursing offers programs such as BSN, MSN (Nurse Practitioner, Nurse Educator), PhD (Nursing Education), and DNP (Doctorate of Nursing Practice).

School of Health Professions – The School of Health Professions has eight degree-granting programs.

School of Public and Population Health – The UTMB School of Public and Population Health is composed of five departments and offers degree programs such as MPH, PhD, and MS. It also provides some training and an MPH degree for trainees in UTMB's Aerospace Medicine Residency Program.

Science complex [ edit ] UTMB's Research Buildings Moody Medical Library From its modest beginnings in the 1890s as the first state medical school in Texas, the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston (UTMB) has developed into a large, sophisticated health science complex with numerous schools and institutes, including: Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences School of Medicine School of Nursing School of Health Professions Institute for Human Infections and Immunity Institute for the Medical Humanities an affiliated Shriners Burns Hospital Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine Sealy Center for Structural Biology Center for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious Diseases Center for Addiction Research Educational Cancer Center Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Women's Health Institute for Translational Sciences, [ 25 ] Galveston National Laboratory (GNL) Sealy Center for Cancer Cell Biology Sealy Center for Environmental Health and Medicine World Health Organization Collaborating Center for Tropical Diseases Stark Diabetes Center Center for Biomedical Engineering Center for Environmental Toxicology Sealy Center on Aging George P. and Cynthia Woods Mitchell Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Institute for Drug Discovery Sealy Center for Vaccine Development UTMB operates an extensive clinical care enterprise with a wide variety of specialty programs.

[ citation needed ] Heliports [ edit ] UTMB has two heliports: the Ewing Hall Heliport ( FAA LID : 9TS7 ) and the Emergency Department Heliport ( FAA LID : 9TA7 ).

Notable alumni and faculty [ edit ] Sally Abston – Surgeon Ernst Bertner – first president of the Texas Medical Center Greg Bonnen – Neurosurgeon and UTMB assistant professor; Republican member of the Texas House of Representatives .

[ 26 ] Mark Frederick Boyd – Malariologist, first head of the Department of Bacteriology and Preventive Medicine Dawn Buckingham – 29th Land Commissioner of Texas and former Texas State Senator Cheri L. Canon – Radiologist and Witten-Stanley Endowed Chair of Radiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine Minnie Fisher Cunningham – Suffragist, first president of the League of Women Voters Maurice Ewing – Geophysicist Hector P. Garcia – Surgeon, civil rights advocate Bernard A. Harris, Jr.

– Astronaut Steven Hotze – Talk radio host, Republican activist Christopher W. Lentz – U.S. Air Force Brigadier General Henry T. Lynch – cancer researcher Ronny Jackson – Physician to the President Mike McKinney – 13th Chancellor of The Texas A&M University System and former Texas House Representative.

Tedd L. Mitchell – physician and American academic; fifth chancellor of the Texas Tech University System and longest-tenured president of Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center ; former president and CEO of the Cooper Clinic in Dallas Michael Obeng – Plastic Surgeon, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center C. J. Peters – Virology and immunology Patricia Robertson – Astronaut-candidate Sean Roden – former NASA flight surgeon Robert Shope – Arbovirologist and emerging infectious diseases expert Charles Milton Strother – Neuroradiologist and Emeritus Professor of Radiology at the University of Wisconsin–Madison .

Luther Leonidas Terry – Surgeon General James Edwin Thompson - Inaugural chairman of surgery at University of Texas Medical Branch William E. Thornton – Astronaut Charles Alderton - Founder of Dr Pepper See also [ edit ] Texas portal Medicine portal Soule University , the 19th-century parent institution Texas Medical Center University of Texas System References [ edit ] ^ "The University of Texas Seal - Traditions" .

UT History Central . Texasexes.org. October 31, 1905. Archived from the original on May 21, 2014 . Retrieved March 29, 2015 .

^ "Endowment Information" . UTIMCO. Archived from the original on October 3, 2018 . Retrieved October 31, 2015 .

^ "Education Facts" .

UTMB Health . University of Texas Medical Branch. October 26, 2015. Archived from the original on May 1, 2016 . Retrieved May 4, 2016 .

^ "UTMB Health: Visual: Color Palettes: Primary Palettes" . UTMB Health. Archived from the original on June 7, 2016 . Retrieved July 26, 2013 .

^ "UTMB School of Medicine" . Retrieved May 8, 2013 .

^ "UTMB Data" . University of Texas Medical Branch . Retrieved May 8, 2013 .

^ "Endowment Information" .

University of Texas Investment Management Company . April 30, 2024. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019 . Retrieved March 30, 2019 .

^ "About UTMB Health" .

^ "UTMB not 'shirking' its charity care responsibilities" .

Houston Chronicle . Retrieved May 8, 2013 .

^ "Verified Trauma Centers" . American College of Surgeons . Retrieved May 8, 2013 .

^ "UTMB, Galveston Histories Intertwined" .

The Galveston Daily News . 1991. p. 46 . Retrieved October 31, 2017 – via Newspapers.com.

^ Dannenmaier, Molly (April 17, 2012).

"UTMB's Children's Hospital makes its debut" .

Galveston Daily News . Retrieved July 26, 2013 .

^ Moran, Kevin (September 14, 1989).

"Work started on new UTMB trauma center" .

Houston Chronicle . p. Section A 25. Archived from the original on October 20, 2012 . Retrieved February 22, 2022 .

^ "St. Mary's Hospital will close/UT branch to buy 128-year-old unit" .

Houston Chronicle . Archived from the original on May 12, 2012 . Retrieved October 3, 2009 .

^ "Academic Freedom and Tenure: University of Texas Medical Branch" .

AAUP . April 23, 2010 . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

^ Rice, Harvey.

"UTMB censured over firing of 124 professors after Ike" .

^ Dawson, Jennifer (August 25, 2011).

"UTMB Galveston to build $438M hospital" .

Houston Business Journal . Retrieved July 26, 2013 .

^ "UTMB on biowar front line / Lab funded by federal grant will seek defenses for terror 10/01/2003" .

Archives | Chron.com . Houston Chronicle. January 10, 2003 . Retrieved November 24, 2012 .

^ "Understanding Charity Care in Today's Health Care Environment" . UTMB Health. Archived from the original on 31 May 2013 . Retrieved 8 May 2013 .

^ Allison Wollam (March 2, 2010).

"UTMB becomes TMC member institution" .

Houston Business Journal . Retrieved July 26, 2013 .

^ Cobb, Timia (March 10, 2022).

"University of Texas Medical Branch names school for 19th-century Galveston magnate John Sealy" .

The Texas Tribune . Retrieved March 11, 2022 .

^ "Pediatric Infectious Diseases" .

www.utmb.edu . Retrieved May 4, 2020 .

^ "Children's Mental Health Services" .

www.utmb.edu . Retrieved May 4, 2020 .

^ "Galveston, TX" . Shriners Hospitals for Children. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013 . Retrieved 26 July 2013 .

^ "ITS – Institute for Translational Sciences" . Institute for Translational Sciences. Archived from the original on April 30, 2009 . Retrieved November 24, 2012 .

^ "Greg Bonnen's Biography" . votesmart.org . Retrieved February 25, 2014 .

Bibliography [ edit ] University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston (1967).

The University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston: A Seventy-five Year History by the Faculty and Staff . Austin, Texas: University of Texas Press.

LCCN 67028060 .

OCLC 1491850 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to University of Texas Medical Branch .

Official website v t e Texas trauma centers List of hospitals in Texas Level I Ascension Dell Seton Medical Center Baylor Scott & White Medical Center–Temple Baylor University Medical Center at Dallas Brooke Army Medical Center Doctors Hospital at Renaissance Harris Health Ben Taub Hospital John Peter Smith Hospital Medical City Plano Memorial Hermann Texas Medical Center Methodist Dallas Medical Center Parkland Memorial Hospital South Texas Health System McAllen Texas Health Harris Methodist Hospital Fort Worth Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas University Hospital San Antonio University Medical Center University Medical Center of El Paso University of Texas Medical Branch UT Health East Texas Tyler Regional Hospital Level II Ascension Seton Williamson Hospital Baylor Scott & White Medical Center–Grapevine Baylor Scott & White Medical Center–Hillcrest Baylor Scott & White Medical Center–McKinney Christus Mother Frances Hospital–Tyler Corpus Christi Medical Center–Bay Area Covenant Medical Center Del Sol Medical Center HCA Houston Healthcare Clear Lake HCA Houston Healthcare Conroe HCA Houston Healthcare Kingwood HCA Houston Healthcare Northwest Medical City Arlington Medical City Denton Medical City McKinney Memorial Hermann The Woodlands Hospital Northwest Texas Hospital St. David's Round Rock Medical Center St. David's South Austin Medical Center Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Plano The Hospitals of Providence–East Campus United Regional Health Care Valley Baptist Medical Center Harlingen William Beaumont Army Medical Center Level III Ascension Dell Children's Medical Center North Campus Ascension Seton Hays Hospital Baylor Scott & White All Saints Medical Center Baylor Scott & White Medical Center–Centennial Baylor Scott & White Medical Center–College Station Baylor Scott & White Medical Center–Lake Pointe BSA Hospital Carl R. Darnall Army Medical Center Children's Medical Center Plano Christus Children's Christus Good Shepherd Medical Center–Longview Christus Southeast Texas–St. Elizabeth Christus St. Michael Hospital Citizens Medical Center DeTar Hospital Navarro Doctors Hospital of Laredo Driscoll Children’s Hospital Harris Health Lyndon B. Johnson Hospital HCA Houston Healthcare Southeast HCA Houston Healthcare Tomball Hendrick Medical Center Hunt Regional Medical Center Laredo Medical Center Las Palmas Medical Center Longview Regional Medical Center Medical Center Hospital Medical City Alliance Medical City Dallas Medical City Frisco Medical City Las Colinas Medical City Lewisville Medical City North Hills Medical City Weatherford Memorial Hermann Cypress Hospital Memorial Hermann Greater Heights Hospital Memorial Hermann Katy Hospital Memorial Hermann Southeast Hospital Methodist Charlton Medical Center Methodist Hospital Methodist Hospital Northeast Methodist Hospital Stone Oak Methodist Mansfield Medical Center Methodist Richardson Medical Center Midland Memorial Hospital North Central Baptist Hospital Northeast Baptist Hospital Paris Regional Health Rio Grande Regional Hospital Shannon Medical Center St. Joseph Regional Health Center Texas Health Arlington Memorial Texas Health Harris Methodist Hospital Alliance Texas Health Harris Methodist Hospital Hurst–Euless–Bedford Texas Health Harris Methodist Hospital Southwest Fort Worth Texas Health Hospital Frisco Texas Health Huguley Hospital Texoma Medical Center The Hospitals of Providence–Memorial Campus UTMB Health Clear Lake Campus UTMB Health League City Campus Valley Baptist Medical Center Brownsville Valley Regional Medical Center Pediatric Level I Ascension Dell Children's Medical Center Children's Medical Center Dallas Children's Memorial Hermann Hospital Texas Children's Hospital University Hospital San Antonio Pediatric Level II McLane Children's Medical Center Cook Children's Medical Center Covenant Children's Hospital University Medical Center v t e The University of Texas System Academic Institutions Arlington Austin Dallas El Paso Permian Basin Rio Grande Valley San Antonio Stephen F. Austin Tyler Health Institutions MD Anderson Cancer Center UT Medical Branch UT Southwestern Medical Center UTHealth UT Health San Antonio Former Institutions Brownsville (Merged into Rio Grande Valley) Pan American (Merged into Rio Grande Valley) UTHSC Tyler (merged into UT Tyler) Administrative Buildings O. Henry Hall (owned 1968–2015, leased until 2017) Category:University of Texas System Portal:Texas v t e City of Galveston Attractions Ashton Villa Balinese Room Bishop's Palace East End Historic District Elissa (ship) Fort Crockett Galveston Island Historic Pleasure Pier Galveston Island State Park Galveston Pirate SC Galveston Railroad Museum Galveston Seawall Galveston Island Trolley Grand 1894 Opera House Lone Star Flight Museum Moody Gardens Moody Plaza Ocean Star Offshore Drilling Rig & Museum Old Red Rosenberg Library Sts. Constantine and Helen Serbian Orthodox Church St. Mary Cathedral Basilica Schlitterbahn Galveston Island Waterpark Seawolf Park Strand Historic District 1861 United States Customs and Federal Court House USS Cavalla USS Stewart Industries American National Insurance Company Galveston Railroad Island Transit Moody Foundation Moody National Bank Port of Galveston Texas First Bank Scholes International Airport at Galveston History Battle of Galveston Harbor First Battle of Galveston Second Battle of Galveston The Beach Hotel Fort Point Light Galveston Railroad Galveston Hurricane of 1900 Galveston Hurricane of 1915 Galveston Movement Jewish history Karankawa Indians Free State of Galveston Strand Historic District 1861 United States Customs and Federal Court House Gulf, Colorado and Santa Fe Railway Geography Galveston Bay Galveston Island Gulf of Mexico San Luis Pass West Bay Education Galveston College Galveston ISD Ball HS Central HS O'Connell College Preparatory School Texas A&M University at Galveston University of Texas Medical Branch Defunct Central HS Dominican HS Healthcare & research Galveston National Biocontainment Laboratory John Sealy Hospital Sealy & Smith Foundation Shriners Hospital for Children Transitional Learning Center University of Texas Medical Branch Media Newspapers The Daily News Television KLTJ (Daystar) KTMD (Telemundo) AM radio KGBC FM radio KOVE VHF radio KHB40 Other Galveston Causeway Mayor List of museums in the Texas Gulf Coast Bolivar Bridge A Weekend in September Battle on the Bay Mythic Galveston v t e Education in Galveston County, Texas See also: Education in Galveston, Texas Public high schools Clear Creek ISD Clear Creek Clear Falls Clear Springs Clear Path Alternative Other schools are in Harris County Dickinson ISD Dickinson High Friendswood ISD Friendswood High Galveston ISD Ball Closed Central High High Island ISD High Island Hitchcock ISD Hitchcock High Santa Fe ISD Santa Fe High Texas City ISD La Marque High (formerly of La Marque ISD ) Texas City High Private schools Religious schools Bay Area Christian School O'Connell College Preparatory School Closed Dominican High School Tertiary Universities University of Texas Medical Branch Texas A&M University at Galveston (branch) Closed St. Mary's University Community colleges College of the Mainland (Texas City) Galveston College Libraries Public libraries Rosenberg Library Clear Creek ISD extends into Harris County; only schools in Galveston County are listed here v t e Hospitals in the Houston area General Harris Health System Ben Taub Hospital Memorial Hermann Health System Memorial Hermann Memorial City Medical Center Memorial Hermann–Texas Medical Center Houston Methodist Hospital Texas Children's Hospital University of Texas Medical Branch Specialist TIRR Memorial Hermann University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center Shriners Hospital for Children Closed Shriners Hospital for Children (Houston) Category: Hospitals in Houston v t e Medical schools in Texas Allopathic Public University of Texas System : UT Medical Branch (Sealy) , UT Southwestern , UT Health San Antonio (Long) , UTHealth Houston (McGovern) , UT Austin (Dell) , UT Rio Grande Valley , UT Tyler Texas A&M Texas Tech System : TTUHSC , TTUHSC-El Paso (Foster) University of Houston Private Baylor College of Medicine Texas Christian University (Burnett) Osteopathic Public UNTHSC: Texas College of Osteopathic Medicine (TCOM) Sam Houston State Private Incarnate Word Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 National Germany United States 2 France BnF data Czech Republic 2 Israel 2 Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=University_of_Texas_Medical_Branch&oldid=1305431198 " Categories : University of Texas Medical Branch 1891 establishments in Texas Universities and colleges established in 1891 Education in Galveston County, Texas Healthcare in Galveston, Texas Education in Galveston, Texas Hospital networks in the United States Medical research institutes in Texas Nursing schools in Texas Pediatrics in the United States Medical schools in Texas Schools of public health in the United States Universities and colleges accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Public universities and colleges in Texas Institutions in the Texas Medical Center University of Texas System campuses Buildings and structures in Galveston, Texas Trauma centers Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2025 Use American English from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2010 Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 01:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents University of Texas Medical Branch 8 languages Add topic

