Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Literature Toggle Literature subsection 2.1 By van Stockum 2.2 By others Toggle the table of contents Willem Jacob van Stockum 8 languages Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی मराठी Nederlands Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dutch mathematician (1910–1944) In this article, Dutch  capitalization is used for tussenvoegsels in Dutch family names . The first letter in Van Stockum  is capitalized unless it is preceded by a name, initial or title of nobility.

Van Stockum, Toronto, c. 1935.

Willem Jacob van Stockum (20 November 1910 – 10 June 1944) was a Dutch mathematician who made an important contribution to the early development of general relativity .

Biography [ edit ] Van Stockum was born in Hattem in the Netherlands .  His father was a mechanically talented officer in the Dutch Navy .  After the family (less the father) relocated to Ireland in the late 1920s, Willem studied mathematics at Trinity College , Dublin , where he earned a gold medal. He went on to earn an M.A. from the University of Toronto and his Ph.D. from the University of Edinburgh in 1937.

In the mid-1930s, van Stockum became an early enthusiast of the then new theory of gravitation , general relativity.  In 1938, he published a paper which contains one of the first exact solutions in general relativity which modeled the gravitational field produced by a configuration of rotating matter, the van Stockum dust , which remains an important example noted for its unusual simplicity.  In this paper, van Stockum was apparently the first to notice the possibility of closed timelike curves , one of the strangest and most disconcerting phenomena in general relativity.

Van Stockum left for the United States in hope of studying under Albert Einstein , eventually in the spring of 1939 gaining a temporary position under Professor Oswald Veblen at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton . The outbreak of the Second World War occurred while he was teaching at the University of Maryland . Anxious to join the fight against Hitler, he enlisted in the Royal Canadian Air Force, eventually earning his pilots wings in July 1942. Because of his advanced knowledge of physics , he spent much of the next year as a test pilot in Canada . After the Netherlands was invaded by Hitler, van Stockum sought to join the war as a pilot. Finally, he was able to transfer to the Dutch Air Force (in exile), and in 1944 became the only Dutch officer posted to No. 10 Sq­ron of the RAF Bomber Command , which was stationed in Yorkshire and flew combat missions in the Halifax heavy bomber over Europe before and after the Normandy invasion . On 10 June 1944, van Stockum and his crew of six took off on their sixth combat mission, as part of another 400-plane raid. Near their target, the plane was hit by flak , and all seven crew members were lost, along with seven from another bomber on the same mission. The fourteen airmen are buried in Laval , near the place where the planes went down.

Literature [ edit ] By van Stockum [ edit ] van Stockum, W. J. (1937).

Axially symmetric gravitational fields . University of Edinburgh.

OCLC 1064448393 .

Doctoral thesis Edinburgh.

van Stockum, W. J. (1938).

"IX.-The gravitational field of a distribution of particles rotating around an axis of symmetry" .

Proc. R. Soc. Edinburgh .

57 . Cambridge University Press: 135– 154.

doi : 10.1017/S0370164600013699 .

The original paper presenting the rediscovery of Lanczos' 1924 dust solution, nowadays referred to as the Lanczos-van Stockum solution.

van Stockum, Willem Jacob (December 1944).

"A SOLDIER'S CREED By A BOMBER PILOT" .

cgoakley.org . Retrieved 1 April 2024 .

Essay written by van Stockum published under the byline " a bomber pilot ", due to wartime security restrictions.

By others [ edit ] Beenakker, Carlo (2004).

"Time travel pioneer" .

ilorentz.org . Lorentz Institute for theoretical physics, Leiden University . Retrieved 1 April 2024 .

Lanczos, K. (Kornel) (1997).

"On a Stationary Cosmology in the Sense of Einstein's Theory of Gravitation" .

General Relativity and Gravitation .

29 (3): 363– 399.

doi : 10.1023/A:1010277120072 .

Translated reprint of Lanczos, Kornel (1924). "Über eine stationäre Kosmologie im Sinne der Einsteinschen Gravitationstheorie".

Zeitschrift für Physik (in German).

21 (1). Springer Science and Business Media LLC: 73– 110.

Bibcode : 1924ZPhy...21...73L .

doi : 10.1007/bf01328251 .

ISSN 1434-6001 .

S2CID 122902359 .

Van Stockum rediscovered Lanczos's result.

van Loo, Erwin (June 2004).

"Willem Jacob van Stockum: A scientist in uniform" .

lorentz.leidenuniv.nl . Translated by Beenakker, Carlo . Retrieved 1 April 2024 .

Translation of an article by a historian  published in the Dutch Air Force magazine "De Vliegende Hollander".

Wack, Robert P. (2014).

Time Bomber . New York: Boissevain Books.

ISBN 9780984523283 . Retrieved 1 April 2024 .

Historical fiction by Robert P. Wack, set in Normandy in June 1944. Van Stockum's life and work inspired this book. Also available as Wack, Robert P. (May 10, 2014).

Time Bomber . Boissevain Books.

ISBN 978-0984523283 .

v t e Relativity Special relativity Background Principle of relativity ( Galilean relativity Galilean transformation ) Special relativity Doubly special relativity Fundamental concepts Frame of reference Speed of light Hyperbolic orthogonality Rapidity Maxwell's equations Proper length Proper time Proper acceleration Relativistic mass Formulation Lorentz transformation Textbooks Phenomena Time dilation Mass–energy equivalence (E=mc 2 ) Length contraction Relativity of simultaneity Relativistic Doppler effect Thomas precession Ladder paradox Twin paradox Terrell rotation Spacetime Light cone World line Minkowski diagram Biquaternions Minkowski space General relativity Background Introduction Mathematical formulation Fundamental concepts Equivalence principle Riemannian geometry Penrose diagram Geodesics Mach's principle Formulation ADM formalism BSSN formalism Einstein field equations Linearized gravity Post-Newtonian formalism Raychaudhuri equation Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation Ernst equation Phenomena Black hole Event horizon Singularity Two-body problem Gravitational waves : astronomy detectors ( LIGO and collaboration Virgo LISA Pathfinder GEO ) Hulse–Taylor binary Other tests : precession of Mercury lensing (together with Einstein cross and Einstein rings ) redshift Shapiro delay frame-dragging / geodetic effect ( Lense–Thirring precession ) pulsar timing arrays Advanced theories Brans–Dicke theory Kaluza–Klein Quantum gravity Solutions Cosmological: Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker ( Friedmann equations ) Lemaître–Tolman Kasner BKL singularity Gödel Milne Spherical: Schwarzschild ( interior Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff equation ) Reissner–Nordström Axisymmetric: Kerr ( Kerr–Newman ) Weyl−Lewis−Papapetrou Taub–NUT van Stockum dust discs Others: pp-wave Ozsváth–Schücking Alcubierre Ellis In computational physics: Numerical relativity Scientists Poincaré Lorentz Einstein Hilbert Schwarzschild de Sitter Weyl Eddington Friedmann Lemaître Milne Robertson Chandrasekhar Zwicky Wheeler Choquet-Bruhat Kerr Zel'dovich Novikov Ehlers Geroch Penrose Hawking Taylor Hulse Bondi Misner Yau Thorne Weiss others Category Authority control databases : Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Willem_Jacob_van_Stockum&oldid=1303248272 " Categories : Dutch relativity theorists People from Hattem 1910 births 1944 deaths Alumni of the University of Edinburgh 20th-century Dutch mathematicians Royal Canadian Air Force personnel of World War II Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve personnel of World War II Royal Air Force pilots of World War II Royal Air Force personnel killed in World War II Aviators killed by being shot down Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata CS1 German-language sources (de) This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 22:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Willem Jacob van Stockum 8 languages Add topic

