Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theory Toggle Theory subsection 1.1 Global people's war 1.2 Joint-dictatorship of the proletariat of oppressed nations 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Maoism–Third Worldism Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Synthesis of Marxism–Leninism–Maoism and Third Worldism This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article contains too many or overly lengthy quotations .

Please help summarise the quotations . Consider transferring direct quotations to Wikiquote or excerpts to Wikisource .

( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous revolution theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path Deng Xiaoping Theory Naxalism People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Salim Rubaya Ali Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill George Jackson İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965—1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black Power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Purba Banglar Sarbahara Party Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Maoist Communist Party of China Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National Democracy Movement Naxalite Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Maoism–Third Worldism ( MTW ) is a broad tendency which is mainly concerned with the infusion and synthesis of Marxism —particularly of the Marxist–Leninist–Maoist persuasion—with concepts of non-Marxist Third Worldism , namely dependency theory and world-systems theory .

There is no general consensus on part of Maoist–Third Worldists as a whole. However, the majority of proponents typically argue for the centrality of anti-imperialism to the victory of global communist revolution as well as against the idea that the working class in the First World is majority- exploited (sometimes arguing that it experiences no exploitation at all) and therefore it is not a part of the international proletariat , but rather labor aristocracy .

Theory [ edit ] Maoism–Third Worldism is theoretically defined by a variety of political principles which emphasize the enormous economic, social and political divisions which exist currently between the "overdeveloped" First World and "underdeveloped" Third World . This is expressed through the lens of Maoist theory and practice - brought into a new, international understanding of imperialism and class - in the context of the world divided into two distinct camps; the exploited countries (the Third World) and their exploiters (the First World).

Global people's war [ edit ] However, the foundations of Maoism–Third Worldism extend to encapsulate a great many strategic and theoretical developments in Marxist theory over the 20th century. Among them is the understanding of a global people's war being necessary as a military strategy for bringing an end to the historically unequal relationship built between the First and Third Worlds. This strategy includes the systematic delinking of the exploited economies of Third World countries from the parasitic First World and the unification of international forces to deprive the imperialist countries of resources and wealth extracted from Third World countries.

[ 1 ] Though this strategy draws inspiration from several historical sources - such as Che Guevara 's Message to the Tri-Continental - it is, most famously, derived from a quote from Lin Biao 's speech Long Live the Victory of People's War!

in 1965: Taking the entire globe, if North America and Western Europe can be called 'the cities of the world', then Asia, Africa and Latin America constitute 'the rural areas of the world'. Since World War II, the proletarian revolutionary movement has for various reasons been temporarily held back in the North American and West European capitalist countries, while the people’s revolutionary movement in Asia, Africa and Latin America has been growing vigorously. In a sense, the contemporary world revolution also presents a picture of the encirclement of cities by the rural areas. In the final analysis, the whole cause of world revolution hinges on the revolutionary struggles of the Asian, African and Latin American peoples who make up the overwhelming majority of the world’s population. The socialist countries should regard it as their internationalist duty to support the people’s revolutionary struggles in Asia, Africa and Latin America.

[ 2 ] Joint-dictatorship of the proletariat of oppressed nations [ edit ] Also fundamental to Maoism–Third Worldism is an understanding of the joint-dictatorship of the proletariat of oppressed nations (JDPON) and/or global new democratic revolution (GNDR) which is proposed as a form of alter-globalization aimed at breaking the political and economic foundations of the economic parasitism between the First and Third Worlds. The JDPON is a point of relative contention between the various proponents of Maoism–Third Worldism or at least the tendencies which have now been named as falling generally under the Third Worldist tendency within Marxism.

[ citation needed ] It is upheld by a variety of Leftist parties, including the Revolutionary Anti-Imperialist Movement and Maoist Internationalist Movement (Prisons) .

[ 3 ] Before Maoism, a similar theory was proposed by Mirsaid Sultan-Galiev , who argued for a Colonial International, that would exist independent of, or if necessary, in opposition to the Third International . Galiev stated that a Colonial International would consist of all oppressed nations in Africa, Asia and both South and North America, arguing that the native populations as well as the African populations of the Americas were colonised nations.

[ 4 ] Galiev argued that this International could possibly need to form a dictatorship over the metropolitan states of America and Europe.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Black radical tradition Non-Aligned Movement Third-Worldism Third World socialism Three Worlds Theory Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat References [ edit ] ^ "Points of Unity and Difference Regarding Global People's War" .

Anti-Imperialism.org . Revolutionary Anti-Imperialist Movement. 17 May 2014 . Retrieved 15 January 2017 .

^ Lin, Biao (September 3, 1965).

"Long Live the Victory of People's War" .

Marxists.org . Foreign Languages Press . Retrieved 15 January 2017 .

^ "What is the dictatorship of the proletariat?" .

www.prisoncensorship.info . Retrieved 10 January 2025 .

^ Alexander, Joshua (8 August 2016).

"Two Articles by Mirsaid Sultan-Galiev, 1919" .

Anti-imperialism.org . Archived from the original on 29 June 2020 . Retrieved 10 January 2025 .

^ Kakınç, Halit.

Kizil Turan . p. 196.

Further reading [ edit ] Accumulation On A World Scale , Samir Amin .

Back on Track: The Object of Third Worldism , Klaas V.

Divided World, Divided Class: Global Political Economy & The Stratification Of Labour Under Capitalism , Zak Cope.

Eurocentrism and the Communist Movement , Robert Biel.

Foreign Trade and the Law of Value, Part I , Anwar Shaikh .

Foreign Trade and the Law of Value, Part II , Anwar Shaikh.

Imperialism & Unequal Development , Samir Amin.

The Law Of Worldwide Value , Samir Amin.

Long Live the Victory of People’s War!

, Lin Biao – via Marxists Internet Archive .

Message to the Tricontinental (Two, Three, Many Vietnams) , Che Guevara – via Marxists Internet Archive .

Unequal Exchange, a Study of the Imperialism of Trade , Arghiri Emmanuel .

Unequal Development: An Essay on the Social Formations of Peripheral Capitalism , Samir Amin.

Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat , J. Sakai.

The Worker Elite: Notes on the "Labor Aristocracy" , Bromma.

v t e Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous Revolution Theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Salmin Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965–1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Peruvian Revolution Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Peru – Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Proletarian Party of East Bengal Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People – Communist League Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National communism National Democracy Movement Naxalism Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Maoism–Third_Worldism&oldid=1296825801 " Categories : Maoism Political theories Third-Worldism Imperialism studies Totalitarian ideologies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from January 2025 All articles lacking reliable references Wikipedia articles with style issues from November 2022 All articles with style issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2023 This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 14:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Maoism–Third Worldism Add languages Add topic

