Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Platform 3 Description 4 In popular and artistic culture 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Albert Einstein Memorial 10 languages Cebuano Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia עברית مصرى Nederlands Português اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°53′33″N 77°02′54″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.8924°N 77.0483°W ﻿ / 38.8924; -77.0483 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1979 sculpture by Robert Berks in Washington, DC, US Albert Einstein Memorial Designer Robert Berks Type Bronze sculpture Completion date 1979 Dedicated to Albert Einstein The Albert Einstein Memorial is a monumental bronze statue by sculptor Robert Berks , depicting Albert Einstein seated with manuscript papers in hand. It is located in central Washington, D.C.

, United States, in a grove of trees at the southwest corner of the grounds of the National Academy of Sciences at 2101 Constitution Avenue N.W., near the Vietnam Veterans Memorial . Two replicas exist at the Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities and the Georgia Institute of Technology .

Life [ edit ] The memorial, situated in an elm and holly grove in the southwest corner of the grounds of the National Academy of Sciences , was unveiled at the Academy's annual meeting, April 22, 1979, in honor of the centennial of Einstein's birth. At the dedication ceremony, physicist John Archibald Wheeler described the statue as "a monument to the man who united space and time into space-time...a remembrance of the man who taught us...that the universe does not go on from everlasting to everlasting, but begins with a bang." [ 1 ] The memorial is a popular spot for tourists visiting the national mall to pose for pictures.

[ 2 ] Replica of the 1979 monument in the academy garden of the Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities .

The statue depicts Einstein seated in casual repose on a three-step bench of  Mount Airy (North Carolina) white granite. The bronze figure weighs approximately 4 tons and is 12 feet in height.  The monument is supported by three caissons, totaling 135 tons, sunk in bedrock to a depth of 23 to 25 feet., [ 3 ] It was cast at Modern Art Foundry, Astoria Queens, NY.

The sculptor, Robert Berks, known for his portrait busts and statues ( John F. Kennedy at the Kennedy Center ; Mary McLeod Bethune in Lincoln Park, Washington, D.C.

), based the work on a bust of Einstein he sculpted from life in 1953 at Einstein's Princeton home. Landscape architect James A. Van Sweden designed the monument landscaping.

[ 3 ] Einstein was elected a foreign associate of the National Academy of Sciences in 1922, the year after he won the Nobel Prize in physics, and became a member of the Academy in 1942, two years after he became a naturalized American citizen.

[ 3 ] Berks created two replicas of his 1979 monument. One of the replicas can presently be viewed in the academy garden of the Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities ; another on the campus of the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta , Georgia.

[ 4 ] Platform [ edit ] The Einstein Memorial seen from the side.

The statue and bench are at one side of a circular dais , 28 feet (8.5 m) in diameter, made from emerald-pearl granite from Larvik , Norway.  Embedded in the dais are more than 2,700 metal studs representing the location of astronomical objects, including the sun , moon , planets , 4 asteroids , 5 galaxies , 10 quasars , and many stars at noon on April 22, 1979, when the memorial was dedicated.  The studs are different sizes to denote the apparent magnitude of the relevant object, and different studs denote binary stars , spectroscopic binaries , pulsars , globular clusters , open clusters , and quasars .  The celestial objects were accurately positioned by astronomers at the U.S. Naval Observatory . Familiar constellations are marked on the map for easy identification.

[ 1 ] To a visitor standing at the center of the dais, Einstein appears to be making direct eye contact, and any spoken words are notably amplified.

Description [ edit ] Engraved as though written on the papers held in the statue's left hand are three equations, summarizing three of Einstein's most important scientific advances: R μ μ ν ν − − 1 2 g μ μ ν ν R = κ κ T μ μ ν ν {\displaystyle R_{\mu \nu }-{1 \over 2}g_{\mu \nu }R=\kappa T_{\mu \nu }} (the general theory of relativity) e V = h ν ν − − A {\displaystyle eV=h\nu -A\,} (the photoelectric effect ) E = m c 2 {\displaystyle E=mc^{2}\,} (the equivalence of energy and matter ) Along the back of the bench, behind the statue, three famous quotations from the scientist are inscribed.  They were selected to reflect Einstein's sense of wonder, scientific integrity, and concern for social justice.

[ 1 ] They are : "As long as I have any choice in the matter, I shall live only in a country where civil liberty, tolerance, and equality of all citizens before the law prevail." "Joy and amazement at the beauty and grandeur of this world of which man can just form a faint notion ..." "The right to search for truth implies also a duty; one must not conceal any part of what one has recognized to be true." In popular and artistic culture [ edit ] The statue was filmed and subsequently used in the opening title sequence of Sesame Street during the show's 20th season.

A copy of the Albert Einstein Memorial made of 100% dark and white chocolate was once on display in the Marriott Wardman Park Hotel in Washington, DC .

[ 5 ] In July 2012, the sculpture was yarn bombed by the Polish-born artist Olek , who enclosed the entire statue in a colorful crocheted wrap of pinks, purples, and teal.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Visual arts portal United States portal List of public art in Washington, D.C., Ward 2 References [ edit ] ^ a b c The Einstein Memorial at the National Academies: A Visitor's Guide (pamphlet) , National Academies ^ Owens, Trevor (2012). "Tripadvisor Rates Einstein: Using the social web to unpack the public meanings of a cultural heritage site".

International Journal of Web Based Communities .

8 : 40.

doi : 10.1504/IJWBC.2012.044681 .

^ a b c "The Einstein Memorial" .

The NAS Building . National Academy of Science . Retrieved April 9, 2013 .

^ Braukman, Stacy (December 10, 2015).

"The Art of Genius" . Georgia Tech Newsroom . Retrieved February 12, 2016 .

^ "Chocolate Einstein" .

Physics Central . American Physical Society . Retrieved June 19, 2016 .

^ Freed, Benjamin (July 19, 2012).

"Albert Einstein Memorial Gets Yarn-Bombed" .

DCist.com .

Archived from the original on October 10, 2014 . Retrieved April 9, 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Albert Einstein Memorial (Washington, D.C.) .

Einstein, Albert: Statue at the Nat'l Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C.

DCmemorials.com Albert Einstein (sculpture) , Save Outdoor Sculpture survey, Art Inventories Catalog, Smithsonian American Art Museum, Smithsonian Institution Research Information System (SIRIS) v t e Albert Einstein Physics Theory of relativity Special relativity General relativity Mass–energy equivalence (E=mc 2 ) Brownian motion Photoelectric effect Einstein coefficients Einstein solid Equivalence principle Einstein field equations Einstein radius Einstein relation (kinetic theory) Einstein ring Cosmological constant Bose–Einstein condensate Bose–Einstein statistics Bose–Einstein correlations Einstein–Cartan theory Einstein–Infeld–Hoffmann equations Einstein–de Haas effect EPR paradox Bohr–Einstein debates Teleparallelism Thought experiments Unsuccessful investigations Wave–particle duality Gravitational wave Tea leaf paradox Works Annus mirabilis papers (1905) " Investigations on the Theory of Brownian Movement " (1905) Relativity: The Special and the General Theory (1916) The Meaning of Relativity (1922) The World as I See It (1934) The Evolution of Physics (1938) " Why Socialism?

" (1949) Russell–Einstein Manifesto (1955) In popular culture Die Grundlagen der Einsteinschen Relativitäts-Theorie (1922 documentary) The Einstein Theory of Relativity (1923 documentary) Relics: Einstein's Brain (1994 documentary) Insignificance (1985 film) Young Einstein (1988 film) Picasso at the Lapin Agile (1993 play) I.Q.

(1994 film) Einstein's Gift (2003 play) Einstein and Eddington (2008 TV film) Genius (2017 series) Oppenheimer (2023 film) Prizes Albert Einstein Award Albert Einstein Medal Kalinga Prize Albert Einstein Peace Prize Albert Einstein World Award of Science Einstein Prize for Laser Science Einstein Prize (APS) Books about Einstein Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel Einstein and Religion Einstein for Beginners Einstein: His Life and Universe Einstein in Oxford Einstein on the Run Einstein's Cosmos I Am Albert Einstein Introducing Relativity Subtle is the Lord Family Mileva Marić (first wife) Elsa Einstein (second wife; cousin) Lieserl Einstein (daughter) Hans Albert Einstein (son) Pauline Koch (mother) Hermann Einstein (father) Maja Einstein (sister) Eduard Einstein (son) Robert Einstein (cousin) Bernhard Caesar Einstein (grandson) Evelyn Einstein (granddaughter) Thomas Martin Einstein (great-grandson) Siegbert Einstein (distant cousin) Related Awards and honors Brain House Memorial Political views Religious views Things named after Einstein–Oppenheimer relationship Albert Einstein Archives Einstein's Blackboard Einstein Papers Project Einstein refrigerator Einsteinhaus Einsteinium Max Talmey Emergency Committee of Atomic Scientists Category v t e Landmarks of Washington, D.C.

Memorials Adams African American Civil War American Veterans Disabled for Life John Barry Belmont–Paul Women's Equality National Monument Mary McLeod Bethune Boy Scout James Buchanan John Carroll Christopher Columbus D.C. War Albert Einstein Emancipation Dwight D. Eisenhower John Ericsson David Farragut First Division Thomas Gallaudet James A. Garfield Kahlil Gibran Samuel Gompers Ulysses S. Grant Holocaust Museum Holodomor Genocide Andrew Jackson Japanese American Patriotism During World War II Jefferson Memorial Lyndon Baines Johnson Grove John Paul Jones Marquis de Lafayette Law Enforcement Officers Lincoln Memorial statue Martin Luther King, Jr.

Korean War Veterans George Mason George B. McClellan George Meade Peter Muhlenberg National Statuary Hall Collection Navy – Merchant Marine Nuns of the Battlefield Peace Monument John J. Pershing Second Division Signers of the Declaration of Independence The Extra Mile Three Soldiers Jean de Rochambeau Franklin Delano Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Island Taras Shevchenko Statues of the Liberators Oscar Straus Robert A. Taft Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium Titanic United States Navy Victims of Communism Vietnam Veterans Vietnam Women's Washington Monument Daniel Webster World War I World War II Rainbow Pool Other Basilica of the Immaculate Conception Blair House Capitol Reflecting Pool Congressional Cemetery DAR Constitution Hall Exorcist steps First Air Mail Marker Ford's Theatre Petersen House Frederick Douglass National Historic Site Healy Hall Hillwood Estate and Museum Islamic Center Jefferson Pier John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts Library of Congress Jefferson Adams Madison National Arboretum National Capitol Columns National Building Museum National Gallery of Art Lincoln's Cottage at Soldiers' Home Lincoln Memorial Reflecting Pool National Archives National Cathedral National Mall Octagon House Old Post Office Old Stone House Smithsonian Institution St. John's Episcopal Church The Arts of War and The Arts of Peace Tidal Basin Treasury Building Freedman's Bank Building Tudor Place Union Station United States Capitol Dome Rotunda United States Supreme Court Building Watergate complex White House Willard Hotel Parks and plazas Constitution Gardens Dupont Circle East Potomac Park Farragut Square Freedom Plaza Lafayette Square L'Enfant Plaza Meridian Hill Park National Arboretum Pershing Park President's Park Rock Creek Park The Ellipse Union Square United States Botanic Garden West Potomac Park Boundaries Anacostia River Arlington Memorial Bridge Boundary markers of the original District of Columbia Chesapeake and Ohio Canal Constitution Avenue Francis Scott Key Bridge Pennsylvania Avenue Potomac River Zero Milestone Nearby landmarks Arlington National Cemetery Tomb of the Unknown Soldier John F. Kennedy gravesite Arlington House Marine Corps War Memorial Mount Vernon Netherlands Carillon Pentagon Pentagon Memorial United States Air Force Memorial Women in Military Service for America Memorial Planned Adams Memorial National Desert Storm and Desert Shield Memorial National Liberty Memorial New Commanders Stadium Peace Corps Commemorative Women's Suffrage National Monument Canceled George Washington Memorial Building Gold Star Mothers National Monument Related National Capital Memorial Advisory Commission National Mall and Memorial Parks List of National Historic Landmarks in Washington, D.C.

National Register of Historic Places in Washington, D.C.

Public art in Washington, D.C.

( American Revolution Statuary , Civil War Monuments , Commemorating African-Americans , Outdoor sculpture ) v t e Public art in Washington, D.C.

Portrait sculpture Dante Alighieri Francis Asbury Mustafa Kemal Atatürk Sheridan Circle Turkish Embassy Mary McLeod Bethune William Blackstone James Buchanan John Carroll Winston Churchill Louis Daguerre Albert Einstein Robert Emmet John Ericsson Albert Gallatin Mahatma Gandhi James A. Garfield James Gibbons Kahlil Gibran Josh Gibson Samuel Gompers Théodore Guérin Samuel Hahnemann Alexander Hamilton Joseph Henry Isabella I of Castile Andrew Jackson Thomas Jefferson Joan of Arc Walter Johnson Jan Karski Martin Luther King Jr.

Vasil Levski Abraham Lincoln D.C. City Hall Emancipation Memorial Lincoln Memorial Henry Wadsworth Longfellow Martin Luther Nelson Mandela Guglielmo Marconi John Marshall Crown Princess Märtha of Norway Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk George Mason Peter Muhlenberg Bernardo O'Higgins John J. Pershing Martin de Porres Alexander Pushkin Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Alberto Santos-Dumont Olive Risley Seward Alexander Robey Shepherd Taras Shevchenko Soh Jaipil Robert A. Taft Eleftherios Venizelos George Washington GWU busts GWU statue National Cathedral U.S. Capitol east lawn † Daniel Webster American Revolution Statuary John Barry Edmund Burke Benjamin Franklin Nathanael Greene Nathan Hale John Paul Jones Tadeusz Kościuszko Marquis de Lafayette Casimir Pulaski Comte de Rochambeau Baron von Steuben Artemas Ward George Washington (Washington Circle) John Witherspoon Civil War Monuments David Farragut Ulysses S. Grant Winfield Scott Hancock John A. Logan George B. McClellan James B. McPherson George Gordon Meade Albert Pike † John Aaron Rawlins Winfield Scott Philip Sheridan William Tecumseh Sherman Benjamin F. Stephenson George Henry Thomas Statues of the Liberators José Gervasio Artigas Simón Bolívar Bernardo de Gálvez Benito Juárez José de San Martín Other monuments Armenian Earthquake Ashes to Answers Boy Scouts Chesapeake and Ohio Canal Cuban–American Friendship Andrew Jackson Downing Founders of the Daughters of the American Revolution Holodomor Genocide Lyndon B. Johnson Law Enforcement Officers Signers of the Declaration of Independence Titanic Victims of Communism Washington Monument War memorials American Veterans Disabled for Life District of Columbia (WWI) First Division (WWI–) Grand Army of the Republic (Civil War) Korean War Navy – Merchant Marine (WWI–) Nuns of the Battlefield (Civil War) Peace Monument (Civil War) Second Division (WWI–) U.S. Navy The Homecoming The Lone Sailor Vietnam War Three Soldiers Women World War II Japanese-American Patriotism Other works Ad Astra Allow Me Always Becoming Arbre Serpents The Arts of War and The Arts of Peace Ascension Australian Seal Bearing Witness Bex Eagle Boy from Pest A Bridge Across and Beyond Bridge Tender's House Buffalo Build-Grow Carry the Rainbow on Your Shoulders Cascading Waterfall Chair The Chess Players Composition for the Axemen Continuum Delta Solar Discovery of America † Discus Thrower Don Quixote The Extra Mile Family Circle Federal Triangle Flowers Fortitude Freedom Bell Friendship Archway Gwenfritz (Here I Stand) In the Spirit of Paul Robeson Homeless Jesus Infinity Japanese Lantern Japanese Pagoda Lift Off Loss and Regeneration El Maíz The Mama Ayesha's Restaurant Presidential Mural Mary, Protector of Faith Nana on a Dolphin Number 23 Basketball Player New Leaf The Parable Pillar of Fire The Rescue † Renaissance River Horse St. Jerome the Priest Saraswati Serenity The Servant Christ She Who Must Be Obeyed Sky Landscape Spirit of Haida Gwaii Symbiosis Trigadilly Les Trois Grâces Two Men Reading Uncle Beazley Architectural sculpture Acacia Griffins American Legion Soldier Apotheosis of Democracy Canova Lions Columbus Doors Darth Vader grotesque Freedom Government Printing Office Workers Guardianship and Heritage Inspiration Man Controlling Trade Progress of Civilization Pediment Revolutionary War Door George Washington and the Revolutionary War Door Past and Present The Progress of Railroading Students Aspire Fountains Bartholdi Fountain Butt–Millet Memorial Fountain Columbus Fountain Court of Neptune Fountain Darlington Memorial Fountain Dupont Circle Fountain McMillan Fountain Andrew W. Mellon Memorial Fountain Oscar Straus Memorial Temperance Fountain By location Ward 1 Ward 2 Ward 3 Ward 4 Ward 5 Ward 6 Ward 7 Ward 8 Related Graffiti in Washington, D.C.

Key : † Removed Artworks commemorating African Americans National Statuary Hall Collection sculptures National Statuary Hall Outdoor sculpture v t e Atlanta landmarks Current Cemeteries Decatur Greenwood Oakland South Bend Utoy Westview Commercial 200 Peachtree Academy of Medicine Atlantic Station AmericasMart Biltmore B. Mifflin Hood Brick Company Building Clermont Lounge Crum & Forster Building Fire Station No. 11 Five Points Coca-Cola sign Forsyth-Walton Building Georgia World Congress Center Kodak Building Lenox Square M.C. Kiser Company Building Magic City Manuel's Tavern Mary Mac's Tea Room Murder Kroger Phipps Plaza Ponce City Market Switchyards Building Underground Atlanta The Battery Atlanta The Varsity Educational Brittain Dining Hall Clough Undergraduate Learning Commons Food Processing Technology Building Georgia Tech Historic District Georgia Tech Library Klaus Advanced Computing Building Marcus Nanotechnology Building Omega Chapter of the Chi Phi Fraternity Student Competition Center Tech Tower Technology Square Governmental Atlanta City Hall Elbert P. Tuttle United States Court of Appeals Building Federal Penitentiary Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Georgia Governor's Mansion Georgia Railroad Freight Depot Georgia State Capitol Miss Freedom Monuments Statue of Ellis Arnall Atlanta from the Ashes (The Phoenix) Autoeater Carnegie Education Pavilion Confederate Obelisk Continuing the Conversation Albert Einstein Memorial Erskine Memorial Fountain Statue of Evander Holyfield Expelled Because of Color Five Points Monument The First Graduate Free Nelson Mandela Gateway of Dreams Statue of Henry W. Grady Homage to King Hope Moving Forward Statue of Jimmy Carter Statue of John Brown Gordon Statue of John Stith Pemberton Kessler Campanile Statue of Martin Luther King Jr.

Sidney Lanier Monument Millennium Gate Peace Monument Pioneer Women Statue of Samuel Spencer Thomas W. Talbot Monument Statue of Eugene Talmadge The Three Pioneers Statue of Thomas E. Watson Statue of Dominique Wilkins World Athletes Monument Museums APEX Museum Atlanta Contemporary Art Center Atlanta Cyclorama & Civil War Museum Atlanta History Center Callanwolde Fine Arts Center Children's Museum of Atlanta College Football Hall of Fame Delta Flight Museum Fernbank Museum of Natural History Fernbank Science Center Fire Station No. 6 Hammonds House Museum High Museum of Art Jimmy Carter Library and Museum Joel Chandler Harris House (Wren's Nest) King Plow Arts Center Margaret Mitchell House and Museum Martin Luther King Jr. National Historical Park Michael C. Carlos Museum Museum of Contemporary Art of Georgia Museum of Design Atlanta National Center for Civil and Human Rights Rhodes Memorial Hall House Museum Robert C. Williams Museum of Papermaking William Breman Jewish Heritage & Holocaust Museum World of Coca-Cola Parks and wildlife Atlanta Botanical Garden BeltLine Burger Bowl Centennial Olympic Park Chastain Park Chattahoochee River Fernbank Forest Georgia Aquarium Grant Park Historic Fourth Ward Park Liberty Plaza Piedmont Park Playscapes Stone Mountain Woodruff Park Zoo Atlanta Performing arts Alliance Theatre Atlanta Symphony Hall Atlanta Civic Center Buckhead Theatre Center for Puppetry Arts Center Stage Coca-Cola Roxy Donna and Marvin Schwartz Center for Performing Arts Ferst Center for the Arts Fox Theatre Goat Farm Arts Center King Plow Arts Center Madison Theatre Plaza Theatre Rialto Center for the Arts Shakespeare Tavern Strand Theatre The Masquerade The Tabernacle Tara Theatre Variety Playhouse Woodruff Arts Center Religious Al-Farooq Masjid All Saints' Episcopal Annunciation Greek Orthodox Antioch Baptist Church North Big Bethel AME Buckhead Cathedral of Christ the King Central Presbyterian The Church at Ponce & Highland (Druid Hills Baptist Church) Church of the Apostles Congregation Beth Jacob Druid Hills Presbyterian Ebenezer Baptist First Church of Christ, Scientist First Congregational First Presbyterian First United Methodist Grace United Methodist Immaculate Conception Lutheran Church of the Redeemer North Avenue Presbyterian Peachtree Presbyterian Rock Spring Presbyterian Sacred Heart of Jesus St. Bartholomew's Episcopal St. John's Lutheran St. Luke's Episcopal St. Mark United Methodist St. Paul United Methodist St. Philip AME St. Philip's Cathedral The Temple Wheat Street Baptist Residential (former) Asa G. Candler Jr. (Callanwolde) Water T. Candler (Lullwater) Joel Chandler Harris (Wren's Nest) Alonzo F. Herndon (Herndon Home) Edward H. Inman (Swan House) Martin Luther King Jr.

Ferdinand McMillan (The Castle) Margaret Mitchell Edward C. Peters (Ivy Hall) Amos Giles Rhodes (Rhodes Hall) Rufus M. Rose Craigie House Skyscrapers Historic (pre- WWII ) Bona Allen (1923) Candler (1906) Carnegie (1925) Connally (1916) Cox-Carlton (1925) Flatiron (1897) Georgian Terrace (1911) Glenn (1923) Healey (1914) Hurt (1926) J. Mack Robinson (Empire) (1901) The Metropolitan (1911) Ponce de Leon Apartments (1913) Rhodes-Haverty (1929) Southern Bell (1929) William-Oliver (1930) Winecoff Hotel (1913) W. D. Grant (1898) Downtown 25 Park Place (Trust Company of Georgia) 55 Marietta Street (Fulton National Bank) 101 Marietta Street 191 Peachtree Tower Coastal States Building Equitable Five Points Plaza Fourth National Bank building Georgia Power Georgia-Pacific Tower Hyatt Regency Atlanta Marriott Marquis One Park Tower Peachtree Center Peachtree Summit State of Georgia Building Truist Plaza TWELVE Centennial Park Westin Peachtree Plaza Hotel Midtown 999 Peachtree 12th & Midtown 1010 Midtown 10 Sixty Five Midtown 1075 Peachtree 1100 Peachtree 1180 Peachtree 1280 West Tower Square Regions Plaza Atlantic Station 171 17th Street The Atlantic Bank of America Plaza Coca-Cola Colony Square CNN Center Four Seasons Hotel Atlanta / GLG Grand Mayfair Condominiums One Atlantic Center (IBM Tower) One Georgia Center Promenade II Spire Ten Peachtree Place ViewPoint Yoo on the Park Buckhead 2828 Peachtree 3344 Peachtree 3630 Peachtree Atlanta Financial Center Atlanta Plaza Buckhead Grand Mandarin Oriental Paramount at Buckhead Park Avenue Condominiums Park Place The Pinnacle Realm Resurgens Plaza Terminus Tower Place Perimeter Center Concourse Corporate Center V & VI (King & Queen towers) Park Towers I & II Three Ravinia Drive Former 688 Club Alex Cooley's Electric Ballroom Atlanta Cabana Motel Atlanta Hotel Atlanta (Confederate) Rolling Mill Atlantic Steel Mill Church of Our Father Coca-Cola Olympic City Confederate Soldiers' Home DeGive's Opera House Equitable Building (1892) First Universalist Fourth National Bank 3rd Georgia Governor's Mansion (John H. James mansion) Henry Grady Hotel Hotel Ansley Hotel Aragon Judge William Wilson House Junior's Grill Kimball House Leyden House Loew's Grand Theatre Majestic Hotel Masonic Temple National Museum of Patriotism Neely Nuclear Research Center Pappenheimer Mansion Paramount Theatre Peachtree Arcade Piedmont Hotel Ponce de Leon amusement park Ponce de Leon Springs Republic Block Rich's Riverbend Apartments Roxy Theatre SciTrek State Square Terminal Station Trout House Turner Broadcasting tower Union Stations: 1853 1871 1930 Post Office and Customs House/City Hall (1911–1930) Walton Spring Washington Hall Planned 1105 West Peachtree Atlanta Multi-Modal Passenger Terminal Atlanta Symphony Center Midtown Union Opus Place The Stitch See also: Atlanta sports venues 38°53′33″N 77°02′54″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.8924°N 77.0483°W ﻿ / 38.8924; -77.0483 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Albert_Einstein_Memorial&oldid=1293362672 " Categories : 1979 sculptures Albert Einstein Bronze sculptures in Washington, D.C.

Monuments and memorials in Washington, D.C.

Monuments and memorials to scientists Outdoor sculptures in Washington, D.C.

Sculptures of men in Washington, D.C.

Statues in Washington, D.C.

Foggy Bottom Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from October 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from October 2020 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 08:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Albert Einstein Memorial 10 languages Add topic

