Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Attachment Toggle Attachment subsection 1.1 Behaviours 1.2 Tenets 1.3 Cultural differences 2 Empirical research and theoretical developments 3 Attachment patterns Toggle Attachment patterns subsection 3.1 Secure attachment 3.2 Anxious - ambivalent attachment 3.3 Dismissive - avoidant attachment 3.4 Disorganized - disoriented attachment 3.5 Categorization differences across cultures 3.6 Later patterns and the dynamic-maturational model 3.7 Significance of patterns 4 Changes in attachment during childhood and adolescence 5 Attachment styles in adults Toggle Attachment styles in adults subsection 5.1 Securely attached 5.2 Anxious-preoccupied 5.3 Dismissive-avoidant 5.4 Fearful-avoidant 5.5 Assessing and measuring attachment 5.6 Associations of adult attachment with other traits 6 History Toggle History subsection 6.1 Maternal deprivation 6.2 Formulation of the theory 6.2.1 Ethology 6.2.2 Psychoanalysis 6.2.3 Internal working model 6.2.4 Cybernetics 6.2.5 Cognitive development 6.2.6 Behaviourism 6.2.7 Developments since 1970s 7 Neurobiology of attachment 8 Crime Toggle Crime subsection 8.1 History 8.2 Age distribution of crime 8.3 Types of offences 8.4 Uses within probation practice 9 Practical applications Toggle Practical applications subsection 9.1 Child care policies 9.2 Clinical practice in children 9.2.1 Prevention and treatment 9.2.2 Reactive attachment disorder and attachment disorder 9.3 Clinical practice in adults and families 10 Criticism 11 See also 12 Citations 13 General and cited references 14 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Attachment theory 40 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Madhurâ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Psychological ethological theory For infants and toddlers, the "set-goal" of the behavioural system is to maintain or achieve proximity to attachment figures, usually the parents.

Attachment theory is a psychological and evolutionary framework, concerning the relationships between humans , particularly the importance of early bonds between infants and their primary caregivers. Developed by psychiatrist and psychoanalyst John Bowlby (1907–90), the theory posits that infants need to form a close relationship with at least one primary caregiver to ensure their survival, and to develop healthy social and emotional functioning.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Pivotal aspects of attachment theory include the observation that infants seek proximity to attachment figures, especially during stressful situations.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Secure attachments are formed when caregivers are sensitive and responsive in social interactions , and consistently present, particularly between the ages of six months and two years. As children grow, they use these attachment figures as a secure base from which to explore the world and return to for comfort. The interactions with caregivers form patterns of attachment, which in turn create internal working models that influence future relationships.

[ 4 ] Separation anxiety or grief following the loss of an attachment figure is considered to be a normal and adaptive response for an attached infant.

[ 5 ] Research by developmental psychologist Mary Ainsworth in the 1960s and '70s expanded on Bowlby's work, introducing the concept of the "secure base", impact of maternal responsiveness and sensitivity to infant distress, and identified attachment patterns in infants: secure, avoidant, anxious, and disorganized attachment.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] In the 1980s, attachment theory was extended to adult relationships and attachment in adults , making it applicable beyond early childhood.

[ 8 ] Bowlby's theory integrated concepts from evolutionary biology , object relations theory , control systems theory , ethology , and cognitive psychology , and was fully articulated in his trilogy, Attachment and Loss (1969–82).

[ 9 ] While initially criticized by academic psychologists and psychoanalysts, [ 10 ] attachment theory has become a dominant approach to understanding early social development and has generated extensive research.

[ 11 ] Despite some criticisms related to temperament, social complexity, and the limitations of discrete attachment patterns, the theory's core concepts have been widely accepted and have influenced therapeutic practices and social and childcare policies.

[ 10 ] [ 12 ] Recent critics of attachment theory argue that it overemphasizes maternal influence while overlooking genetic, cultural, and broader familial factors, with studies suggesting that adult attachment is more strongly shaped by genes and individual experiences than by shared upbringing.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Attachment [ edit ] Although it is usual for the mother to be the primary attachment figure, infants will form attachments to any carer who is sensitive and responsive in social interactions with them.

Within attachment theory, attachment means an affectional bond or tie between an individual and an attachment figure (usually a caregiver/guardian). Such bonds may be reciprocal between two adults, but between a child and a caregiver, these bonds are based on the child's need for safety, security, and protection—which is most important in infancy and childhood.

[ 17 ] Attachment theory is not an exhaustive description of human relationships, nor is it synonymous with love and affection, although these may indicate that bonds exist. In child-to-adult relationships, the child's tie is called the "attachment" and the caregiver's reciprocal equivalent is referred to as the "care-giving bond".

[ 18 ] The theory proposes that children attach to carers instinctively, [ 19 ] for the purpose of survival and, ultimately, genetic replication.

[ 18 ] The biological aim is survival and the psychological aim is security.

[ 11 ] The relationship that a child has with their attachment figure is especially important in threatening situations. Having access to a secure figure decreases fear in children when they are presented with threatening situations. Not only is having a decreased level of fear important for general mental stability, but it also implicates how children might react to threatening situations. The presence of a supportive attachment figure is especially important in a child's developmental years.

[ 20 ] In addition to support, attunement (accurate understanding and emotional connection) is crucial in a caregiver-child relationship. If the caregiver is poorly attuned to the child, the child may grow to feel misunderstood and anxious.

[ 21 ] Infants form attachments to any consistent caregiver who is sensitive and responsive in social interactions with them. The quality of social engagement is more influential than the amount of time spent. The biological mother is the usual principal attachment figure, but the role can be assumed by anyone who consistently behaves in a "mothering" way over a period of time. Within attachment theory, this means a set of behaviours that involves engaging in lively social interaction with the infant and responding readily to signals and approaches.

[ 22 ] Nothing in the theory suggests that fathers are not equally likely to become principal attachment figures if they provide most of the child care and related social interaction.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] A secure attachment to a father who is a "secondary attachment figure" may also counter the possible negative effects of an unsatisfactory attachment to a mother who is the primary attachment figure.

[ 25 ] Some infants direct attachment behaviour (proximity seeking) towards more than one attachment figure almost as soon as they start to show discrimination between caregivers; most come to do so during their second year. These figures are arranged hierarchically, with the principal attachment figure at the top.

[ 26 ] The set-goal of the attachment behavioural system is to maintain a bond with an accessible and available attachment figure.

[ 27 ] "Alarm" is the term used for activation of the attachment behavioural system caused by fear of danger. "Anxiety" is the anticipation or fear of being cut off from the attachment figure. If the figure is unavailable or unresponsive, separation distress occurs.

[ 28 ] In infants, physical separation can cause anxiety and anger, followed by sadness and despair. By age three or four, physical separation is no longer such a threat to the child's bond with the attachment figure. Threats to security in older children and adults arise from prolonged absence, breakdowns in communication, emotional unavailability or signs of rejection or abandonment.

[ 27 ] Behaviours [ edit ] Insecure attachment patterns can compromise exploration and the achievement of self-confidence. A securely attached baby is free to concentrate on their environment.

The attachment behavioural system serves to achieve or maintain proximity to the attachment figure.

[ 5 ] Pre-attachment behaviours occur in the first six months of life. During the first phase (the first two months), infants smile, babble, and cry to attract the attention of potential caregivers. Although infants of this age learn to discriminate between caregivers, these behaviours are directed at anyone in the vicinity.

During the second phase (two to six months), the infant discriminates between familiar and unfamiliar adults, becoming more responsive toward the caregiver; following and clinging are added to the range of behaviours. The infant's behaviour toward the caregiver becomes organized on a goal-directed basis to achieve the conditions that make it feel secure.

[ 29 ] By the end of the first year, the infant is able to display a range of attachment behaviours designed to maintain proximity. These manifest as protesting the caregiver's departure, greeting the caregiver's return, clinging when frightened, and following when able.

[ 30 ] With the development of locomotion, the infant begins to use the caregiver or caregivers as a "safe base" from which to explore.

[ 29 ] [ 31 ] : 71 Infant exploration is greater when the caregiver is present because the infant's attachment system is relaxed and it is free to explore. If the caregiver is inaccessible or unresponsive, attachment behaviour is more strongly exhibited.

[ 32 ] Anxiety, fear, illness, and fatigue will cause a child to increase attachment behaviours.

[ 33 ] After the second year, as the child begins to see the caregiver as an independent person, a more complex and goal-corrected partnership is formed.

[ 34 ] Children begin to notice others' goals and feelings and plan their actions accordingly.

For coverage of this topic in Wolves , see Attachment behaviour in wolves .

Tenets [ edit ] Modern attachment theory is based on three principles: [ 35 ] Bonding is an intrinsic human need.

Regulation of emotion and fear to enhance vitality.

Promoting adaptiveness and growth.

Common attachment behaviours and emotions, displayed in most social primates including humans, are adaptive . The long-term evolution of these species has involved selection for social behaviours that make individual or group survival more likely. The commonly observed attachment behaviour of toddlers staying near familiar people would have had safety advantages in the environment of early adaptation and has similar advantages today. Bowlby saw the environment of early adaptation as similar to current hunter-gatherer societies.

[ 36 ] There is a survival advantage in the capacity to sense possibly dangerous conditions such as unfamiliarity, being alone, or rapid approach. According to Bowlby, proximity-seeking to the attachment figure in the face of threat is the "set-goal" of the attachment behavioural system.

[ 37 ] Bowlby's original account of a sensitivity period during which attachments can form of between six months and two to three years has been modified by later researchers. These researchers have shown there is indeed a sensitive period during which attachments will form if possible, but the time frame is broader and the effect less fixed and irreversible than first proposed.

[ 38 ] With further research, authors discussing attachment theory have come to appreciate social development is affected by later as well as earlier relationships. Early steps in attachment take place most easily if the infant has one caregiver, or the occasional care of a small number of other people. According to Bowlby, almost from the beginning, many children have more than one figure toward whom they direct attachment behaviour. These figures are not treated alike; there is a strong bias for a child to direct attachment behaviour mainly toward one particular person. Bowlby used the term "monotropy" to describe this bias.

[ 39 ] Researchers and theorists have abandoned this concept insofar as it may be taken to mean the relationship with the special figure differs qualitatively from that of other figures. Rather, current thinking postulates definite hierarchies of relationships.

[ 10 ] [ 40 ] Early experiences with caregivers gradually give rise to a system of thoughts, memories, beliefs, expectations, emotions, and behaviours about the self and others. This system, called the "internal working model of social relationships", continues to develop with time and experience.

[ 41 ] Internal models regulate, interpret, and predict attachment-related behaviour in the self and the attachment figure. As they develop in line with environmental and developmental changes, they incorporate the capacity to reflect and communicate about past and future attachment relationships.

[ 4 ] They enable the child to handle new types of social interactions; knowing, for example, an infant should be treated differently from an older child, or that interactions with teachers and parents share characteristics. Even interaction with coaches share similar characteristics, as athletes who secure attachment relationships with not only their parents but their coaches will play a role in the growth of athletes in their prospective sport.

[ 42 ] This internal working model continues to develop through adulthood, helping cope with friendships, marriage, and parenthood, all of which involve different behaviours and feelings.

[ 43 ] [ 41 ] The development of attachment is a transactional process. Specific attachment behaviours begin with predictable, apparently innate, behaviours in infancy.

[ 44 ] They change with age in ways determined partly by experiences and partly by situational factors.

[ 45 ] As attachment behaviours change with age, they do so in ways shaped by relationships. A child's behaviour when reunited with a caregiver is determined not only by how the caregiver has treated the child before, but on the history of effects the child has had on the caregiver.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] Cultural differences [ edit ] In Western culture child-rearing, there is a focus on single attachment to primarily the mother. This dyadic model is not the only strategy of attachment producing a secure and emotionally adept child. Having a single, dependably responsive and sensitive caregiver (namely the mother) does not guarantee the ultimate success of the child. Results from Israeli, Dutch and east African studies show children with multiple caregivers grow up not only feeling secure, but developed "more enhanced capacities to view the world from multiple perspectives." [ 48 ] This evidence can be more readily found in hunter-gatherer communities, like those that exist in rural Tanzania.

[ 49 ] In hunter-gatherer communities, in the past and present, mothers are the primary caregivers, but share the maternal responsibility of ensuring the child's survival with a variety of different allomothers . So while the mother is important, she is not the only opportunity for relational attachment a child can make. Several group members (with or without blood relation) contribute to the task of bringing up a child, sharing the parenting role and therefore can be sources of multiple attachment. There is evidence of this communal parenting throughout history that "would have significant implications for the evolution of multiple attachment." [ 50 ] In "non-metropolis" India (where "dual income nuclear families" are more the norm and dyadic mother relationship is) [ clarify ] , where a family normally consists of 3 generations (and sometimes 4: great-grandparents, grandparents, parents, and child or children), the child or children would have four to six caregivers from whom to select their "attachment figure". A child's "uncles and aunts" (parents' siblings and their spouses) also contribute to the child's psycho-social enrichment.

[ 51 ] Although it has been debated for years, and there are differences across cultures, research has shown that the three basic aspects of attachment theory are, to some degree, universal.

[ 52 ] Studies in Israel and Japan resulted in findings which diverge from a number of studies completed in Western Europe and the United States.  The prevailing hypotheses are: 1) that secure attachment is the most desirable state, and the most prevalent; 2) maternal sensitivity influences infant attachment patterns; and 3) specific infant attachments predict later social and cognitive competence.

[ 52 ] Empirical research and theoretical developments [ edit ] John Bowlby initially conceptualized attachment as an evolutionary system that would ensure infant survival.

Mary Ainsworth provided empirical testing through observational studies such as the Strange Situation Experiment.

During the Strange Situation experiment, four participants partake in a series of eight "episodes" of experiences. These participants are a mother, a baby, a stranger and an observer.

The mother, accompanied by the observer, carries the baby into the room and the observer leaves.

The mother puts the baby down in a specified location, then sits quietly in her chair until the baby solicites her attention.

The stranger enters, sits quietly for one minute, then converses with the mother for one minute, and then gradually approaches the baby. The mother then leaves the room.

If the baby is playing with its toys, the stranger merely observes. If the baby is not playing with its toys, the stranger tries to interest the baby in the toys. If the baby is distressed, the stranger tries to comfort the baby.

The mother enters, and pauses in the doorway so that the baby can respond to her presence. The stranger then leaves. After the baby begins to play with its toys again, the mother leaves again and says, "bye-bye".

the baby is left alone for three minutes, unless the baby is so distressed it has to be comforted.

The stranger enters and repeats the same behavior from the fourth episode.

The mother returns, the stranger leaves, and the mother reunites with her baby.

These eight episodes were observed through an adjoining room, and the baby's responses were categorized into different types of attachment behaviours.

[ 53 ] Bretherton (1992) then followed this theoretical development, highlighting Bowlby's interdisciplinary framework. He relied on the concepts of ethology, psychoanalysis, and cognitive science. Ainsworth introduced the systematic classification of attachment styles contingent upon infant caregivers' interactive experiences.

[ 54 ] Building on this foundation, Main and Solomon (1990) extended the original attachment classification to identify a disorganized/disoriented attachment style. They observed infants displaying contradictory or confused behaviors when reunited with a caregiver.

[ 55 ] This further complicated the understanding of attachment patterning and has informed clinical practice and developmental research.

Empirical studies have further classified how early attachment is formed and passed on across generations. Beebe et al. (2010) studied four-month-old mother interactions using microanalytic methods. They determined that coordinated gazes and vocal affect predicted attachment security at twelve months using the Strange Situation Procedure.

[ 56 ] Similarly, Steele et al. (1996) found intergenerational continuity regarding parents' attachment classifications and those of infants.

[ 57 ] Another one of the most influential studies supporting the principle of attachment theory was conducted by Harry Harlow. Harlow’s research with rhesus monkeys demonstrated the critical importance of caregiving and emotional comfort in creating attachment. In these experiments, infant monkeys were separated from their biological mothers and given the choice between two inanimate surrogate mothers: one made of wire and wood and one made of foam and cloth. In addition, the monkeys were assigned one of two conditions: one condition where the wire mother provided milk while the cloth mother had no food to offer, and the other condition where the cloth mother provided food while the wire mother did not. In both conditions, the infant monkeys overwhelmingly preferred the cloth mother, clinging to it for comfort and security even though it did not provide nourishment.

[ 58 ] The infant monkeys' preference highlighted the importance of comfort, warmth, and emotional security over mere sustenance. Harlow’s work provided strong support for Bowlby’s claim that the need for affection and emotional security is a fundamental aspect of earlier development, also influencing later social and emotional outcomes. Clearly, children need more than just food and shelter; they require emotional attunement and a reliable source of comfort to develop a sense of security. This introduces the importance of having a “secure base.” A secure base allows children to confidently explore their environment, knowing that they have a supportive caregiver to return to when distressed. This level of responsiveness, as well as warmth and responsiveness, is critical for successful relationships and attachment.

[ 59 ] The attachment theory has also been extended into the adult relationship domain. Adult romantic attachment has been reviewed by Fraley and Shaver (2000), who advocated that attachment behaviors are observed in infancy. Seeking proximity and secure base responses were also present in adult romantic relationships [ 60 ] This review illustrates how the attachment framework can be applied across the lifespan and highlights ongoing debates about continuity , measurements, and individual differences.

Together, both the theoretical advances and empirical studies underscore the importance of early relational experiences. It also supports the broader application of attachment theory in various contexts across developmental stages and relationships.

Attachment patterns [ edit ] Attachment theory styles The strength of a child's attachment behaviour in a given circumstance does not indicate the "strength" of the attachment bond. Some insecure children will routinely display very pronounced attachment behaviours, while many secure children find that there is no great need to engage in either intense or frequent shows of attachment behaviour.

[ 61 ] Individuals with different attachment styles have different beliefs about romantic love period, availability, trust capability of love partners and love readiness.

[ 62 ] Secure attachment [ edit ] Main article: Secure attachment A toddler who is securely attached to their parent (or other familiar caregiver) will explore freely while the caregiver is present, typically engages with strangers, is often visibly upset when the caregiver departs, and is generally happy to see the caregiver return. The extent of exploration and of distress are affected, however, by the child's temperamental make-up and by situational factors as well as by attachment status. A child's attachment is largely influenced by their primary caregiver's sensitivity to their needs. Parents who consistently (or almost always) respond to their child's needs will create securely attached children. Such children are certain that their parents will be responsive to their needs and communications.

[ 63 ] In the traditional Ainsworth et al. (1978) coding of the Strange Situation , secure infants are denoted as "Group B" infants and they are further subclassified as B1, B2, B3, and B4.

[ 64 ] Although these subgroupings refer to different stylistic responses to the comings and goings of the caregiver, they were not given specific labels by Ainsworth and colleagues, although their descriptive behaviours led others (including students of Ainsworth) to devise a relatively "loose" terminology for these subgroups. B1s have been referred to as "secure-reserved", B2s as "secure-inhibited", B3s as "secure-balanced", and B4s as "secure-reactive". However, in academic publications the classification of infants (if subgroups are denoted) is typically simply "B1" or "B2", although more theoretical and review-oriented papers surrounding attachment theory may use the above terminology. Secure attachment is the most common type of attachment relationship seen throughout societies.

[ 65 ] Securely attached children are best able to explore when they have the knowledge of a secure base (their caregiver) to return to in times of need. When assistance is given, this bolsters the sense of security and also, assuming the parent's assistance is helpful, educates the child on how to cope with the same problem in the future. Therefore, secure attachment can be seen as the most adaptive attachment style. According to some psychological researchers, a child becomes securely attached when the parent is available and able to meet the needs of the child in a responsive and appropriate manner. At infancy and early childhood, if parents are caring and attentive towards their children, those children will be more prone to secure attachment.

[ 66 ] Anxious - ambivalent attachment [ edit ] Anxious - ambivalent attachment is a form of insecure attachment and is also misnamed as "resistant attachment".

[ 65 ] [ 67 ] In general, a child with an anxious - ambivalent pattern of attachment will typically explore little (in the Strange Situation) and is often wary of strangers, even when the parent is present. When the caregiver departs, the child is often highly distressed showing behaviours such as crying or screaming. The child is generally ambivalent when the caregiver returns.

[ 64 ] The anxious - ambivalent strategy is a response to unpredictably responsive caregiving, and the displays of anger (ambivalent resistant, C1) or helplessness (ambivalent passive, C2) towards the caregiver on reunion can be regarded as a conditional strategy for maintaining the availability of the caregiver by preemptively taking control of the interaction.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] The C1 (ambivalent resistant) subtype is coded when "resistant behavior is particularly conspicuous. The mixture of seeking and yet resisting contact and interaction has an unmistakably angry quality and indeed an angry tone may characterize behavior in the preseparation episodes".

[ 64 ] Regarding the C2 (ambivalent passive) subtype, Ainsworth et al. wrote: Perhaps the most conspicuous characteristic of C2 infants is their passivity. Their exploratory behavior is limited throughout the SS and their interactive behaviors are relatively lacking in active initiation. Nevertheless, in the reunion episodes they obviously want proximity to and contact with their mothers, even though they tend to use signalling rather than active approach, and protest against being put down rather than actively resisting release ... In general the C2 baby is not as conspicuously angry as the C1 baby.

[ 64 ] Research done by McCarthy and Taylor (1999) found that children with abusive childhood experiences were more likely to develop ambivalent attachments. The study also found that children with ambivalent attachments were more likely to experience difficulties in maintaining intimate relationships as adults.

[ 70 ] Dismissive - avoidant attachment [ edit ] An infant with a dismissive - avoidant pattern of attachment will avoid or ignore the caregiver—showing little emotion when the caregiver departs or returns. The infant will not explore very much regardless of who is there. Infants classified as dismissive - avoidant (A) represented a puzzle in the early 1970s. They did not exhibit distress on separation, and either ignored the caregiver on their return (A1 subtype) or showed some tendency to approach together with some tendency to ignore or turn away from the caregiver (A2 subtype). Ainsworth and Bell theorized that the apparently unruffled behaviour of the avoidant infants was in fact a mask for distress, a hypothesis later evidenced through studies of the heart-rate of avoidant infants.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] Infants are depicted as dismissive - avoidant when there is: ... conspicuous avoidance of the mother in the reunion episodes which is likely to consist of ignoring her altogether, although there may be some pointed looking away, turning away, or moving away ... If there is a greeting when the mother enters, it tends to be a mere look or a smile ... Either the baby does not approach his mother upon reunion, or they approach in "abortive" fashions with the baby going past the mother, or it tends to only occur after much coaxing ... If picked up, the baby shows little or no contact-maintaining behavior; he tends not to cuddle in; he looks away and he may squirm to get down.

[ 64 ] Ainsworth's narrative records showed that infants avoided the caregiver in the stressful Strange Situation Procedure when they had a history of experiencing rebuff of attachment behaviour. The infant's needs were frequently not met and the infant had come to believe that communication of emotional needs had no influence on the caregiver.

Ainsworth's student Mary Main theorized that avoidant behaviour in the Strange Situation Procedure should be regarded as "a conditional strategy, which paradoxically permits whatever proximity is possible under conditions of maternal rejection" by de-emphasising attachment needs.

[ 73 ] Main proposed that avoidance has two functions for an infant whose caregiver is consistently unresponsive to their needs. Firstly, avoidant behaviour allows the infant to maintain a conditional proximity with the caregiver: close enough to maintain protection, but distant enough to avoid rebuff. Secondly, the cognitive processes organizing avoidant behaviour could help direct attention away from the unfulfilled desire for closeness with the caregiver who is avoiding a situation in which the child is overwhelmed with emotion ("disorganized distress"), and therefore unable to maintain control of themselves and achieve even conditional proximity.

[ 74 ] Disorganized - disoriented attachment [ edit ] Beginning in 1983, Crittenden offered A/C and other new organized classifications (see below). Drawing on records of behaviours discrepant with the A, B and C classifications, a fourth classification was added by Ainsworth's colleague Mary Main.

[ 55 ] In the Strange Situation, the attachment system is expected to be activated by the departure and return of the caregiver. If the behaviour of the infant does not appear to the observer to be coordinated in a smooth way across episodes to achieve either proximity or some relative proximity with the caregiver, then it is considered 'disorganized' as it indicates a disruption or flooding of the attachment system (e.g. by fear). Infant behaviours in the Strange Situation Protocol coded as disorganized/disoriented include overt displays of fear; contradictory behaviours or affects occurring simultaneously or sequentially; stereotypic, asymmetric, misdirected or jerky movements; or freezing and apparent dissociation. Lyons-Ruth has urged, however, that it should be more widely "recognized that 52% of disorganized infants continue to approach the caregiver, seek comfort, and cease their distress without clear ambivalent or avoidant behavior".

[ 75 ] The benefit of this category was hinted at earlier in Ainsworth's own experience finding difficulties in fitting all infant behaviour into the three classifications used in her Baltimore study. Ainsworth and colleagues sometimes observed tense movements such as hunching the shoulders, putting the hands behind the neck and tensely cocking the head, and so on. It was our clear impression that such tension movements signified stress, both because they tended to occur chiefly in the separation episodes and because they tended to be prodromal to crying. Indeed, our hypothesis is that they occur when a child is attempting to control crying, for they tend to vanish if and when crying breaks through.

[ 76 ] Such observations also appeared in the doctoral theses of Ainsworth's students. Crittenden, for example, noted that one abused infant in her doctoral sample was classed as secure (B) by her undergraduate coders because her strange situation behaviour was "without either avoidance or ambivalence, she did show stress-related stereotypic headcocking throughout the strange situation. This pervasive behavior, however, was the only clue to the extent of her stress".

[ 77 ] There is rapidly growing interest in disorganized attachment from clinicians and policy-makers as well as researchers.

[ 78 ] However, the disorganized/disoriented attachment (D) classification has been criticized by some for being too encompassing, including Ainsworth herself.

[ 79 ] In 1990, Ainsworth put in print her blessing for the new 'D' classification, though she urged that the addition be regarded as "open-ended, in the sense that subcategories may be distinguished", as she worried that too many different forms of behaviour might be treated as if they were the same thing.

[ 80 ] Indeed, the D classification puts together infants who use a somewhat disrupted secure (B) strategy with those who seem hopeless and show little attachment behaviour; it also puts together infants who run to hide when they see their caregiver in the same classification as those who show an avoidant (A) strategy on the first reunion and then an ambivalent-resistant (C) strategy on the second reunion. Perhaps responding to such concerns, George and Solomon have divided among indices of disorganized/disoriented attachment (D) in the Strange Situation, treating some of the behaviours as a 'strategy of desperation' and others as evidence that the attachment system has been flooded (e.g. by fear, or anger).

[ 81 ] Crittenden also argues that some behaviour classified as Disorganized/disoriented can be regarded as more 'emergency' versions of the avoidant and/or ambivalent/resistant strategies, and function to maintain the protective availability of the caregiver to some degree. Sroufe et al. have agreed that "even disorganized attachment behaviour (simultaneous approach-avoidance; freezing, etc.) enables a degree of proximity in the face of a frightening or unfathomable parent".

[ 82 ] However, "the presumption that many indices of 'disorganization' are aspects of organized patterns does not preclude acceptance of the notion of disorganization, especially in cases where the complexity and dangerousness of the threat are beyond children's capacity for response." [ 83 ] For example, "Children placed in care, especially more than once, often have intrusions. In videos of the Strange Situation Procedure, they tend to occur when a rejected/neglected child approaches the stranger in an intrusion of desire for comfort, then loses muscular control and falls to the floor, overwhelmed by the intruding fear of the unknown, potentially dangerous, strange person." [ 84 ] Main and Hesse [ 85 ] found most of the mothers of these children had suffered major losses or other trauma shortly before or after the birth of the infant and had reacted by becoming severely depressed.

[ 86 ] In fact, fifty-six per cent of mothers who had lost a parent by death before they completed high school had children with disorganized attachments.

[ 85 ] Subsequent studies, while emphasising the potential importance of unresolved loss, have qualified these findings.

[ 87 ] For example, Solomon and George found unresolved loss in the mother tended to be associated with disorganized attachment in their infant primarily when they had also experienced an unresolved trauma in their life prior to the loss.

[ 88 ] Categorization differences across cultures [ edit ] Across different cultures deviations from the Strange Situation Protocol have been observed.  A Japanese study in 1986 (Takahashi) studied 60 Japanese mother-infant pairs and compared them with Ainsworth's distributional pattern. Although the ranges for securely attached and insecurely attached had no significant differences in proportions, the Japanese insecure group consisted of only resistant children, with no children categorized as avoidant.  This may be because the Japanese child rearing philosophy stressed close mother infant bonds more so than in Western cultures.  In Northern Germany, Grossmann et al. (Grossmann, Huber, & Wartner, 1981; Grossmann, Spangler, Suess, & Unzner, 1985) replicated the Ainsworth Strange Situation with 46 mother infant pairs and found a different distribution of attachment classifications with a high number of avoidant infants: 52% avoidant, 34% secure, and 13% resistant (Grossmann et al., 1985).  Another study in Israel found there was a high frequency of an ambivalent pattern, which according to Grossman et al. (1985) could be attributed to a greater parental push toward children's independence.

Later patterns and the dynamic-maturational model [ edit ] Techniques have been developed to guide a child to verbalize their state of mind with respect to attachment. One such is the "stem story", in which a child receives the beginning of a story that raises attachment issues and is asked to complete it. This is modified for older children, adolescents and adults, where semi-structured interviews are used instead, and the way content is delivered may be as significant as the content itself.

[ 11 ] However, there are no substantially validated measures of attachment for middle childhood or early adolescence (from 7 to 13 years of age).

[ 89 ] Some studies of older children have identified further attachment classifications. Main and Cassidy observed that disorganized behaviour in infancy can develop into a child using caregiver-controlling or punitive behaviour to manage a helpless or dangerously unpredictable caregiver. In these cases, the child's behaviour is organized, but the behaviour is treated by researchers as a form of disorganization, since the hierarchy in the family no longer follows parenting authority in that scenario.

[ 90 ] American psychologist Patricia McKinsey Crittenden has elaborated classifications of further forms of avoidant and ambivalent attachment behaviour, as seen in her dynamic-maturational model of attachment and adaptation (DMM). These include the caregiving and punitive behaviours also identified by Main and Cassidy (termed A3 and C3, respectively), but also other patterns such as compulsive compliance with the wishes of a threatening parent (A4).

[ 91 ] Crittenden's ideas developed from Bowlby's proposal: "Given certain adverse circumstances during childhood, the selective exclusion of information of certain sorts may be adaptive. Yet, when during adolescence and adulthood the situation changes, the persistent exclusion of the same forms of information may become maladaptive".

[ 92 ] Crittenden theorizes the human experience of danger comprise two basic components: [ 93 ] Emotions provoked by the potential for danger, which Crittenden refers to as "affective information." In childhood, the unexplained absence of an attachment figure would cause these emotions. A strategy an infant faced with insensitive or rejecting parenting may use to maintain availability of the attachment figure is to repress emotional information that could result in rejection by said attachment figure.

[ 94 ] Causal or other sequentially ordered knowledge about the potential for safety or danger, which would include awareness of behaviours that indicate whether an attachment figure is available as a secure haven. If the infant represses knowledge that the caregiver is not a reliable source of protection and safety, they may use clingy and/or aggressive behaviour to demand attention and potentially increase the availability of an attachment figure who otherwise displays inconsistent or misleading responses to the infant's attachment behaviours.

[ 95 ] Crittenden proposes both kinds of information can be split off from consciousness or behavioural expression as a 'strategy' to maintain the availability of an attachment figure (see disorganized/disoriented attachment for type distinctions). Type A strategies split off emotional information about feeling threatened, and Type C strategies split off temporally-sequenced knowledge about how and why the attachment figure is available.

[ 96 ] In contrast, Type B strategies use both kinds of information without much distortion.

[ 97 ] For example, a toddler may have come to depend upon a Type C strategy of tantrums to maintain an unreliable attachment figure's availability, which may cause the attachment figure to respond appropriately to the child's attachment behaviours. As a result of learning the attachment figure is becoming more reliable, the toddler's reliance on coercive behaviours is reduced, and a more secure attachment may develop.

[ 98 ] Significance of patterns [ edit ] Research based on data from longitudinal studies, such as the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Study of Early Child Care and the Minnesota Study of Risk and Adaption from Birth to Adulthood, and from cross-sectional studies, consistently shows associations between early attachment classifications and peer relationships as to both quantity and quality. Lyons-Ruth, for example, found that "for each additional withdrawing behavior displayed by mothers in relation to their infant's attachment cues in the Strange Situation Procedure, the likelihood of clinical referral by service providers was increased by 50%." [ 99 ] There is an extensive body of research demonstrating a significant association between attachment organizations and children's functioning across multiple domains.

[ 100 ] Early insecure attachment does not necessarily predict difficulties, but it is a liability for the child, particularly if similar parental behaviours continue throughout childhood.

[ 101 ] Compared to that of securely attached children, the adjustment of insecure children in many spheres of life is not as soundly based, putting their future relationships in jeopardy. Although the link is not fully established by research and there are other influences besides attachment, secure infants are more likely to become socially competent than their insecure peers. Relationships formed with peers influence the acquisition of social skills, intellectual development and the formation of social identity. Classification of children's peer status (popular, neglected or rejected) has been found to predict subsequent adjustment.

[ 11 ] Insecure children, particularly avoidant children, are especially vulnerable to family risk. Their social and behavioural problems increase or decline with deterioration or improvement in parenting. However, an early secure attachment appears to have a lasting protective function.

[ 102 ] As with attachment to parental figures, subsequent experiences may alter the course of development.

[ 11 ] Studies have suggested that infants with a high-risk for autism spectrum disorders (ASD) may express attachment security differently from infants with a low-risk for ASD.

[ 103 ] Behavioural problems and social competence in insecure children increase or decline with deterioration or improvement in quality of parenting and the degree of risk in the family environment.

[ 102 ] Some authors have questioned the idea that a taxonomy of categories representing a qualitative difference in attachment relationships can be developed. Examination of data from 1,139 15-month-olds showed that variation in attachment patterns was continuous rather than grouped.

[ 104 ] This criticism introduces important questions for attachment typologies and the mechanisms behind apparent types. However, it has relatively little relevance for attachment theory itself, which "neither requires nor predicts discrete patterns of attachment." [ 105 ] There is some evidence that gender differences in attachment patterns of adaptive significance begin to emerge in middle childhood. There has been a common tendency observed by researchers that males demonstrate a greater tendency to engage in criminal behaviour which is suspected to be related to males being more likely to experience inadequate early attachments to primary caregivers.

[ 106 ] Insecure attachment and early psycho social stress indicate the presence of environmental risk (for example poverty, mental illness, instability, minority status, violence). Environmental risk can cause insecure attachment, while also favouring the development of strategies for earlier reproduction. Different reproductive strategies have different adaptive values for males and females: Insecure males tend to adopt avoidant strategies, whereas insecure females tend to adopt anxious/ambivalent strategies, unless they are in a very high risk environment.

Adrenarche is proposed as the endocrine mechanism underlying the reorganization of insecure attachment in middle childhood.

[ 107 ] Changes in attachment during childhood and adolescence [ edit ] Childhood and adolescence allows the development of an internal working model useful for forming attachments. This internal working model is related to the individual's state of mind which develops with respect to attachment generally and explores how attachment functions in relationship dynamics based on childhood and adolescent experience. The organization of an internal working model is generally seen as leading to more stable attachments in those who develop such a model, rather than those who rely more on the individual's state of mind alone in forming new attachments.

[ 108 ] Age, cognitive growth, and continued social experience advance the development and complexity of the internal working model. Attachment-related behaviours lose some characteristics typical of the infant-toddler period and take on age-related tendencies. The preschool period involves the use of negotiation and bargaining.

[ 109 ] For example, four-year-olds are not distressed by separation if they and their caregiver have already negotiated a shared plan for the separation and reunion.

[ 110 ] Ideally, these social skills become incorporated into the internal working model to be used with other children and later with adult peers. As children move into the school years at about six years old, most develop a goal-corrected partnership with parents, in which each partner is willing to compromise in order to maintain a gratifying relationship.

[ 109 ] By middle childhood, the goal of the attachment behavioural system has changed from proximity to the attachment figure to availability. Generally, a child is content with longer separations, provided contact—or the possibility of physically reuniting, if needed—is available. Attachment behaviours such as clinging and following decline and self-reliance increases. By middle childhood (ages 7–11), there may be a shift toward mutual coregulation of secure-base contact in which caregiver and child negotiate methods of maintaining communication and supervision as the child moves toward a greater degree of independence.

[ 109 ] The attachment system used by adolescents is seen as a "safety regulating system" whose main function is to promote physical and psychological safety. There are 2 different events that can trigger the attachment system. Those triggers include, the presence of a potential danger or stress, internal and external, and a threat of accessibility and/or availability of an attachment figure. The ultimate goal of the attachment system is security, so during a time of danger or inaccessibility the behavioural system accepts felt security in the context of the availability of protection. By adolescence we are able to find security through a variety of things, such as food, exercise, and social media.

[ 111 ] Felt security can be achieved through a number of ways, and often without the physical presence of the attachment figure. Higher levels of maturity allows adolescent teens to more capably interact with their environment on their own because the environment is perceived as less threatening. Adolescents teens will also see an increase in cognitive, emotional and behavioural maturity that dictates whether or not teens are less likely to experience conditions that activate their need for an attachment figure. For example, when teenagers get sick and stay home from school, surely they want their parents to be home so they can take care of them, but they are also able to stay home by themselves without experiencing serious amounts of distress.

[ 112 ] Additionally, the social environment that a school fosters impacts adolescents attachment behaviour, even if these same adolescents have not had issues with attachment behaviour previously. High schools that have a permissive environment compared to an authoritative environment promote positive attachment behaviour. For example, when students feel connected to their teachers and peers because of their permissive schooling environment, they are less likely to skip school. Positive-attachment behaviour in high schools have important implications on how a school's environment should be structured.

[ 113 ] Here are the attachment style differences during adolescence: [ 114 ] Secure adolescents are expected to hold their mothers at a higher rate than all other support figures, including father, significant others, and best friends.

Insecure adolescents identify more strongly with their peers than their parents as their primary attachment figures. Their friends are seen as a significantly strong source of attachment support.

Dismissing adolescents rate their parents as a less significant source of attachment support and would consider themselves as their primary attachment figure.

Preoccupied adolescents would rate their parents as their primary source of attachment support and would consider themselves as a much less significant source of attachment support.

[ 114 ] Attachment styles in adults [ edit ] Main article: Attachment in adults See also: Attachment measures Attachment theory was extended to adult romantic relationships in the late 1980s by Cindy Hazan and Phillip Shaver .

[ 115 ] Four styles of attachment have been identified in adults: secure, anxious-preoccupied, dismissive-avoidant and fearful-avoidant. These roughly correspond to infant classifications: secure, insecure-ambivalent, insecure-avoidant and disorganized/disoriented.

[ 116 ] Securely attached [ edit ] Securely attached adults have been "linked to a high need for achievement and a low fear of failure (Elliot & Reis, 2003)". They will positively approach a task with the goal of mastering it and have an appetite for exploration in achievement settings (Elliot & Reis, 2003). Research shows that securely attached adults have a "low level of personal distress and high levels of concern for others".

[ 117 ] Due to their high rates of self-efficacy , securely attached adults typically do not hesitate to remove a person having a negative impact from problematic situations they are facing.

[ 117 ] This calm response is representative of the securely attached adult's emotionally regulated response to threats that many studies have supported in the face of diverse situations. Adult secure attachment comes from an individual's early connection with their caregiver(s), genes and their romantic experiences.

[ 118 ] Within romantic relationships, a securely attached adult will appear in the following ways: excellent conflict resolution, mentally flexible, effective communicators, avoidance of manipulation, comfortable with closeness without fearfulness of being enmeshed, quickly forgiving, viewing sex and emotional intimacy as one, believing they can positively impact their relationship, and caring for their partner in the way they want to be cared for. In summation, they are great partners who treat their partners very well, as they are not afraid to give positively and ask for their needs to be met. Securely attached adults believe that there are "many potential partners that would be responsive to their needs", and if they come across an individual who is not meeting their needs, they will typically lose interest quickly.

[ 118 ] Anxious-preoccupied [ edit ] Anxious preoccupied adults seek high levels of intimacy, approval and responsiveness from partners, becoming overly dependent. They tend to be less trusting, have less positive views about themselves than their partners, and may exhibit high levels of emotional expressiveness, worry and impulsiveness in their relationships. The anxiety that adults feel prevents the establishment of satisfactory defence exclusion. Thus, it is possible that individuals that have been anxiously attached to their attachment figure or figures have not been able to develop sufficient defences against separation anxiety. Because of their lack of preparation these individuals will then overreact to the anticipation of separation or the actual separation from their attachment figure. The anxiety comes from an individual's intense and/or unstable relationship that leaves the anxious or preoccupied individual relatively defenceless.

[ 119 ] In terms of adult relationships, if an adult experiences this inconsistent behaviour from their romantic partner or acquaintance, they might develop some of the aspects of this attachment type. Besides, insecurity and distress about relationships can be driven by individuals who exhibit inconsistent connection or emotionally abusive behaviours.

[ 120 ] However, a secure relationship can also reduce anxious behaviour and be a resource for safety and support.

[ 121 ] Dismissive-avoidant [ edit ] Dismissive-avoidant adults desire a high level of independence, often appearing to avoid attachment altogether.

[ 122 ] They view themselves as self-sufficient, invulnerable to attachment feelings and not needing close relationships.

[ 123 ] They tend to suppress their feelings, dealing with conflict by distancing themselves from partners of whom they often have a poor opinion.

[ 124 ] Adults lack the interest of forming close relationships and maintaining emotional closeness with the people around them. They have a great amount of distrust in others, but at the same time possess a positive model of self; they would prefer to invest in their own ego skills. They try to create high levels of self-esteem by investing disproportionately in their abilities or accomplishments. These adults maintain their positive views of self, based on their personal achievements and competence rather than searching for and feeling acceptance from others. These adults will explicitly reject or minimize the importance of emotional attachment and passively avoid relationships when they feel as though they are becoming too close. They strive for self-reliance and independence. When it comes to the opinions of others about themselves, they are very indifferent and are relatively hesitant to internalize positive feedback from their peers. Dismissive avoidance is considered to be the result of defensive deactivation and disconnection to avoid potential rejection, and is in some cases amplified by a genuine disinterest in social connection.

[ 125 ] Adults with dismissive-avoidant patterns are less likely to seek social support than other attachment styles.

[ 126 ] They are likely to fear intimacy and lack confidence in others.

[ 127 ] [ 128 ] Because of their distrust they cannot be convinced that other people have the ability to deliver emotional support.

[ 125 ] Under a high cognitive load, however, dismissive-avoidant adults appear to have a lowered ability to suppress difficult attachment-related emotions, as well difficulty maintaining positive self-representations.

[ 129 ] This suggests that hidden vulnerabilities may underlie an active denial process.

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] Fearful-avoidant [ edit ] Fearful-avoidant adults have mixed feelings about close relationships, both desiring and feeling uncomfortable with emotional closeness. The dangerous part about the contrast between wanting to form social relationships while simultaneously fearing the relationship is that it creates mental instability. This mental instability then translates into mistrusting the relationships they do form and also viewing themselves as unworthy. Furthermore, fearful-avoidant adults also have a less pleasant outlook on life compared to anxious-preoccupied and dismissive avoidant groups.

[ 131 ] Like dismissive-avoidant adults, fearful-avoidant adults tend to seek less intimacy, suppressing their feelings.

[ 8 ] [ 132 ] [ 133 ] [ 134 ] According to research studies, an individual with a fearful avoidant attachment might have had childhood trauma or persistently negative perceptions and actions from their family members. Apart from these, genetic factors and personality may also have an impact on how an individual behaves with parents as well as how they understand their relationships in their adulthood.

[ 135 ] Assessing and measuring attachment [ edit ] Two main aspects of adult attachment have been studied. The organization and stability of the mental working models that underlie the attachment styles is explored by social psychologists interested in romantic attachment.

[ 136 ] [ 137 ] Developmental psychologists interested in the individual's state of mind with respect to attachment generally explore how attachment functions in relationship dynamics and impacts relationship outcomes. The organization of mental working models is more stable while the individual's state of mind with respect to attachment fluctuates more. Some authors have suggested that adults do not hold a single set of working models. Instead, on one level they have a set of rules and assumptions about attachment relationships in general. On another level they hold information about specific relationships or relationship events. Information at different levels need not be consistent. Individuals can therefore hold different internal working models for different relationships.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] There are a number of different measures of adult attachment, the most common being self-report questionnaires and coded interviews based on the Adult Attachment Interview . The various measures were developed primarily as research tools, for different purposes and addressing different domains, for example romantic relationships, platonic relationships, parental relationships or peer relationships. Some classify an adult's state of mind with respect to attachment and attachment patterns by reference to childhood experiences, while others assess relationship behaviours and security regarding parents and peers.

[ 139 ] Associations of adult attachment with other traits [ edit ] Adult attachment styles are related to individual differences in the ways in which adults experience and manage their emotions. Recent meta-analyses link insecure attachment styles to lower emotional intelligence [ 140 ] and lower trait mindfulness.

[ 141 ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of attachment theory Maternal deprivation [ edit ] Main article: Maternal deprivation The early thinking of the object relations school of psychoanalysis , particularly Melanie Klein , influenced Bowlby. However, he profoundly disagreed with the prevalent psychoanalytic belief that infants' responses relate to their internal fantasy life rather than real-life events. As Bowlby formulated his concepts, he was influenced by case studies on disturbed and delinquent children, such as those of William Goldfarb published in 1943 and 1945.

[ 142 ] [ 143 ] Prayer time in the Five Points House of Industry residential nursery, 1888. The maternal deprivation hypothesis published in 1951 spurred a shift away from the use of residential nurseries in favour of foster homes.

[ 144 ] Bowlby's contemporary René Spitz observed separated children's grief, proposing that " psychotoxic " results were brought about by inappropriate experiences of early care.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] A strong influence was the work of social worker and psychoanalyst James Robertson who filmed the effects of separation on children in hospital. He and Bowlby collaborated in making the 1952 documentary film A Two-Year Old Goes to the Hospital which was instrumental in a campaign to alter hospital restrictions on visits by parents.

[ 147 ] In his 1951 monograph for the World Health Organization , Maternal Care and Mental Health , Bowlby put forward the hypothesis that "the infant and young child should experience a warm, intimate, and continuous relationship with his mother in which both find satisfaction and enjoyment", the lack of which may have significant and irreversible mental health consequences. This was also published as Child Care and the Growth of Love for public consumption. The central proposition was influential but highly controversial.

[ 148 ] At the time there was limited empirical data and no comprehensive theory to account for such a conclusion.

[ 149 ] Nevertheless, Bowlby's theory sparked considerable interest in the nature of early relationships, giving a strong impetus to, (in the words of Mary Ainsworth), a "great body of research" in an extremely difficult, complex area.

[ 148 ] Bowlby's work (and Robertson's films) caused a virtual revolution in a hospital visiting by parents, hospital provision for children's play, educational and social needs, and the use of residential nurseries. Over time, orphanages were abandoned in favour of foster care or family-style homes in most developed countries.

[ 144 ] Bowlby's work about parental provisions after child birth implicates that maternal deprivation negatively influences the attachment behaviour trajectory of a child's life. If a mother experiences post-partum anxiety, stress, or depression, the attachment they have with their child can be disrupted. It is important for pregnant women to have mental-health support pre and post-partum because mental illness often results in low feelings of attachment to their infant.

[ 150 ] Formulation of the theory [ edit ] Following the publication of Maternal Care and Mental Health , Bowlby sought new understanding from the fields of evolutionary biology, ethology, developmental psychology , cognitive science and control systems theory. He formulated the innovative proposition that mechanisms underlying an infant's emotional tie to the caregiver(s) emerged as a result of evolutionary pressure . He set out to develop a theory of motivation and behaviour control built on science rather than Freud's psychic energy model. Bowlby argued that with attachment theory he had made good the "deficiencies of the data and the lack of theory to link alleged cause and effect" of Maternal Care and Mental Health .

[ 151 ] Ethology [ edit ] Bowlby's attention was drawn to ethology in the early 1950s when he read Konrad Lorenz 's work.

[ 152 ] Other important influences were ethologists Nikolaas Tinbergen and Robert Hinde .

[ 153 ] Bowlby subsequently collaborated with Hinde.

[ 154 ] In 1953 Bowlby stated "the time is ripe for a unification of psychoanalytic concepts with those of ethology, and to pursue the rich vein of research which this union suggests." [ 155 ] Konrad Lorenz had examined the phenomenon of " imprinting ", a behaviour characteristic of some birds and mammals which involves rapid learning of recognition by the young, of a conspecific or comparable object. After recognition comes a tendency to follow.

This bottle-fed young moose has developed an attachment to its caregiver (at Kostroma Moose Farm ).

Certain types of learning are possible, respective to each applicable type of learning, only within a limited age range known as a critical period . Bowlby's concepts included the idea that attachment involved learning from experience during a limited age period, influenced by adult behaviour. He did not apply the imprinting concept in its entirety to human attachment. However, he considered that attachment behaviour was best explained as instinctive, combined with the effect of experience, stressing the readiness the child brings to social interactions.

[ 156 ] Over time it became apparent there were more differences than similarities between attachment theory and imprinting so the analogy was dropped.

[ 10 ] Ethologists expressed concern about the adequacy of some research on which attachment theory was based, particularly the generalization to humans from animal studies.

[ 157 ] [ 158 ] Schur, discussing Bowlby's use of ethological concepts (pre-1960) commented that concepts used in attachment theory had not kept up with changes in ethology itself.

[ 159 ] Ethologists and others writing in the 1960s and 1970s questioned and expanded the types of behaviour used as indications of attachment.

[ 160 ] Observational studies of young children in natural settings provided other behaviours that might indicate attachment; for example, staying within a predictable distance of the mother without effort on her part and picking up small objects, bringing them to the mother but not to others.

[ 161 ] Although ethologists tended to be in agreement with Bowlby, they pressed for more data, objecting to psychologists writing as if there were an "entity which is 'attachment', existing over and above the observable measures." [ 162 ] Robert Hinde considered "attachment behaviour system" to be an appropriate term which did not offer the same problems "because it refers to postulated control systems that determine the relations between different kinds of behaviour." [ 163 ] Psychoanalysis [ edit ] Evacuation of smiling Japanese school children in World War II from the book Road to Catastrophe Psychoanalytic concepts influenced Bowlby's view of attachment, in particular, the observations by Anna Freud and Dorothy Burlingham of young children separated from familiar caregivers during World War II.

[ 164 ] However, Bowlby rejected psychoanalytical explanations for early infant bonds including " drive theory " in which the motivation for attachment derives from gratification of hunger and libidinal drives. He called this the " cupboard-love " theory of relationships. In his view it failed to see attachment as a psychological bond in its own right rather than an instinct derived from feeding or sexuality.

[ 165 ] Based on ideas of primary attachment and Neo-Darwinism , Bowlby identified what he saw as fundamental flaws in psychoanalysis: the overemphasis of internal dangers rather than external threat, and the view of the development of personality via linear phases with regression to fixed points accounting for psychological distress. Bowlby instead posited that several lines of development were possible, the outcome of which depended on the interaction between the organism and the environment. In attachment this would mean that although a developing child has a propensity to form attachments, the nature of those attachments depends on the environment to which the child is exposed.

[ 166 ] From early in the development of attachment theory there was criticism of the theory's lack of congruence with various branches of psychoanalysis. Bowlby's decisions left him open to criticism from well-established thinkers working on similar problems.

[ 167 ] [ 168 ] [ 169 ] Internal working model [ edit ] The philosopher Kenneth Craik had noted the ability of thought to predict events. He stressed the survival value of natural selection for this ability. A key component of attachment theory is the attachment behaviour system where certain behaviours have a predictable outcome (i.e. proximity) and serve as self-preservation method (i.e. protection).

[ 170 ] All taking place outside of an individual's awareness,  This internal working model allows a person to try out alternatives mentally, using knowledge of the past while responding to the present and future. Bowlby applied Craik's ideas to attachment, when other psychologists were applying these concepts to adult perception and cognition.

[ 171 ] Infants absorb all sorts of complex social-emotional information from the social interactions that they observe. They notice the helpful and hindering behaviours of one person to another. From these observations they develop expectations of how two characters should behave, known as a "secure base script." These scripts provide as a template of how attachment related events should unfold and they are the building blocks of ones internal working models.

[ 170 ] An infant's internal working model is developed in response to the infant's experience based internal working models of self, and environment, with emphasis on the caregiving environment and the outcomes of their proximity-seeking behaviours. Theoretically, secure child and adult script, would allow for an attachment situation where one person successfully utilizes another as a secure base from which to explore and as a safe haven in times of distress. In contrast, insecure individuals would create attachment situations with more complications.

[ 170 ] For example, If the caregiver is accepting of these proximity-seeking behaviours and grants access, the infant develops a secure organization; if the caregiver consistently denies the infant access, an avoidant organization develops; and if the caregiver inconsistently grants access, an ambivalent organization develops.

[ 172 ] In retrospect, internal working models are constant with and reflect the primary relationship with our caregivers. Childhood attachment directly influences our adult relationships.

[ 173 ] A parent's internal working model that is operative in the attachment relationship with her infant can be accessed by examining the parent's mental representations.

[ 174 ] [ 175 ] Recent research has demonstrated that the quality of maternal attributions as markers of maternal mental representations can be associated with particular forms of maternal psychopathology and can be altered in a relative short time-period by targeted psychotherapeutic intervention.

[ 176 ] Cybernetics [ edit ] The theory of control systems ( cybernetics ), developing during the 1930s and 1940s, influenced Bowlby's thinking.

[ 177 ] The young child's need for proximity to the attachment figure was seen as balancing homeostatically with the need for exploration. (Bowlby compared this process to physiological homeostasis whereby, for example, blood pressure is kept within limits). The actual distance maintained by the child would vary as the balance of needs changed. For example, the approach of a stranger, or an injury, would cause the child exploring at a distance to seek proximity. The child's goal is not an object (the caregiver) but a state; maintenance of the desired distance from the caregiver depending on circumstances.

[ 1 ] Cognitive development [ edit ] Bowlby's reliance on Piaget 's theory of cognitive development gave rise to questions about object permanence (the ability to remember an object that is temporarily absent) in early attachment behaviours. An infant's ability to discriminate strangers and react to the mother's absence seemed to occur months earlier than Piaget suggested would be cognitively possible.

[ 178 ] More recently, it has been noted that the understanding of mental representation has advanced so much since Bowlby's day that present views can be more specific than those of Bowlby's time.

[ 179 ] Behaviourism [ edit ] In 1969, Gerwitz discussed how mother and child could provide each other with positive reinforcement experiences through their mutual attention, thereby learning to stay close together. This explanation would make it unnecessary to posit innate human characteristics fostering attachment.

[ 180 ] Learning theory, ( behaviourism ), saw attachment as a remnant of dependency with the quality of attachment being merely a response to the caregiver's cues. The main predictors of attachment quality are parents being sensitive and responsive to their children. When parents interact with their infants in a warm and nurturing manner, their attachment quality increases. The way that parents interact with their children at four months is related to attachment behaviour at 12 months, thus it is important for parents' sensitivity and responsiveness to remain stable. The lack of sensitivity and responsiveness increases the likelihood for attachment disorders to development in children.

[ 181 ] Behaviourists saw behaviours like crying as a random activity meaning nothing until reinforced by a caregiver's response. To behaviourists, frequent responses would result in more crying. To attachment theorists, crying is an inborn attachment behaviour to which the caregiver must respond if the infant is to develop emotional security. Conscientious responses produce security which enhances autonomy and results in less crying. Ainsworth's research in Baltimore supported the attachment theorists' view.

[ 182 ] In the last decade, behaviour analysts have constructed models of attachment based on the importance of contingent relationships. These behaviour analytic models have received some support from research [ 183 ] and meta-analytic reviews.

[ 184 ] Developments since 1970s [ edit ] In the 1970s, problems with viewing attachment as a trait (stable characteristic of an individual) rather than as a type of behaviour with organizing functions and outcomes, led some authors to the conclusion that attachment behaviours were best understood in terms of their functions in the child's life.

[ 185 ] This way of thinking saw the secure base concept as central to attachment theory's logic, coherence, and status as an organizational construct.

[ 186 ] Following this argument, the assumption that attachment is expressed identically in all humans cross-culturally was examined.

[ 187 ] The research showed that though there were cultural differences, the three basic patterns, secure, avoidant and ambivalent, can be found in every culture in which studies have been undertaken, even where communal sleeping arrangements are the norm. The selection of the secure pattern is found in the majority of children across cultures studied. This follows logically from the fact that attachment theory provides for infants to adapt to changes in the environment, selecting optimal behavioural strategies.

[ 188 ] How attachment is expressed shows cultural variations which need to be ascertained before studies can be undertaken; for example Gusii infants are greeted with a handshake rather than a hug. Securely attached Gusii infants anticipate and seek this contact. There are also differences in the distribution of insecure patterns based on cultural differences in child-rearing practices.

[ 188 ] The scholar Michael Rutter in 1974 studied the importance of distinguishing between the consequences of attachment deprivation upon intellectual retardation in children and lack of development in the emotional growth in children.

[ 189 ] Rutter's conclusion was that a careful delineation of maternal attributes needed to be identified and differentiated for progress in the field to continue.

The biggest challenge to the notion of the universality of attachment theory came from studies conducted in Japan where the concept of amae plays a prominent role in describing family relationships. Arguments revolved around the appropriateness of the use of the Strange Situation procedure where amae is practised. Ultimately research tended to confirm the universality hypothesis of attachment theory.

[ 188 ] Most recently a 2007 study conducted in Sapporo in Japan found attachment distributions consistent with global norms using the six-year Main and Cassidy scoring system for attachment classification.

[ 190 ] [ 191 ] Critics in the 1990s such as J. R. Harris , Steven Pinker and Jerome Kagan were generally concerned with the concept of infant determinism ( nature versus nurture ), stressing the effects of later experience on personality.

[ 192 ] [ 193 ] [ 194 ] Building on the work on temperament of Stella Chess , Kagan rejected almost every assumption on which attachment theory's cause was based. Kagan argued that heredity was far more important than the transient developmental effects of early environment. For example, a child with an inherently difficult temperament would not elicit sensitive behavioural responses from a caregiver. The debate spawned considerable research and analysis of data from the growing number of longitudinal studies. Subsequent research has not borne out Kagan's argument, possibly suggesting that it is the caregiver's behaviours that form the child's attachment style, although how this style is expressed may differ with the child's temperament.

[ 195 ] Harris and Pinker put forward the notion that the influence of parents had been much exaggerated, arguing that socialization took place primarily in peer groups. H. Rudolph Schaffer concluded that parents and peers had different functions, fulfilling distinctive roles in children's development.

[ 196 ] Psychoanalyst/psychologists Peter Fonagy and Mary Target have attempted to bring attachment theory and psychoanalysis into a closer relationship through cognitive science as mentalization . Mentalization, or theory of mind, is the capacity of human beings to guess with some accuracy what thoughts, emotions and intentions lie behind behaviours as subtle as facial expression.

[ 197 ] It has been speculated that this connection between theory of mind and the internal working model may open new areas of study, leading to alterations in attachment theory.

[ 198 ] Since the late 1980s, there has been a developing rapprochement between attachment theory and psychoanalysis, based on common ground as elaborated by attachment theorists and researchers, and a change in what psychoanalysts consider to be central to psychoanalysis.

Object relations models which emphasise the autonomous need for a relationship have become dominant and are linked to a growing recognition in psychoanalysis of the importance of infant development in the context of relationships and internalized representations. Psychoanalysis has recognized the formative nature of a child's early environment including the issue of childhood trauma. A psychoanalytically based exploration of the attachment system and an accompanying clinical approach has emerged together with a recognition of the need for measurement of outcomes of interventions.

[ 199 ] One focus of attachment research has been the difficulties of children whose attachment history was poor, including those with extensive non-parental child care experiences. Concern with the effects of child care was intense during the so-called "day care wars" of the late-20th century, during which some authors stressed the deleterious effects of day care.

[ 200 ] As a result of this controversy, training of child care professionals has come to stress attachment issues, including the need for relationship-building by the assignment of a child to a specific care-giver. Although only high-quality child care settings are likely to provide this, more infants in child care receive attachment-friendly care than in the past.

[ 201 ] A natural experiment permitted extensive study of attachment issues as researchers followed thousands of Romanian orphans adopted into Western families after the end of the Nicolae Ceaușescu regime. The English and Romanian Adoptees Study Team, led by Michael Rutter , followed some of the children into their teens, attempting to unravel the effects of poor attachment, adoption, new relationships, physical problems and medical issues associated with their early lives. Studies of these adoptees, whose initial conditions were shocking, yielded reason for optimism as many of the children developed quite well. Researchers noted that separation from familiar people is only one of many factors that help to determine the quality of development.

[ 202 ] Although higher rates of atypical insecure attachment patterns were found compared to native-born or early-adopted samples, 70% of later-adopted children exhibited no marked or severe attachment disorder behaviours.

[ 100 ] Authors considering attachment in non-Western cultures have noted the connection of attachment theory with Western family and child care patterns characteristic of Bowlby's time.

[ 203 ] As children's experience of care changes, so may attachment-related experiences. For example, changes in attitudes toward female sexuality have greatly increased the numbers of children living with their never-married mothers or being cared for outside the home while the mothers work. This social change has made it more difficult for childless people to adopt infants in their own countries. There has been an increase in the number of older-child adoptions and adoptions from third-world sources in first-world countries. Adoptions and births to same-sex couples have increased in number and gained legal protection, compared to their status in Bowlby's time.

[ 204 ] Regardless of whether parents are genetically related, adoptive parents attachment roles they will still influence and affect their child's attachment behaviours throughout their lifetime.

[ 205 ] Issues have been raised to the effect that the dyadic model characteristic of attachment theory cannot address the complexity of real-life social experiences, as infants often have multiple relationships within the family and in child care settings.

[ 206 ] It is suggested these multiple relationships influence one another reciprocally, at least within a family.

[ 207 ] Principles of attachment theory have been used to explain adult social behaviours, including mating, social dominance and hierarchical power structures, in-group identification, [ 208 ] group coalitions, membership in cults and totalitarian systems [ 209 ] and negotiation of reciprocity and justice.

[ 210 ] Those explanations have been used to design parental care training, and have been particularly successful in the design of child abuse prevention programmes.

[ 211 ] While a wide variety of studies have upheld the basic tenets of attachment theory, research has been inconclusive as to whether self-reported early attachment and later depression are demonstrably related.

[ 212 ] Neurobiology of attachment [ edit ] In addition to longitudinal studies, there has been psychophysiological research on the neurobiology of attachment.

[ 213 ] Research has begun to include neural development , [ 214 ] behaviour genetics and temperament concepts.

[ 195 ] Generally, temperament and attachment constitute separate developmental domains, but aspects of both contribute to a range of interpersonal and intrapersonal developmental outcomes.

[ 195 ] Some types of temperament may make some individuals susceptible to the stress of unpredictable or hostile relationships with caregivers in the early years.

[ 215 ] In the absence of available and responsive caregivers it appears that some children are particularly vulnerable to developing attachment disorders.

[ 216 ] The quality of caregiving received at infancy and childhood directly affects an individual's neurological systems which controls stress regulation.

[ 213 ] In psychophysiological research on attachment, the two main areas studied have been autonomic responses , such as heart rate or respiration, and the activity of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis , a system that is responsible for the body's reaction to stress .

[ 217 ] Infants' physiological responses have been measured during the Strange Situation procedure looking at individual differences in infant temperament and the extent to which attachment acts as a moderator. Recent studies convey that early attachment relationships become molecularly instilled into the being, thus affecting later immune system functioning.

[ 170 ] Empirical evidence communicates that early negative experiences produce pro inflammatory phenotype cells in the immune system, which is directly related to cardiovascular disease, autoimmune diseases, and certain types of cancer.

[ 218 ] Recent [ when?

] improvements involving methods of research have enabled researchers to further investigate the neural correlates of attachment in humans. These advances include identifying key brain structures, neural circuits, neurotransmitter systems, and neuropeptides, and how they are involved in attachment system functioning and can indicate more about a certain individual, even predict their behaviour.

[ 219 ] There is initial evidence that caregiving and attachment involve both unique and overlapping brain regions.

[ 220 ] Another issue is the role of inherited genetic factors in shaping attachments: for example one type of polymorphism of the gene coding for the D 2 dopamine receptor has been linked to anxious attachment and another in the gene for the 5-HT 2A serotonin receptor with avoidant attachment.

[ 221 ] Studies show that attachment in adulthood is simultaneously related to biomarkers of immunity. For example, individuals with an avoidance attachment style produce higher levels of the pro inflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6) when reacting to an interpersonal stressor, [ 222 ] while individuals representing an anxious attachment style tend to have elevated cortisol production and lower numbers of T cells.

[ 223 ] Although children vary genetically and each individual requires different attachment relationships, there is consistent evidence that maternal warmth during infancy and childhood creates a safe haven for individuals resulting in superior immune system functioning.

[ 224 ] One theoretical basis for this is that it makes biological sense for children to vary in their susceptibility to rearing influence.

[ 225 ] Crime [ edit ] Attachment theory has often been applied in the discipline of criminology .

[ 226 ] It has been used in an attempt to identify causal mechanisms in criminal behaviour – with uses ranging from offender profiling , better understanding types of offence and the pursuit of preventative policy. It has been found that disturbances early on in child-caregiver relationships are a risk factor in criminality. Attachment theory in this context has been described as "perhaps the most influential of contemporary psychoanalytically oriented theories of crime".

[ 227 ] History [ edit ] The origins of attachment theory within criminology can be found in the work of August Aichhorn . In applying psychoanalysis to pedagogy , he argued that abnormal child relationships are the underlying problem causing delinquency.

[ 228 ] The intersection of crime and attachment theory was further researched by John Bowlby. In his first published work, Forty-four Juvenile Thieves , he studied a sample of 88 children (44 juvenile thieves and 44 non-delinquent controls) and determined that child-mother separation caused delinquent character formation, particularly in the development of an "affectionless character" often seen in the persistent offender. 17 of the juvenile thieves had been separated from their mothers for longer than six months during their first five years, and only 2 children from the control group had such a separation. He also found that 14 of the thieves were "affectionless characters" distinguishing them from others by their lack of affection, no emotional ties, no real friendships, and having "no roots in their relationships".

[ 229 ] Age distribution of crime [ edit ] Two theories about why the crime peaks around the late teenage years and early twenties are called the developmental theory and life-course theory, and both involve attachment theory. Developmental perspectives argue that individuals who have disrupted childhood attachments will have criminal careers that continue long into adulthood.

[ 230 ] Life course perspectives argue that relationships at every stage of the life course can influence an individual's likelihood of committing crimes.

[ 231 ] Types of offences [ edit ] Disrupted attachment patterns from childhood have been identified as a risk factor for domestic violence.

[ 232 ] These disruptions in childhood can prevent the formation of a secure attachment relationship, and in turn adversely affecting a healthy way to deal with stress.

[ 233 ] In adulthood, lack of coping mechanisms can result in violent behaviour.

[ 234 ] Bowlby's theory of functional anger states that children signal to their caregiver that their attachment needs are not being met by use of angry behaviour. This perception of low support from partner has been identified as a strong predictor of male violence. Other predictors have been named as perceived deficiency in maternal love in childhood, low self-esteem.

[ 233 ] It has also been found that individuals with a dismissive attachment style, often seen in an antisocial/narcissistic-narcissistic subtype of offender, tend to be emotionally abusive as well as violent. Individuals in the borderline/emotionally dependent subtype have traits which originate from insecure attachment in childhood, and tend to have high levels of anger.

[ 232 ] It has been found that sexual offenders have significantly less secure maternal and paternal attachments compared with non-offenders which suggests that insecure attachments in infancy persist into adulthood.

[ 235 ] In a recent study, 57% of sexual offenders were found to be of a preoccupied attachment style.

[ 236 ] There is also evidence that suggests subtypes of sexual crime can have different attachment styles. Dismissive individuals tend to be hostile towards others, and are more likely to offend violently against adult women. By contrast, child abusers are more likely to have preoccupied attachment styles as the tendency to seek approval from others becomes distorted and attachment relationships become sexualized.

[ 237 ] Uses within probation practice [ edit ] Attachment theory has been of special interest within probation settings. When put into practice, probation officers aim to learn their probationer's attachment history because it can give them insight into how the probationer will respond to different scenarios and when they are the most vulnerable to reoffend. One of the primary strategies of implementation is to set up the probation officer as a secure base. This secure base relationship is formed by the probation officer being reliable, safe, and in tune with the probationer, and is intended to help give them a partly representational secure relationship that they have not been able to form.

[ 238 ] Practical applications [ edit ] As a theory of socioemotional development , attachment theory has implications and practical applications in social policy, decisions about the care and welfare of children and mental health. Attachment theory research also highlights that insecure attachment styles are linked to difficulties in emotional regulation and the development of maladaptive coping strategies, which can have long-term implications for mental health treatment planning.

[ 239 ] Child care policies [ edit ] Social policies concerning the care of children were the driving force in Bowlby's development of attachment theory. The difficulty lies in applying attachment concepts to policy and practice.

[ 240 ] In 2008 C.H. Zeanah and colleagues stated, "Supporting early child-parent relationships is an increasingly prominent goal of mental health practitioners, community-based service providers and policy makers ... Attachment theory and research have generated important findings concerning early child development and spurred the creation of programs to support early child-parent relationships." [ 12 ] Additionally, practitioners can use the concepts of attachment theory that suggests deep relationships which builds attachment security towards mental health interventions. Attachment security has been found to strengthen one's ability to cope with stress, anxiety, and maintain that, in turn, can contribute to the person's well-being and mental health [ 241 ] For example,  previous studies have demonstrated that individuals who demonstrate avoidance attachment styles experiences less stress and distress when presented with ostracism.

[ 242 ] However, finding quality childcare while at work or school is an issue for many families. NIHD recent study convey that top notch day care contributes to secure attachment relationships in children.

[ 243 ] People have commented on this matter stating that "legislative initiatives reflecting higher standards for credentialing and licensing childcare workers, requiring education in child development and attachment theory, and at least a two-year associate degree course as well as salary increases and increased stature for childcare positions".

[ 244 ] Corporations should implement more flexible work arrangements that recognize child care as essential for all its employees. This includes re-examination of parental leave policies. Too many parents are forced to return to work too soon post childbirth because of company policy or financial necessity. No matter the reason this inhibits early parent child bonding.

[ 170 ] In addition to this, there should be increased attention to the training and screening of childcare workers. In his article reviewing attachment theory, Sweeney suggested, among several policy implications, "legislative initiatives reflecting higher standards for credentialing and licensing childcare workers, requiring education in child development and attachment theory, and at least a two-year associate degree course as well as salary increases and increased stature for childcare positions".

[ 244 ] Historically, attachment theory had significant policy implications for hospitalized or institutionalized children, and those in poor quality daycare.

[ 245 ] Controversy remains over whether non-maternal care, particularly in group settings, has deleterious effects on social development. It is plain from research that poor quality care carries risks but that those who experience good quality alternative care cope well although it is difficult to provide good quality, individualized care in group settings.

[ 240 ] Attachment theory has implications in residence and contact disputes, [ 245 ] and applications by foster parents to adopt foster children. In the past, particularly in North America, the main theoretical framework was psychoanalysis. Increasingly attachment theory has replaced it, thus focusing on the quality and continuity of caregiver relationships rather than economic well-being or automatic precedence of any one party, such as the biological mother.

Rutter noted that in the UK, since 1980, family courts have shifted considerably to recognize the complications of attachment relationships.

[ 246 ] Children tend to have attachment relationships with both parents and often grandparents or other relatives. Judgements need to take this into account along with the impact of step-families. Attachment theory has been crucial in highlighting the importance of social relationships in dynamic rather than fixed terms.

[ 240 ] Attachment theory can also inform decisions made in social work , especially in humanistic social work ( Petru Stefaroi ), [ 247 ] [ 248 ] and court processes about foster care or other placements. Considering the child's attachment needs can help determine the level of risk posed by placement options.

[ 249 ] [ 250 ] Within adoption, the shift from "closed" to "open" adoptions and the importance of the search for biological parents would be expected on the basis of attachment theory. Many researchers in the field were strongly influenced by it.

[ 240 ] Clinical practice in children [ edit ] Although attachment theory has become a major scientific theory of socioemotional development with one of the widest research lines in modern psychology, it has, until recently, been less used in clinical practice.

[ 251 ] The attachment theory focused on the attention of the child when the mother is there and the responses that the child shows when the mother leaves, which indicated the attachment and bonding of the mother and the child. The attention therapy is done while the child is being restrained by the therapists and the responses displayed were noted. The tests were done to show the responses of the child.

[ citation needed ] This may be partly due to lack of attention paid to clinical application by Bowlby himself and partly due to broader meanings of the word 'attachment' used among practitioners. It may also be partly due to the mistaken association of attachment theory with the pseudoscientific interventions misleadingly known as attachment therapy or holding therapy.

[ 252 ] Prevention and treatment [ edit ] Main article: Attachment-based therapy In 1988, Bowlby published a series of lectures indicating how attachment theory and research could be used in understanding and treating child and family disorders. His focus for bringing about change was the parents' internal working models, parenting behaviours and the parents' relationship with the therapeutic intervenor.

[ 253 ] Ongoing research has led to a number of individual treatments and prevention and intervention programs.

[ 253 ] In regards to personal development, children from all the age groups were tested to show the effectiveness of the theory that is being theorized by Bowlby. They range from individual therapy to public health programs to interventions designed for foster caregivers. For infants and younger children, the focus is on increasing the responsiveness and sensitivity of the caregiver, or if that is not possible, placing the child with a different caregiver.

[ 254 ] [ 255 ] An assessment of the attachment status or caregiving responses of the caregiver is invariably included, as attachment is a two-way process involving attachment behaviour and caregiver response. Some programs are aimed at foster cares because the attachment behaviours of infants or children with attachment difficulties often do not elicit appropriate caregiver responses. Modern prevention and intervention programs have proven successful.

[ 256 ] Reactive attachment disorder and attachment disorder [ edit ] Main articles: Reactive attachment disorder and Attachment disorder One atypical attachment pattern is considered to be an actual disorder, known as reactive attachment disorder or RAD, which is a recognized psychiatric diagnosis ( ICD-10 F94.1/2 and DSM-IV-TR 313.89). Against common misconception, this is not the same as 'disorganized attachment'. The essential feature of reactive attachment disorder is markedly disturbed and developmentally inappropriate social relatedness in most contexts that begins before age five years, associated with gross pathological care. There are two subtypes, one reflecting a disinhibited attachment pattern, the other an inhibited pattern. RAD is not a description of insecure attachment styles, however problematic those styles may be; instead, it denotes a lack of age-appropriate attachment behaviours that may appear to resemble a clinical disorder.

[ 257 ] Although the term "reactive attachment disorder" is now popularly applied to perceived behavioural difficulties that fall outside the DSM or ICD criteria, particularly on the Web and in connection with the pseudo-scientific attachment therapy, "true" RAD is thought to be rare.

[ 258 ] "Attachment disorder" is an ambiguous term, which may refer to reactive attachment disorder or to the more problematic insecure attachment styles (although none of these are clinical disorders). It may also be used to refer to proposed new classification systems put forward by theorists in the field, [ 259 ] and is used within attachment therapy as a form of unvalidated diagnosis.

[ 258 ] One of the proposed new classifications, "secure base distortion" has been found to be associated with caregiver traumatization.

[ 260 ] Clinical practice in adults and families [ edit ] As attachment theory offers a broad, far-reaching view of human functioning, it can enrich a therapist's understanding of patients and the therapeutic relationship rather than dictate a particular form of treatment.

[ 261 ] Some forms of psychoanalysis-based therapy for adults—within relational psychoanalysis and other approaches—also incorporate attachment theory and patterns.

[ 261 ] [ 262 ] Criticism [ edit ] In his 1984 book The Nature of the Child , Jerome Kagan challenged central assumptions of attachment theory, particularly the notion that the quality of early attachments to caregivers is a primary determinant of a child’s future well-being. Through a series of essays, Kagan argued that the emphasis on early attachment experiences is often overstated and insufficiently supported by empirical evidence. He proposed that a child’s temperament and later development are more strongly influenced by biological factors and cognitive maturation than by early relational experiences alone.

[ 263 ] A 2010 study in the Journal of Personality looked at twins in Italy using the ACE Model and found that their shared environment (including shared aspects of their upbringing) was "completely irrelevant" in explaining their adult attachment styles.

[ 13 ] Instead, levels of attachment-related anxiety and avoidance in the adult twins were completely explained by their genes and their unshared environment (aspects of the environment that were different for the twins).

[ 13 ] A 2013 study from Utah State suggests an individual can have different attachment styles in relation to different people and that "parents' time away from their child was not a significant predictor of attachment." [ 14 ] Attachment theory models are heavily focused on attachment to the mother, not other family members and peers, also noted by Rosjke Hasseldine .

[ 264 ] Salvador Minuchin suggested that attachment theory's focus on the mother-child relation ignores the value in other familial influences: "The entire family—not just the mother or primary caretaker—including father, siblings, grandparents, often cousins, aunts and uncles, are extremely significant in the experience of the child...And yet, when I hear attachment theorists talk, I don't hear anything about these other important figures in a child's life." [ 265 ] A 2016 article from the Psychological Bulletin suggests that one's attachment could largely be due to heredity ; hence, the authors point to the need to focus research on nonshared environmental effects, requiring "behavioral genetic designs that afford differentiating heritability from shared and nonshared environmental influences".

[ 15 ] A 2018 paper critiques attachment theory’s claim to universality, highlighting its basis in Western middle class values and its neglect of diverse cultural caregiving practices. It argues that applying Western parenting norms in non-Western contexts without understanding local cultures is scientifically flawed and ethically questionable.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Psychology portal Zoology portal Atlas personality – Personality trait found in those who took on adult responsibilities early Attachment parenting – Parenting philosophy Attachment theory and psychology of religion Fathers as attachment figures Human bonding – Process of development of a close, interpersonal relationship Nurture kinship – Acts of nurture between individuals Parental love – Feeling of attachment towards progeny Passionate and companionate love – Two fundamental ways to experience romantic feelings for another person Relationship science – Field dedicated to the scientific study of interpersonal relationship processes Citations [ edit ] ^ a b Cassidy J (1999).

"The Nature of a Child's Ties" . In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York: Guilford Press. pp.

3–20 .

ISBN 1-57230-087-6 .

^ a b Abrams DB, Turner JR, Baumann LC, Karel A, Collins SE, Witkiewitz K, et al. (2013). "Attachment Theory".

Encyclopedia of Behavioral Medicine . New York, NY: Springer New York. pp.

149– 155.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4419-1005-9_939 .

ISBN 978-1-4419-1004-2 .

Bowlby (1969, 1988) described an attachment as an emotional bond that is characterized by the tendency to seek out and maintain proximity to a specific attachment figure, particularly during times of distress.

^ Brimhall AS, Haralson DM (2017). "Bonds in Couple and Family Therapy".

Encyclopedia of Couple and Family Therapy . Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp.

1– 3.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-15877-8_513-1 .

ISBN 978-3-319-15877-8 .

Bond is an emotional attachment between one or more individuals. To be considered an attachment bond, the relationship must have four defining characteristics: proximity maintenance, separation distress, safe haven, and secure base.

^ a b Bretherton I, Munholland KA (1999).

"Internal Working Models in Attachment Relationships: A Construct Revisited" . In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment:Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York: Guilford Press. pp.

89–114 .

ISBN 1-57230-087-6 .

^ a b Prior & Glaser 2006 , p. 17.

^ Bernard K, Meade E, Dozier M (November 2013).

"Parental synchrony and nurturance as targets in an attachment based intervention: building upon Mary Ainsworth's insights about mother–infant interaction" .

Attachment & Human Development .

15 ( 5– 6): 507– 523.

doi : 10.1080/14616734.2013.820920 .

ISSN 1461-6734 .

PMC 3855268 .

PMID 24299132 .

^ Bretherton I (1992).

"The Origins of Attachment Theory: John Bowlby and Mary Ainsworth" .

Developmental Psychology .

28 (5): 759– 775.

doi : 10.1037/0012-1649.28.5.759 .

^ a b Hazan C, Shaver P (March 1987).

"Romantic love conceptualized as an attachment process" .

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

52 (3): 511– 24.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.52.3.511 .

PMID 3572722 .

S2CID 2280613 .

^ Simpson JA (1999).

"Attachment Theory in Modern Evolutionary Perspective" . In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment:Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York: Guilford Press. pp.

115–40 .

ISBN 1-57230-087-6 .

^ a b c d Rutter M (May 1995).

"Clinical implications of attachment concepts: retrospect and prospect" .

Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines .

36 (4): 549– 71.

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-7610.1995.tb02314.x .

PMID 7650083 .

^ a b c d e Schaffer R (2007).

Introducing Child Psychology . Oxford: Blackwell. pp.

83– 121.

ISBN 978-0-631-21628-5 .

^ a b Berlin L, Zeanah CH, Lieberman AF (2008).

"Prevention and Intervention Programs for Supporting Early Attachment Security" . In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York and London: Guilford Press. pp.

745–61 .

ISBN 978-1-60623-028-2 .

^ a b c Picardi A, Fagnani C, Nisticò L, Stazi MA (2010).

"A Twin Study of Attachment Style in Young Adults" .

Journal of Personality .

79 (5): 965– 992.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-6494.2010.00707.x .

ISSN 1467-6494 .

^ a b Benware J.

"Predictors of F ors of Father-Child and Mother-Child A ather-Child and Mother-Child Attachment in T ttachment in TwoParent Families" . Utah State University.

^ a b Barbaro N.

"Rethinking the Transmission Gap: What Behavioral Genetics and Evolutionary Psychology Mean for Attachment Theory" (PDF) . Psychological Bulletin.

^ a b Keller H (November 2018).

"Universality claim of attachment theory: Children's socioemotional development across cultures" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

115 (45): 11414– 11419.

Bibcode : 2018PNAS..11511414K .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1720325115 .

PMC 6233114 .

PMID 30397121 .

^ Murphy A, Steele M, Dube SR, Bate J, Bonuck K, Meissner P, et al. (2014).

"Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) Questionnaire and Adult Attachment Interview (AAI): Implications for parent child relationships" .

Child Abuse & Neglect .

38 (2): 224– 233.

doi : 10.1016/j.chiabu.2013.09.004 .

PMID 24670331 .

S2CID 3919568 .

^ a b Prior and Glaser p. 15.

^ Bretherton I (1992). "The Origins of Attachment Theory: John Bowlby and Mary Ainsworth".

[Bowlby] begin by noting that organisms at different levels of the phylogenetic scale regulate instinctive behaviour in distinct ways, ranging from primitive reflex-like "fixed action patterns" to complex plan hierarchies with subgoals and strong learning components. In the most complex organisms, instinctive behaviours may be "goal-corrected" with continual on-course adjustments (such as a bird of prey adjusting its flight to the movements of the prey). The concept of cybernetically controlled behavioural systems organized as plan hierarchies (Miller, Galanter, and Pribram, 1960) thus came to replace Freud's concept of drive and instinct. Such systems regulate behaviours in ways that need not be rigidly innate, but – depending on the organism – can adapt in greater or lesser degrees to changes in environmental circumstances, provided that these do not deviate too much from the organism's environment of evolutionary adaptedness. Such flexible organisms pay a price, however, because adaptable behavioural systems can more easily be subverted from their optimal path of development. For humans, Bowlby speculates, the environment of evolutionary adaptedness probably resembles that of present-day hunter-gatherer societies.

^ Stupica B, Brett BE, Woodhouse SS, Cassidy J (July 2019).

"Attachment Security Priming Decreases Children's Physiological Response to Threat" .

Child Development .

90 (4): 1254– 1271.

doi : 10.1111/cdev.13009 .

PMID 29266177 .

^ "Attunement" .

Evolve In Nature . 4 April 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2023 .

^ Bowlby (1969) p. 365.

^ Holmes p. 69.

^ Cosentino A (5 September 2017).

"Viewing fathers as attachment figures" .

Counseling today .

Archived from the original on 24 September 2017.

^ Lamb ME, Lamb JE (1976).

"The Nature and Importance of the Father-Infant Relationship" .

The Family Coordinator .

25 (4): 379– 385.

doi : 10.2307/582850 .

ISSN 0014-7214 .

JSTOR 582850 .

^ Bowlby (1969) 2nd ed. pp. 304–05.

^ a b Kobak R, Madsen S (2008). "Disruption in Attachment Bonds". In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York and London: Guilford Press. pp.

23– 47.

ISBN 978-1-59385-874-2 .

^ Prior and Glaser p. 16.

^ a b Prior & Glaser 2006 , p. 19.

^ Karen 1998 , pp. 90–92.

^ Parritz RH, Troy MF (24 May 2017).

Disorders of childhood : development and psychopathology (Third ed.). Boston, MA.

ISBN 978-1-337-09811-3 .

OCLC 960031712 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Ainsworth M (1967).

Infancy in Uganda: Infant Care and the Growth of Love . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8018-0010-8 .

^ Karen 1998 , p. 97.

^ Prior & Glaser 2006 , pp. 19–20.

^ Johnson SM (2019).

Attachment Theory in Practice: Emotionally Focused Therapy (EFT) with Individuals, Couples and Families . New York: The Guildford Press. p. 5.

ISBN 978-1-4625-3828-7 .

^ Bowlby 1971 , p. 300.

^ Bowlby J (1969–1982).

Attachment and loss (PDF) .

Basic Books . p. 11.

^ McLeod S (5 February 2017).

"Bowlby's Attachment Theory" .

Simply Psychology .

^ Bowlby 1982 , p. 309.

^ Main M (1999).

"Epilogue: Attachment Theory: Eighteen Points with Suggestions for Future Studies" . In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York: Guilford Press. pp.

845–87 .

ISBN 978-1-57230-087-3 .

although there is general agreement an infant or adult will have only a few attachment figures at most, many attachment theorists and researchers believe infants form 'attachment hierarchies' in which some figures are primary, others secondary, and so on. This position can be presented in a stronger form, in which a particular figure is believed continually to take top place ("monotropy") ... questions surrounding monotropy and attachment hierarchies remain unsettled ^ a b Mercer 2006 , pp. 39–40.

^ Davis L, Brown DJ, Arnold R, Gustafsson H (2 August 2021).

"Thriving Through Relationships in Sport: The Role of the Parent–Athlete and Coach–Athlete Attachment Relationship" .

Frontiers in Psychology .

12 : 694599.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.694599 .

ISSN 1664-1078 .

PMC 8366224 .

PMID 34408711 .

^ Bowlby J (1973).

Separation: Anger and Anxiety . Attachment and loss. Vol. 2. London: Hogarth.

ISBN 978-0-7126-6621-3 .

^ Pilkington PD, Bishop A, Younan R (2021).

"Adverse childhood experiences and early maladaptive schemas in adulthood: A systematic review and meta-analysis" .

Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy .

28 (3): 569– 584.

doi : 10.1002/cpp.2533 .

ISSN 1063-3995 .

PMID 33270299 .

S2CID 227258822 .

^ Bowlby 1971 , pp. 414–21.

^ Bowlby 1971 , pp. 394–395.

^ Ainsworth MD (December 1969).

"Object relations, dependency, and attachment: a theoretical review of the infant-mother relationship" .

Child Development .

40 (4): 969– 1025.

doi : 10.2307/1127008 .

JSTOR 1127008 .

PMID 5360395 .

^ Hrdy SB (2009).

Mothers and Others-The Evolutionary Origins of Mutual Understanding . United States of America: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. pp.

130 , 131, 132.

ISBN 978-0-674-03299-6 .

^ Crittenden AN, Marlowe FW (2013), "Cooperative Child Care among the Hadza: Situating Multiple Attachment in Evolutionary Context", Attachment Reconsidered , Palgrave Macmillan US, pp.

67– 83, doi : 10.1057/9781137386724_3 , ISBN 978-1-137-38674-8 ^ Quinn N, Mageo JM (2013).

Attachment Reconsidered: Cultural Perspectives on a Western Theory . United States of America: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 73, 74.

ISBN 978-1-137-38672-4 .

^ Parens H (1995).

"Parenting for Emotional Growth: Lines of Development" .

Thomas Jefferson University-Jefferson Digital Commons . Retrieved 14 March 2024 .

^ a b Van Ijzendoorn MH, Sagi-Schwartz A (2008). "Cross-cultural patterns of attachment: Universal and contextual dimensions.". In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press. pp.

880 –905.

^ Ainsworth MD, Bell SM (1970).

"Attachment, Exploration, and Separation: Illustrated by the Behavior of One-Year-Olds in a Strange Situation" .

Child Development .

41 (1): 49– 67.

doi : 10.2307/1127388 .

ISSN 0009-3920 .

JSTOR 1127388 .

^ Bretherton I (September 1992).

"The origins of attachment theory: John Bowlby and Mary Ainsworth" .

Developmental Psychology .

28 (5): 759– 775.

doi : 10.1037/0012-1649.28.5.759 .

ISSN 1939-0599 .

^ a b Main M, Solomon J (1990).

"Procedures for Identifying Infants as Disorganized/Disoriented during the Ainsworth Strange Situation" . In Greenberg MT, Cicchetti D, Cummings EM (eds.).

Attachment in the Preschool Years: Theory, Research, and Intervention . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp.

121– 60.

ISBN 978-0-226-30630-8 .

^ Beebe B, Jaffe J, Markese S, Buck K, Chen H, Cohen P, et al. (1 January 2010).

"The origins of 12-month attachment: A microanalysis of 4-month mother–infant interaction" .

Attachment & Human Development .

12 ( 1– 2): 3– 141.

doi : 10.1080/14616730903338985 .

ISSN 1461-6734 .

PMC 3763737 .

PMID 20390524 .

^ Steele H, Steele M, Fonagy P (1996).

"Associations among Attachment Classifications of Mothers, Fathers, and Their Infants" .

Child Development .

67 (2): 541– 555.

doi : 10.2307/1131831 .

ISSN 0009-3920 .

JSTOR 1131831 .

^ "Harlow’s Classic Studies Revealed the Importance of Maternal Contact" ^ Bowlby, J. (1988).

A Secure Base . New York: Basic Books.

^ Fraley RC, Shaver PR (1 June 2000).

"Adult Romantic Attachment: Theoretical Developments, Emerging Controversies, and Unanswered Questions" .

Review of General Psychology .

4 (2): 132– 154.

doi : 10.1037/1089-2680.4.2.132 .

ISSN 1089-2680 .

^ Howe, D. (2011) Attachment across the lifecourse, London: Palgrave, p.13 ^ Honari B, Saremi AA (2015).

"The Study of Relationship between Attachment Styles and Obsessive Love Style" .

Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences .

165 : 152– 159.

doi : 10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.12.617 .

^ Schacter, D.L.

et al. (2009). Psychology, Second Edition. New York: Worth Publishers. pp.441 ^ a b c d e Ainsworth MD, Blehar MC, Waters E, Wall S (1978).

Patterns of attachment: A psychological study of the strange situation . Hillsdale, NJ: Earlbaum.

^ a b Ainsworth MD, Blehar M, Waters E, Wall S (1978).

Patterns of Attachment: A Psychological Study of the Strange Situation . Hillsdale NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

ISBN 978-0-89859-461-4 .

^ Aronoff J (2012).

"Parental Nurturance in the Standard Cross-Cultural Sample: Theory, Coding, and Scores" .

Cross-Cultural Research .

46 (4): 315– 347.

doi : 10.1177/1069397112450851 .

S2CID 147304847 .

^ Plotka R (2011). "Ambivalent Attachment".

Encyclopedia of Child Behavior and Development . Boston, MA: Springer US. pp.

81– 83.

doi : 10.1007/978-0-387-79061-9_104 .

ISBN 978-0-387-77579-1 .

Ambivalent attachment is a form of insecure attachment characterized by inconsistent responses of the caregivers and by the child's feelings of anxiety and preoccupation about the caregiver's availability.

^ Solomon J, George C, De Jong A (1995). "Children classified as controlling at age six: Evidence of disorganized representational strategies and aggression at home and at school".

Development and Psychopathology .

7 (3): 447– 463.

doi : 10.1017/s0954579400006623 .

S2CID 146576663 .

^ Crittenden P (1999). "Danger and development: the organization of self-protective strategies". In Vondra JI, Barnett D (eds.).

Atypical Attachment in Infancy and Early Childhood Among Children at Developmental Risk . Oxford: Blackwell. pp.

145 –171.

ISBN 978-0-631-21592-9 .

^ McCarthy G, Taylor A (1999).

"Avoidant/ambivalent attachment style as a mediator between abusive childhood experiences and adult relationship difficulties" .

Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry . Vol. 40, no. 3. pp.

465– 477.

doi : 10.1111/1469-7610.00463 .

^ Ainsworth MD, Bell SM (March 1970).

"Attachment, exploration, and separation: illustrated by the behavior of one-year-olds in a strange situation" .

Child Development .

41 (1): 49– 67.

doi : 10.2307/1127388 .

JSTOR 1127388 .

PMID 5490680 .

S2CID 3942480 .

^ Sroufe A, Waters E (1977).

"Attachment as an Organizational Construct" .

Child Development .

48 (4): 1184– 1199.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.598.3872 .

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8624.1977.tb03922.x .

^ Main M (1979).

"The "ultimate" causation of some infant attachment phenomena" .

Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

2 (4): 640– 643.

doi : 10.1017/s0140525x00064992 .

S2CID 144105265 .

^ Main M (1977). "Analysis of a peculiar form of reunion behaviour seen in some day-care children.". In Webb R (ed.).

Social Development in Childhood . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins. pp.

33 –78.

ISBN 978-0-8018-1946-9 .

^ Karlen Lyons-Ruth, Jean-Francois Bureau, M. Ann Easterbrooks, Ingrid Obsuth, Kate Hennighausen & Lauriane Vulliez-Coady (2013) Parsing the construct of maternal insensitivity: distinct longitudinal pathways associated with early maternal withdrawal, Attachment & Human
Development, 15:5–6, 562–582 ^ Ainsworth MD, Blehar M, Waters E, Wall S (1978).

Patterns of Attachment: A Psychological Study of the Strange Situation . Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. p. 282.

ISBN 978-0-89859-461-4 .

^ Crittenden PM (May 1983).

Mother and Infant Patterns of Attachment (Ph.D. thesis). University of Virginia. p. 73.

^ Kochanska G, Kim S (2013).

"Early attachment organization with both parents and future behavior problems: from infancy to middle childhood" .

Child Development .

84 (1): 283– 96.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8624.2012.01852.x .

PMC 3530645 .

PMID 23005703 .

^ Svanberg PO (2009). "Promoting a secure attachment through early assessment and interventions.". In Barlow J, Svanberg PO (eds.).

Keeping the Baby in Min . London: Routledge. pp.

100– 114.

^ Ainsworth M (1990). "Epilogue". In Greenberg MT, Ciccheti D, Cummings EM (eds.).

Attachment in the Preschool Years . Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press. pp.

463– 488.

^ Solomon J, George C (1999). "The place of disorganization in attachment theory.". In Solomon J, George C (eds.).

Attachment Disorganization . NY: Guilford. pp.

27 .

^ Sroufe A, Egeland B, Carlson E, Collins WA (2005).

The Development of the person: the Minnesota study of risk and adaptation from birth to adulthood . NY: Guilford Press. p.

245 .

ISBN 978-1-59385-158-3 .

^ Crittenden P (1999). "Danger and development: the organization of self-protective strategies". In Vondra JI, Barnett D (eds.).

Atypical Attachment in Infancy and Early Childhood Among Children at Developmental Risk . Oxford: Blackwell. pp.

159 –160.

ISBN 978-0-631-21592-9 .

^ Crittenden P, Landini A (2011).

Assessing Adult Attachment: A Dynamic-Maturational Approach to Discourse Analysis . NY: W.W. Norton. p. 269.

^ a b Main M, Hesse E (1993).

"Parents' Unresolved Traumatic Experiences Are Related to Infant Disorganized Attachment Status: Is Frightened and/or Frightening Parental Behavior the Linking Mechanism?" . In Greenberg MT, Cicchetti D, Cummings EM (eds.).

Attachment in the Preschool Years: Theory, Research, and Intervention . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp.

161– 84.

ISBN 978-0-226-30630-8 .

^ Parkes CM (2006).

Love and Loss . Routledge, London and New York. p. 13.

ISBN 978-0-415-39041-5 .

^ Madigan S, Bakermans-Kranenburg MJ, Van Ijzendoorn MH, Moran G, Pederson DR, Benoit D (June 2006). "Unresolved states of mind, anomalous parental behavior, and disorganized attachment: a review and meta-analysis of a transmission gap".

Attachment & Human Development .

8 (2): 89– 111.

doi : 10.1080/14616730600774458 .

PMID 16818417 .

S2CID 1691924 .

^ Solomon J, George C (2006). "Intergenerational transmission of dysregulated maternal caregiving: Mothers describe their upbringing and child rearing.". In Mayseless O (ed.).

Parenting representations: Theory, research, and clinical implications . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp.

265 –295.

ISBN 978-0-521-82887-1 .

^ Boris NW, Zeanah CH (November 2005).

"Practice parameter for the assessment and treatment of children and adolescents with reactive attachment disorder of infancy and early childhood" (PDF) .

Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry .

44 (11). Work Group on Quality Issues: 1206– 19.

doi : 10.1097/01.chi.0000177056.41655.ce .

PMID 16239871 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 August 2009 . Retrieved 13 September 2009 .

^ Main M, Cassidy J (1988).

"Categories of response to reunion with the parent at age 6" .

Developmental Psychology .

24 (3): 415– 426.

doi : 10.1037/0012-1649.24.3.415 .

^ Crittenden PM (2008).

Raising Parents: Attachment, Parenting and Child Safety . London: Routledge.

^ Bowlby J (1980).

Loss: Sadness and depression . Attachment and Loss. Vol. III. New York: Basic Books. p. 45.

ISBN 978-0-465-04237-1 .

^ Strathearn L, Fonagy P, Amico J, Montague PR (December 2009).

"Adult attachment predicts maternal brain and oxytocin response to infant cues" .

Neuropsychopharmacology .

34 (13): 2655– 66.

doi : 10.1038/npp.2009.103 .

PMC 3041266 .

PMID 19710635 .

^ Andrea Crittenden, Patricia McKinsey Landini (2011).

Assessing adult attachment : a dynamic-maturational approach to discourse analysis . W.W Norton & Co.

ISBN 978-0-393-70667-3 .

OCLC 768809528 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Landa S, Duschinsky R (2013). "Crittenden's dynamic–maturational model of attachment and adaptation".

Review of General Psychology .

17 (3): 326– 338.

doi : 10.1037/a0032102 .

S2CID 17508615 .

^ Crittenden PM, Newman L (July 2010). "Comparing models of borderline personality disorder: Mothers' experience, self-protective strategies, and dispositional representations".

Clinical Child Psychology and Psychiatry .

15 (3): 433– 51.

doi : 10.1177/1359104510368209 .

PMID 20603429 .

S2CID 206707532 .

^ Crittenden PM (1992).

"Children's strategies for coping with adverse home environments: an interpretation using attachment theory" .

Child Abuse & Neglect .

16 (3): 329– 43.

doi : 10.1016/0145-2134(92)90043-q .

PMID 1617468 .

^ Benoit D (October 2004).

"Infant-parent attachment: Definition, types, antecedents, measurement and outcome" .

Paediatrics & Child Health .

9 (8): 541– 545.

doi : 10.1093/pch/9.8.541 .

PMC 2724160 .

PMID 19680481 .

^ Lyons-Ruth K, Bureau JF, Easterbrooks MA, Obsuth I, Hennighausen K, Vulliez-Coady L (2013).

"Parsing the construct of maternal insensitivity: distinct longitudinal pathways associated with early maternal withdrawal" .

Attachment & Human Development .

15 ( 5– 6): 562– 82.

doi : 10.1080/14616734.2013.841051 .

PMC 3861901 .

PMID 24299135 .

^ a b Pearce JW, Pezzot-Pearce TD (2007).

Psychotherapy of abused and neglected children (2nd ed.). New York and London: Guilford press. pp.

17 –20.

ISBN 978-1-59385-213-9 .

^ Karen 1998 , pp. 248–66.

^ a b Berlin LJ, Cassidy J, Appleyard K (2008). "The Influence of Early Attachments on Other Relationships". In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York and London: Guilford Press. pp.

333– 47.

ISBN 978-1-59385-874-2 .

^ Haltigan JD, Ekas NV, Seifer R, Messinger DS (July 2011).

"Attachment security in infants at-risk for autism spectrum disorders" .

Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders .

41 (7): 962– 7.

doi : 10.1007/s10803-010-1107-7 .

PMC 4486071 .

PMID 20859669 .

^ Fraley RC, Spieker SJ (May 2003). "Are infant attachment patterns continuously or categorically distributed? A taxometric analysis of strange situation behavior".

Developmental Psychology .

39 (3): 387– 404.

doi : 10.1037/0012-1649.39.3.387 .

PMID 12760508 .

^ Waters E, Beauchaine TP (May 2003).

"Are there really patterns of attachment? Comment on Fraley and Spieker (2003)" .

Developmental Psychology .

39 (3): 417– 22, discussion 423–9.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.128.1029 .

doi : 10.1037/0012-1649.39.3.417 .

PMID 12760512 .

^ Hayslett-Mccall KL, Bernard TJ (February 2002).

"Attachment, masculinity, and self-control" .

Theoretical Criminology .

6 (1): 5– 33.

doi : 10.1177/136248060200600101 .

ISSN 1362-4806 .

S2CID 143624197 .

^ Del Giudice M (February 2009). "Sex, attachment, and the development of reproductive strategies".

The Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

32 (1): 1– 21, discussion 21–67.

doi : 10.1017/S0140525X09000016 .

PMID 19210806 .

S2CID 5396375 .

^ Main M, Kaplan N, Cassidy J (1985). "Security in Infancy, Childhood, and Adulthood: A Move to the Level of Representation".

Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development .

50 (1/2): 66– 104.

doi : 10.2307/3333827 .

JSTOR 3333827 .

^ a b c Waters E, Kondo-Ikemura K, Posada G, Richters J (1991). Gunnar M, Sroufe T (eds.). "Learning to love: Mechanisms and milestones".

Minnesota Symposia on Child Psychology .

23 (Self–Processes and Development). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

^ Marvin RS, Britner PA (2008). "Normative Development: The Ontogeny of Attachment". In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York and London: Guilford Press. pp.

269– 94.

ISBN 978-1-59385-874-2 .

^ Kerns KA, Richardson RA (2005).

Attachment in Middle Childhood . Guilford Press.

^ McElhaney KB, Allen JP, Stephenson JC, Hare AL (30 October 2009). "Attachment and Autonomy During Adolescence". In Lerner RM, Steinberg L (eds.).

Part II: Domains of Individual Development in Adolescence . Handbook of Adolescent Psychology. Wiley-Blackwell.

doi : 10.1002/9780470479193.adlpsy001012 .

ISBN 978-0-470-47919-3 .

^ Keppens G, Spruyt B (November 2019).

"The School as a Socialization Context: Understanding the Influence of School Bonding and an Authoritative School Climate on Class Skipping" .

Youth & Society .

51 (8): 1145– 1166.

doi : 10.1177/0044118X17722305 .

ISSN 0044-118X .

S2CID 149330059 .

^ a b Freeman H, Brown BB (2001). "Primary Attachment to Parents and Peers during Adolescence: Differences by Attachment Style".

Journal of Youth and Adolescence .

30 (6): 653– 674.

doi : 10.1023/A:1012200511045 .

ISSN 0047-2891 .

S2CID 35110543 .

^ Hazan C, Shaver P (1987).

"Romantic love conceptualized as an attachment process" .

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

52 (3): 511– 524.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.52.3.511 .

PMID 3572722 .

S2CID 2280613 – via APA PsycNet.

^ Hazan C, Shaver PR (1990).

"Love and work: An attachment-theoretical perspective" .

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

59 (2): 270– 280.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.59.2.270 .

ISSN 0022-3514 .

^ a b Ahmad S, Mohammad H, Shafique Z (2018). "The impact of attachment styles on helping behavior in adults".

Journal of Social Sciences and Humanity Studies .

4 (1): 24– 29.

^ a b Levine A, Heller R (2011).

Attached: The new science of adult attachment and how it can help you find and keep love . New York, NY: Penguin Group.

^ Sperling MB, Berman WH (1994).

Attachment in Adults: Clinical and Developmental Perspectives . Guilford Press.

^ "Preoccupied Attachment Style: How It Develops & How To Cope" . 3 November 2022 . Retrieved 27 August 2023 .

^ Simpson JA, Overall NC (February 2014).

"Partner Buffering of Attachment Insecurity" .

Current Directions in Psychological Science .

23 (1): 54– 59.

doi : 10.1177/0963721413510933 .

ISSN 0963-7214 .

PMC 4157676 .

PMID 25214722 .

^ Pettigrew TF (4 January 2016).

"In Pursuit of Three Theories: Authoritarianism, Relative Deprivation, and Intergroup Contact" .

Annual Review of Psychology .

67 (1): 1– 21.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-psych-122414-033327 .

ISSN 0066-4308 .

PMID 26361053 .

S2CID 207668034 .

^ Aluisy A (2016).

Reinvent your relationship. A Therapist's Insights to having the Relationship You've Always Wanted . [United States]: Morgan James Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-63047-896-4 .

OCLC 974240408 .

^ Zahra FT (6 October 2022).

"Attachment Security and Attachment Styles in Romantic Relationships" .

South Asian Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities .

3 (5): 42– 53.

doi : 10.48165/sajssh.2022.3504 .

ISSN 2582-7065 .

S2CID 252863935 .

^ a b Carvallo M, Gabriel S (2006). "No Man Is an Island: The Need to Belong and Dismissing Avoidant Attachment Style".

PsycEXTRA Dataset .

32 (5): 697– 709.

doi : 10.1037/e511092014-160 .

PMID 16702161 .

^ Lopez FG (2009).

Oxford handbook of positive psychology . Oxford University Press. pp. (pp. 405–415).

ISBN 978-0-19-986216-0 . Retrieved 29 March 2023 .

^ Hazen, C. & Shaver, P. (1987). "Romantic love conceptualized as an attachment process".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

52 (3): 511– 524.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.52.3.511 .

PMID 3572722 .

S2CID 2280613 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Collins, N. L., & Read, S. J. (1990). "Adult attachment, working models, and relationship quality in dating couples".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

58 (4): 644– 663.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.58.4.644 .

PMID 14570079 .

S2CID 3143987 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Mikulincer, M., Dolev, T., & Shaver, P. R. (2004). "Attachment-Related Strategies During Thought Suppression: Ironic Rebounds and Vulnerable Self-Representations".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

87 (6): 940– 956.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.87.6.940 .

PMID 15598116 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Brown, D. P., & Elliott, D. S. (2016).

Attachment disturbances in adults: Treatment for comprehensive repair (1 ed.). W W Norton & Co. p. 111.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Dan O (2020).

"The relationship between individuals with fearful-avoidant adult attachment orientation and early neural responses to emotional content: An event-related potentials (ERPs) study" .

Neuropsychology .

34 (2): 155– 167.

doi : 10.1037/neu0000600 .

PMID 31682140 .

S2CID 207891295 – via APA PsychArticles.

^ Hazan C, Shaver PR (1990).

"Love and work: An attachment theoretical perspective" .

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

59 (2): 270– 80.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.59.2.270 .

S2CID 53487697 .

^ Hazan C, Shaver PR (1994). "Attachment as an organizational framework for research on close relationships".

Psychological Inquiry .

5 : 1– 22.

doi : 10.1207/s15327965pli0501_1 .

^ Bartholomew K, Horowitz LM (August 1991).

"Attachment styles among young adults: a test of a four-category model" .

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

61 (2): 226– 44.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.61.2.226 .

PMID 1920064 .

S2CID 3547883 .

^ "What is a fearful avoidant attachment?" .

www.medicalnewstoday.com . 28 October 2022 . Retrieved 27 August 2023 .

^ Fraley RC, Shaver PR (2000). "Adult romantic attachment: Theoretical developments, emerging controversies, and unanswered questions".

Review of General Psychology .

4 (2): 132– 54.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.471.8896 .

doi : 10.1037/1089-2680.4.2.132 .

S2CID 15620444 .

^ a b Pietromonaco PR, Barrett LF (2000). "The internal working models concept: What do we really know about the self in relation to others?".

Review of General Psychology .

4 (2): 155– 75.

doi : 10.1037/1089-2680.4.2.155 .

S2CID 17413696 .

^ Rholes WS, Simpson JA (2004). "Attachment theory: Basic concepts and contemporary questions". In Rholes WS, Simpson JA (eds.).

Adult Attachment: Theory, Research, and Clinical Implications . New York: Guilford Press. pp.

3– 14.

ISBN 978-1-59385-047-0 .

^ Crowell JA, Fraley RC, Shaver PR (2008). "Measurement of Individual Differences in Adolescent and Adult Attachment". In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York and London: Guilford Press. pp.

599– 634.

ISBN 978-1-59385-874-2 .

^ Walker S, Double KS, Kunst H, Zhang M, MacCann C (2022).

"Emotional intelligence and attachment in adulthood: A meta-analysis" .

Personality and Individual Differences .

184 111174.

doi : 10.1016/j.paid.2021.111174 .

ISSN 0191-8869 .

^ Stevenson JC, Emerson LM, Millings A (December 2017).

"The Relationship Between Adult Attachment Orientation and Mindfulness: a Systematic Review and Meta-analysis" .

Mindfulness .

8 (6): 1438– 1455.

doi : 10.1007/s12671-017-0733-y .

ISSN 1868-8527 .

PMC 5693974 .

PMID 29201245 .

^ "Review of evidence on effects of deprivation. II: Retrospective and follow-up studies" .

Bulletin of the World Health Organization .

3 (3): 380– 95. 1951.

PMC 2554009 .

PMID 20603943 .

With monotonous regularity each put his finger on the child's inability to make relationships as being the central feature from which all other disturbances sprang, and on the history of institutionalization or, as in the case quoted, of the child's being shifted about from one foster-mother to another as being its cause.

^ Bowlby J (1944). "Forty-four juvenile thieves: Their characters and home life".

International Journal of Psychoanalysis .

25 ( 19– 52): 107– 27.

^ a b Rutter M (2008). "Implications of Attachment Theory and Research for Child Care Policies". In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York and London: Guilford Press. pp.

958– 74.

ISBN 978-1-59385-874-2 .

^ Spitz RA (1945). "Hospitalism; an inquiry into the genesis of psychiatric conditions in early childhood".

The Psychoanalytic Study of the Child .

1 : 53– 74.

doi : 10.1080/00797308.1945.11823126 .

PMID 21004303 .

^ Spitz RA (1951). "The psychogenic diseases in infancy".

The Psychoanalytic Study of the Child .

6 : 255– 75.

doi : 10.1080/00797308.1952.11822915 .

^ Schwartz J (1999).

Cassandra's Daughter: A History of Psychoanalysis . New York: Viking/Allen Lane. p.

225 .

ISBN 978-0-670-88623-4 .

^ a b "Preface".

Deprivation of Maternal Care: A Reassessment of its Effects . Public Health Papers. Geneva: World Health Organization. 1962.

^ Bowlby J (1988).

A Secure Base: Clinical Applications of Attachment Theory . London: Routledge. p. 24.

ISBN 978-0-415-00640-8 .

^ Reilly N, Brake E, Briggs N, Austin MP (1 November 2019).

"Trajectories of clinical and parenting outcomes following admission to an inpatient mother-baby unit" .

BMC Psychiatry .

19 (1): 336.

doi : 10.1186/s12888-019-2331-0 .

ISSN 1471-244X .

PMC 6825337 .

PMID 31675945 .

^ Bowlby J (December 1986).

"Citation Classic, Maternal Care and Mental Health " (PDF) . Current Contents . Retrieved 13 July 2008 .

^ Bretherton I (1992).

"The origins of attachment theory: John Bowlby and Mary Ainsworth" (PDF) .

Developmental Psychology .

28 (5): 759– 775.

doi : 10.1037/0012-1649.28.5.759 .

^ Holmes 1993 , p. 62.

^ Bowlby J (December 2007). "John Bowlby and ethology: an annotated interview with Robert Hinde".

Attachment & Human Development .

9 (4): 321– 35.

doi : 10.1080/14616730601149809 .

PMID 17852051 .

S2CID 146211690 .

^ Bowlby J (1953). "Critical Phases in the Development of Social Responses in Man and Other Animals".

New Biology .

14 : 25– 32.

^ Bowlby 1982 , pp. 220–23.

^ Crnic LS, Reite ML, Shucard DW (1982). "Animal models of human behavior: Their application to the study of attachment". In Emde RN, Harmon RJ (eds.).

The development of attachment and affiliative systems . New York: Plenum. pp.

31– 42.

ISBN 978-0-306-40849-6 .

^ Brannigan CR, Humphries DA (1972). "Human non-verbal behaviour: A means of communication". In Blurton-Jones N (ed.).

Ethological studies of child behaviour . Cambridge University Press. pp.

37– 64.

ISBN 978-0-521-09855-7 .

... it must be emphasized that data derived from species other than man can be used only to suggest hypotheses that may be worth applying to man for testing by critical observations. In the absence of critical evidence derived from observing man such hypotheses are no more than intelligent guesses. There is a danger in human ethology ... that interesting, but untested, hypotheses may gain the status of accepted theory. [One author] has coined the term 'ethologism' as a label for the present vogue [in 1970] ... for uncritically invoking the findings from ethological studies of other species as necessary and sufficient explanations ... Theory based on superficial analogies between species has always impeded biological understanding ... We conclude that a valid ethology of man must be based primarily on data derived from man, and not on data obtained from fish, birds, or other primates ^ Schur M (1960). "Discussion of Dr. John Bowlby's paper".

The Psychoanalytic Study of the Child .

15 : 63– 84.

doi : 10.1080/00797308.1960.11822568 .

PMID 13749000 .

Bowlby ... assumes the fully innate, unlearned character of most complex behavior patterns ... (whereas recent animal studies showed) ... both the early impact of learning and the great intricacy of the interaction between mother and litter" ... (and applies) ... "to human behavior an instinct concept which neglects the factor of development and learning far beyond even the position taken by Lorenz [the ethological theorist] in his early propositions ^ Schaffer HR, Emerson PE (1964). "The development of social attachment in infancy".

Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, Serial No. 94 .

29 (3).

^ Anderson JW (1972). "Attachment behaviour out of doors". In Blurton-Jones N (ed.).

Ethological studies of child behaviour . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

199– 216.

ISBN 978-0-521-09855-7 .

^ Jones NB, Leach GM (1972). "Behaviour of children and their mothers at separation and greeting". In Blurton-Jones N (ed.).

Ethological studies of child behaviour . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

217– 48.

ISBN 978-0-521-09855-7 .

^ Hinde R (1982).

Ethology . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 229.

ISBN 978-0-00-686034-1 .

^ Freud A, Burlingham DT (1943).

War and children . Medical War Books.

ISBN 978-0-8371-6942-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Holmes 1993 , pp. 62–63.

^ Holmes 1993 , pp. 64–65.

^ Steele H, Steele M (1998). "Attachment and psychoanalysis: Time for a reunion".

Social Development .

7 (1): 92– 119.

doi : 10.1111/1467-9507.00053 .

^ Cassidy J (1998). "Commentary on Steele and Steele: Attachment and object relations theories and the concept of independent behavioral systems".

Social Development .

7 (1): 120– 26.

doi : 10.1111/1467-9507.00054 .

^ Steele H, Steele M (1998). "Debate: Attachment and psychoanalysis: Time for a reunion".

Social Development .

7 (1): 92– 119.

doi : 10.1111/1467-9507.00053 .

^ a b c d e Cassidy J, Jones JD, Shaver PR (November 2013).

"Contributions of attachment theory and research: a framework for future research, translation, and policy" .

Development and Psychopathology .

25 (4 Pt 2): 1415– 34.

doi : 10.1017/s0954579413000692 .

PMC 4085672 .

PMID 24342848 .

^ Johnson-Laird PN (1983).

Mental models . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. pp.

179 –87.

ISBN 978-0-674-56881-5 .

^ Main M, Kaplan N, Cassidy J (1985). "Security in Infancy, Childhood, and Adulthood: A Move to the Level of Representation".

Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development .

50 (1/2): 66– 104.

doi : 10.2307/3333827 .

JSTOR 3333827 .

^ Ravitz P, Maunder R, Hunter J, Sthankiya B, Lancee W (1 October 2010).

"Adult attachment measures: A 25-year review" .

Journal of Psychosomatic Research .

69 (4): 419– 432.

doi : 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2009.08.006 .

ISSN 0022-3999 .

PMID 20846544 .

^ Lieberman AF (1997). "Toddlers' internalization of maternal attributions as a factor in quality of attachment". In Atkinson L, Zucker KJ (eds.).

Attachment and psychopathology . New York, NY, US: Guilford Press. pp.

277 –292.

ISBN 978-1-57230-191-7 .

^ Zeanah CH, Keener MA, Anders TF (August 1986). "Adolescent mothers' prenatal fantasies and working models of their infants".

Psychiatry .

49 (3): 193– 203.

doi : 10.1080/00332747.1986.11024321 .

PMID 3749375 .

^ Schechter DS, Moser DA, Reliford A, McCaw JE, Coates SW, Turner JB, et al. (February 2015).

"Negative and distorted attributions towards child, self, and primary attachment figure among posttraumatically stressed mothers: what changes with Clinician Assisted Videofeedback Exposure Sessions (CAVES)" .

Child Psychiatry and Human Development .

46 (1): 10– 20.

doi : 10.1007/s10578-014-0447-5 .

PMC 4139484 .

PMID 24553738 .

^ Robbins P, Zacks JM (2007). "Attachment theory and cognitive science: commentary on Fonagy and Target".

Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association .

55 (2): 457– 67, discussion 493–501.

doi : 10.1177/00030651070550021401 .

PMID 17601100 .

S2CID 17846200 .

^ Fraiberg S (1969). "Libidinal object constancy and mental representation".

The Psychoanalytic Study of the Child .

24 : 9– 47.

doi : 10.1080/00797308.1969.11822685 .

PMID 5353377 .

^ Waters HS, Waters E (September 2006). "The attachment working models concept: among other things, we build script-like representations of secure base experiences".

Attachment & Human Development .

8 (3): 185– 97.

doi : 10.1080/14616730600856016 .

PMID 16938702 .

S2CID 11443750 .

^ Gewirtz N (1969).

"Potency of a social reinforcer as a function of satiation and recovery" .

Developmental Psychology .

1 : 2– 13.

doi : 10.1037/h0026802 .

^ Volling B (2002).

"Parents' emotional availability and infant emotional competence: Predictors of parent-infant attachment and emerging self-regulation" .

Journal of Family Psychology .

164 (4): 447– 465.

doi : 10.1037/0893-3200.16.4.447 .

PMID 12561291 – via APA PsycArticles.

^ Karen pp. 166–73.

^ Kassow DZ, Dunst CJ (2004). "Relationship between parental contingent-responsiveness and attachment outcomes".

Bridges .

2 (4): 1– 17.

^ Dunst CJ, Kassow DZ (2008).

"Caregiver Sensitivity, Contingent Social Responsiveness, and Secure Infant Attachment" .

Journal of Early and Intensive Behavior Intervention .

5 (1): 40– 56.

doi : 10.1037/h0100409 .

ISSN 1554-4893 .

^ Sroufe LA, Waters E (1977).

"Attachment as an organizational construct" .

Child Development .

48 (4): 1184– 99.

doi : 10.2307/1128475 .

JSTOR 1128475 .

^ Waters E, Cummings EM (2000). "A secure base from which to explore close relationships".

Child Development .

71 (1): 164– 72.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.505.6759 .

doi : 10.1111/1467-8624.00130 .

PMID 10836570 .

S2CID 15158143 .

^ Tronick EZ, Morelli GA, Ivey PK (1992).

"The Efe forager infant and toddler's pattern of social relationships: Multiple and simultaneous" .

Developmental Psychology .

28 (4): 568– 77.

doi : 10.1037/0012-1649.28.4.568 .

S2CID 1756552 .

^ a b c van IJzendoorn MH, Sagi-Schwartz A (2008). "Cross-Cultural Patterns of Attachment; Universal and Contextual Dimensions". In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York and London: Guilford Press. pp.

880– 905.

ISBN 978-1-59385-874-2 .

^ Rutter M (1974).

The Qualities of Mothering . New York, N.Y.

ISBN 978-0-87668-189-3 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Behrens KY, Hesse E, Main M (November 2007).

"Mothers' attachment status as determined by the Adult Attachment Interview predicts their 6-year-olds' reunion responses: a study conducted in Japan" .

Developmental Psychology .

43 (6): 1553– 1567.

doi : 10.1037/0012-1649.43.6.1553 .

PMID 18020832 .

^ Main M, Cassidy J (1988).

"Categories of response to reunion with the parent at age 6: Predictable from infant attachment classifications and stable over a 1-month period" .

Developmental Psychology .

24 (3): 415– 26.

doi : 10.1037/0012-1649.24.3.415 .

^ Harris JR (1998).

The Nurture Assumption: Why Children Turn Out the Way They Do . New York: Free Press. pp.

1–4 .

ISBN 978-0-684-84409-1 .

^ Pinker S (2002).

The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature . London: Allen Lane. pp.

372– 99.

ISBN 978-0-14-027605-3 .

^ Kagan J (1994).

Three Seductive Ideas . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. pp.

83–150 .

ISBN 978-0-674-89033-6 .

^ a b c Vaughn BE, Bost KK, van IJzendoorn MH (2008). "Attachment and Temperament". In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York and London: Guilford Press. pp.

192– 216.

ISBN 978-1-59385-874-2 .

^ Schaffer HR (2004).

Introducing Child Psychology . Oxford: Blackwell. p. 113.

ISBN 978-0-631-21627-8 .

^ Fonagy P, Gergely G, Jurist EL, Target M (2002).

Affect regulation, mentalization, and the development of the self . New York: Other Press.

ISBN 978-1-59051-161-9 .

^ Mercer 2006 , pp. 165–68.

^ Fonagy P, Gergely G, Target M (2008). "Psychoanalytic Constructs and Attachment Theory and Research". In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment, Second Edition: Theory, Research, and Clinical Applications .

Handbook of Attachment: Theory, research and Clinical Applications . New York and London: Guilford Press. pp.

783– 810.

ISBN 978-1-59385-874-2 .

^ Belsky J, Rovine MJ (February 1988).

"Nonmaternal care in the first year of life and the security of infant-parent attachment" .

Child Development .

59 (1): 157– 67.

doi : 10.2307/1130397 .

JSTOR 1130397 .

PMID 3342709 .

^ Mercer 2006 , pp. 160–63.

^ Rutter M (January–February 2002). "Nature, nurture, and development: from evangelism through science toward policy and practice".

Child Development .

73 (1): 1– 21.

doi : 10.1111/1467-8624.00388 .

PMID 14717240 .

S2CID 10334844 .

^ Miyake K, Chen SJ (1985). "Infant temperament, mother's mode of interaction, and attachment in Japan: An interim report". In Bretherton I, Waters E (eds.).

Growing Points of Attachment Theory and Research: Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development . Vol. 50 1–2, Serial No. 209. pp.

276– 97.

ISBN 978-0-226-07411-5 .

^ Mercer 2006 , pp. 152–56.

^ Raby KL, Dozier M (February 2019).

"Attachment across the lifespan: insights from adoptive families" .

Current Opinion in Psychology .

25 : 81– 85.

doi : 10.1016/j.copsyc.2018.03.011 .

PMC 6158124 .

PMID 29621692 .

^ McHale JP (July 2007).

"When infants grow up in multiperson relationship systems" .

Infant Mental Health Journal .

28 (4): 370– 392.

doi : 10.1002/imhj.20142 .

PMC 3079566 .

PMID 21512615 .

^ Zhang X, Chen H (2010). "Reciprocal influences between parents' perceptions of mother-child and father-child relationships: a short-term longitudinal study in Chinese preschoolers".

The Journal of Genetic Psychology .

171 (1): 22– 34.

doi : 10.1080/00221320903300387 .

PMID 20333893 .

S2CID 35227740 .

^ Milanov M, Rubin M, Paolini S (2013).

"Adult attachment styles as predictors of different types of ingroup identification" .

Bulgarian Journal of Psychology .

1 (4): 175– 186.

^ Stein A (2017).

Terror, love and brainwashing : attachment in cults and totalitarian systems . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-138-67797-5 .

^ Bugental DB (March 2000). "Acquisition of the algorithms of social life: a domain-based approach".

Psychological Bulletin .

126 (2): 187– 219.

doi : 10.1037/0033-2909.126.2.187 .

PMID 10748640 .

S2CID 8499316 .

^ Bugental DB, Ellerson PC, Lin EK, Rainey B, Kokotovic A, O'Hara N (September 2002). "A cognitive approach to child abuse prevention".

Journal of Family Psychology .

16 (3): 243– 58.

doi : 10.1037/0893-3200.16.3.243 .

PMID 12238408 .

S2CID 32696082 .

^ Ma K (2006).

"Attachment theory in adult psychiatry. Part 1: Conceptualizations, measurement and clinical research findings" .

Advances in Psychiatric Treatment .

12 (6): 440– 449.

doi : 10.1192/apt.12.6.440 . Retrieved 21 April 2010 .

^ a b Fox NA, Hane AA (2008). "Studying the Biology of Human Attachment". In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York and London: Guilford Press. pp.

811– 29.

ISBN 978-1-59385-874-2 .

^ Landers MS, Sullivan RM (2012).

"The development and neurobiology of infant attachment and fear" .

Developmental Neuroscience .

34 ( 2– 3): 101– 14.

doi : 10.1159/000336732 .

PMC 3593124 .

PMID 22571921 .

^ Marshall PJ, Fox NA (2005). "Relationship between behavioral reactivity at 4 months and attachment classification at 14 months in a selected sample".

Infant Behavior and Development .

28 (4): 492– 502.

doi : 10.1016/j.infbeh.2005.06.002 .

^ Prior & Glaser 2006 , p. 219.

^ Adam EK, Klimes-Dougan B, Gunnar MR (2007). "Social regulation of the adrenocortical response to stress in infants, children, and adolescents.". In Coch D, Dawson G, Fischer KW (eds.).

Human behavior and the developing brain: Atypical development . New York, NY: Guilford Press. pp.

264– 304.

^ Chung HY, Cesari M, Anton S, Marzetti E, Giovannini S, Seo AY, et al. (January 2009).

"Molecular inflammation: underpinnings of aging and age-related diseases" .

Ageing Research Reviews .

8 (1): 18– 30.

doi : 10.1016/j.arr.2008.07.002 .

PMC 3782993 .

PMID 18692159 .

^ Coan JA (2008). "Toward a neuroscience of attachment.". In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press. pp.

241 –265.

^ Bartels A, Zeki S (March 2004). "The neural correlates of maternal and romantic love".

NeuroImage .

21 (3): 1155– 66.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.11.003 .

PMID 15006682 .

S2CID 15237043 .

^ Gillath O , Shaver PR, Baek JM, Chun DS (October 2008).

"Genetic correlates of adult attachment style" .

Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin .

34 (10): 1396– 405.

doi : 10.1177/0146167208321484 .

PMID 18687882 .

S2CID 39668634 .

^ Gouin JP, Glaser R, Loving TJ, Malarkey WB, Stowell J, Houts C, et al. (October 2009).

"Attachment avoidance predicts inflammatory responses to marital conflict" .

Brain, Behavior, and Immunity .

23 (7): 898– 904.

doi : 10.1016/j.bbi.2008.09.016 .

PMC 2771542 .

PMID 18952163 .

^ Jaremka L, Glaser R, Loving T, Malarkey W, Stowell J, Kiecolt-Glaser J. Attachment anxiety is linked to alterations in cortisol production and cellular immunity. Psychological Science. Advance online publication 2013 ^ Chen E, Miller GE, Kobor MS, Cole SW (July 2011).

"Maternal warmth buffers the effects of low early-life socioeconomic status on pro-inflammatory signaling in adulthood" .

Molecular Psychiatry .

16 (7): 729– 37.

doi : 10.1038/mp.2010.53 .

PMC 2925055 .

PMID 20479762 .

^ Belsky J, Pasco Fearon RM (2008). "Precursors of Attachment Security". In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York and London: Guilford Press. pp.

295– 316.

ISBN 978-1-59385-874-2 .

^ Ranu J, Kalebic N, Melendez-Torres GJ, Taylor PJ (17 September 2022).

"Association Between Adverse Childhood Experiences and a Combination of Psychosis and Violence Among Adults: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis" .

Trauma, Violence, & Abuse .

24 (5): 2997– 3013.

doi : 10.1177/15248380221122818 .

ISSN 1524-8380 .

PMID 36117458 .

S2CID 252363546 .

^ Hollin CR (2013).

Psychology and Crime: An Introduction to Criminological Psychology . USA & Canada: Routledge. p. 62.

^ Aichhorn A (1935).

Wayward Youth . the University of Michigan: The Viking Press.

^ Bowlby J (1 January 1944). "Forty-four Juvenile Thieves: their Characters and Home-Life".

International Journal of Psycho-Analysis .

25 .

^ Moffitt TE, Caspi A (2001).

"Childhood predictors differentiate life-course persistent and adolescence-limited antisocial pathways among males and females" .

Development and Psychopathology .

13 (2): 355– 75.

doi : 10.1017/S0954579401002097 .

PMID 11393651 .

S2CID 29182035 .

^ Sampson RJ, Laub JH (2005). "A Life-Course View of the Development of Crime".

Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science .

602 : 12– 45.

doi : 10.1177/0002716205280075 .

S2CID 45146032 .

^ a b Gilchrist E, Johnson R, Takriti R, Weston S, Anthony Beech A, Kebbell M (2003).

"Domestic Violence offenders: characteristics and offending related needs" (PDF) .

Research, Development and Statistics Directorate . United Kingdom Home Office. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 February 2011 . Retrieved 29 March 2019 .

^ a b Kesner JE, Julian T, McKenry PC (1 June 1997).

"Application of Attachment Theory to Male Violence Toward Female Intimates" .

Journal of Family Violence .

12 (2): 211– 228.

doi : 10.1023/A:1022840812546 .

ISSN 1573-2851 .

S2CID 26203922 .

^ Dollard J, Miller NE, Doob LW, Mowrer OH, Sears RR (1939).

Frustration and aggression . New Haven: Yale University Press.

doi : 10.1037/10022-000 .

^ Smallbone S, Dadds M (October 1998). "Childhood Attachment and Adult Attachment in Incarcerated Adult Male Sex Offenders".

Journal of Interpersonal Violence .

13 5 .

^ Brown J, Miller S, Northey S, O'Neill D (2014). "Attachments: The Multiple Sorting Task Procedure".

What Works in Therapeutic Prisons . London: Palgrave Macmillan.

doi : 10.1057/9781137306210 .

ISBN 978-1-137-30620-3 .

^ Ward T, Beech A (2006). "An integrated theory of sexual offending".

Aggression and Violent Behavior .

11 : 44– 63.

doi : 10.1016/j.avb.2005.05.002 .

^ Ansbro M (September 2022).

"Using attachment theory in probation practice" (PDF) .

justiceinspectorates.gov.uk . Retrieved 17 April 2024 .

^ Mikulincer, Mario; Shaver, Phillip R. (2019). Attachment in Adulthood: Structure, Dynamics, and Change. Guilford Press.

^ a b c d Rutter M (2008).

"Implications of Attachment Theory and Research for Child Care Policies" . In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York and London: Guilford Press. pp.

958–74 .

ISBN 978-1-60623-028-2 .

^ Chen J, Jordan LP (17 July 2019).

"Psychological Well-Being of Coresiding Elderly Parents and Adult Children in China: Do Father–Child and Mother–Child Relationships Make a Difference?" .

Journal of Family Issues .

40 (18): 2728– 2750.

doi : 10.1177/0192513x19862845 .

ISSN 0192-513X .

S2CID 199177299 .

^ Yaakobi E, Williams KD (May 2016).

"Recalling an Attachment Event Moderates Distress after Ostracism" .

European Journal of Personality .

30 (3): 258– 273.

doi : 10.1002/per.2050 .

ISSN 0890-2070 .

S2CID 147614160 .

^ NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (1997).

"The effects of infant child care on infant-mother attachment security: Results of the NICHD study of early child care" .

Child Development .

68 (5): 860– 879.

doi : 10.2307/1132038 .

JSTOR 1132038 .

^ a b Sweeney GM (2007). "Why childhood attachment matters: Implications for personal happiness, families and public policy.". In Loveless S, Homan T (eds.).

The family in the new millennium . Westport, CT: Praeger. pp.

332 –346.

^ a b Karen 1998 , pp. 252–58.

^ Rutter M, O'Connor TG (1999).

"Implications of Attachment Theory for Child Care Policies" . In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York: Guilford Press. pp.

823–44 .

ISBN 978-1-57230-087-3 .

^ Stefaroi P (2012). "Humanistic Paradigm of Social Work or Brief Introduction in Humanistic Social Work".

Social Work Review .

10 (1): 161– 174.

ICID 985513 ^ Stefaroi P (2014).

Humane & Spiritual Qualities of the Professional in Humanistic Social Work: Humanistic Social Work – The Third Way in Theory and Practice . Charleston, SC: Createspace.

^ Goldsmith DF, Oppenheim D, Wanlass J (2004).

"Separation and Reunification: Using Attachment Theory and Research to Inform Decisions Affecting the Placements of Children in Foster Care" (PDF) .

Juvenile and Family Court Journal . Spring (2): 1– 14.

doi : 10.1111/j.1755-6988.2004.tb00156.x .

S2CID 144988504 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 October 2007 . Retrieved 19 June 2009 .

^ Crittenden PM, Farnfield S, Landini A, Grey B (2013). "Assessing attachment for family court decision making".

Journal of Forensic Practice .

15 (4): 237– 248.

doi : 10.1108/jfp-08-2012-0002 .

S2CID 46679519 .

^ Cassidy J, Jones JD, Shaver PR (November 2013).

"Contributions of attachment theory and research: A framework for future research, translation, and policy" .

Development and Psychopathology .

25 (4pt2): 1415– 1434.

doi : 10.1017/S0954579413000692 .

PMC 4085672 .

PMID 24342848 .

^ Ziv Y (2005). "Attachment-Based Intervention programs: Implications for Attachment Theory and Research". In Berlin LJ, Ziv Y, Amaya-Jackson L, Greenberg MT (eds.).

Enhancing Early Attachments: Theory, Research, Intervention and Policy . Duke series in child development and public policy. New York and London: Guilford Press. p. 63.

ISBN 978-1-59385-470-6 .

^ a b Berlin LJ, Zeanah CH, Lieberman AF (2008). "Prevention and Intervention Programs for Supporting Early Attachment Security". In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York and London: Guilford Press. pp.

745– 61.

ISBN 978-1-59385-874-2 .

^ Prior & Glaser 2006 , pp. 231–32.

^ Bakermans-Kranenburg MJ, van IJzendoorn MH, Juffer F (March 2003).

"Less is more: meta-analyses of sensitivity and attachment interventions in early childhood" .

Psychological Bulletin .

129 (2): 195– 215.

doi : 10.1037/0033-2909.129.2.195 .

PMID 12696839 .

S2CID 7504386 .

^ Hoffman KT, Marvin RS, Cooper G, Powell B (December 2006).

"Changing toddlers' and preschoolers' attachment classifications: the Circle of Security intervention" .

Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology .

74 (6): 1017– 26.

doi : 10.1037/0022-006x.74.6.1017 .

PMID 17154732 .

S2CID 6672909 .

^ Thompson RA (2000). "The legacy of early attachments".

Child Development .

71 (1): 145– 52.

doi : 10.1111/1467-8624.00128 .

PMID 10836568 .

S2CID 18055255 .

^ a b Chaffin M, Hanson R, Saunders BE, Nichols T, Barnett D, Zeanah C, et al. (February 2006). "Report of the APSAC task force on attachment therapy, reactive attachment disorder, and attachment problems".

Child Maltreatment .

11 (1): 76– 89.

doi : 10.1177/1077559505283699 .

PMID 16382093 .

S2CID 11443880 .

^ Prior & Glaser 2006 , pp. 223–25.

^ Schechter DS, Willheim E (July 2009).

"Disturbances of attachment and parental psychopathology in early childhood" .

Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America .

18 (3): 665– 86.

doi : 10.1016/j.chc.2009.03.001 .

PMC 2690512 .

PMID 19486844 .

^ a b Slade A (2008). "Attachment Theory and Research: Implications for the theory and practice of individual psychotherapy with adults". In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York and London: Guilford Press. pp.

762– 82.

ISBN 978-1-59385-874-2 .

^ Sable P (2000).

Attachment & Adult Psychotherapy . Northvale, NJ: Aaronson.

ISBN 978-0-7657-0284-5 .

^ Kagan J (10 October 1984).

Nature Of The Child . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0-465-04850-2 .

^ Field T (February 1996). "Attachment and separation in young children".

Annual Review of Psychology .

47 (1): 541– 61.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.psych.47.1.541 .

PMID 8624142 .

S2CID 15251864 .

^ Wylie MS (March 2011).

"Do We Still Need Attachment Theory?" . Psychotherapy Networker.

General and cited references [ edit ] Bowlby J (1953).

Child Care and the Growth of Love . London: Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-0-14-020271-7 . Version of WHO publication Maternal Care and Mental Health published for sale to the general public.

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) CS1 maint: postscript ( link ) Bowlby J (1971) [1969].

Attachment and Loss (Vol. 1: Attachment) (1st ed.). London: Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-0-14-021276-1 .

Bowlby J (1979).

The Making and Breaking of Affectional Bonds . London: Tavistock Publications.

ISBN 978-0-422-76860-3 .

Bowlby J (1982).

Attachment and Loss (Vol. 1: Attachment) (2nd ed.). New York: Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0-465-00543-7 .

LCCN 00266879 .

OCLC 11442968 . NLM 8412414.

Bowlby J (1999) [1982].

Attachment . Attachment and Loss Vol. I (2nd ed.). New York: Basic Books.

ISBN 0-465-00543-8 .

LCCN 00266879 .

OCLC 11442968 . NLM 8412414.

Craik K (1967) [1943].

The Nature of Explanation . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-09445-0 .

Elliot AJ, Reis HT (August 2003).

"Attachment and exploration in adulthood" .

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

85 (2): 317– 31.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.85.2.317 .

PMID 12916573 .

Holmes J (1993).

John Bowlby & Attachment Theory . Makers of modern psychotherapy. London: Routledge.

ISBN 041507729X .

Karen R (1998).

Becoming Attached: First Relationships and How They Shape Our Capacity to Love . Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-511501-5 .

Mercer J (2006).

Understanding Attachment: Parenting, child care, and emotional development . Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-275-98217-1 .

LCCN 2005019272 .

OCLC 61115448 .

Prior V, Glaser D (2006).

Understanding Attachment and Attachment Disorders: Theory, Evidence and Practice . Child and Adolescent Mental Health, RCPRTU. London and Philadelphia: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-84310-245-8 .

Tinbergen N (1951).

The Study of Instinct . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-857722-5 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Further reading [ edit ] Library resources about Attachment theory Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Schore AN (1994).

Affect Regulation and the Origin of the Self: The Neurobiology of Emotional Development . Hillsdale, N.J.: L. Erlbaum Associates.

ISBN 978-1-135-69392-3 .

Karen R (February 1990).

"Becoming Attached" .

The Atlantic Monthly .

v t e Attachment theory Theory Affectional bond Attachment in adults Attachment in children Attachment disorder Attachment and health Attachment measures Attachment theory Dynamic-maturational model of attachment and adaptation Fathers as attachment figures Human bonding Maternal deprivation Object relations theory Reactive attachment disorder Notable theorists Mary Ainsworth William E. Blatz John Bowlby Patricia McKinsey Crittenden Erik Erikson Sigmund Freud Harry Harlow Jerome Kagan Melanie Klein Konrad Lorenz Mary Main René Spitz Nikolaas Tinbergen Clinical applications Attachment-based therapy (children) Attachment-based psychotherapy Dyadic developmental psychotherapy Others History of attachment theory v t e Human psychological development Developmental psychology Antenatal Cognitive development of infants Child development Positive youth development Young adult Adult development Positive adult development Maturity Theorists and theories Freud (1856–1939) ( Psychosexual development ) Piaget (1896–1980) ( Theory of cognitive development ) Vygotsky (1896–1934) ( Cultural-historical psychology ) Erikson (1902–1994) ( Psychosocial development ) Bowlby (1907–1990) ( Attachment theory ) Bronfenbrenner (1917–2005) ( Ecological systems theory ) Kohlberg (1927–1987) ( Stages of moral development ) Commons (b. 1939), Fischer (1943–2020), Kegan (b. 1946), Demetriou (b. 1950), and others ( Neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development ) Evolutionary developmental psychology v t e Parenting Kinship terminology Parent Mother Father Adoptive Alloparenting Coparenting Extended family Foster care Noncustodial Nuclear family Orphaned Same-sex Shared parenting Single parent Blended family Surrogacy In loco parentis Theories · Areas Attachment theory Applied behavior analysis Behaviorism Child development Cognitive development Developmental psychology Human development Identity formation Introjection Love Maternal bond Nature versus nurture Parental investment Care work Cost of raising a child Paternal care Unpaid work Paternal bond Pediatrics Social emotional development Socialization Social psychology Styles Achievement ideology Atlas personality Attachment parenting Baby talk Buddha-like parenting Concerted cultivation Enmeshment Free-range parenting Gatekeeper parent Helicopter parent Nurturant parenting Reflective parenting Slow parenting Soccer mom Strict father model Taking Children Seriously Theybie Tiger parenting Work at home parent Techniques After-school activity Allowance Bedtime Child care Co-sleeping Dishabituation Education Habituation Homeschooling Identification (psychology) Introjection Kommune 1 Latchkey kid Moral development Normative social influence Parent management training Play ( date ) Role model Social integration Television The talk (race) The talk (sex education) Toy ( educational ) Positive Parenting Program Child discipline Blanket training Corporal punishment in the home Curfew Grounding Positive discipline Tactical ignoring Time-out Abuse Adverse childhood experiences Child abandonment Child abuse Child labour Child neglect Cinderella effect Codependency Deadbeat parent Dysfunctional family Effects of domestic violence Incest Management of domestic violence Narcissistic parent Parental abuse by children Parental alienation Stress in early childhood Legal Child custody Child support Disownment Family disruption Right to family life Marriage Parental leave Parental responsibility Parents' rights Paternity Shared parenting Experts Mary Ainsworth Diana Baumrind John Bowlby T. Berry Brazelton Rudolf Dreikurs David Elkind Jo Frost Haim Ginott Thomas Gordon Alan E. Kazdin Truby King Annette Lareau Penelope Leach Matthew Sanders William Sears B. F. Skinner Benjamin Spock Organizations Families Need Fathers Mothers' Union National Childbirth Trust National Fatherhood Initiative National Parents Organization Parent–teacher association Parents Against Child Exploitation v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal v t e Infants and their care Health ( pediatrics ) Baby food Birth weight Breast pump Breastfeeding Breastfeeding and medications Breastfeeding and mental health Bottle feeding Colic Cradle cap Esotropia Failure to thrive Immunization Infant and toddler safety Infant bathing Infant feeding Infant food safety Infant formula Infant massage Infant respiratory distress syndrome Infant sleep training Neonatal intensive care unit Newborn care and safety Oral rehydration therapy Pedialyte Preterm birth Shaken baby syndrome Soy formula SIDS Development Attachment parenting Baby-led weaning Baby talk Babbling Birth defect Childbirth Crawling Gestational age Infant visual development Irritant diaper dermatitis Infant cognitive development Infant crying Kangaroo care Mother Nursery rhyme Object permanence Parent Parenting Peekaboo Play Prenatal development Prenatal development table Teething Walking Weaning Socialization and culture Attachment Babysitting Child abuse Child care Child custody Children's rights UN Child rights Circumcision Foster care Grandparent visitation Infant swimming Milk bank Nanny Wet nurse Infant care and equipment Baby bouncer Baby gate Baby monitor / Hidden camera Baby powder Baby shampoo Baby toy Baby walker Bib Baby swing Baby transport Bassinet Car seat safety Child vehicular heat stroke deaths Cloth diaper Cradle board Diaper Diaper bag Baby wipes Haberman Feeder High chair Infant bed (American 'crib' and 'cradle', British 'cot') Infant carrier Infant clothing Pacifier Playpen Stroller Supplemental nursing system Swaddling Swim diaper Teether Travel cot Other topics Baby shower Babywearing Child neglect Closed adoption Cry room Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder Infant ear piercing Open adoption Prenatal cocaine exposure Neonatal withdrawal syndrome Parental child abduction Parental responsibility Parenting plan Paternity Paternity fraud Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐lmrrp
Cached time: 20250814214922
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.426 seconds
Real time usage: 2.647 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 18581/1000000
Revision size: 202388/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 693543/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9533/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 996892/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.636/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18481524/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2277.603      1 -total
 61.38% 1397.959      1 Template:Reflist
 28.16%  641.342    128 Template:Cite_journal
 17.74%  404.075     74 Template:Cite_book
  8.61%  196.150     26 Template:Sfn
  8.30%  189.076     26 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  6.13%  139.579      9 Template:Annotated_link
  4.01%   91.238      7 Template:Navbox
  2.92%   66.522      1 Template:Attachment_theory
  2.74%   62.398      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:884589:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814214922 and revision id 1305421535. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Attachment_theory&oldid=1305421535 " Categories : Attachment theory Adoption, fostering, orphan care and displacement Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary psychology Human development Interpersonal relationships Object relations theory Psychoanalytic theory Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use Oxford spelling from November 2024 Use dmy dates from August 2024 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2023 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from January 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2020 CS1 maint: postscript This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 00:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Attachment theory 40 languages Add topic

