Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Family 3 Death and burial 4 The "Ussishkin Fortresses" 5 Commemoration 6 Gallery 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Menachem Ussishkin 9 languages Čeština Deutsch Français Bahasa Indonesia עברית Polski Português Русский اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Menahem Ussishkin ) Russian-born Zionist leader "Ussishkin" redirects here. For other uses, see Ussishkin (disambiguation) .

For the archaeologist, see David Ussishkin .

You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Russian .

(July 2025) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Russian Wikipedia article at [[:ru:Усышкин, Менахем]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|ru|Усышкин, Менахем}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Menachem Ussishkin מנחם אוסישקין Born Menachem Ussishkin August 14, 1863 Dubrowna , Belarus Died October 2, 1941 (aged 78) Jerusalem , Mandatory Palestine Nationality Russian Occupation President of the Jewish National Fund Known for Secretary of the First Zionist Congress Menachem Ussishkin ( Russian : Авраам Менахем Мендл Усышкин Avraham Menachem Mendel Ussishkin , Hebrew : מנחם אוסישקין ; August 14, 1863 – October 2, 1941) was a Russian-born Zionist leader and head of the Jewish National Fund .

Biography Menachem Ussishkin was born in Dubrowna in the Belarusian part of the Russian Empire . He received a traditional Jewish education, but when his family moved to Moscow , he learned in secular school.

[ 1 ] In 1889, he graduated as a technical engineer from Moscow State Technical University, today known as Bauman Moscow State Technical University .  Ussishkin was among the founders of the BILU movement and the Moscow branch of the Hovevei Zion . He also joined the Bnei Moshe society founded by Ahad HaAm . In 1891, he made his first trip to Palestine.

[ 2 ] Ussishkin served as Secretary of the First Zionist Congress . In 1903, Ussishkin visited Palestine and was not present at the Sixth Zionist Congress where the Uganda plan was presented. Soon after, he became one of the main leaders who strongly opposed this plan, until it was abandoned in the Seventh Zionist Congress in 1905.

He was one of the Jewish delegates to the Paris peace conference after World War I .

[ 2 ] In 1919, Ussishkin immigrated to what was in the process of becoming Mandatory Palestine on board the ship Ruslan. In 1920, he was appointed head of the Zionist Commission in Palestine.

[ 2 ] In his pamphlet "Our Program", he advocated group settlement based on labour Zionism . Under his influence, the Zionist movement actively supported the establishment of agricultural settlements, educational and cultural institutions, and Jewish polytechnic - later the Technion .

In 1923, Ussishkin was elected President of the Jewish National Fund which he headed until his death. Ussishkin was behind major land acquisitions in the Hefer , Jezreel and Beit She'an valleys.

In 1941, Ussishkin said he opposed any attempt to establish a Jewish state without Jews having a majority. He said that a minority-Jewish state would inevitably end in what would later be called apartheid . His proposal was to focus on large-scale immigration rather than independence: "First, a Jewish state, and second, equal rights for the Arabs, and third, transfer of the Arabs only if they consent." "In South Africa, the blacks are eighty percent and the rulers there are the twenty percent of whites; the eighty percent have no rights at all … do you want that the Jews who are twenty percent should rule in Palestine? If that's what you say, then the way you use the term 'Jewish state' is comprehensible. But you won't say that, because you can’t say that, since there is no hope that anyone in the non-Jewish world would accept that concept, and also a large part of the Zionist movement would oppose that concept, justly or not." [ 3 ] Family Ussishkin had two children: His daughter, Rachel, married Friedrich Simon Bodenheimer , entomologist and son of Zionist Max Bodenheimer . His son, Samuel , a lawyer, married Elsa Schoenberg. Their son is archaeologist David Ussishkin .

Death and burial Ussishkin died in 1941 in Jerusalem at the age of 78. He is buried in Nicanor's Cave at the botanical gardens of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem on Mount Scopus .

[ 4 ] The "Ussishkin Fortresses" This section may be expanded using the corresponding article in Hebrew (March 2024) A group of villages in northern Israel, including Dan , Dafna , She'ar Yashuv and Beit Hillel , were collectively named the " Ussishkin Fortresses ".

Commemoration Ussishkin's name is commemorated in many places in Israel. Kibbutz Kfar Menahem is named after him.

On his 70th birthday, the Rehavia neighborhood council decided to change the name of the street in which he lived, Rechov Keren Kayemet Le'Israel ( Jewish National Fund ) to Rechov Ussishkin, and move Rechov Keren Kayamet Le'Israel to its present location.

[ 5 ] Following Ussishkin's death, many streets and schools in Israel were named after him, as is the largest auditorium at the International Convention Center in Jerusalem.

Gallery Menachem Ussishkin (seated) with Adolf Stand . pre 1919 Home of Menachem Ussishkin in Rehavia , Jerusalem Menachem Ussishkin 1929 Menachem Ussishkin with Albert Einstein Menachem Ussishkin visiting Dafna 1 May 1939 References ^ Редакция.

"Усышкин Аврахам Менахем Мендл" .

Электронная еврейская энциклопедия ОРТ (in Russian) . Retrieved 2023-11-13 .

^ a b c "Menachem Mendel Ussishkin" .

The complete guide to Israeli postage stamps from 1948 onward . Boeliem. Archived from the original on 2011-07-08 . Retrieved 2010-11-07 .

^ Segev, Tom (2019-09-24).

A State at Any Cost: The Life of David Ben-Gurion . Farrar, Straus and Giroux. p. 184.

ISBN 978-1-4299-5184-5 .

^ "Mount Scopus botanical garden" . Archived from the original on 2012-04-06 . Retrieved 2012-02-22 .

^ Dotan Goren, Et-Mol 247 (August 2016), pages 23-26 (in Hebrew). There is a different version, according to which the name was previously called Rechov Yehuda HaLevy , see Kurtz, Chani. "Road of Remembrance: Street names and their stories".

Binah Pesach supplement, 2015, p. 54. However, the historical documents show this version is incorrect. In particular, Yehuda HaLevy is the former name of Gan HaKuzari in Rehavia.

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Menachem Ussishkin .

Menachem Ussishkin Jewish Agency for Israel The personal papers of Menachem Ussishkin are kept at the Central Zionist Archives in Jerusalem. The notation of the record group is A24 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Netherlands Sweden Poland 2 Israel Other IdRef SNAC Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Menachem_Ussishkin&oldid=1304808563 " Categories : 1863 births 1941 deaths Belarusian Jews Belarusian Zionists Hovevei Zion Ashkenazi Jews in Mandatory Palestine Mandatory Palestine people of Belarusian-Jewish descent Mandatory Palestine people of Russian-Jewish descent Jewish National Council members Labor Zionists Members of the Assembly of Representatives (Mandatory Palestine) People from Dubrowna People from Jerusalem Soviet emigrants to Mandatory Palestine Russian Zionists Delegates to the First World Zionist Congress Immigrants of the Third Aliyah Hidden categories: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1: unfit URL Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Biography articles needing translation from Russian Wikipedia Articles with hCards Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 08:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Menachem Ussishkin 9 languages Add topic

