Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 New Zealand law 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Restraint on alienation 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Property law The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( October 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Property law Part of the common law series Types Personal property Community property Real property Unowned property Acquisition Gift Adverse possession Deed Conquest Discovery Accession Lost, mislaid, and abandoned property Treasure trove Bailment License Alienation Estates in land Allodial title Fee simple Fee tail Life estate Defeasible estate Future interest remainder Concurrent estate Leasehold estate Condominiums Real estate Land tenure Conveyancing Bona fide purchaser Torrens title Strata title Deeds registration Estoppel by deed Quitclaim deed Mortgage Equitable conversion Action to quiet title Escheat Future use control Restraint on alienation Rule against perpetuities Rule in Shelley's Case Doctrine of worthier title Nonpossessory interest Lien Easement Profit Usufruct Covenant Equitable servitude Related topics Fixtures Waste Partition Practicing without a license Property rights Mineral rights Water rights prior appropriation riparian Lateral and subjacent support Assignment Nemo dat Quicquid plantatur Conflict of property laws Blackacre Security deposit Other common law areas Contract law Tort law Wills , trusts and estates Criminal law Evidence Higher category: Law and Common law v t e A restraint on alienation , in the law of real property , is a clause used in the conveyance of real property that seeks to prohibit the recipient from selling or otherwise transferring their interest in the property. Under the common law such restraints are void as against the public policy of allowing landowners to freely dispose of their property. Perhaps the ultimate restraint on alienation was the fee tail , a form of ownership which required that property be passed down in the same family from generation to generation, which has also been widely abolished.

[ 1 ] However, certain reasonable restraints will be given effect in most jurisdictions. These traditionally include: A prohibition against partition of property for a limited time.

The right of first refusal – for example, if Joey sells property to Rachel, he may require that if Rachel later decides to sell the property, she must first give Joey the opportunity to buy it back.

The establishment of public parks and gardens, as was the case for the Royal Parks of London in the UK. These public spaces were created under such terms by the Crown Estate ; which meant that these parks were held in perpetuity for the public to use.

Some specific restraints on alienation in the United States include: Disabling restraints To be effective the grantor must sue the grantee for enforcement.  The effectiveness of the lawsuit could prevent the transfer from being made.  In addition, if the disabling restraint is found to be unconstitutional the restraint will not be effective.

Promissory restraints If the promissory note is breached by the grantee, the grantor may sue for damages. Unlike disabling restraints, the effectiveness of the lawsuit does not prevent the transfer from being made.  However, the Supreme Court says promissory restraints are not permissible.  The promissory note discourages the person getting ready to sell the property which is the same effect as the disabling restraint.

Forfeiture restraints In the event of a breach the property returns to the grantor or the grantor's heirs.  The return happens automatically, hence the argument can be made that there is no state actions.  However, according to a constitutional argument the mere fact that the state recognizes the validity of an automatic transfer makes it a state action.

To be effective the restraint must be reasonable and the restraint must be the same as a real covenant or equitable servitude.

There are six factors to determine if a restraint on alienation is reasonable: Type of price (fixed or not fixed; courts prefer non-fixed) Purpose: Is it a legitimate purpose, or not? (courts prefer legitimate) Equal bargaining power of the parties Duration (a time limit to the restraint is preferred) Limit to the number of persons to which transfer is prohibited A restraint that increases the value of property is more reasonable.

There are five basic conditions that must be met in order for there to be an effective real covenant and equitable servitude: It must be enforceable .  To be enforceable it must not be too vague, it must not violate a statute or the constitution , it must not violate public policy, and it must meet the requirements under the statute of frauds .

It must touch and concern the land.

It must be intended to run.

There must be privity between the successive occupants.

There must be notice of the existence of a real covenant/equitable servitude.

New Zealand law [ edit ] In New Zealand , Te Ture Whenua Maori Act 1993/Maori Land Act 1993 puts restrictions on alienation of land owned by a Māori person, or by a group which is predominantly Māori. Sections 146 and 147 of the Act force an owner of Māori land who wishes to alienate their interest in the land to give right of first refusal to people belonging to "preferred classes of alienees".

[ 2 ] These preferred classes include whanaunga (blood relations) [ 3 ] of the owner, other current owners, and members of the owner's hapū .

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Moynihan, Cornelius J.

Introduction to the Law of Real Property: An Historical Background of The Common Law of Real Property and its Modern Application , 4th ed. (St. Paul, Mn: Thompson West), 42.

References [ edit ] ^ "Fee Tail" .

Archived from the original on 2017-04-12 . Retrieved 2017-04-11 .

^ Te Ture Whenua Maori Act 1993/Maori Land Act 1993 Archived 2012-01-18 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Māori Dictionary Archived 2011-07-22 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Section 4, Te Ture Whenua Maori Act 1993/Maori Land Act 1993 Archived 2012-01-18 at the Wayback Machine .

v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐p8tdn
Cached time: 20250812020903
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.288 seconds
Real time usage: 0.374 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 662/1000000
Revision size: 6017/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 46918/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 392/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 25505/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.194/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4717104/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  308.573      1 -total
 27.56%   85.038      1 Template:Property_law
 26.88%   82.939      1 Template:Sidebar
 20.65%   63.724      1 Template:Cite_web
 17.33%   53.481      1 Template:Short_description
 15.10%   46.596      1 Template:Property_navbox
 14.84%   45.784      1 Template:Globalize
 14.78%   45.622      2 Template:Navbox
 13.45%   41.492      1 Template:Ambox
  9.95%   30.703      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2279629:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020903 and revision id 1267558537. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Restraint_on_alienation&oldid=1267558537 " Category : Property law Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from October 2011 United States-centric This page was last edited on 5 January 2025, at 17:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Restraint on alienation 1 language Add topic

