Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 General views on economics 3 Differences between traditional and Buddhist economics 4 Other beliefs 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Buddhist economics 20 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Čeština Deutsch فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Português Русский ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Buddhist philosophy on economics Slogan in Bhutan about gross national happiness in Thimphu's School of Traditional Arts.

Part of a series on Economic systems Major types Capitalism Socialism By ideology Associative Capitalist Corporate Democratic Laissez-faire Mercantilist Neo- Neoliberal Social market State Welfare Democratic Developmentalism Distributist Fascist Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgist Green Nationalist Protectionist Religious Buddhist economics Christian Sabbath economics Islamic Socialist Communist Market socialist Mutualist Participatory Socialist market Socialist-oriented market State Syndicalist Social credit Traditionalist Corporatist Feudalism By coordination Closed (autarky) Decentralized Digital Dirigist Dual Gift Informal Market Mixed Natural Open Planned Robinson Crusoe Sharing Subsistence Underground Vertical archipelago Virtual By regional model Asian East Asian Chinese Singaporean Keralan European Anglo-Saxon German Nordic Dutch Rhenish Soviet Latin America Socialism of the 21st century Sectors Common ownership Private Public Voluntary Property types Collective ownership Commons ( Common ownership ) Private property State ownership Social ownership Transition Collectivization Communization Corporatization Demutualization Deregulation Expropriation Financialization Liberalization Marketization Municipalization Mutualization Nationalization Privatization Socialization Marxist Coordination Barter Market Free Open Regulated Planning In kind Cybernetics Indicative Material balancing Price Self-managed Peer-to-peer Sharing Open access Other types Attention Commons-based peer production Expeditionary Hunter-gatherer Inclusive Democracy Information Manorialism Newly industrialized Palace Plantation Plutonomy Post-capitalist Post-industrial Post-scarcity Resource-based Token Traditional Transition World Business portal Economics portal v t e Part of the behavioral sciences Economics Outline Index Glossary Economists Principles of Economics Tools and methodology Economic theory Mathematical modeling Game theory Rational choice Cognitive science ( Behavioral ) Economic equilibrium Empirical methods Experimental National accounts Econometrics Time series Spatial Prescriptive and policy Welfare analysis Social choice theory Rational choice theory Cost–benefit analysis Branches and subfields Applied Econometrics International Heterodox Micro Macro Mainstream Mathematical Mech. design Methodology Political Industrial org.

Market design Applications Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Economics portal Society portal v t e Part of a series on Anti-consumerism Theories and ideas Asceticism Affluenza Alternative culture Anti-capitalism Autonomous building Billboard hacking Buyer's remorse Bioeconomics Buddhist economics Buy Nothing Day Collaborative consumption Collapsology Commodification Commodity fetishism Commune Compulsive buying disorder Conspicuous consumption Consumer capitalism Consumerism Conviviality Criticism of advertising Culture jamming Degrowth Do it yourself Downshifting Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological economics Ecovillage Ethical consumerism Feminist political ecology Food loss and waste Freeganism Gift economy Green consumption Hyperconsumerism Laconophilia Local food Microgeneration Non-possession Overconsumption Planned obsolescence Right to repair Political ecology Post-consumerism Simple living Slow Food Steady-state economy Subvertising Sustainable consumer behaviour Sustainable consumption Notable works Walden The Theory of the Leisure Class Brave New World The Affluent Society One-Dimensional Man The Society of the Spectacle ( book , film ) The Consumer Society: Myths and Structures [ fr ] Steal This Book Small Is Beautiful To Have or to Be?

Future Primitive and Other Essays Fight Club ( novel , film ) Escape from Affluenza No Logo Profit over People: Neoliberalism and Global Order The Cultural Creatives Affluenza: The All-Consuming Epidemic Evasion The Corporation Surplus: Terrorized into Being Consumers So, What's Your Price?

What Would Jesus Buy?

Organizations and groups Adbusters Crass CrimethInc.

Deep Green Resistance Democracy Now!

Earth Liberation Front Fifth Estate Freecycle Green Anarchy Institute for Social Ecology Monthly Review Rage Against the Machine Reverend Billy The Venus Project The Yes Men 350.org People Mauro Bonaiuti Noam Chomsky Erich Fromm Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen Edward Goldsmith Paul Goodman André Gorz Ivan Illich Serge Latouche Donella Meadows Pierre Rabhi John Ruskin E. F. Schumacher Bernard Stiegler Henry David Thoreau Related social movements Alter-globalization Amateurism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-punk Anti-capitalism Anti-corporate activism Anti-globalization movement Communism Diggers (theater) Ecofeminism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Food Not Bombs Fossil fuel phase-out Green anarchism Green left Green politics Hippie Libertarian socialism Neo-Luddism New Left Occupy Wall Street Postmodernism Punk Situationists Slow movement Social anarchism Social ecology See also Advanced capitalism Advertising Barter Consumer behaviour Consumption (economics) Consumption (sociology) Cooperative Counterculture Disneyfication Ecological economics Economic materialism Economic problems Frugality Green economy Gross National Happiness Heterodox economics HospEx Illth Influence of mass media Informal sector Intentional community Left-wing politics McDonaldization Mutual aid Natural resource economics Non-monetary economy Permaculture Post-materialism Productivism Shopping Subsistence economy Sustainability Sweatshops Veblen good Workaholic v t e Buddhist economics is a spiritual and philosophical approach to the study of economics .

[ 1 ] It examines the psychology of the human mind and the emotions that direct economic activity, in particular concepts such as anxiety, aspirations and self-actualization principles. In the view of its proponents, Buddhist economics aims to clear the confusion about what is harmful and what is beneficial in the range of human activities involving the production and consumption of goods and services, ultimately trying to make human beings ethically mature.

[ 2 ] The ideology's stated purpose is to "find a middle way between a purely mundane society and an immobile, conventional society." [ 3 ] The most fundamental feature of Buddhist economics is seeing "people interdependent with one another and with Nature." [ 4 ] Sri Lankan economist Neville Karunatilake wrote that: "A Buddhist economic system has its foundations in the development of a co-operative and harmonious effort in group living. Selfishness and acquisitive pursuits have to be eliminated by developing man himself." [ 5 ] Karunatilake sees Buddhist economic principles as exemplified in the rule of the Buddhist king Ashoka .

The core values of western economics are based in the selfishness of human nature and profit maximization. In Buddhist Economics on the other hand, the driving principle is maximization of wellbeing with minimal use of resources.

[ 6 ] E. F. Schumacher , an early proponent of Buddhist economics, drew inspiration from the Buddhist principle of "Right Livelihood" in his influential essay "Buddhist Economics." [ 7 ] The focus of right livelihood is finding employment which harms neither oneself nor others. Schumacher seizes on the point that the capitalist system assumes that people see work as "a necessary evil," or something to be disliked. He proposes that, based on Buddhist ideas of divine balance, there ought to be a healthy split between leisure and work. In Buddhist economics, there are three major functions to work, "to give man a chance to utilise and develop his faculties; to enable him to overcome his ego-centredness by joining with other people in a common task; and to bring forth the goods and services needed for a becoming existence." [ 7 ] This shift in the way work is viewed, both by employers and employees, if applied to the western world, would be fundamentally altering to the incentives driving modern economies.

Bhutan 's King Jigme Singye Wangchuck and its government have promoted the concept of " gross national happiness " (GNH) since 1972, based on Buddhist spiritual values, as a counter to gauging a nation's development by gross domestic product (GDP). This represents a commitment to building an economy that would serve Bhutan's culture based on Buddhist spiritual values instead of material development, such as being gauged by only GDP.

[ 8 ] U.S. economics professor Clair Brown sets up a Buddhist economics framework that integrates Amartya Sen 's capability approach with shared prosperity and sustainability.

[ 9 ] In her Buddhist economics model, valuation of economic performance is based on how well the economy delivers a high quality of life to everyone while it protects the environment.

[ 10 ] In addition to domestic output (or consumption), measuring economic performance includes equity, sustainability, and activities that create a meaningful life. A person's well-being depends on cultivation of inner (spiritual) wealth even more than outer (material) wealth.

[ 11 ] Buddhist economics holds that truly rational decisions can only be made when we understand what creates irrationality. When people understand what constitutes desire, they realize that all the wealth in the world cannot satisfy it. When people understand the universality of fear, they become more compassionate to all beings. Thus, this spiritual approach to economics doesn't rely on theories and models, but on the essential forces of acumen, empathy, and restraint.

[ 2 ] From the perspective of a Buddhist, economics and other streams of knowledge cannot be separated. Economics is a single component of a combined effort to fix the problems of humanity and Buddhist economics works with it to reach a common goal of societal, individual, and environmental sufficiency.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Buddhist ethics was first applied to the running of a state's economy during the rule of the Indian Buddhist emperor Ashoka (c. 268 to 232 BCE). The reign of Ashoka is famous for an extensive philanthropic and public works program, which built hospitals, hostels, parks, and nature preserves.

The term "Buddhist economics" was coined by E. F. Schumacher in 1955, when he travelled to Burma as an economic consultant for Prime Minister U Nu .

[ 12 ] The term was used in his essay named "Buddhist Economics", which was first published in 1966 in Asia: A Handbook , and republished in his influential collection Small Is Beautiful (1973). The term is currently used by followers of Schumacher and by Theravada Buddhist writers, such as Prayudh Payutto , Padmasiri De Silva, and Luang Por Dattajivo .

The 1st Conference of the Buddhist Economics Research Platform was held in Budapest, Hungary from 23–24 August 2007.

[ 13 ] The second conference was held at Ubon Ratchathani University, Thailand from 9–11 April 2009.

[ 14 ] General views on economics [ edit ] Unlike traditional economics, Buddhist economics considers stages after the consumption of a product, investigating how trends affect the three intertwined aspects of human existence: the individual, society, and the environment. For example, if there were an increase in the consumption of cigarettes, Buddhist economists try to decipher how this increase affects the pollution levels in the environment, its impact on passive smokers and active smokers, and the various health hazards that come along with smoking, thus taking into consideration the ethical side of economics. The ethical aspect of it is partly judged by the outcomes it brings and partly by the qualities that lead to it.

[ 2 ] The Buddhist point of view ascribes to work three functions: to give man a chance to utilize and develop his aptitude; to enable him to overcome his self-aggrandizement by engaging with other people in common tasks; and to bring forward the goods and services needed for a better existence.

[ 15 ] Differences between traditional and Buddhist economics [ edit ] There are a number of differences between traditional economics and Buddhist economics.

While traditional economics concentrates on self-interest, the Buddhist view challenges it by changing the concept of self to Anatta or no-self. It posits that all things perceived by one's senses are not actually "I" or "mine" and therefore, humans must detach themselves from this feeling. Buddhist Economists believe that the self-interest based, opportunistic approach to ethics will always fail. According to Buddhist Economists, generosity is a viable economic model of mutual reciprocity, because human beings are Homo reciprocans who tend to reciprocate to feelings (either positively or negatively) by giving back more than what is given to them.

[ 16 ] Traditional economists emphasize importance to maximizing profits and individual gains, while the underlying principle of Buddhist economics is to minimize suffering (losses) for all living or non-living things. Studies conducted by Buddhist economists correlate that human beings show greater sensitivity to loss than to gains, and concluded that people should concentrate more on reducing the former.

[ 16 ] There is a difference with respect to the concept of desire. Traditional economics encourages material wealth and desire in which people attempt to accumulate more wealth to satisfy those cravings.  In contrast, in Buddhist economics, importance is given to simplifying one's desires.  According to Buddhist economists, apart from the basic necessities like food, shelter, clothing, and medicines, other materialistic needs should be minimized. Buddhist economists say that overall well-being decreases if people pursue meaningless desires; wanting less will benefit the person, the community they live in, and nature overall.

[ 16 ] Views on the market are also different.  While many economists advocate maximizing markets to a point of saturation, Buddhist economists aim at minimizing violence. Traditional economics do not take into consideration "primordial stakeholders", like future generations and the natural world because their vote is not considered relevant in terms of purchasing power.  They think that other stakeholders such as poor and marginalized people are under-represented because of their inadequate purchasing power and preference is given to the strongest stakeholder.  Therefore, they believe that the market is not an unbiased place, but truly representative of the economy.  Thus, Buddhist economists advocate ahimsa or non-violence.  Ahimsa prevents doing anything that directly causes suffering to oneself or others and urges to find solutions in a participatory way.

Community supported agriculture is one such example of community-based economic activities.  Buddhist economists believe that community-supported agriculture fosters trust, helps build value based communities and brings people closer to the land and their food source.  Achieving this sustainability and non-violence requires restructuring of dominating configurations of modern business, which they advocate. This leads to de-emphasizing profit maximization as the ultimate motive and renewed emphasis on introducing small-scale, locally adaptable, substantive economic activities.

[ 16 ] Traditional economists try to maximize instrumental use where the value of any entity is determined by its marginal contribution to the production output while Buddhist economists feel that the real value of an entity is neither realized nor given importance to.  Buddhist economists attempt to reduce instrumental use and form caring organizations that will be rewarded in terms of trust among the management, co-workers, and employees.

[ 16 ] Traditional economists tend to believe that bigger is better and more is more, whereas Buddhist economists believe that small is beautiful and less is more.

[ 16 ] Traditional economics gives importance to gross national product whereas Buddhist economics gives importance to gross national happiness .

[ 17 ] Other beliefs [ edit ] Buddhist economists believe that as long as work is considered a disutility for laborers and laborers a necessary evil for employers, the true potential of the laborers and employers cannot be achieved. In such a situation, employees will always prefer income without employment and employers will always prefer output without employees.

According to them, people are unable to feel liberated not because of wealth but because of their attachment to wealth. In the same way, they say that it is the craving for pleasurable baubles and not the enjoyment from them that holds humans back.

[ 3 ] Buddhist economists do not believe in measuring standard of living by the amount of consumption because according to them, obtaining maximum well being as a result of minimum consumption is more important than obtaining maximum well being from maximum consumption. Thus, they feel that the concept of being "better off" because of greater levels of consumption is not a true measure of happiness.

[ 3 ] Buddhist economics also gives importance to natural, renewable, and non-renewable resources . They feel that non-renewable resources should only be used when most needed and then also with utmost care, meticulously planning out its use. They believe that using them extravagantly is violent and not in keeping with the Buddhist belief of nonviolence. According to them, if the entire population relies on non-renewable resources for their existence, they are behaving parasitically, preying on capital goods instead of income. Adding to this, they feel that this uneven distribution and ever increasing exploitation of natural resources will lead to violence between men.

[ 3 ] They also believe that satisfaction need not necessarily be felt only when something tangible is got back in return for giving something or something material is gained, as stated in modern economics. They say that the feeling of satisfaction can be achieved even when one parts with something without getting anything tangible in return. An example is when one gives presents to their loved ones simply because they want them to be happy.

[ 2 ] Buddhist economists believe that production is a very misleading term. According to them, to produce something new, the old form has to be destroyed. Therefore, production and consumption become complementary to each other. Taking this into consideration, they advocate non-production in certain cases because when one produces less materialistic things, they reduce exploitation of the world's resources and lead the life of a responsible and aware citizen.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Buddhist ethics Buddhist philosophy Buddhist socialism Engaged Buddhism Five precepts Gross national happiness Middle Way Noble Eightfold Path Schools of economic thought Small Is Beautiful Sufficiency economy Three Refuges References [ edit ] ^ Gross National Happiness » Maintenance Mode Archived September 2, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c d e f Payutto, Ven. P. A.

"Buddhist Economics - A Middle Way for the Market Place" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2022-12-05 . Retrieved 2011-09-13 .

^ a b c d Schumacher, E. F.

"BUDDHIST ECONOMICS" . Archived from the original on 13 December 2012 . Retrieved 4 December 2012 .

^ Brown, Clair (2017).

Buddhist Economics: An Enlightened Approach to the Dismal Science . New York: Bloomsbury Press.

^ Karunatilake, This Confused Society (1976) ^ Brown, Clair; Zsolnai, Laszlo (2018-12-01).

"Buddhist economics: An overview" .

Society and Economy .

40 (4): 497– 513.

doi : 10.1556/204.2018.40.4.2 .

ISSN 1588-9726 .

^ a b "Buddhist Economics | New Economics Institute" . 2012-12-13. Archived from the original on 2012-12-13 . Retrieved 2024-11-04 .

^ "Policy Innovations - Redefining Progress" .

policyinnovations.org . Archived from the original on 13 April 2016 . Retrieved 18 July 2015 .

^ "About Clair Brown" . Retrieved 2024-09-19 .

^ Sen, Amartya (1999).

Development as Freedom . Knopf.

^ "The Symbolism of the Traditional Temple" .

^ E. F. Schumacher: Life and Work Archived October 12, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Buddhist Economics - Conferences" .

archive.is . 9 July 2012. Archived from the original on 9 July 2012 . Retrieved 28 February 2019 .

^ "Download latest Hindi bollywood Punjabi Hollywood Movies Hdfriday" .

buddhist-economics.info . Archived from the original on 3 March 2019 . Retrieved 28 February 2019 .

^ "Buddhist Economics" .

www.worldtrans.org . Retrieved 28 February 2019 .

^ a b c d e f Zsolnai, Laszlo.

"Buddhist Economics for Business" (PDF) . Retrieved 13 September 2011 .

^ Ads, Ambo Digital.

"Gross National Happiness" .

Ambo Travels . Archived from the original on 2019-04-13 . Retrieved 2019-12-10 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Buddhist economics .

The Reality and Diversity of Buddhist Economics by Wolfgang Drechsler Buddhist Economics by Rufus Pollock Indias-New-Economic-Model-Sustainable-Development-the-Buddhist-Way Dharma Economics by Susmita Barua http://www.urbandharma.org/udharma5/buddhisteco.html#Preface https://web.archive.org/web/20110623122228/http://www.truehappiness.ws/What_is_Buddhist_economics.html https://web.archive.org/web/20110812224108/http://buddhist-economics.info/documents/puntasen.pdf https://web.archive.org/web/20110610233131/http://www.buddhanet.net/cmdsg/econ2.htm http://www.sacred-texts.com/bud/j1/j1059.htm Buddhist Virtues in Socio-Economic Development, ICDV Conference Vol. Bangkok, May 2011 Buddhist Economics and the "Great Ball of Doubt," Radio Interview with Prof. Peter Timmerman , University of Toronto, 23 March 2007 Less is More , Ajahn Amaro (2020) [1] , Anuda Kanchana,  “Significance of Buddhist teachings for the Socio-economic Development ”, Ñāṇagavesi (2023), Published by the department of Pali and Buddhist Studies, University of Ruhuna, Sri Lanka, Page Numbers –151-165.

v t e Schools of economic thought Pre-modern Ancient schools Medieval Islamic Scholasticism Modern era Early modern Cameralism Mercantilism Physiocrats School of Salamanca Late modern American (National) Austrian Birmingham Classical Ricardian Distributist English historical Freiwirtschaft French liberal Georgism German historical Malthusian Manchester Marginalism Marxist economics Marxian critique of political economy Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne Socialist Contemporary (20th and 21st centuries) Behavioral Buddhist Capability approach Carnegie Chartalism Modern Monetary Theory Chicago Constitutional Cracovian Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiburg Geneva Institutional Keynesian Neo- Neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis New Post- Circuitism Keynes–Marx synthesis Monetarism Market Neo-Malthusian Neo-Marxian Neo-Ricardian Neo-Schumpeterian Neoliberalism New classical Rational expectations theory Real business-cycle theory New institutional New neoclassical synthesis Organizational Public choice Regulation Saltwater/freshwater Stockholm Structuralist Supply-side Technocracy movement Thermoeconomics Virginia Social credit Related Critique of political economy History of economic thought History of macroeconomic thought Economics Political economy Mainstream economics Heterodox economics Post-autistic economics Degrowth World-systems theory Economic systems Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Buddhist_economics&oldid=1293520502 " Categories : Buddhism and society Economy and religion Schools of economic thought Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 05:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Buddhist economics 20 languages Add topic

