Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Appearance 2 Formation 3 Forecast 4 Origin of name 5 Subtypes and derivative types 6 Relation to other clouds 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Nimbostratus cloud 50 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Kaszëbsczi Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Nimbostratus virga ) Common type of rain cloud Nimbostratus cloud Nimbostratus with pannus Abbreviation Ns Symbol Genus Nimbostratus ( rain, layered ) Altitude 500–5,500 m (2,000–18,000 ft) Appearance Dark and featureless layer cloud full of water vapor; responsible for rain and snow Precipitation Yes: rain , ice pellets , or snow ; sometimes virga A nimbostratus cloud is a multilevel, amorphous , nearly uniform, and often dark-grey cloud that usually produces continuous rain , snow , or sleet , but no lightning or thunder .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Although it is usually a low-based stratiform cloud, it actually forms most commonly in the middle level of the troposphere and then spreads vertically into the low and high levels. Nimbostratus usually produces precipitation over a wide area.

The prefix nimbo- comes from the Latin word nimbus , which means "rain bearing cloud" Downward-growing nimbostratus can have the same vertical extent as most large upward-growing cumulus , but its horizontal expanse tends to be even greater.

Appearance [ edit ] Nimbostratus has a diffuse cloud base generally found anywhere from near surface in the low levels to about 2,000 to 4,000 m (6,600 to 13,100 ft).in the middle level of the troposphere. Although usually dark at its base, it often appears illuminated from within to a surface observer.

[ 4 ] Though found worldwide, nimbostratus occurs more commonly in the middle latitudes.

[ 5 ] It is coded C M 2 on the SYNOP report.

Formation [ edit ] Nimbostratus occurs along a warm front or occluded front where the slowly rising warm air mass creates nimbostratus along with shallower stratus clouds producing less rain, these clouds being preceded by higher-level clouds such as cirrostratus and altostratus .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Often, when an altostratus cloud thickens and descends into lower altitudes, it will become nimbostratus.

[ 8 ] Nimbostratus, unlike cumulonimbus, is not associated with thunderstorms , however at an unusually unstable warm front caused as a result of the advancing warm air being hot, humid and unstable, cumulonimbus clouds may be embedded within the usual nimbostratus. Lightning from an embedded cumulonimbus cloud may interact with the nimbostratus but only in the immediate area around it. In this situation with lightning and rain occurring it would be hard to tell which type of cloud was producing the rain from the ground, however cumulonimbus tend to produce larger droplets and more intense downpours. The simultaneous presence of cumulonimbus and nimbostratus clouds is uncommon; nimbostratus clouds are typically associated with warm fronts and occasionally appear along cold fronts. however in eastern Australia Low pressure systems (ECL) can bring some of the heaviest rain to fall from nimbostratus on record due to the often warm Tasman sea as one of Sydney's heaviest record 24 hr rainfall (327.8mm) 12.9055 inches was purely from nimbostratus with 100mm 3.93 inches falling in 3 hours from 12pm to 3pm. Simultaneous presence of cumulonimbus and nimbostratus clouds are common in eastern Australia, these are called imbedded thunderstorms.

Forecast [ edit ] Nimbostrati often have very few visual features.

Nimbostratus is generally a sign of an approaching warm or occluded front producing steady moderate precipitation, as opposed to the shorter period of typically heavier precipitation released by a cold-frontal cumulonimbus cloud.

[ 5 ] Precipitation may last for several days, depending on the speed of the frontal system.

[ 6 ] A nimbostratus virga cloud is the same as normal nimbostratus, but the rain or snow falls as virga which doesn't reach the ground.

Stratus or stratocumulus usually replace the nimbostratus after the passage of the warm or occluded front.

Origin of name [ edit ] Further information: Cloud § History of cloud science and nomenclature Under Luke Howard 's first systematized study of clouds, carried out in France in 1802, three general cloud forms were established based on appearance and characteristics of formation: cirriform, cumuliform and stratiform.

These were further divided into upper and lower types depending on altitude. In addition to these three main types, Howard added two names to designate multiple cloud types joined together: cumulostratus, a blending of cumulus clouds and stratus layers, and nimbus, a complex blending of cirriform, cumuliform, and stratiform clouds with sufficient vertical development to produce significant precipitation.

Later, in the 20th century, an IMC [ clarification needed ] commission for the study of clouds put forward a refined and more restricted definition of the genus nimbus, effectively reclassifying it as a stratiform cloud type. It was then renamed nimbostratus, and published with the new name in the 1932 edition of the International Atlas of Clouds and of States of the Sky . This left cumulonimbus as the only nimboform type as indicated by its root name.

Subtypes and derivative types [ edit ] Species and varieties: Nimbostratus is very thick, opaque, and featureless, so this genus type is not subdivided into species or varieties.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Precipitation-based supplementary features: Nimbostratus is a major precipitation cloud and produces the virga or precipitation features.  The latter can achieve heavy intensity due to the cloud's vertical depth.

Accessory cloud: Nimbostratus pannus is an accessory cloud of nimbostratus that forms as a ragged layer in precipitation below the main cloud deck.

[ 11 ] Pannus is coded C L 7.

Genitus mother clouds: This genus type can form from cumulus and cumulonimbus.

Mutatus mother clouds: Nimbostratus can form due to the complete transformation of altocumulus, altostratus and stratocumulus.

Relation to other clouds [ edit ] Multi-level nimbostratus is physically related to other stratiform genus-types by way of being non-convective in nature. However, the other sheet-like clouds usually each occupy only one or two levels at the same time.

Stratus clouds are low-level and form from near ground level to 2,000 metres (6,600 ft) at all latitudes. In the middle level are the altostratus clouds that form from 2,000 metres (6,600 ft) to 7,000 metres (23,000 ft) in polar areas, 7,000 metres (23,000 ft) in temperate areas, and 7,600 metres (24,900 ft) in tropical areas. Although altostratus forms mostly in the middle level of the troposphere, strong frontal lift can push it into the lower part of the high-level. The main high-level stratiform cloud is cirrostratus which is composed of ice crystals that often produce halo effects around the sun.

Cirrostratus forms at altitudes of 3,000 to 7,600 metres (9,800 to 24,900 ft) in high latitudes, 5,000 to 12,000 metres (16,000 to 39,000 ft) in temperate latitudes, and 6,100 to 18,000 metres (20,000 to 59,100 ft) in low, tropical latitudes.   Of the non-stratiform clouds, cumulonimbus and cumulus congestus are the most closely related to nimbostratus because of their vertical extent and ability to produce moderate to heavy precipitation.  The remaining cumuliform ( cumulus ) and stratocumuliform ( stratocumulus , altocumulus , and cirrocumulus ) clouds have the least in common with nimbostratus.

See also [ edit ] Nimbostratus virga Cumulonimbus List of cloud types References [ edit ] ^ "cloud" .

Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia .

Columbia University Press – via The Free Dictionary .

^ "nimbostratus" .

The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (5th ed.). HarperCollins.

^ "nimbostratus | Definition of nimbostratus in US English by Oxford Dictionaries" .

Oxford Dictionaries | English . Archived from the original on 2019-01-15 . Retrieved 2025-08-08 .

^ World Meteorological Organization, ed. (1975).

Nimbostratus, International Cloud Atlas . Vol. I. pp.

37–39 .

ISBN 92-63-10407-7 . Retrieved 26 August 2014 .

^ a b Pretor-Pinney, Gavin (2007).

The Cloudspotter's Guide: The Science, History, and Culture of Clouds . Perigee.

ISBN 0-399-53345-1 .

^ a b Dunlop, Storm (2003).

Weather Identification Handbook: The Ultimate Guide for Weather Watchers . Guilford, Connecticut: Globe Pequot.

ISBN 1-58574-857-9 .

^ Thompson, Graham; Turk, Jonathan (1993).

Earth Science and the Environment . Fort Worth: Saunders College Publishing.

ISBN 0-03-075446-1 .

^ Lankford, Terry (2000).

Aviation Weather Handbook . McGraw-Hill Professional.

ISBN 978-0-07-136103-3 .

^ World Meteorological Organization, ed. (1975).

Species, International Cloud Atlas (PDF) . pp.

18– 20. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 July 2016 . Retrieved 26 August 2014 .

^ World Meteorological Organization, ed. (1975).

Varieties, International Cloud Atlas (PDF) . pp.

20– 22. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 July 2016 . Retrieved 26 August 2014 .

^ World Meteorological Organization , ed. (1975).

Features, International Cloud Atlas . Vol. I. pp.

22–24 .

ISBN 92-63-10407-7 . Retrieved 26 August 2014 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nimbostratus clouds .

National Science Digital Library - Nimbostratus Nimbostratus and Other Low Clouds v t e Cloud genera and selected species, supplementary features, and other airborne hydrometeors - WMO Latin terminology except where indicated Mesospheric Extreme-level 80–85 km Noctilucent (NLC) Polar mesospheric clouds Noctilucent type I veils Noctilucent type II bands Noctilucent type III billows Noctilucent type IV whirls Stratospheric Very high-level 15–30 km Nacreous polar stratospheric clouds (PSC) Cirriform nacreous Lenticular nacreous Nitric acid and water polar stratospheric clouds (PSC) No differentiated sub-types; tends to resemble cirrostratus Tropospheric High-level 3–18 km Cirrus (Ci) Species Cirrus castellanus (Ci cas) Cirrus fibratus (Ci fib) Cirrus floccus (Ci flo) Cirrus spissatus (Ci spa) Cirrus uncinus (Ci unc) Ci-only varieties Cirrus intortus (Ci in) Cirrus vertebratus (Ci ve) Cirrocumulus (Cc) Species Cirrocumulus castellanus (Cc cas) Cirrocumulus floccus (Cc flo) Cirrocumulus lenticularis (Cc len) Cirrocumulus stratiformis (Cc str) Cirrostratus (Cs) Species Cirrostratus fibratus (Cs fib) Cirrostratus nebulosus (Cs neb) High-level-only mutatus cloud Mutatus non-height specific (see below) Medium-level 2–8 km Altocumulus (Ac) Species Altocumulus castellanus (Ac cas) Altocumulus floccus (Ac flo) Altocumulus lacunosus (Ac la) Altocumulus lenticularis (Ac len) Altocumulus stratiformis (Ac str) Altocumulus volutus (Ac vol) Altostratus (As) Altostratus undulatus Nimbostratus (Ns) Multi-level Varieties Nimbostratus virga (Ns vir) Low-level 0–2 km Cumulonimbus (Cb) Towering vertical Species Cumulonimbus calvus (Cb cal) Cumulonimbus capillatus (Cb cap) Cb-only supplementary features Cumulonimbus cauda ((cau) Tail cloud) Cumulonimbus incus (inc) Cumulonimbus murus ((mur) Wall cloud) Cb-only accessories and other Cumulonimbus flumen ((Cb flu) Beaver tail) Overshooting top Hot tower Cumulus (Cu) Variable vertical extent Species Fractus Cumulus humilis (Cu hum) Cumulus mediocris (Cu med) ( Cumulus congestus (Cu con) ( Cumulus castellanus (unofficial alternative name for Cu con)) ( ICAO term for Cu con and "Cu cas" is  Towering cumulus [Tcu])) Other Horseshoe Trade wind cumulus Stratus (St) Species Stratus fractus (St fra) Stratus nebulosus (St neb) St-only genitus cloud and other Stratus silvagenitus (St sil) Fog (Fg) Surface level Stratocumulus (Sc) Species Stratocumulus castellanus (Sc cas) Stratocumulus floccus (Sc flo) Stratocumulus lenticularis (Sc len) Stratocumulus stratiformis (Sc str) Stratocumulus Undulatus Stratocumulus volutus (Sc vol) Low-level-only supplementary features Arcus ((arc) Shelf) Tuba ((tub) Funnel cloud) Low-level-only accessory cloud and other Pileus (pil) Velum (vel) Pannus (pan) Other- Actinoform cloud (Stratocumulus) Non-height specific Varieties Duplicatus (du) Lacunosus (la) Opacus (op) Perlucidus (pe) Radiatus (ra) Translucidus (tr) Undulatus (un) Supplementary features Asperitas (asp) Cavum (cav) Fluctus (flu) Mamma (mam) Praecipitatio (pra) Virga (vir) Mother clouds and human-made clouds (Mother cloud)+genitus (e.g. cumulogenitus (cugen) (Mother cloud)+mutatus (e.g. cumulomutatus (cumut) Homogenitus (hogen) Homomutatus (homut) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nimbostratus_cloud&oldid=1304860449#Subtypes_and_derivative_types " Categories : Cloud types Stratus Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 16:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nimbostratus cloud 50 languages Add topic

