Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and career 2 Publications 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Frigyes Riesz 28 languages Afrikaans Արեւմտահայերէն Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Svenska Võro 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hungarian mathematician Frigyes Riesz Born ( 1880-01-22 ) 22 January 1880 Győr , Austria-Hungary Died 28 February 1956 (1956-02-28) (aged 76) Budapest , Hungary Citizenship Hungarian Known for Functional analysis Integral equations Ergodic theory Weak topology Hardy space L p space Proximity space Denjoy–Riesz theorem Herglotz–Riesz representation theorem Riesz space Riesz rearrangement inequality Riesz's lemma Riesz representation theorem Riesz–Fischer theorem Riesz projector Radon–Riesz property F. and M. Riesz theorem F. Riesz's theorem Riesz–Markov–Kakutani representation theorem Scientific career Fields Mathematics Doctoral advisor Gyula Vályi Doctoral students János Aczél Steven Gaal John Horvath Tibor Radó Alfréd Rényi The native form of this personal name is Riesz Frigyes . This article uses Western name order when mentioning individuals.

Frigyes Riesz ( Hungarian : Riesz Frigyes , pronounced [ˈriːs ˈfriɟɛʃ] , sometimes known in English and French as Frederic Riesz ; [ 1 ] 22 January 1880 – 28 February 1956) [ 2 ] was a Hungarian [ 3 ] mathematician who made fundamental contributions to functional analysis , as did his younger brother Marcel Riesz .

Life and career [ edit ] He was born into a Jewish family in Győr , Austria-Hungary and died in Budapest , Hungary . Between 1911 and 1919 he was a professor at the Franz Joseph University in Kolozsvár , Austria-Hungary.  The post-WW1 Treaty of Trianon transferred former Austro-Hungarian territory including Kolozsvár to the Kingdom of Romania , whereupon Kolozsvár's name changed to Cluj and the University of Kolozsvár moved to Szeged , Hungary, becoming the University of Szeged .

[ 4 ] Then, Riesz was the rector and a professor at the University of Szeged, as well as a member of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences .

[ 5 ] and the Polish Academy of Learning . He was the older brother of the mathematician Marcel Riesz .

Riesz did some of the fundamental work in developing functional analysis and his work has had a number of important applications in physics. He established the spectral theory for bounded symmetric operators in a form very much like that now regarded as standard.

[ 3 ] He also made many contributions to other areas including ergodic theory , topology [ 6 ] and he gave an elementary proof of the mean ergodic theorem.

Together with Alfréd Haar , Riesz founded the Acta Scientiarum Mathematicarum journal.

He had an uncommon method of giving lectures: he entered the lecture hall with an assistant and a docent . The docent then began reading the proper passages from Riesz's handbook and the assistant wrote the appropriate equations on the blackboard—while Riesz himself stood aside, nodding occasionally.

[ 7 ] The Swiss-American mathematician Edgar Lorch spent 1934 in Szeged working under Riesz and wrote a reminiscence about his time there, including his collaboration with Riesz.

[ 4 ] The corpus of his bibliography was compiled by the mathematician Pál Medgyessy .

[ 8 ] Publications [ edit ] Riesz, Frederic ; Sz.-Nagy, Béla (1990) [1955].

Functional Analysis . Translated by Boron, Leo F. New York: Dover Publications .

ISBN 0-486-66289-6 .

OCLC 21228994 .

See also [ edit ] Proximity space Rising sun lemma Denjoy–Riesz theorem F. and M. Riesz theorem Riesz representation theorem Riesz-Fischer theorem Riesz groups Riesz's lemma Riesz projector Riesz sequence Riesz space Radon-Riesz property References [ edit ] ^ W. J. Thron, Frederic Riesz' contributions to the foundations of general topology , in C.E. Aull and R. Lowen (eds.), Handbook of the History of General Topology , Volume 1, 21-29, Kluwer 1997.

^ O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Frigyes Riesz" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews ^ a b Eberhard Zeidler: Nonlinear Functional Analysis and Its Applications: Linear monotone operators. Springer, 1990 [1] ^ a b Lorch, Edgar R. (1993). Hersh, Rubem (ed.).

"Szeged in 1934" .

Amer. Math. Monthly .

100 (3): 219– 230.

doi : 10.2307/2324453 .

JSTOR 2324453 .

^ János Horváth: A Panorama of Hungarian Mathematics in the Twentieth Century , Volume 1, Springer, 2006 [2] ^ Frederic Riesz made significant suggestions as to how the axiomatic foundations of general topology might be formulated... Unfortunately they were generally overlooked at that time and their importance was appreciated only after they were rediscovered much later... He lost interest in General Topology after 1908 and never elaborated any of the promising ideas he had put forward , Thron, cit.

^ Wróblewski, Andrzej Kajetan (September 2008). "Czyściec, niebo i piekło".

Wiedza I Życie : 65.

^ Pál Medgyessy's entry in Tudósnaptár ("Calendar of Scientists") External links [ edit ] Media related to Frigyes Riesz at Wikimedia Commons Frigyes Riesz at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Hersh, Reuben ; John-Steiner, Vera (1993).

"A Visit to Hungarian Mathematics" (PDF) .

Mathematical Intelligencer .

15 (2): 13– 26.

doi : 10.1007/bf03024187 .

S2CID 122827181 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 June 2013 . Retrieved 22 August 2012 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Israel Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Frigyes_Riesz&oldid=1270081345 " Categories : 1880 births 1956 deaths Academic staff of the University of Szeged 19th-century Hungarian mathematicians 20th-century Hungarian mathematicians Mathematical analysts Functional analysts Operator theorists Mathematicians from Budapest Members of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences Burials at Kerepesi Cemetery Academic staff of Franz Joseph University Rectors of the Franz Joseph University Mathematicians from Austria-Hungary Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2022 Articles with hCards Articles containing Hungarian-language text Pages with Hungarian IPA Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 January 2025, at 20:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Frigyes Riesz 28 languages Add topic

