Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 In the media 3 In languages 4 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 4.1 Social justice 4.2 Education 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Americentrism 8 languages العربية Català Ελληνικά Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Idea that US culture is most important Not to be confused with Americanism or American exceptionalism .

A 1912 newspaper cartoon highlighting the United States ' influence in Latin America following the Monroe Doctrine Americentrism , also known as American-centrism [ 1 ] or US-centrism , is a tendency to assume the culture of the United States is more important than those of other countries or to judge foreign cultures based on American cultural standards. It refers to the practice of viewing the world from an overly US-focused perspective, with an implied belief, either consciously or subconsciously, in the preeminence of American culture.

[ 2 ] The term is not to be confused with American exceptionalism , which is the assertion that the United States is qualitatively different from other nations and is often accompanied by the notion that the United States has superiority over every other nation.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Scholarship of Americentrism traces the ideological system's origins, historically, to the late 1700s following the established independence of the United States . Americentrism is presented as a shift from Eurocentrism that idolizes the newly founded United States' ideals of freedom and democracy.

[ 4 ] Such scholarship itself was initially built on Jim Blaut's 1980s scholarship of Eurocentrism by Geographer Richard Peet whom coined the term in his 2005 journal, From Eurocentrism to Americanism .

[ 4 ] In the media [ edit ] American television networks have been perceived to contain an Americentric bias in the selection of their material.

[ 5 ] Another instance of Americentrism is in the high focus companies have on US markets in relation to others. Often, products produced and developed outside the US are still marketed as typically American.

[ 6 ] According to the European Commission , internet governance (in particular that related to the NSA [ definition needed ] ) is too Americentric. It criticized the major role of American company ICANN [ definition needed ] in its administration.

[ 7 ] The English Wikipedia has been criticized for having an Americentric systemic bias with regards to its occasional preference towards US English sources, language, and spelling.

[ 8 ] In languages [ edit ] US defaultism refers to the tendency for people, particularly those in the United States, to assume that the US is the default or only relevant context when discussing various topics. For example, in an online forum, people may talk about a policy that only applies to US without identifying the locality being referenced.

[ 9 ] US defaultism is about a lack of awareness or consideration for the global context, leading to the United States being treated as the unspoken default. This can be annoying or confusing for non-Americans looking for information on the internet.

[ 10 ] Criticism [ edit ] Social justice [ edit ] Critics of Americentrism denote the ideology in fear of misunderstandings between peoples or nations, and in some cases, escalating into severe racial conflicts or even wars. They claim that distorted Americentrism has the potential to foster racism, create chaos, or ignite armed conflicts.

[ 11 ] Critics of American policies utilise the term in a negative context to highlight a deliberate, nationalistic ignorance displayed by the American government towards its own faults, warning of the possible distortion of international relations possible by followers of the ideology.

[ 11 ] Education [ edit ] Azimuthal map centered in the USA Educators have brought attention to the usage of Americentric views in American educational policy and scholarship. Critics have noted the usage of Americentric views specifically in the United States' public school systems' educational policy in world history. Sources claim that schools in the United States often tend to prioritise the detailed teaching of the history of Europe and the United States in their World History curriculum, while providing only brief coverage of events in Asia, Africa, and Latin America.

[ 11 ] In terms of scholarship, it has been noted by various observers that the field of psychological research is predominantly influenced by Americans. It has been asserted that Americans hold the highest share as producers of psychological research, with a significant focus on studying Americans themselves. Therefore there have been criticisms of theories and principles derived from such research in if it is universally applicable to all human beings.

Jeffrey Arnett , a professor of psychology at Clark University supports the idea, writing of scholarship, to his critique, disregarding the diversity of human experiences and contexts.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Afrocentrism American exceptionalism American nationalism American way Anti-Americanism Discovery doctrine Ethnocentrism Eurocentrism Indocentrism Sinocentrism References [ edit ] ^ William R. Thompson, "Global War and the Foundations of US Systemic Leadership", chap. 7 in America, War and Power: Defining the State, 1775–2005 , eds. Lawrence Sondhaus and A. James Fuller (Abingdon, Oxon, UK: 2007), 146 ("The customary approach to accounting for the rise of the United States to global primacy is descriptive, American-centric, and heavily reliant on the distinctiveness of the ascent.").

^ NI, Chun-yan (2008).

"Analysis of ethnocentrism" (PDF) .

US-China Foreign Language . p. 78. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 3, 2013 . Retrieved March 20, 2009 .

^ American Exceptionalism: A Double-Edged Sword.

Seymour Martin Lipset. New York, N.Y.: W.W. Norton & Co., Inc. 1996. p. 18.

^ a b Peet, Richard (2005-11-05).

"From Eurocentrism to Americentrism" .

Antipode .

37 (5): 936– 943.

Bibcode : 2005Antip..37..936P .

doi : 10.1111/j.0066-4812.2005.00542.x .

ISSN 0066-4812 – via DOI Foundation.

^ Kaufman, King (August 20, 2004).

"King Kaufman's Sports Daily" .

Salon . Salon Media Group. Archived from the original on February 9, 2011.

^ Maden, Sead (12 December 2012).

"American-Centric UI Is Leveling Tech Culture – and Design Diversity" .

Wired .

^ Traynor, Ian (12 February 2014).

"Internet governance too US-centric, says European commission" .

The Guardian . Brussels.

^ Browne, Marcus (12 February 2008).

"Wikipedia accused of 'US-centric bias' " .

ZDnet .

^ "USdefaultism - Reddit" .

www.reddit.com . Retrieved 2025-06-09 .

^ Longjumping_Car3318 (2025-06-08).

"Can we please stop the USA defaultism" .

r/MtF . Retrieved 2025-06-09 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c Yongkun, Wan (2018).

"Ethnocentrism: A Common Human Failing" (PDF) .

Francis Academic Press, UK : 36– 41.

^ Arnett, Jeffrey (October 2008).

"The Neglected 95%: Why American Psychology Needs to Become Less American" (PDF) .

American Psychologist .

63 (7): 602– 614.

doi : 10.1037/0003-066X.63.7.602 .

PMID 18855491 .

S2CID 21072349 .

v t e Ethnocentrism Regional variants Afrocentrism Americentrism Asiacentrism Indocentrism Sinocentrism Little China Eurocentrism Anglocentrism Germanocentrism Hellenocentrism Related phenomena Anthropocentrism Chronocentrism Colonial mentality Exceptionalism Template Geocentrism Religiocentrism Sentiocentrism Xenocentrism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Americentrism&oldid=1298789420 " Categories : Geocultural perspectives Ethnocentrism Political neologisms Western culture Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2021 This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 18:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Americentrism 8 languages Add topic

