Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Facilities 2 Location 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Oxford Science Park 1 language Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 51°42′57″N 1°13′06″W ﻿ / ﻿ 51.71583°N 1.21833°W ﻿ / 51.71583; -1.21833 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Research park in Oxfordshire, England For Oxford University's science departments, see Science Area, Oxford .

View of Oxford Science Park. Behind the fountain is the Gosling Building - headquarters to Oxford Nanopore Technologies , and to the right is the Sherard Building, offices both built in 2002.

Littlemore Brook , a tributary of the River Thames that runs through the Oxford Science Park from the Blackbird Leys estate in Oxford.

The Oxford Science Park ( OSP ) is a science and technology park [ 1 ] located on the southern edge of the city of Oxford , England . It was officially opened in 1991 and is owned by Magdalen College, Oxford . The park maintains strong links with the nearby University of Oxford and currently [ when?

] contains just over 60 companies.

Facilities [ edit ] There are two amenity buildings on the Science Park, [ 2 ] the Magdalen Centre and the Sadler Building.
Both contain: Cafe/restaurant Conference suite Meeting rooms There is a nursery on the Science Park operated by The Oxford Nursery.

[ 3 ] There is also an Oxford Science Park Netball Club.

[ 4 ] Location [ edit ] The science park is situated in Littlemore , which is about 5 km to the south of Oxford city centre, south of the Oxford Ring Road .

See also [ edit ] Begbroke Science Park Cambridge Science Park List of science parks in the United Kingdom Science Area, Oxford References [ edit ] ^ Oxford Science Park Archived 1 January 2011 at the Wayback Machine , Park Life Style , UK.

^ Park Life Style , UK.

^ "oxford" .

The Old Station Nursery | we care for your child and support your family . Retrieved 19 November 2019 .

^ Oxford Science Park Netball Club , UK.

External links [ edit ] Oxford Science Park website v t e University of Oxford Leadership Chancellor William Hague Vice-Chancellor Irene Tracey Registrar Heads of houses Colleges All Souls Balliol Brasenose Christ Church Corpus Christi Exeter Green Templeton Harris Manchester Hertford Jesus Keble Kellogg Lady Margaret Hall Linacre Lincoln Magdalen Mansfield Merton New College Nuffield Oriel Pembroke Queen's Reuben St Anne's St Antony's St Catherine's St Cross St Edmund Hall St Hilda's St Hugh's St John's St Peter's Somerville Trinity University College Wadham Wolfson Worcester Permanent private halls Blackfriars Hall Campion Hall Regent's Park Wycliffe Hall Divisions and departments Humanities Asian and Middle Eastern Studies American Institute Art Classics History Linguistics, Philology & Phonetics Medieval and Modern Languages Music Philosophy Theology and Religion Medical Sciences Biochemistry Human Genetics Medical School Pathology Population Health Mathematical, Physical and Life Sciences Biology Chemistry Computer Science Earth Sciences Engineering Science Materials Mathematical Institute Physics Social Sciences Archaeology Business Continuing Education Economics Government International Development Law Politics & International Relations Social Policy and Intervention Gardens, Libraries and Museums Ashmolean Museum Bodleian Libraries Botanic Garden History of Science Natural History Pitt Rivers Institutes and affiliates Begbroke Science Park Big Data Institute Ineos Oxford Institute Jenner Institute Internet Institute Oxford-Man Institute Martin School Oxford University Innovation Oxford University Press Ripon College Cuddesdon Smith School Independent centres Buddhist Studies Energy Studies Hebrew and Jewish Studies Hindu Studies Islamic Studies Sports Australian rules football Boxing Cricket Cycling Dancesport Football Women's Handball Ice hockey Mountaineering Quidditch Polo Rowing Men's Women's Men's Lightweight Women's Lightweight Rugby Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races Polo Varsity Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Venues Bullingdon Green Christ Church Ground Magdalen Ground New College Ground Roger Bannister running track University Parks Student life Cherwell The Isis Magazine The Mays The Oxford Student Oxford Union Student Union Related People fictional colleges fictional people First women graduates Association for the Education of Women Delegacy for Women Students The Oxford Magazine Oxford University Gazette Category Portal 51°42′57″N 1°13′06″W ﻿ / ﻿ 51.71583°N 1.21833°W ﻿ / 51.71583; -1.21833 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Oxford_Science_Park&oldid=1300638856 " Categories : 1989 establishments in England University of Oxford sites Magdalen College, Oxford Parks and open spaces in Oxford Buildings and structures in Oxford Science parks in the United Kingdom High-technology business districts in the United Kingdom Economy of Oxford Economy of Oxfordshire Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2019 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from October 2023 Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 14:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Oxford Science Park 1 language Add topic

