Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Academics 3 Campus Toggle Campus subsection 3.1 Student Center 4 Student life Toggle Student life subsection 4.1 Extra curriculars 4.2 Athletics 5 Notable alumni 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Curry College 2 languages العربية مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°14′17″N 71°06′59″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.23806°N 71.11639°W ﻿ / 42.23806; -71.11639 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Curry Colonels ) Private college in Milton, Massachusetts, US This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Curry College" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Curry College Former names School of Elocution and Expression (1879–1885), School of Expression (1885–1943) Motto Rem Tene Verba Sequentur Type Private college Established 1879 ; 146 years ago ( 1879 ) Endowment $97.6 million (2020) [ 1 ] President Jay Gonzalez Students 4,700 Undergraduates 2,100 traditional Postgraduates 1,000 Other students 1,650 nontraditional Location Milton , Massachusetts , United States 42°14′17″N 71°06′59″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.23806°N 71.11639°W ﻿ / 42.23806; -71.11639 Campus Suburban, 131 acres (53 ha) Colors Purple & white [ 2 ] Nickname Colonels Sporting affiliations NCAA ( Conference of New England ) Website curry.edu Curry College is a private college in Milton, Massachusetts , United States. It was founded as the School of Elocution and Expression by Anna Baright in 1879. In 1885, it was taken over and renamed by Samuel Silas Curry .

History [ edit ] Curry College was founded in 1879 on Boston's Beacon Street near the State House by Anna Baright as the School of Elocution and Expression . Baright graduated from the Boston University School of Oratory in 1877 and was described by one of her professors as "the greatest woman reader in the country." This was a significant compliment in an era of oratory when speakers like Charles Dickens and Mark Twain were paid thousands to read lengthy pieces of their work.

[ 3 ] In 1882, Baright married Boston minister and fellow Boston University alumnus and professor Samuel Silas Curry .

The School of Elocution and Expression had many prominent Bostonians on its Board including Alexander Graham Bell, Alexander Melville Bell, the father of Alexander Graham Bell, legendary Harvard President Charles W. Eliot and author William Dean Howells , who wrote The Rise of Silas Lapham and was nominated for the Nobel Prize for Literature. Among the students in attendance were Smiley Blanton and Sara Stinchfield Hawk, who became pioneers in the field of speech language pathology.

In 1885, the school became the School of Expression and, in 1888, the school was chartered by the state. Silas Curry became the head of the school, and Anna Baright Curry became a professor. Former Boston University School of Oratory professor and telephone inventor Alexander Graham Bell became the school's first chancellor from 1907 to 1922 when Mr. Bell died. Bell, as a professor at Boston University, taught Samuel Silas Curry and, according to the recollections of Curry's daughter, Silas Curry was present when Bell made the first telephone call in 1876. After Mr. Bell's death, Samuel Silas Curry and Anna Baright ran the school until their respective deaths in 1921 and Avenue. In 1932, Curry College relocated to the Bigelow Mansion at 251 Commonwealth Avenue in the Back Bay.

[ 4 ] In 1932, Curry began a radio broadcasting major, still considered the oldest of its kind in the country. In 1938, the Massachusetts Legislature gave the institution the power to confer the degrees of Bachelor of Science of Oratory and Master of Science of Oratory. In 1943, the School of Expression became Curry College to reflect its founders.

Curry College moved from Commonwealth Avenue in Boston to its current suburban location in Milton, Massachusetts in 1952. Curry continued to place strong emphasis on communication and self-development but it now became more diversified in its curriculum. In 1953, the college was authorized by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to confer the Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Science Degrees. The first of these degrees was awarded in 1955.

Despite the dramatic change in the school's mission after the 1952 move to Milton, Massachusetts, Curry College maintained its debt to its founders and their scholarship focus that centered on the delivery of words. Curry College sponsors an award-winning, non-commercial radio station WMLN-FM 91.5 operated by Curry students.

During the 1960s, the growth of Curry was led by President John Hafer, a former Academic Dean at Coe College in Cedar Rapids, Iowa and Dean of Admissions at Syracuse University .

Academics [ edit ] Curry College offers bachelor's degrees in 25 majors and master's degree in four majors. One certificate program is administered through the Continuing Education office. Army and Air Force Reserve Officers Training Corps (ROTC) programs are offered through a cross-enrolled program with Boston University.

Curry College is accredited by the New England Commission of Higher Education .

Campus [ edit ] Curry's main campus in Milton is 131 acres (53 ha) near the Blue Hills Reservation . The campus is seven miles (11 km) from downtown Boston . Curry maintains a satellite campus in Plymouth offering eight bachelor's degree programs, two master's degree programs, and one certificate program, [ 5 ] through the Office of Continuing Education and Graduate Studies.

The Milton campus is separated into north and south campuses with the Student Center located in the center of campus. The campus has 19 residence halls with a mix of traditional dormitories, suites and houses.  Plans are underway to build a dome-style sports complex and a food court.

Student Center [ edit ] The Student Center opened its doors in September, 2009. It replaced the Drapkin Student Center. The 84,000 square feet (7,800 m 2 ) building houses a 5,500 square feet (510 m 2 ) fitness center, a gymnasium, a dining marketplace, a game room, the James P. O'Toole Chapel and multiple meeting rooms and lounges. The mail room, campus bookstore, Disability Services, Conference and Event Services, Residence Life office, and Student Activities office are also located within the Student Center. The Hallways of Champions, located outside of the doors of the gymnasium, showcases trophies and awards of teams and individual athletes throughout Curry's history.

The Curry College Student Center, with its central campus location and wide array of activities, services and spiritual activities including The Newman Club for Catholic students, Hillel for Jewish students and JAM (Jesus and ME) for non-denominational Christians
has been the hub of the Curry campus since its opening in 2009.

Student life [ edit ] Curry has an enrollment of approximately 4,250 students. 2,100 are traditional students from over 31 states and 13 countries. Approximately 1,500 of these students reside in the nineteen residence halls on campus. 1,650 Curry students study in continuing education courses and about 500 Curry students are in graduate school pursuing master's degrees and certificates. Continuing education and graduate students study at either the main Milton campus or the Plymouth satellite campus.

Extra curriculars [ edit ] Curry students have created over 36 clubs and organizations. Students are offered the opportunity to create new clubs through the Student Activities Office.

Athletics [ edit ] Curry athletics logo Curry College's athletic teams are nicknamed the Colonels . Curry is a member of the NCAA Division III and participates in the Conference of New England .

A Colonels football player tackles a Coast Guard Bears football player during a 2019 game Curry offers baseball, basketball, football, ice hockey, lacrosse, soccer and tennis for men and basketball, cross country, lacrosse, soccer, softball, tennis and volleyball for women. All sports are played on campus except for hockey, which plays at the Canton Ice House in Canton, Massachusetts.

Curry also has numerous intramural and club sports. The men's rugby club [ 6 ] competes throughout New England with other colleges. The Curry College Bowling team and Billiards Club compete with surrounding colleges. The team members receive individual and group lessons on and off campus. Additional clubs exist on campus that do not compete against other colleges' clubs.

The Boston Patriots, now the New England Patriots, used the Curry College football field for its in-season practice facility in 1967 while playing its home games in Fenway Park. During their year at Curry, the Patriots were led by American Football League MVP Jim Nance, Hall of Fame member Nick Buoniconti, and kicker and longtime Patriot announcer, Gino Cappelletti. Heisman Trophy winner Joe Bellino from Winchester and The Naval Academy was also a member of the Boston team, as was Everett High School and Harvard University great, Bobby Leo.

In 2020, Curry announced that they would no longer be using the colonel mascot on uniforms or merchandise. A decision on whether to change the team name is pending.

Notable alumni [ edit ] Michael Skakel nephew of Robert Kennedy and defendant in infamous murder trial whose guilty verdict was vacated.

Ken Coleman , sports announcer for the Boston Red Sox , Cleveland Indians , Cleveland Browns , and Cincinnati Reds ; member of the Boston Red Sox Hall of Fame .

Mara Davis , an award-winning radio DJ in Atlanta James S. Gracey , former Commandant of the United States Coast Guard Hal Halpin , president and founder of the Entertainment Consumers Association (ECA) Buddy Lazier , winner of 1996 Indianapolis 500 Marc Maron , podcaster and comedian (attended, but did not graduate) Bill McColgan , sports announcer for the Cleveland Browns , Cleveland Indians , Washington Redskins , and New Orleans Saints Jeff Perry , former MA State Rep, former  Special Sheriff of Barnstable County.

Jordan Rich , radio talk show host Mark Snyder , national radio talk show host (PMPNetwork.com), and syndicated columnist (Gatehouse Media) Grace Hyde Trine , writer, lecturer, dramatic reader Ryan Warsofsky (born 1987), NHL ice hockey head coach References [ edit ] ^ As of June 30, 2020.

U.S. and Canadian Institutions Listed by Fiscal Year 2020 Endowment Market Value and Change in Endowment Market Value from FY19 to FY20 (Report). National Association of College and University Business Officers and TIAA . February 19, 2021 . Retrieved February 20, 2021 .

^ Franks, Ray (1982).

What's in a Nickname: Exploring the Jungle of College Athletic Mascots . Ray Franks Pub Ranch.

^ "Curry College History" . Curry College . Retrieved 2012-07-24 .

^ Back Bay Houses:251 Commonwealth Avenue ^ "Plymouth Campus" . Retrieved 2012-07-30 .

^ "Men's Rugby Club" . Archived from the original on 2015-11-19 . Retrieved 2012-07-24 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Curry College .

Official website Athletics website v t e Conference of New England Current full members Curry Colonels Endicott Gulls Gordon Fighting Scots 4 Hartford Hawks 4 Johnson & Wales Wildcats 1 New England Nor'easters 2 Nichols Bison Roger Williams Hawks 4 Suffolk Rams 3 Wentworth Leopards 1 Western New England Golden Bears Current associate member Husson Eagles (football) See also Commonwealth Coast Football 1 non-football member 2 non-tennis member 3 non-football and lacrosse member 4 non-football and ice hockey member v t e Commonwealth Coast Football (formally New England Football Conference) Current CCC Football members Curry Colonels Endicott Gulls Husson Eagles New England Nor'easters Nichols Bison Western New England Golden Bears Former CCC Football/NEFC members Becker Hawks Boston State Warriors Bridgewater State Bears Coast Guard Bears Fitchburg State Falcons Framingham State Rams Maine Maritime Mariners Salve Regina Seahawks UMass Boston Beacons UMass Dartmouth Corsairs UMass Lowell River Hawks Massachusetts Maritime Buccaneers MIT Engineers NEC Pilgrims New Haven Chargers Plymouth State Panthers Western Connecticut State Wolves Westfield State Owls Worcester State Lancers v t e Colleges and universities in metropolitan Boston Current Babson College Benjamin Franklin Institute of Technology Bentley University Berklee College of Music Boston Architectural College Boston Baptist College Boston College Boston Conservatory Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis Boston University Brandeis University Bunker Hill Community College Cambridge College Curry College Eastern Nazarene College Emerson College Emmanuel College Fisher College Harvard University Hebrew College Hellenic College Hult International Business School Labouré College Lasell University Lesley University Longy School of Music Massachusetts Bay Community College Massachusetts College of Art and Design Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences Massachusetts Institute of Technology MGH Institute New England College of Optometry New England Conservatory of Music New England School of Law Northeastern University North Shore Community College Quincy College Roxbury Community College St. John's Seminary Simmons University Suffolk University Tufts University University of Massachusetts Boston Urban College of Boston Wellesley College Wentworth Institute of Technology William James College Former Episcopal Divinity School Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Curry_College&oldid=1300336331#Athletics " Categories : Curry College 1879 establishments in Massachusetts Universities and colleges established in 1879 Liberal arts colleges in Massachusetts Universities and colleges in Norfolk County, Massachusetts Private universities and colleges in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2018 All articles needing additional references Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 19:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Curry College 2 languages Add topic

