Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early career 2 Foreign Secretary Toggle Foreign Secretary subsection 2.1 China 2.2 Stance on nuclear weapons 3 Later career 4 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 4.1 Essays and reporting 4.2 Books 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Shyam Saran 2 languages Deutsch हिन्दी Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian politician Shyam Saran Shyam Sharan receiving the Padma Bhushan 26th Foreign Secretary of India In office 31 July 2004 – 1 September 2006 Preceded by Shashank Succeeded by Shivshankar Menon Personal details Born ( 1946-09-04 ) 4 September 1946 (age 78) Shyam Saran (born 4 September 1946) is an Indian career diplomat. He joined the Indian Foreign Service in 1970 and rose to become the Foreign Secretary to the Government of India from 2004 to 2006. Prior to his appointment as the Foreign Secretary he served as India's ambassador to Myanmar , Indonesia and Nepal and as its High Commissioner to Mauritius . Upon retiring as the Foreign Secretary, he was appointed the Prime Minister's Special Envoy for Indo-US Civil Nuclear Issues and later as Special Envoy and Chief Negotiator on Climate Change.

Until 2015, Shyam Saran was the Chairman of the National Security Advisory Board under the National Security Council . He also served as the Chairman of Research and Information System for Developing Countries — an autonomous think tank specializing in studies on economic and trade related issues.

[ 1 ] He regularly comments and speaks on politics and foreign policy issues and is a contributor to multiple magazines and newspapers.

In 2011, in recognition of his contribution to the civil service, he was awarded the Padma Bhushan - third highest civilian honor in India.

[ 2 ] Early career [ edit ] He joined the Indian Foreign Service in 1970 and subsequently served in different capacities in the Indian diplomatic missions in several capitals of the world including Beijing, Tokyo and Geneva.  Prior to his appointment as the Foreign Secretary, he was India's Ambassador to Myanmar , Indonesia and Nepal and High Commissioner to Mauritius . In the Ministry of External Affairs , New Delhi, he headed the Economic Division and the Multilateral Economic Division and also headed the East Asia Division which handles relations with China and Japan. As a Joint Secretary in the Prime Minister's Office in 1991/92, he advised the Prime Minister on foreign policy, nuclear and defense related issues. As foreign secretary and later as the special envoy on nuclear issues, he made a significant contribution to the Indo-US nuclear deal.

[ 3 ] Foreign Secretary [ edit ] China [ edit ] As foreign secretary, he visited China in March 2005 for the 15th meeting of the India-China Joint Working Group on the boundary issue.

Shyam Saran and the Secretary Ministry of Cultural Affairs of Bangladesh, Shamim Ahsan signing the Cultural Exchange Programme (CEP) for 2005–2008 in Dhaka Stance on nuclear weapons [ edit ] In April 2006, he said that India has no obligation to define its minimum credible nuclear-deterrent after United States Assistant Secretary of State Richard Boucher suggested that India "further define" its minimum deterrent. During his tenure, Saran helped negotiate the U.S.–India Civil Nuclear Agreement . In December 2012, he wrote a research article in which, he pointed out that Pakistan's nuclear arsenal expansion has been extended, this time, not to deter India but to deter possible American attack on Pakistan.

[ 4 ] Later career [ edit ] Even though the Prime Minister's Office was willing to extend his tenure as foreign secretary when he was set to retire in September 2006, Amb. Saran did retire. He was an advisor to the Prime Minister specializing in nuclear issues, as well as the Indian envoy on climate change. He quit office on 19 February 2010. He was the Chairman of the Research and Information System for Developing Countries (RIS) thinktank and a Senior Fellow at the Centre for Policy Research in New Delhi.
He is also on the advisory board of World Development Forum, an upcoming forum that aims to bring together citizens' groups, development organizations, businesses and governments, to a common platform to produce, evidence-based politically actionable guidance and unlock greater value, through human enterprise.

[ 5 ] Additionally, Saran is a Member of the Board of Advisors of the Global Panel Foundation , a respected NGO that works behind the scenes in crisis areas around the world.

[ 6 ] Bibliography [ edit ] This list is incomplete ; you can help by adding missing items .

( May 2015 ) Essays and reporting [ edit ] Saran, Shyam (6 October 2014). "Crucible of convergence".

India Today .

39 (40): 26– 28.

Books [ edit ] How India Sees The World: Kautilya To The 21st Century.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Navtej Sarna Vikas Swarup Taranjit Singh Sandhu Harsh Vardhan Shringla References [ edit ] ^ "Ambassador Shyam Saran, Chairman, Research and Information Systems" . Archived from the original on 28 July 2014 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 .

^ "Padma Vibhushan for Montek Ahluwalia, Azim Premji" . Economic Times. Archived from the original on 15 October 2012 . Retrieved 28 September 2014 .

^ Sreenivasan, T. P.

"Shyam Saran: A glorious innings come to an end" .

Rediff.com . Retrieved 28 September 2014 .

^ Daily News (7 December 2012).

"Pakistan 'expanding nuclear arsenal to deter US attack' " .

Daily News, India . Archived from the original on 10 May 2013 . Retrieved 15 January 2013 .

^ Shyam Saran, World Development Forum ^ "Global Panel Foundation | Meeting the World in Person" . Archived from the original on 20 September 2012 . Retrieved 18 June 2016 .

^ "The hard-earned wisdom of a good diplomat" . 27 September 2017.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Shyam Saran .

Profile on website of Ministry of External Affairs of India v t e Padma Bhushan award recipients (2010–2019) 2010 Satya Paul Agarwal Mohammad Amin Sailesh Kumar Bandopadhyay M. S. Banga Anil Bordia Bipan Chandra B. K. Chaturvedi Sant Singh Chatwal G. P. Chopra Tan Chung Madhusudan Dhaky P. R. Dubhashi Puttaraj Gawai Belle Monappa Hegde Ilaiyaraaja Jagdish Chandra Kapur Shrinivas Khale Aamir Khan Sultan Khan Ram Kumar Kumudini Lakhia Kuzhur Narayana Marar Chhannulal Mishra Eledath Thaikkattu Narayanan Mooss C. P. Krishnan Nair S. P. Oswal Akbar Padamsee Ramakanta Panda Balasaheb Vikhe Patil Arogyaswami Paulraj A. R. Rahman Moosa Raza Mallika Sarabhai Nookala Chinna Satyanarayana Abhijit Sen Satya Vrat Shastri Noshir M. Shroff Kushal Pal Singh Bikash Sinha Balagangadharanatha Swamiji Narayanan Vaghul P. K. Warrier Fareed Zakaria 2011 S. P. Balasubrahmanyam Rajashree Birla M. N. Buch C. V. Chandrasekhar Ajai Chowdhry Yogesh Chander Deveshwar Satyadev Dubey T. J. S. George Shankha Ghosh Kris Gopalakrishnan Keki Byramjee Grant Shashi Kapoor Krishen Khanna Khayyam Chanda Kochhar Dwijen Mukhopadhyay Madavoor Vasudevan Nair Ramdas Pai Dashrath Patel Rajendra Singh Pawar Suryanarayanan Ramachandran Shobhana Ranade Gunupati Venkata Krishna Reddy Kallam Anji Reddy Waheeda Rehman Shyam Saran Analjit Singh Arpita Singh Surendra Singh R. K. Srikantan Raghavan Thirumulpad 2012 Suresh H. Advani Shabana Azmi Homi K. Bhabha Shashikumar Chitre Khaled Choudhury Jatin Das Vidya Dehejia Dharmendra S. N. Goenka M. S. Gopalakrishnan T. V. Gopalakrishnan Buddhadev Das Gupta Sunil Janah Anish Kapoor S. B. Mujumdar B. Muthuraman Mira Nair Arvind Panagariya José Pereira Mata Prasad M. S. Raghunathan P. Chandrasekhara Rao Ronen Sen Devi Shetty M. V. Subbiah N. Vittal N. H. Wadia George Yeo 2013 Satya N. Atluri Maharaj Kishan Bhan Jaspal Bhatti Rahul Dravid Adi Godrej Abdul Rashid Khan Rajesh Khanna Mary Kom Nandkishore Shamrao Laud Mangesh Padgaonkar Hemendra Singh Panwar Jogesh Pati Shivajirao Girdhar Patil A. Sivathanu Pillai D. Ramanaidu Kanak Rele V. K. Saraswat Ashoke Sen Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak B. N. Suresh Sharmila Tagore Ramamurthy Thyagarajan Saroja Vaidyanathan 2014 Anisuzzaman Mrityunjay Athreya Padmanabhan Balaram Dalveer Bhandari Ruskin Bond Anita Desai Pullela Gopichand Kamal Haasan Jyeshtharaj Joshi V. N. Kaul Neelam Kler M. Mahadevappa Leander Paes Koppillil Radhakrishnan Anumolu Ramakrishna Thirumalachari Ramasami Lloyd Rudolph Susanne Hoeber Rudolph Vinod Prakash Sharma Gulam Mohammed Sheikh Parween Sultana Dhirubhai Thaker Vairamuthu J. S. Verma T. H. Vinayakram 2015 Jahnu Barua Manjul Bhargava Vijay P. Bhatkar Swapan Dasgupta David Frawley Bill Gates Melinda French Gates Swami Satyamitranand N. Gopalaswami Subhash C. Kashyap Gokulotsavji Maharaj Saichiro Misumi Ambrish Mithal Sudha Ragunathan Harish Salve Ashok Seth Rajat Sharma Satpal Singh Shivakumara Swami Khadg Singh Valdiya 2016 Ravindra Chandra Bhargava Robert D. Blackwill Hafeez Contractor Indu Jain Heisnam Kanhailal Anupam Kher Sania Mirza Pallonji Mistry Udit Narayan Saina Nehwal Yarlagadda Lakshmi Prasad Vinod Rai N. S. Ramanuja Tatacharya A. V. Rama Rao D. Nageshwara Reddy Dayananda Saraswati Barjinder Singh Hamdard Ram V. Sutar Tejomayananda 2017 Vishwa Mohan Bhatt Deviprasad Dwivedi Ratnasundarsuri Niranjanananda Saraswati Cho Ramaswamy Maha Chakri Sirindhorn Tehemton Erach Udwadia 2018 Pankaj Advani Philipose Mar Chrysostom Mahendra Singh Dhoni Alexander Kadakin Ramachandran Nagaswamy Laxman Pai Arvind Parikh Sharda Sinha 2019 John T. Chambers Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa Pravin Gordhan Dharampal Gulati Darshan Lal Jain Ashok Laxmanrao Kukade Kariya Munda Budhaditya Mukherjee Mohanlal Nambi Narayanan Kuldip Nayar Bachendri Pal V. K. Shunglu Hukmdev Narayan Yadav # Posthumous conferral 1954–1959 1960–1969 1970–1979 1980–1989 1990–1999 2000–2009 2010–2019 2020–2029 v t e Indian civil servants Organizations Indian Administrative Service Indian Forest Service Indian Police Service Indian Foreign Service Award presented to Civil Servants G-Files awards Indian Administrative Service Officers Amrit Abhijat K. M. Abraham (Bureaucrat) B. P. Acharya Adeela Abdulla J. Alexander (politician) Pratyaya Amrit P. S. Appu Anil Baijal Pradip Baijal R. C. Bhargava Sudhir Bhargava Arun Bhatnagar Rahul Bhatnagar C. B. Bhave Ashwini Bhide T. N. Chaturvedi more Indian Police Service officers Manoj Abraham Vipul Aggarwal Javeed Ahmad K. C. Surendra Babu Masud Choudhary Swaran Ram Darapuri Ajit Doval Edward Lee French Om Prakash Galhotra Kanwar Pal Singh Gill D.V. Guruprasad P. G. Harlankar Abdul Rahman Infant Ahmed Javed Merin Joseph Banwari Lal Joshi Bhaskar Jyoti Mahanta Ashok Kamte Narendra Kumar more Indian Foreign Service officers Harsh Vardhan Shringla Venu Rajamony Kamlesh Sharma Vijayalakshmi Pandit Maharaja Krishna Rasgotra Abid Hasan Shivshankar Menon Nirupama Rao Subimal Dutt Kanwal Sibal C. B. Muthamma Shyam Saran K. M. Panikkar Triloki Nath Kaul Mohammad Hamid Ansari more Indian Forest Service Officers Hari Singh P. Srinivas Sanjiv Chaturvedi Hemendra Singh Panwar Fateh Singh Rathore Shri Sanjay Singh Templates Category WikiProject India portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shyam_Saran&oldid=1305107298 " Categories : Indian civil servants Living people Ambassadors of India to Nepal Ambassadors of India to Myanmar Ambassadors of India to Indonesia Indian Foreign Secretaries 1946 births Recipients of the Padma Bhushan in civil service High commissioners of India to Mauritius Indian Foreign Service officers 20th-century Indian politicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from September 2014 Use dmy dates from September 2014 Incomplete lists from May 2015 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 02:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shyam Saran 2 languages Add topic

