Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and career 2 Philosophical work Toggle Philosophical work subsection 2.1 Action theory 2.2 Epistemology 2.3 Other work 3 Bibliography 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Alvin Goldman 13 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 مصرى 日本語 Português Suomi Volapük Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher (1938–2024) Alvin Goldman Goldman in 1966 Born ( 1938-10-01 ) October 1, 1938 Brooklyn, New York , U.S.

Died August 4, 2024 (2024-08-04) (aged 85) Education Thesis Action (1965) Doctoral advisor Paul Benacerraf Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic Foundationalism Main interests Epistemology , philosophy of action Notable ideas Causal theory of knowledge , social epistemology , externalist foundationalist theory of justification Alvin Ira Goldman (October 1, 1938 – August 4, 2024) was an American philosopher who was emeritus Board of Governors Professor of Philosophy and Cognitive Science at Rutgers University in New Jersey and a leading figure in epistemology .

Education and career [ edit ] Goldman earned his BA from Columbia University and PhD from Princeton University and previously taught at the University of Michigan (1963–1980), the University of Illinois, Chicago (1980–1983) and the University of Arizona (1983–1994). He joined the Rutgers faculty in 1994 [ 1 ] and retired in 2018.

[ 2 ] Goldman was married to the ethicist Holly Martin Smith . He died on August 4, 2024, at the age of 85.

[ 3 ] Philosophical work [ edit ] Goldman did influential work on a wide range of philosophical topics, but his principal areas of research were epistemology , philosophy of mind , and cognitive science .

Action theory [ edit ] Goldman's early book, A Theory of Human Action (a revised version of his Ph.D. thesis), presents a systematic way of classifying and relating the many actions we perform at any time. Its influence was broad and can be found in, among other writings, John Rawls's book A Theory of Justice .  Goldman's early work in action theory soon gave way to work in other branches of philosophy, most influentially epistemology.

Epistemology [ edit ] Goldman's accounts of knowledge and justified belief, using notions like causation and reliability instead of normative concepts like permissibility and obligation, contributed to a philosophical approach that came to be known in the 1970s as naturalized epistemology . (Unlike W.V.O. Quine 's version of naturalized epistemology, however, Goldman's retains a traditional focus on questions of justification.) Goldman's view emerged initially as part of the efforts in the 1960s to find a "fourth" condition in response to the Gettier challenge to the account of knowledge as "justified true belief."  In his 1967 paper, " A Causal Theory of Knowing ", Goldman proposed that knowledge amounts to the true belief appropriately caused by the fact that makes it true.  Later, he claimed knowledge amounts to true belief that is produced by a reliable process.

[ 4 ] Goldman described his "naturalistic" approach to epistemology as splitting "epistemology (individual epistemology, anyway) into two parts...

The first part is dedicated to the 'analytic' task of identifying the criteria, or satisfaction conditions, for various normative epistemic statuses. With respect to the normative status of justifiedness (of belief), the proposed criterion is the reliability of the belief-forming processes by which the belief is produced. Defense of this criterion of justifiedness was not based on scientific psychology, but rather a familiar form of armchair methodology.

The second part is the task where the science enters the picture. Psychological science is required to identify the kinds of operations or computations available to the human cognizer, how well they work when operating on certain inputs and under certain conditions." [ 5 ] Goldman latterly focused his epistemological efforts on questions of social epistemology , of the different social mechanisms through which knowledge is transmitted in society. His work in social epistemology dealt with the law (especially evidence), voting, and media, among other topics. He attempted to provide (in his words) a less radical view of social epistemology than those suggested by cultural theorists and postmodernists under that name. His approach used tools of analytic philosophy especially formal epistemology to analyze problems in social knowledge. Some of this work is summarized in his book Knowledge in a Social World .

Other work [ edit ] Goldman devoted significant time to showing how research in cognitive science is relevant to a variety of branches of philosophy including epistemology. Much of this work appears in his books Epistemology and Cognition , Philosophical Applications of Cognitive Science , and Simulating Minds .

Bibliography [ edit ] Action (1965) " A Causal Theory of Knowing " in The Journal of Philosophy v. 64 (1967), pp. 357–372.

A Theory of Human Action (1970) "Epistemics: The Regulative Theory of Cognition," The Journal of Philosophy 75 (1978) pp. 509–523.

"What is Justified Belief?" in Justification and Knowledge (1979), pp. 1–23.

Epistemology and Cognition (1986) Liaisons: Philosophy Meets the Cognitive and Social Sciences (1991) Philosophical Applications of Cognitive Science (1993) Readings in Philosophy and Cognitive Science (editor), (1993) Knowledge in a Social World (1999) Pathways to Knowledge: Private and Public (2004) Simulating Minds (2006) Joint Ventures: Mindreading, Mirroring, and Embodied Cognition (2013) See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers Reliabilism References [ edit ] ^ Goldman CV fas-philosophy.rutgers.edu ^ "Alvin Goldman Retirement Conference" .

^ Weinberg, Justin (2024-08-12).

"Alvin Goldman (1938-2024) - Daily Nous" . Retrieved 2024-08-20 .

^ Goldman, Alvin I.

Liaisons: Philosophy meets the cognitive and social sciences . Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press, 1992. (Chapter 5, 85-103) ^ "Thinking About Mindreading, Mirroring and Embedded Cognition et al… - 3:AM Magazine" . Archived from the original on 2017-12-29 . Retrieved 2015-07-11 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Alvin Goldman .

Alvin Goldman's home page Article partly devoted to Goldman's epistemic views Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on reliabilism, written by Goldman Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on naturalised epistemology, relevant to Goldman v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Croatia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH PhilPeople People Trove Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alvin_Goldman&oldid=1303211568 " Categories : 1938 births 2024 deaths 20th-century American philosophers 21st-century American philosophers Princeton University alumni Philosophers from Michigan Philosophers from Arizona Philosophers from Texas American epistemologists University of Michigan faculty University of Arizona faculty Rutgers University faculty Action theorists American philosophers of mind Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 17:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alvin Goldman 13 languages Add topic

