Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Lunar dome 11 languages Català Dansk Español Français Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of shield volcano on the Moon Typical lunar dome Milichius Pi, about 11 km across A lunar dome is a type of shield volcano that is found on the surface of the Earth 's Moon . They are typically formed by highly viscous, possibly silica -rich lava , erupting from localized vents followed by relatively slow cooling. Lunar domes are wide, rounded, circular features with a gentle slope rising in elevation a few hundred meters to the midpoint. They are typically 8–12 km in diameter, but can be up to 20 km across. Some of the domes contain a small craterlet at the peak.

Some of the domes have been shown to consist of the same materials as the lunar maria . Thus they could be created by some mechanism that differs from the mare-forming flows. It is thought that these domes are formed from a smaller magma chamber that is closer to the surface than is the case for a mare. This results in a lower pressure, and so the lava flows more slowly. The magma wells up through a crack in the surface, but the flow eventually concentrates through one primary vent. This concentration can then result in a vent crater at the peak of the dome.

The cluster of lunar domes at the Marius Hills was considered as a possible landing site of Apollo 15 .  There are concentrations of lunar domes near the craters Hortensius , and T. Mayer , across the top of Mons Rümker , and in Mare Fecunditatis . Solitary lunar domes are also found, including Kies Pi (π), Milichius Pi (π), Mons Gruithuisen Gamma (γ) and Delta (δ), and domes near the craters Gambart C , Beer , and Capuanus . Omega Cauchy (ω) and Tau Cauchy (τ) form a pair of domes near the crater Cauchy . Likewise near Arago are the domes Arago Alpha (α) and Arago Beta (β).  There are two domes south of Mons Esam . 
The IAU does not currently have rules that establish the naming of lunar domes, but the practice in the professional literature and in lunar sciences is to name the dome with the name of the nearest crater followed by a number that denotes the order of discovery.

Examples [ edit ] Omega Cauchy, with the small crater Donna at its summit, Mare Tranquillitatis Oblique view of a dome north of Sinas , Mare Tranquillitatis Oblique view of lunar dome near Messier in Mare Fecunditatis . Note dark 'halo' deposits.  The crater left of center is unrelated (formed after the dome).

Lunar dome south of Beer , Mare Imbrium Oblique view of three of the six lunar domes north of Hortensius , from Lunar Orbiter 3 LRO image of the Hortensius domes Domes in Lacus Veris , Orientale basin Mons Gruithuisen Gamma (left) and Delta (right), from Lunar Orbiter 4 See also [ edit ] Volcanism on the Moon References [ edit ] Lionel Wilson and James W. Head, " Lunar Gruithuisen and Mairan domes: Rheology and mode of emplacement Archived 2007-03-12 at the Wayback Machine ", Journal of Geophysical Research , vol. 108, 2003.

Lena, R., Wöhler, C., Phillips, J., Chiocchetta, M.T., "Lunar Domes:Properties and Formation Processes", "Springer Praxis Books", 2013, " [1] ".

External links [ edit ] Marvin W. Huddleston, ALPO Lunar Dome Survey Coordinator's web page on Lunar Domes Association of Lunar & Planetary Observers, Lunar Section GLR Group Website UAI Lunar Dome Introduction v t e Moon Outline Physical properties Internal structure Topography Atmosphere Gravity field Hill sphere Magnetic field Sodium tail Moonlight Earthlight Orbit Orbital elements Distance Perigee and apogee Libration Nodes Nodal period Precession Syzygy New moon Full moon Eclipses Lunar eclipse Total penumbral lunar eclipse Tetrad Solar eclipse Solar eclipses on the Moon Eclipse cycle Supermoon Tide Tidal force Tidal locking Tidal acceleration Tidal range Lunar station Surface and features Selenography Terminator Limb Hemispheres Near side Far side Poles North pole South pole Face Maria List Mountains Peak of eternal light Valleys Volcanic features Domes Calderas Lava tubes Craters List Ray systems Permanently shadowed craters South Pole–Aitken basin Regolith swirls Rilles Wrinkle ridges Rocks Lunar basalt 70017 Changesite-(Y) Water Space weathering Micrometeorite Sputtering Quakes Transient lunar phenomenon Selenographic coordinate system Science Observation Libration Lunar theory Origin Giant-impact hypothesis Theia Lunar magma ocean Geology Timescale Late Heavy Bombardment Lunar meteorites KREEP Volcanism Experiments Lunar laser ranging ALSEP Lunar sample displays Apollo 11 Apollo 17 Lunar seismology Exploration Missions Apollo program Explorers Probes Landing Colonization Moonbase Tourism Lunar resources Time-telling and navigation Lunar calendar Lunisolar calendar Month Lunar month Nodal period Fortnight Sennight Lunar station Lunar distance Phases and names New Full Names Crescent Super and micro Blood Blue Black Dark Wet Tetrad Daily phenomena Moonrise Meridian passage Moonset Related Lunar deities Lunar effect Earth phase Moon illusion Pareidolia Man in the Moon Moon rabbit Craters named after people Artificial objects on the Moon Memorials on the Moon Moon in science fiction list Apollo era futuristic exploration Hollow Moon Moon landing conspiracy theories Moon Treaty " Moon is made of green cheese " Natural satellite Double planet Lilith (hypothetical second moon) Splitting of the Moon Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lunar_dome&oldid=1140156464 " Categories : Volcanoes on the Moon Shield volcanoes Lava domes Geologic domes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 18 February 2023, at 18:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lunar dome 11 languages Add topic

