Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Course Toggle Course subsection 2.1 In the Czech Republic 2.2 In Germany 3 Towns and cities 4 Navigation 5 Islands Toggle Islands subsection 5.1 Headwaters 5.2 Upper reaches 5.3 Middle Elbe 5.4 Between Northern and Southern Elbe (Norderelbe/Süderelbe) 5.5 Lower Elbe 5.6 Outer Elbe (estuary) 5.7 Former islands 6 Ferries 7 Prehistory 8 History 9 See also 10 References 11 Bibliography 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Elbe 117 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Seeltersk Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 53°55′20″N 8°43′20″E ﻿ / ﻿ 53.92222°N 8.72222°E ﻿ / 53.92222; 8.72222 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Major river in Central Europe For other uses, see Elbe (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with the island of Elba .

Elbe Elve The Elbe (Labe) near Děčín, Czech Republic The Elbe drainage basin Native name Elbe ( German ) Labe ( Czech ) Ilv, Elv ( Low German ) Łobjo ( Sorbian languages ) Location Countries Czech Republic Germany Regions (CZ) Hradec Králové Pardubice Central Bohemia Ústí nad Labem States (DE) Saxony Saxony-Anhalt Brandenburg Lower Saxony Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Hamburg Schleswig-Holstein Cities Hradec Králové Pardubice Ústí nad Labem Děčín Dresden Meissen Wittenberg Dessau Magdeburg Hamburg Stade Cuxhaven Physical characteristics Source Elbe Meadow • location Giant Mountains, Czech Republic • coordinates 50°46′32.59″N 15°32′10.14″E ﻿ / ﻿ 50.7757194°N 15.5361500°E ﻿ / 50.7757194; 15.5361500 • elevation 1,386 m (4,547 ft) Mouth North Sea • location Germany • coordinates 53°55′20″N 8°43′20″E ﻿ / ﻿ 53.92222°N 8.72222°E ﻿ / 53.92222; 8.72222 • elevation 0 m (0 ft) Length 1,112 km (691 mi) Basin size 148,268 km 2 (57,247 sq mi) Discharge • location mouth • average 870 m 3 /s (31,000 cu ft/s) • minimum 493 m 3 /s (17,400 cu ft/s) • maximum 1,232 m 3 /s (43,500 cu ft/s) Discharge • location Děčín • average 303 m 3 /s (10,700 cu ft/s) Basin features Tributaries • left Vltava , Ohře , Mulde , Saale , Ohre , Ilmenau , Este , Lühe , Schwinge , Oste , Medem • right Jizera , Schwarze Elster , Havel , Elde , Bille , Alster , Mrlina The Elbe ( Czech : Labe [ˈlabɛ] ⓘ ; German: [ˈɛlbə] ⓘ ; Low German : Ilv or Elv ; Upper and Lower Sorbian : Łobjo , pronounced [ˈwɔbʲɔ] ) is one of the major rivers of Central Europe . It rises in the Giant Mountains of the northern Czech Republic before traversing much of Bohemia (western half of the Czech Republic), then Germany and flowing into the North Sea at Cuxhaven , 110 kilometres (68 miles) northwest of Hamburg . Its total length is 1,094 km (680 mi).

[ 1 ] The Elbe's major tributaries include the rivers Vltava , Ohře , Saale , Havel , Mulde , and Schwarze Elster .

[ 1 ] The Elbe river basin, comprising the Elbe and its tributaries, has a catchment area of 148,268 square kilometres (57,247 sq mi), the twelfth largest in Europe. The basin spans four countries; however, it lies almost entirely just in two of them, Germany (65.5%) and the Czech Republic (33.7%, covering about two thirds of the nation's territory). On its southeastern edges, the Elbe river basin also comprises small parts of Austria (0.6%) and Poland (0.2%). The Elbe catchment area is inhabited by 24.4 million people; its biggest cities are Berlin , Hamburg , Prague , Dresden and Leipzig .

[ 1 ] Etymology [ edit ] Albis or Albia are old medieval names for the river Elbe First attested in Latin as Albis , the name Elbe means "river" or "river-bed" and is nothing more than the High German version of a word ( *albī ) found elsewhere in Germanic; cf.

Old Norse river name Elfr , Swedish älv "river", Norwegian elv "river", Old English river name elf , and Middle Low German elve "river-bed".

[ 2 ] Course [ edit ] In the Czech Republic [ edit ] The Elbe (Labe) rises on the slopes of Mt.

Violík at an elevation of 1,386 metres (4,547 ft) in the Giant Mountains on the northwest borders of the Czech Republic. Of the numerous small streams whose waters compose the infant river. After plunging down the 30 metres (98 ft) of the Elbe Falls , the latter stream unites with the steeply torrential Bílé Labe , and thereafter the united stream of the Elbe pursues a southerly course, emerging from the mountain glens at Jaroměř , where it receives Úpa and Metuje .

Here the Elbe enters the vast vale named Polabí (meaning "land along the Elbe"), and continues on southwards through Hradec Králové (where Orlice flows in) and then to Pardubice , where it turns sharply to the west. At Kolín some 43 kilometres (27 mi) further on, it bends gradually towards the north-west. At the village of Káraný , a little above Brandýs nad Labem , the Jizera enters in.

At Mělník its stream is more than doubled in volume by the Vltava , a major river which winds northwards through Bohemia . Upstream from the confluence the Vltava is in fact much longer (434 kilometres (270 mi) against 294 kilometres (183 mi) of the Elbe so far), and has a greater discharge and a larger drainage basin . Nonetheless, for historical reasons the river retains the name Elbe, also because at the confluence point it is the Elbe that flows through the main, wider valley while the Vltava flows into the valley to meet the Elbe at almost a right angle, and thus appears to be the tributary river.

Some distance lower down, at Litoměřice , the waters of the Elbe are tinted by the reddish Ohře . Thus augmented, and swollen into a stream 140 metres (460 ft) wide, the Elbe carves a path through the basaltic mass of the České Středohoří , churning its way through a picturesque, deep, narrow and curved rocky gorge.

In Germany [ edit ] Shortly after crossing the Czech-German frontier, and passing through the sandstone defiles of the Elbe Sandstone Mountains , the stream assumes a north-westerly direction, which on the whole it preserves right to the North Sea.

The river rolls through Dresden and finally, beyond Meissen , enters on its long journey across the North German Plain passing along the former western border of East Germany , touching Torgau , Wittenberg , Dessau , Magdeburg , Wittenberge , and Hamburg on the way, and taking on the waters of the Mulde and Saale from the west, and those of the Schwarze Elster , Havel and Elde from the east. In its northern section both banks of the Elbe are characterised by flat, very fertile marshlands ( Elbe Marshes ), former flood plains of the Elbe now diked.

At Magdeburg  there is a  viaduct, the Magdeburg Water Bridge , that carries a canal and its shipping traffic over the Elbe and its banks, allowing shipping traffic to pass under it unhindered.

The Middle Elbe in the North German Plain near the village of Gorleben . In this section, the river had been part of the Iron Curtain between West and East Germany during the Cold War . For that reason, the river banks even today look relatively natural and undeveloped. (Photo taken 2011) From the sluice of Geesthacht (at kilometre 586) on downstream the Elbe is subject to the tides , the tidal Elbe section is called the Unterelbe (Low Elbe). Soon the Elbe reaches Hamburg. Within the city-state the Unterelbe has a number of branch streams, such as Dove Elbe , Gose Elbe , Köhlbrand , Norderelbe (Northern Elbe), Reiherstieg , Süderelbe (Southern Elbe). Some of which have been disconnected for vessels from the main stream by dikes. In 1390 the Gose Elbe (literally in English: shallow Elbe ) was separated from the main stream by a dike connecting the two then-islands of Kirchwerder and Neuengamme . The Dove Elbe (literally in English: deaf Elbe ) was diked off in 1437/38 at Gammer Ort. These hydraulic engineering works were carried out to protect marshlands from inundation, and to improve the water supply of the Port of Hamburg . After the heavy inundation by the North Sea flood of 1962 the western section of the Southern Elbe was separated, becoming the Old Southern Elbe, while the waters of the eastern Southern Elbe now merge into the Köhlbrand, which is bridged by the Köhlbrandbrücke , the last bridge over the Elbe before the North Sea.

The Northern Elbe passes the Elbe Philharmonic Hall and is then crossed under by the old Elbe Tunnel (Alter Elbtunnel) , both in Hamburg's city centre. A bit more downstream, the Low Elbe's two main anabranches Northern Elbe and the Köhlbrand reunite south of Altona -Altstadt, a locality of Hamburg. Right after both anabranches reunite, the Low Elbe is passed under by the New Elbe Tunnel (Neuer Elbtunnel) , the last structural road link crossing the river before the North Sea. At the bay Mühlenberger Loch in Hamburg at kilometre 634, the Northern Elbe and the Southern Elbe (here now the cut-off meander Old Southern Elbe) used to reunite, which is why the bay is seen as the starting point of the Niederelbe (Lower Elbe). Leaving the city-state the Lower Elbe then passes between Holstein and the Elbe-Weser Triangle with Stade until it flows into the North Sea at Cuxhaven . Near its mouth, it passes the entrance to the Kiel Canal at Brunsbüttel before it debouches into the North Sea.

View of the Elbe in Saxon Switzerland , an area in Germany Towns and cities [ edit ] The Port of Hamburg on the Elbe The Elbe passing Dresden The Elbe flows through Magdeburg Town Population Špindlerův Mlýn 979 Vrchlabí 11,968 Dvůr Králové nad Labem 15,170 Jaroměř 12,260 Smiřice 2,969 Hradec Králové 90,596 Pardubice 88,520 Kolín 32,046 Poděbrady 14,536 Brandýs nad Labem-Stará Boleslav 18,755 Mělník 19,472 Štětí 8,438 Roudnice nad Labem 12,506 Litoměřice 22,950 Lovosice 8,605 Ústí nad Labem 90,378 Děčín 47,029 Bad Schandau 3,423 Königstein 2,085 Pirna 38,361 Heidenau 16,540 Dresden 555,351 Radebeul 33,743 Coswig (Saxony) 20,462 Meissen 28,080 Riesa 28,850 Strehla 3,651 Belgern-Schildau 7,579 Torgau 19,625 Wittenberg 44,984 Coswig (Saxony-Anhalt) 11,494 Dessau-Roßlau 78,731 Aken (Elbe) 7,363 Barby 8,173 Schönebeck 30,067 Magdeburg 236,188 Tangermünde 10,350 Wittenberge 16,682 Dömitz 2,991 Hitzacker 5,020 Bleckede 9,613 Boizenburg 10,689 Lauenburg 11,644 Geesthacht 31,539 Hamburg 1,906,411 Wedel 34,151 Stade 47,579 Glückstadt 10,719 Brunsbüttel 12,381 Otterndorf 7,443 Cuxhaven 48,318 Navigation [ edit ] The Elbe has always been navigable by commercial vessels, [ 3 ] and provides important trade links as far inland as Prague . The river is linked by canals ( Elbe Lateral Canal , Elbe-Havel Canal , Mittellandkanal ) to the industrial areas of Germany and to Berlin . The Elbe-Lübeck Canal links the Elbe to the Baltic Sea , as does the Kiel Canal , whose western entrance is near the mouth of the Elbe. The Elbe-Weser Shipping Channel connects the Elbe with the Weser .

By the Treaty of Versailles the navigation on the Elbe became subject to the International Commission of the Elbe, seated in Dresden.

[ 4 ] The statute of the commission was signed in Dresden on 22 February 1922.

[ 5 ] Following articles 363 and 364 of the Treaty of Versailles, Czechoslovakia was entitled to lease its own harbour basin, Moldauhafen in Hamburg. The contract of lease with Germany, and supervised by the United Kingdom , was signed on 14 February 1929, ending in 2028. Since 1993 the Czech Republic holds the former Czechoslovak legal position.

Before Germany was reunited, waterway transport in Western Germany was hindered by the fact that inland navigation to Hamburg had to pass through the German Democratic Republic. The Elbe-Seitenkanal (Elbe Lateral Canal) was built between the West German section of the Mittellandkanal and the Lower Elbe to restore this connection. When the two nations were reunited, works were begun to improve and restore the original links: the Magdeburg Water Bridge now allows large barges to cross the Elbe without having to enter the river. The often low water levels of the Elbe no longer hinder navigation to Berlin.

[ 6 ] Islands [ edit ] Cuxhaven The mouth of the Elbe with the island of Trischen in the North Sea Headwaters [ edit ] Hořejší – in Kolín Kmochův – in Kolín Upper reaches [ edit ] Pillnitzer Elbinsel – in Dresden 's southern quarter of Pillnitz in the Dresden Basin Gauernitzer Elbinsel – east of Gauernitz in the Dresden Basin between Dresden and Meißen Middle Elbe [ edit ] Rotehorninsel – in Magdeburg Steinkopfinsel – in Magdeburg Between Northern and Southern Elbe (Norderelbe/Süderelbe) [ edit ] Wilhelmsburg , including the islands Veddel , Georgswerder , Kleiner Grasbrook , Steinwerder , Peute and several more – in Hamburg 's borough of Mitte (centre) Kaltehofe (also "Kalte Hofe") – in Hamburg's borough of Mitte Finkenwerder – in Hamburg's borough of Mitte Lower Elbe [ edit ] Schweinesand – south of Blankenese (Hamburg) Neßsand – south of Tinsdal Hahnöfersand – north of Jork Hanskalbsand – south of Schulau Lühesand – east of Stade Bisterhorster Sand – west of Wedel Pagensand – west of Seestermühe Schwarztonnensand – east of Drochtersen Rhinplate – west of Glückstadt Outer Elbe (estuary) [ edit ] Neuwerk – an exclave – in Hamburg's borough of Mitte Scharhörn – an exclave Hamburg's borough of Mitte Nigehörn – an exclave Hamburg's borough of Mitte Former islands [ edit ] Medemsand Ferries [ edit ] The Dolní Žleb Ferry The Wörlitz Coswig Ferry The Zollenspieker Ferry The Elbe is crossed by many ferries, both passenger and car carrying. In downstream order, these include: [ 7 ] Dolní Žleb Ferry , at Dolní Žleb part of Děčín Rathen Ferry , at Rathen Pillnitz Kleinzschachwitz Ferry , in the eastern suburbs of Dresden Laubegast Niederpoyritz Ferry , in Dresden Johannstadt Neustadt Ferry , in Dresden Belgern Ottersitz Ferry , between Belgern and Ottersitz Dommitzsch Prettin Ferry , between Dommitzsch and Prettin Mauken Pretzsch Ferry , between Mauken and Pretzsch Wartenburg Elster Ferry , between Wartenburg and Elster Wörlitz Coswig Ferry , between Wörlitz and Coswig Steutz Aken Ferry , between Steutz and Aken Tochheim Ferry , between Tochheim and Alt Tochheim near Breitenhagen Ronney Barby Ferry , between Barby and Walternienburg Westerhüsen Ferry , at Westerhüsen near Magdeburg Schartau Rogätz Ferry , between Schartau and Rogätz Ferchland Grieben Ferry , between Ferchland and Grieben Sandau Büttnershof Ferry , between Sandau and Büttnershof Räbel Havelberg Ferry , between Räbel and Havelberg Lenzen Pevestorf Ferry , between Lenzen and Pevestorf Neu Darchau Darchau Ferry , between Darchau and Neu Darchau Bleckede Ferry [ de ] , between Bleckede and Neu Bleckede Zollenspieker Ferry , between Kirchwerder a part of the Bergedorf borough  of Hamburg, and Hoopte, part of the town Winsen (Luhe), in the state of Lower Saxony, about 30 kilometres (19 mi) south-east of Hamburg centre Ferries in the port of Hamburg , operated by HADAG [ 8 ] Wischhafen Glückstadt Ferry [ de ] , between Wischhafen and Glückstadt to the west of Hamburg Brunsbüttel Cuxhaven Ferry [ de ] , between Brunsbüttel and Cuxhaven at the mouth of the river (out of service as of October 2022).

Many of these ferries are traditional reaction ferries , a type of cable ferry that uses the current flow of the river to provide propulsion.

Prehistory [ edit ] You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in German .

(November 2019) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Elbe]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|de|Elbe}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Humans first lived in the northern Elbe region before about 200,000 years ago, during the Middle Paleolithic .

History [ edit ] Ptolemy recorded the Elbe as Albis ( Germanic for "river") in Germania Magna, with its source in the Asciburgis mountains ( Giant Mountains ), where the Germanic Vandalii then lived.

The Elbe near Königstein Fortress in Germany The Elbe has long served as an important delineator of European geography. The Romans knew the river as the Albis ; however, they made only one serious attempt to move the border of their empire forward from the Rhine to the Elbe, and this attempt failed with the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest in 9 AD, after which they never seriously tried again. In the Middle Ages the Elbe formed the eastern limit of the Empire of Charlemagne (King of the Franks from 769 to 814). The river's navigable sections were essential to the success of the Hanseatic League in the Late Middle Ages , and much trade was carried on its waters.

From the early 6th century Slavic tribes (known as the Polabian Slavs ) settled in the areas east of the rivers Elbe and Saale (which had been depopulated since the 4th century). In the 10th century the Ottonian Dynasty (dominant from 919 to 1024) began conquering these lands; a slow process of Germanization ensued, including the Wendish Crusade of 1147.

The Elbe delineated the western parts of Germany from the eastern so-called East Elbia , where soccage and serfdom were more strict and prevailed longer than westwards of the river, and where feudal lords held bigger estates than in the west. Thus incumbents of huge land-holdings became characterised [ when?

] as East Elbian Junkers . The Northern German area north of the Lower Elbe used to be called North Albingia in the Middle Ages. When the four Lutheran church bodies there united in 1977 they chose the name North Elbian Evangelical Lutheran Church . Other, administrative units were named after the river Elbe, such as the Westphalian Elbe département (1807–1813) and Lower Elbe département (1810), and the French département Bouches-de-l'Elbe (1811–1814).

On 10 April 1945, General Wenck of the German Twelfth Army located to the west of Berlin to guard against the advancing American and British forces. But, as the Western Front moved eastwards and the Eastern Front moved westwards, the German armies making up both fronts backed towards each other. As a result, the area of control of Wenck's army to his rear and east of the Elbe River had become a vast refugee camp for Germans fleeing from the approaching Soviet Army. Wenck took great pains to provide food and lodging for these refugees. At one stage, the Twelfth Army was estimated to be feeding more than a quarter of a million people every day. During the night of 28 April, Wenck reported to the German Supreme Army Command in Fuerstenberg that his Twelfth Army had been forced back along the entire front. According to Wenck, no attack on Berlin was possible as support from Busse's Ninth Army could no longer be expected. Instead, starting April 24, Wenck moved his army towards the Forest of Halbe , broke into the Halbe pocket and linked up with the remnants of the Ninth Army , Hellmuth Reymann 's "Army Group Spree", and the Potsdam garrison. Wenck brought his army, remnants of the Ninth Army, and many civilian refugees across the Elbe and into territory occupied by the U.S. Army .

In 1945, as World War II drew to a close, Germany came under attack from the armies of the western Allies advancing from the west and those of the Soviet Union advancing from the east. On 25 April 1945 these two forces linked up near Torgau , on the Elbe. The victorious countries marked the event unofficially as Elbe Day . From 1949 to 1990 the Elbe formed part of the Inner German border between East Germany and West Germany .

During the 1970s the Soviet Union stated that Adolf Hitler 's ashes had been scattered in the Elbe following disinterment from their original burial-site.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Rivers portal Geography portal Czech Republic portal Germany portal 2002 European floods – Major European floods in August 2002 2006 European floods – Floods affecting Eastern Europe 2013 European floods – May-June floods in central Europe caused by heavy rainfall Saxon Elbeland – Region of the Upper Elbe in Germany Saxon Switzerland – Hilly natural area in Saxony, Germany List of waterbodies in Saxony-Anhalt References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Elbe River basin" (PDF) . International Commission for the Protection of the Elbe River . Retrieved 2018-03-20 .

^ Orel, Vladimir.

A Handbook of Germanic Etymology . Leiden, Netherlands: Brill, 2003: 13 ^ Ellmers, Detlev (1991). Brachmann, Hansjürgen (ed.).

"Die Rolle der Binnenschiffahrt für die Entwicklung der mittelalterlichen Städte" [The role of inland shipping in the development of mediaeval cities].

Monum. Ger. Hist . Frühgeschichte der europäischen Stadt.

4 (425). Berlin: Akademie Verlag: 137– 147.

^ The commission was staffed with two representatives of Czechoslovakia and one representative of Anhalt , Belgium , France , Hamburg, Italy , Prussia , Saxony , and the United Kingdom each, with Czecholosvakia and the German states being those, whose territory was crossed by the Elbe and thus competent for maintaining navigation installations. Cf.

Der Große Brockhaus: Handbuch des Wissens in zwanzig Bänden : 21 vols., completely revised ed., Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 15 1928–1935, vol. 5 (1930): Fünfter Band Doc–Ez, article: 'Elbe', pp. 400seqq., here p. 402. No ISBN.

^ Text in League of Nations Treaty Series , vol. 26, 220–247.

^ NoorderSoft Waterways Database ^ "Google Maps" . Google Maps . Retrieved 2008-02-03 .

^ "Public transport operators co-operating in the HVV partnership" . Archived from the original on 2009-03-31 . Retrieved 2009-03-26 .

^ Hans Meissner, Magda Goebbels, First Lady of the Third Reich , 260–277 ^ Maxim Tkachenko (11 December 2009).

"Official: KGB chief ordered Hitler's remains destroyed" .

CNN . Retrieved 11 December 2009 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Rada, Uwe (2013).

Die Elbe. Europas Geschichte im Fluss (in German). Munich: Siedler.

ISBN 978-3-88680-995-0 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Elbe .

Geographic data related to Elbe at OpenStreetMap v t e Rivers of Germany by drainage basin or main stem Baltic Sea Oder Lusatian Neisse Peenestrom Peene Recknitz Schwentine Alte Schwentine Trave Stepenitz Uecker Warnow Nebel Black Sea Danube Abens Altmühl Brenz Friedberger Ach Große Laber Günz Iller Ilz Inn Isar Lauchert Lech Mindel Naab Paar Regen Riß Rot Schwarze Laber Vils Wörnitz Zusam North Sea Elbe Aland Alster Bille Black Elster Eger Havel Ilmenau Jeetzel Löcknitz Mulde Ohre Oste Saale Stör Stepenitz Weißeritz Wesenitz Eider Treene Ems Hase Rhine Acher Ahr Elz Emscher Erft Kinzig Lahn Lauter Lippe Main Moselle Murg Nahe Neckar Pfinz Queich Rench Ruhr Sauer Selz Sieg Wied Wiese Wupper Wutach Weser Aller Diemel Fulda Hunte Lesum Werra Werre Maas Niers Rur Inde Merzbach Wurm Germany portal Category Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National Germany United States Czech Republic Spain Israel Geographic Pleiades Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Elbe&oldid=1298434744 " Categories : Elbe Elbe basin Rivers of the Hradec Králové Region Rivers of the Central Bohemian Region Rivers of the Pardubice Region Rivers of the Ústí nad Labem Region Rivers of the Czech Republic International rivers of Europe Rivers of Brandenburg Rivers of Hamburg Rivers of Lower Saxony Rivers of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Rivers of Saxony Rivers of Saxony-Anhalt Rivers of Schleswig-Holstein Inner German border Federal waterways in Germany Rivers of Germany Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Pages using the Phonos extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Czech-language text Articles containing Low German-language text Articles with text in Sorbian languages Coordinates on Wikidata Pages with Czech IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Pages with German IPA Articles containing Lower Sorbian-language text Pages with Sorbian languages IPA Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Old Norse-language text Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles containing Norwegian-language text Articles containing Old English (ca. 450-1100)-language text Articles containing Middle Low German-language text Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text Geography articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Articles with text in Germanic languages All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from November 2019 Pages using div col with small parameter CS1 German-language sources (de) Commons link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 13:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Elbe 117 languages Add topic

