Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure Toggle Structure subsection 1.1 Intracranial branches 1.2 Extracranial branches 1.3 Nucleus 1.4 Development 2 Function Toggle Function subsection 2.1 Facial expression 2.2 Facial sensation 2.3 Other 2.4 Functional components 3 Clinical significance Toggle Clinical significance subsection 3.1 Palsy 3.2 Examination 4 Additional images 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Facial nerve 44 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cranial nerve VII, for the face and tasting Not to be confused with other nerves that innervate the face, such as the trigeminal nerve .

Facial nerve The course of the facial nerve is shown here The nerves of the scalp, face, and side of neck.

Details From Facial nerve nucleus , intermediate nerve To Greater superficial petrosal nerve Innervates Motor: Muscles of facial expression , posterior belly of digastric , stylohyoid , stapedius Special sensory: taste to anterior two-thirds of tongue Parasympathetic: submandibular gland , sublingual gland , lacrimal glands Identifiers Latin nervus facialis MeSH D005154 NeuroNames 551 TA98 A14.2.01.099 TA2 6284 FMA 50868 Anatomical terms of neuroanatomy [ edit on Wikidata ] Cranial nerves CN 0 – Terminal CN I – Olfactory CN II – Optic CN III – Oculomotor CN IV – Trochlear CN V – Trigeminal CN VI – Abducens CN VII – Facial CN VIII – Vestibulocochlear CN IX – Glossopharyngeal CN X – Vagus CN XI – Accessory CN XII – Hypoglossal Overview Table v t e The facial nerve , also known as the seventh cranial nerve , cranial nerve VII , or simply CN VII , is a cranial nerve that emerges from the pons of the brainstem , controls the muscles of facial expression , and functions in the conveyance of taste sensations from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The nerve typically travels from the pons through the facial canal in the temporal bone and exits the skull at the stylomastoid foramen .

[ 3 ] It arises from the brainstem from an area posterior to the cranial nerve VI (abducens nerve) and anterior to cranial nerve VIII (vestibulocochlear nerve).

The facial nerve also supplies preganglionic parasympathetic fibers to several head and neck ganglia .

The facial and intermediate nerves can be collectively referred to as the nervus intermediofacialis.

[ citation needed ] Structure [ edit ] The path of the facial nerve can be divided into six segments: intracranial (cisternal) segment (from brainstem pons to internal auditory canal) meatal (canalicular) segment (within the internal auditory canal) labyrinthine segment (internal auditory canal to geniculate ganglion) tympanic (or horizontal) segment (from geniculate ganglion to pyramidal eminence ) mastoid (or vertical) segment (from pyramidal eminence to stylomastoid foramen) extratemporal segment (from stylomastoid foramen to post parotid branches) The motor part of the facial nerve arises from the facial nerve nucleus in the pons , while the sensory and parasympathetic parts of the facial nerve arise from the intermediate nerve .

From the brain stem, the motor and sensory parts of the facial nerve join and traverse the posterior cranial fossa before entering the petrous temporal bone via the internal auditory meatus .  Upon exiting the internal auditory meatus, the nerve then runs a tortuous course through the facial canal , which is divided into the labyrinthine, tympanic, and mastoid segments.

The labyrinthine segment is the shortest and narrowest segment of the facial nerve and ends where the facial nerve forms a bend known as the geniculum of the facial nerve ( genu meaning knee), which contains the geniculate ganglion for sensory nerve bodies.  The first branch of the facial nerve, the greater petrosal nerve , arises here from the geniculate ganglion. The greater petrosal nerve runs through the pterygoid canal and synapses at the pterygopalatine ganglion .  Postsynaptic fibers of the greater petrosal nerve innervate the lacrimal gland .

In the tympanic segment, the facial nerve runs through the tympanic cavity , medial to the incus .

The pyramidal eminence is the second bend in the facial nerve, where the nerve runs downward as the mastoid segment, the longest segment of the facial nerve.  In the temporal part of the facial canal, the nerve gives branch to the stapedius muscle and chorda tympani . The chorda tympani supplies taste fibers to the anterior two thirds of the tongue, and also synapses with the submandibular ganglion . Postsynaptic fibers from the submandibular ganglion supply the sublingual and submandibular glands .

Upon emerging from the stylomastoid foramen , the facial nerve gives rise to the posterior auricular branch .  It then gives rise to the branch to the posterior belly of the digastric, and then the branch to the stylohyoid.  The facial nerve then passes through the parotid gland , which it does not innervate, to form the parotid plexus . The nerve then bifurcates at the pes anserinus to become the upper and lower divisions of the facial nerve.

[ 4 ] It then splits into five branches (temporal, zygomatic, buccal, marginal mandibular and cervical), innervating the muscles of facial expression .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Intracranial branches [ edit ] The greater petrosal nerve arises at the superior salivatory nucleus of the pons and provides parasympathetic innervation to several glands, including the nasal glands , the palatine glands , the lacrimal gland , and the pharyngeal gland . It also provides parasympathetic innervation to the sphenoid sinus , frontal sinus , maxillary sinus , ethmoid sinus , and nasal cavity . This nerve also includes taste fibers for the palate via the lesser palatine nerve and greater palatine nerve .

The communicating branch to the otic ganglion arises at the geniculate ganglion and joins the lesser petrosal nerve to reach the otic ganglion.

[ 7 ] The nerve to stapedius provides motor innervation for the stapedius muscle in middle ear The chorda tympani provides parasympathetic innervation to the sublingual and submandibular glands, as well as special sensory taste fibers for the anterior two thirds of the tongue.

[ 1 ] Extracranial branches [ edit ] Distal to stylomastoid foramen , the following nerves branch off the facial nerve: Posterior auricular nerve which controls movements of some of the scalp muscles around the ear Branch to posterior belly of digastric muscle Branch of the stylohyoid muscle Five major facial branches (at parotid plexus ) – from superior to inferior: Temporal branch Zygomatic branch Buccal branch Marginal mandibular branch Cervical branch Intra operatively the facial nerve is recognized at 3 constant landmarks: [ citation needed ] At the tip of tragus where the nerve is 1 cm deep and inferior [ 8 ] At the posterior belly of digastric by tracing this backwards to the tympanic plate, the nerve can be found between these two structures By locating the posterior facial vein at the inferior aspect of the gland where the marginal branch would be seen crossing it.

Lateral semicircular canal Foot of incus Nucleus [ edit ] The cell bodies for the facial nerve are grouped in anatomical areas called nuclei or ganglia . The cell bodies for the afferent nerves are found in the geniculate ganglion for taste sensation.  The cell bodies for muscular efferent nerves are found in the facial motor nucleus whereas the cell bodies for the parasympathetic efferent nerves are found in the superior salivatory nucleus .

Development [ edit ] The facial nerve is developmentally derived from the second pharyngeal arch , or branchial arch.  The second arch is called the hyoid arch because it contributes to the formation of the lesser horn and upper body of the hyoid bone (the rest of the hyoid is formed by the third arch).  The facial nerve supplies motor and sensory innervation to the muscles formed by the second pharyngeal arch, including the muscles of facial expression, the posterior belly of the digastric, stylohyoid, and stapedius.  The motor division of the facial nerve is derived from the basal plate of the embryonic pons, while the sensory division originates from the cranial neural crest .

[ 9 ] Although the anterior two thirds of the tongue are derived from the first pharyngeal arch, which gives rise to the trigeminal nerve, not all innervation of the tongue is supplied by it.  The lingual branch of the mandibular division (V3) of the trigeminal nerve supplies non-taste sensation (pressure, heat, texture) to the anterior part of the tongue via general somatic afferent fibers .  Nerve fibers for taste are supplied by the chorda tympani branch of the facial nerve via special visceral afferent fibers.

[ 10 ] Function [ edit ] Facial expression [ edit ] The main function of the facial nerve is motor control of all the muscles of facial expression . It also innervates the posterior belly of the digastric muscle , the stylohyoid muscle , and the stapedius muscle of the middle ear . These skeletal muscles are developed from the second pharyngeal arch .

Facial sensation [ edit ] In addition, the facial nerve receives taste sensations from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue via the chorda tympani . Taste sensation is sent to the gustatory portion (superior part) of the solitary nucleus . General sensation from the anterior two-thirds of tongue are supplied by afferent fibers of the third division of the fifth cranial nerve ( CN V -3). These sensory ( CN V3 ) and taste (VII) fibers travel together as the lingual nerve briefly before the chorda tympani leaves the lingual nerve to enter the tympanic cavity (middle ear) via the petrotympanic fissure. It joins the rest of the facial nerve via the canaliculus for chorda tympani. The facial nerve then forms the geniculate ganglion , which contains the cell bodies of the taste fibers of chorda tympani and other taste and sensory pathways. From the geniculate ganglion, the taste fibers continue as the intermediate nerve which goes to the upper anterior quadrant of the fundus of the internal acoustic meatus along with the motor root of the facial nerve. The intermediate nerve reaches the posterior cranial fossa via the internal acoustic meatus before synapsing in the solitary nucleus .

The facial nerve also supplies a small amount of afferent innervation to the oropharynx below the palatine tonsil . There is also a small amount of cutaneous sensation carried by the nervus intermedius from the skin in and around the auricle (outer ear).

Other [ edit ] The facial nerve also supplies parasympathetic fibers to the submandibular gland and sublingual glands via chorda tympani . Parasympathetic innervation serves to increase the flow of saliva from these glands. It also supplies parasympathetic innervation to the nasal mucosa and the lacrimal gland via the pterygopalatine ganglion . The parasympathetic fibers that travel in the facial nerve originate in the superior salivatory nucleus .

The facial nerve also functions as the efferent limb of the corneal reflex .

Functional components [ edit ] The facial nerve carries axons of type GSA, general somatic afferent , to skin of the posterior ear.

The facial nerve also carries axons of type GVE, general visceral efferent , which innervate the sublingual, submandibular, and lacrimal glands, also mucosa of nasal cavity.

Axons of type SVE, special visceral efferent , innervate muscles of facial expression, stapedius, the posterior belly of digastric, and the stylohyoid.

The axons of type SVA, special visceral afferent , provide taste to the anterior two-thirds of tongue via chorda tympani .

Clinical significance [ edit ] Palsy [ edit ] See also: Bell's palsy and acute facial nerve paralysis People may suffer from acute facial nerve paralysis , which is usually manifested by facial paralysis.

[ 11 ] Bell's palsy is one type of idiopathic acute facial nerve paralysis, which is more accurately described as a multiple cranial nerve ganglionitis that involves the facial nerve, and most likely results from viral infection and also sometimes as a result of Lyme disease . Iatrogenic Bell's palsy may also be as a result of an incorrectly placed dental local-anesthetic ( inferior alveolar nerve block ). Although giving the appearance of a hemiplegic stroke, effects dissipate with the drug. When the facial nerve is permanently damaged due to a birth defect, trauma, or other disorder, surgery including a cross facial nerve graft or masseteric facial nerve transfer may be performed to help regain facial movement.

[ citation needed ] Facial nerve decompression surgery is also sometimes carried out in certain cases of facial nerve compression.

Examination [ edit ] Voluntary facial movements, such as wrinkling the brow, showing teeth, frowning, closing the eyes tightly (inability to do so is called lagophthalmos ), [ 12 ] pursing the lips and puffing out the cheeks, all test the facial nerve. There should be no noticeable asymmetry.

In an upper motor neuron lesion, called central seven , only the lower part of the face on the contralateral side will be affected, due to the bilateral control to the upper facial muscles ( frontalis and orbicularis oculi ).

Lower motor neuron lesions can result in a CN VII palsy (Bell's palsy is the idiopathic form of facial nerve palsy), manifested as both upper and lower facial weakness on the same side of the lesion.

Taste can be tested on the anterior two-thirds of the tongue. This can be tested with a swab dipped in a flavored solution, or with electronic stimulation (similar to putting your tongue on a battery).

Corneal reflex . The afferent arc is mediated by the general sensory afferents of the trigeminal nerve.  The efferent arc occurs via the facial nerve. The reflex involves consensual blinking of both eyes in response to stimulation of one eye. This is due to the facial nerves' innervation of the muscles of facial expression, namely orbicularis oculi, responsible for blinking. Thus, the corneal reflex effectively tests the proper functioning of both cranial nerves V and VII.

Additional images [ edit ] Inferior view of the human brain, with the cranial nerves labelled.

Mandibular division of the trifacial nerve.

Plan of the facial and intermediate nerves and their communication with other nerves.

The course and connections of the facial nerve in the temporal bone .

Upper part of medulla spinalis and hind- and mid-brains; posterior aspect, exposed in situ.

Left temporal bone showing surface markings for the tympanic antrum (red), transverse sinus (blue), and facial nerve (yellow).

Head facial nerve branches Facial nerve. Deep dissection.

See also [ edit ] This article uses anatomical terminology .

List of medical mnemonics#Anatomy List of anatomy mnemonics#Cranial nerves References [ edit ] This article incorporates text in the public domain from page 901 of the 20th edition of Gray's Anatomy (1918) ^ a b "The Facial Nerve (CN VII)" .

TeachMeAnatomy . 2013-09-04 . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ "Facial nerve | anatomy" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2020-10-13 .

^ Kochhar A, Larian B, Azizzadeh B (April 2016). "Facial Nerve and Parotid Gland Anatomy".

Otolaryngologic Clinics of North America .

49 (2): 273– 84.

doi : 10.1016/j.otc.2015.10.002 .

PMID 27040583 .

^ "Parotidectomy with Facial Nerve Dissections | Iowa Head and Neck Protocols" .

medicine.uiowa.edu . Retrieved 2023-11-05 .

^ Gupta S, Mends F, Hagiwara M, Fatterpekar G, Roehm PC (2013).

"Imaging the facial nerve: a contemporary review" .

Radiology Research and Practice .

2013 : 248039.

doi : 10.1155/2013/248039 .

PMC 3676972 .

PMID 23766904 .

^ Snell RS (2011).

Clinical Anatomy by Regions (Ninth ed.). Philadelphia, Pa.; London: LWW.

ISBN 9781451110326 .

^ Singh V.

Textbook of Clinical Neuroanatomy (2nd ed.). p. 104.

^ Saha S, Pal S, Sengupta M, Chowdhury K, Saha VP, Mondal L (January 2014).

"Identification of facial nerve during parotidectomy: a combined anatomical & surgical study" .

Indian Journal of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery .

66 (1): 63– 8.

doi : 10.1007/s12070-013-0669-z .

PMC 3938689 .

PMID 24605304 .

^ Dudek RW (2014).

BRS Embryology (Sixth ed.). LWW.

ISBN 9781451190380 .

^ Moore KL, Persaud TV, Torchia MG (2011).

The Developing Human: Clinically Oriented Embryology with Student Consult Online Access, 9th Edition (9th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Saunders.

ISBN 9781437720020 .

^ Masterson L, Vallis M, Quinlivan R, Prinsley P (September 2015). "Assessment and management of facial nerve palsy".

BMJ .

351 : h3725.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.h3725 .

PMID 26378061 .

S2CID 206906594 .

^ Kliniska Färdigheter: Informationsutbytet Mellan Patient Och Läkare, LINDGREN, STEFAN, ISBN 91-44-37271-X External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nervus facialis .

v t e The cranial nerves Terminal (CN 0) Nuclei septal nuclei Course no significant branches Olfactory (CN I) Nuclei anterior olfactory nucleus Course olfactory bulb olfactory tract Optic (CN II) Nuclei lateral geniculate nucleus Course optic chiasm optic tract Oculomotor (CN III) Nuclei oculomotor nucleus Edinger–Westphal nucleus Branches superior parasympathetic root of ciliary ganglion inferior Trochlear (CN IV) Nucleus Branches no significant branches Trigeminal (CN V) Nuclei PSN spinal trigeminal nucleus MN TMN Course trigeminal ganglion Branches ophthalmic maxillary mandibular Abducens (CN VI) Nucleus Branches no significant branches Facial (CN VII) Near origin Intermediate nerve Geniculate Inside facial canal Greater petrosal pterygopalatine ganglion Nerve to the stapedius Chorda tympani lingual nerve submandibular ganglion At stylomastoid foramen Posterior auricular Suprahyoid digastric stylohyoid Parotid plexus temporal zygomatic buccal mandibular cervical Nuclei Facial motor nucleus Solitary nucleus Superior salivary nucleus Vestibulocochlear (CN VIII) Nuclei vestibular nuclei cochlear nuclei Cochlear nerve striae medullares lateral lemniscus Vestibular Scarpa's ganglion Glossopharyngeal (CN IX) Before jugular fossa Ganglia superior inferior After jugular fossa Tympanic tympanic plexus lesser petrosal otic ganglion Stylopharyngeal branch Pharyngeal branches Tonsillar branches Lingual branches Carotid sinus Nuclei Nucleus ambiguus Inferior salivatory nucleus Solitary nucleus Vagus (CN X) Before jugular fossa Ganglia superior inferior After jugular fossa Meningeal branch Auricular branch Neck Pharyngeal branch pharyngeal plexus Superior laryngeal external internal Recurrent laryngeal Superior cervical cardiac Thorax Inferior cardiac Pulmonary Vagal trunks anterior posterior Abdomen Celiac Renal Hepatic Anterior gastric Posterior gastric Nuclei Nucleus ambiguus Dorsal nucleus of vagus nerve Solitary nucleus Accessory (CN XI) Nuclei nucleus ambiguus spinal accessory nucleus Cranial Spinal Hypoglossal (CN XII) Nucleus Branches lingual Authority control databases National Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Terminologia Anatomica Portal : Anatomy NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐nv89s
Cached time: 20250817050813
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.506 seconds
Real time usage: 0.584 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2918/1000000
Revision size: 19316/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 104726/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4760/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 80654/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.320/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8084210/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  504.842      1 -total
 23.97%  121.018      1 Template:Reflist
 16.02%   80.869      1 Template:Cranial_nerves_short
 15.85%   80.004      1 Template:Sidebar
 12.35%   62.365      1 Template:Infobox_Nerve
 11.86%   59.885      1 Template:Infobox_anatomy
 11.14%   56.237      1 Template:Cite_news
 11.09%   55.979      1 Template:Infobox
 10.14%   51.166      4 Template:Navbox
  8.57%   43.243      1 Template:Cranial_nerves Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:215260:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817050813 and revision id 1242925645. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Facial_nerve&oldid=1242925645 " Categories : Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 20th edition of Gray's Anatomy (1918) Facial nerve Cranial nerves Motor system Innervation of the face Autonomic nervous system Gustatory system Human mouth anatomy Otorhinolaryngology Nerves of the head and neck Neurology Nervous system Parasympathetic nervous system Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2013 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 August 2024, at 14:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Facial nerve 44 languages Add topic

