Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education Toggle Early life and education subsection 1.1 Gold Coast 1.2 United States 1.3 London 2 Return to the Gold Coast Toggle Return to the Gold Coast subsection 2.1 United Gold Coast Convention 2.2 Convention People's Party 2.3 Leader of Government Business and Prime Minister 3 Ghanaian independence 4 Ghana's leader (1957–1966) Toggle Ghana's leader (1957–1966) subsection 4.1 Political developments and presidential election 4.1.1 Opposition to tribalism 4.1.2 Increased power of the Convention People's Party 4.2 Civil service 4.3 Education 4.4 Culture 4.5 Media 4.6 Economic policy 4.6.1 Energy projects 4.6.2 Cocoa 4.7 Foreign and military policy 4.7.1 Armed forces 4.7.2 Relationship with Communist world 5 1966 coup d'état 6 Exile and death 7 Tributes and legacy 8 Personal life 9 Cultural depictions 10 Honours and awards Toggle Honours and awards subsection 10.1 Foreign honours 11 Works by Kwame Nkrumah 12 Festival 13 See also 14 Notes 15 References 16 Bibliography 17 Further reading 18 External links Toggle the table of contents Kwame Nkrumah 141 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ अंगिका العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština ChiShona ChiTumbuka Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Eʋegbe Farefare فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Ladino Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lingála Lombard Magyar Madhurâ मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Mfantse Монгол Nederlands 日本語 ߒߞߏ Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский संस्कृतम् Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Thuɔŋjäŋ Türkçe Twi Українська اردو Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Võro Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Dagaare Ghanaian Pidgin Yerwa Kanuri Kʋsaal Moore Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia President of Ghana from 1960 to 1966 His Excellency The Right Honourable Osagyefo Kwame Nkrumah Nkrumah in 1961 1st President of Ghana In office 1 July 1960 – 24 February 1966 Preceded by Office established Succeeded by Joseph Arthur Ankrah as Chairman of the NLC 3rd Chairperson of the Organisation of African Unity In office 21 October 1965 – 24 February 1966 Preceded by Gamal Abdel Nasser Succeeded by Joseph Arthur Ankrah 1st Prime Minister of Ghana In office 6 March 1957 – 1 July 1960 Monarch Elizabeth II Governors‑General Charles Arden-Clarke The Lord Listowel Preceded by Himself as Prime Minister of the Gold Coast Succeeded by Himself as President 1st Prime Minister of the Gold Coast In office 21 March 1952 – 6 March 1957 Monarch Elizabeth II Governor‑General Charles Arden-Clarke Preceded by Office established Succeeded by Himself as Prime Minister of Ghana Personal details Born Francis Kwame Nkrumah ( 1909-09-21 ) 21 September 1909 Nkroful , Colony of the Gold Coast , British Empire Died 27 April 1972 (1972-04-27) (aged 62) Bucharest , Socialist Republic of Romania Political party UGCC (1947–1949) CPP (1949–1966) Spouse Fathia Rizk ​ ( m.

1957) ​ Children 4, including Gamal and Samia Education Lincoln University ( BA , BTh ) University of Pennsylvania ( MA , MS ) Awards Lenin Peace Prize (1962) Part of a series on Pan-Africanism Symbols African art Western collections Black Star of Africa Pan-African colours Pan-African flag Ideologies African anarchism African communalism African nationalism African philosophy African socialism Afrocentrism Black nationalism Garveyism Négritude Nkrumaism Rastafari Sankarism Third International Theory Ujamaa Organizations African Union Conscious Community Organisation of African Unity People Akumu Amin Ben-Jochannan Cham Joof Diop Diouf Du Bois Fanon Gaddafi Garvey Houphouët-Boigny James Kenyatta Mak'Anyengo Malcolm X Malema (Julius) Mbah Mboya Mugabe Ngum Nkrumah Nyerere (Julius) Padmore Rodney Sankara Selassie Small Sékou Touré Thiaw Yeshitela Wilson Williams Dynamics Ethnic groups of Africa Languages of Africa Religion in Africa Conflicts in Africa Related Africa African and Black Topics Afro-Asian Afro-Latino Anti-imperialism Anti-Western sentiment Black people Reparations for slavery Pan-Africanism portal Africa portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Leninism Schools of thought Bolshevism Bordigism Marxism–Leninism Nkrumaism Right communism Trotskyism Workerism Concepts Anti-imperialism Collective leadership Democratic centralism Dialectical materialism Dual power Labor aristocracy Liquidationism National liberation Proletarian internationalism Revolutionary defeatism Revolutionary situation Self-determination Socialist state Soviet democracy Vanguardism World revolution People Lenin Trotsky Bukharin Kamenev Stalin Zinoviev Rykov Bubnov Sokolnikov Lukács Bordiga Hồ Gramsci Nkrumah Negri Theoretical works The Development of Capitalism in Russia (1899) What Is to Be Done?

(1902) Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1917) The State and Revolution (1917) The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky (1918) "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder (1920) Foundations of Leninism (1924) Leninism: Introduction to the Study of Leninism (1925) History Russian Social Democratic Labour Party 2nd Congress Prague Conference Bolsheviks RSDLP (Bolsheviks) Russian Revolution February Revolution October Revolution History of Soviet Russia RSFSR Collective leadership Civil War Red Army War communism Red Terror National delimitation Anti-religious campaign New Economic Policy Soviet Union Death and funeral of Lenin Comintern Joseph Stalin's rise to power Related topics 26 Baku Commissars Anti-Leninist left De-Leninization Jacobinism Marxism Libertarian Luxemburgism Left communism Mensheviks Orthodox Marxism Proletkult Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series about Imperialism studies Theories Cultural imperialism Dependency theory Economic imperialism Expansionism Intercommunalism Irredentism Linguistic imperialism Neo-Gramscianism Neocolonialism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Ultra-imperialism World-systems theory Concepts Conquest Great power Hegemony North–South model Unequal exchange Balance of trade Global labor arbitrage Ecological Sphere of influence Superprofit Uneven and combined development War of aggression People Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Paul A. Baran Charles Bettelheim Nikolai Bukharin Arghiri Emmanuel John Bellamy Foster Andre Gunder Frank Michael Hardt Rudolf Hilferding Peter Gowan J. A. Hobson Vladimir Lenin Mirsaid Sultan-Galiev Li Minqi Rosa Luxemburg Antonio Negri Kwame Nkrumah Huey P. Newton Walter Rodney Paul Sweezy Leon Trotsky Immanuel Wallerstein Works The Accumulation of Capital Empire How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Imperialism Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism Monopoly Capital Multitude Naked Imperialism Related Banana republic Economic development Illicit financial flows List of irredentist claims or disputes Global North and Global South Neofunctionalism Prebisch–Singer hypothesis Third-worldism Category:Imperialism studies v t e Francis Kwame Nkrumah ( Nzema : [kʷame nkruma] , 21 September 1909 – 27 April 1972) was a Ghanaian politician, political theorist, and revolutionary. He served as Prime Minister of the Gold Coast from 1952 until 1957, when it gained independence from Britain .

[ 1 ] He was then the first prime minister and then the president of Ghana , from 1957 until 1966. An influential advocate of Pan-Africanism , Nkrumah was a founding member of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and winner of the Lenin Peace Prize from the Soviet Union in 1962.

[ 2 ] After twelve early years abroad pursuing higher education, developing his political philosophy , and organizing with other diasporic pan-Africanists, Nkrumah returned to the Gold Coast to begin his political career as an advocate of national independence.

[ 3 ] He formed the Convention People's Party , which achieved rapid success through its unprecedented appeal to the common voter.

[ 4 ] He became Prime Minister in 1952 and retained the position when he led Ghana to independence from Britain in 1957, a first in sub-Saharan Africa at the time. In 1960, Ghanaians approved a new constitution and elected Nkrumah as president .

[ 5 ] His administration was primarily socialist as well as nationalist . It funded national industrial and energy projects, developed a strong national education system and promoted a pan-Africanist culture.

[ 6 ] Under Nkrumah, Ghana played a leading role in African international relations and the pan-africanist movement during Africa's decolonization period, supporting numerous liberation struggles.

[ 7 ] After an alleged assassination plot against him, [ 8 ] coupled with increasingly difficult local economic conditions, Nkrumah's government became authoritarian in the 1960s, as he repressed political opposition and conducted elections that were neither free nor fair.

[ 9 ] In 1964, a constitutional amendment made Ghana a one-party state , with Nkrumah as president for life of both the nation and its party.

[ 10 ] He fostered a personality cult , forming ideological institutes and adopting the title of 'Osagyefo Dr.' [ 11 ] [ full citation needed ] Nkrumah was deposed in 1966 in a coup d'état by the National Liberation Council . Claims of CIA involvement in his overthrow have never been verified.

[ 12 ] Nkrumah lived the rest of his life in Guinea , where he was named honorary co-president. In 1999, he was voted BBC African of the millennium.

[ 13 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Gold Coast [ edit ] Kwame Nkrumah was born on Tuesday, 21 September 1909 [ 14 ] [ 15 ] in Nkroful , Nzema East , (now Ellembele ), Gold Coast (now Ghana).

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Nkroful was a small village in the Nzema area, [ 18 ] in the southwest of the Gold Coast, close to the frontier with the French colony of the Ivory Coast . His father did not live with the family, but worked in Half Assini where he pursued his goldsmith business until his death.

[ 19 ] Kwame Nkrumah was raised by his mother and his extended family, who lived together traditionally and had more distant relatives often visiting.

[ 20 ] He lived a carefree childhood, spent in the village, in the bush, and on the nearby sea.

[ 21 ] During his years as a student in the United States , he was known as Francis Nwia Kofi Nkrumah, Kofi being the Akan name given to males born on Fridays.

[ 22 ] He later changed his name to Kwame Nkrumah in 1945 in the UK , preferring the name "Kwame".

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] According to Ebenezer Obiri Addo in his study of the future president, the name "Nkrumah", a name traditionally given to a ninth child, indicates that Kwame probably held that place in the house of his father, who had several wives.

[ 25 ] His father, Opanyin Kofi Nwiana Ngolomah, came from Nkroful and belonged to the Asona clan  of the Akan  Tribe.

[ 26 ] Sources indicated that Ngolomah stayed at Tarkwa-Nsuaem and dealt in the goldsmith business.

[ 27 ] Ngolomah was respected for his wise counsel by those who sought his advice on traditional issues and domestic affairs. He died in 1927.

[ 28 ] [ 17 ] Kwame was his mother's only child.

[ a ] [ 29 ] She sent him to the elementary school run by a Catholic mission at Half Assini , where he proved an adept student.

[ 30 ] Although his mother, whose name was Elizabeth Nyanibah (1877–1979), [ 24 ] [ 31 ] later stated his year of birth as 1912, Nkrumah wrote that he was born on 21 September 1909. His mother hailed from Nsuaem and belonged to the Agona family . She was a fishmonger and petty trader when she married his father.

[ 32 ] Eight days after his birth, his father named him as Francis Nwia-Kofi after a relative [ 17 ] but later his parents named him as Francis Kwame Ngolomah.

[ 27 ] He progressed through the ten-year elementary programme in eight years. In 1925, he was a student-teacher in the school and was baptized into the Catholic faith.

[ 33 ] While at the school, he was noticed by the Reverend Alec Garden Fraser , principal of the Government Training College (soon to become Achimota School ) in the Gold Coast's capital, Accra . Fraser arranged for Nkrumah to train as a teacher at his school.

[ 30 ] [ 34 ] Here, Columbia -educated deputy headmaster Kwegyir Aggrey exposed him to the ideas of Marcus Garvey and W. E. B. Du Bois . Aggrey, Fraser, and others at Achimota thought that there should be close co-operation between the races in governing the Gold Coast, but Nkrumah, echoing Garvey, soon came to believe that only when the black race governed itself could there be harmony between the races.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] After obtaining his teacher's certificate from the Prince of Wales' College at Achimota in 1930, [ 24 ] Nkrumah was given a teaching post at the Roman Catholic primary school in Elmina in 1931.

[ 24 ] After a year there, he was made headmaster of the school at Axim . In Axim, he started to get involved in politics and founded the Nzema Literary Society. In 1933, he was appointed a teacher at the Catholic seminary at Amissano .

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Although life there was strict, he liked it, and considered becoming a Jesuit . Nkrumah had heard journalist and future Nigerian president Nnamdi Azikiwe speak while a student at Achimota; the two men met and Azikiwe's influence increased Nkrumah's interest in black nationalism.

[ 39 ] The young teacher decided to further his education.

[ 38 ] Azikiwe had attended Lincoln University , a historically black college in Chester County, Pennsylvania , west of Philadelphia , and he advised Nkrumah to enroll there.

[ 40 ] Nkrumah, who had failed the entrance examination for London University , gained funds for the trip and his education from relatives. He travelled by way of Britain , where he learned, to his outrage, of Italy's invasion of Ethiopia , one of the few independent African nations. He arrived in the United States , in October 1935.

[ 38 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] United States [ edit ] According to historian John Henrik Clarke in his article on Nkrumah's American sojourn, "the influence of the ten years that he spent in the United States had a lingering effect on the rest of his life." [ 43 ] Nkrumah had sought entry to Lincoln University some time before he began his studies there. On Friday, 1 March 1935, he sent the school a letter noting that his application had been pending for more than a year. When he arrived in New York in October 1935, he traveled to Pennsylvania, where he enrolled despite lacking the funds for the full semester .

[ 44 ] He soon won a scholarship that provided for his tuition at Lincoln University. He remained short of funds through his time in the US.

[ 45 ] To make ends meet, he did menial jobs on roles such as a wholesaler of fish and poultries, cleaner, dishwasher and others.

[ 46 ] On Sundays, he visited black Presbyterian churches in Philadelphia and in New York.

[ 47 ] Nkrumah completed a Bachelor of Arts degree in economics and sociology in 1939. Lincoln then appointed him an assistant lecturer in philosophy. He began to receive invitations to be a guest preacher in Presbyterian churches in Philadelphia and New York.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] In 1939, Nkrumah enrolled at Lincoln's seminary and at the Ivy League institution, the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia and in 1942, he was initiated into the Mu chapter of Phi Beta Sigma fraternity at Lincoln University.

[ 50 ] Nkrumah gained a Bachelor of Theology degree from Lincoln in 1942, the top student in the course. He earned from Penn the following year a Master of Arts degree in philosophy and a Master of Science in education.

[ 51 ] While at Penn, Nkrumah worked with the linguist William Everett Welmers, providing the spoken material that formed the basis of the first descriptive grammar of his native Fante dialect of the Akan language .

[ 52 ] Nkrumah was also initiated into Prince Hall Freemasonry while living in the United States.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] Nkrumah spent his summers in Harlem , a center of black life, thought and culture. He found housing and employment in New York City with difficulty and involved himself in the community.

[ 55 ] He spent many evenings listening to and arguing with street orators, and according to Clarke, Kwame Nkrumah in his years in America stated; [ 56 ] These evenings were a vital part of Kwame Nkrumah's American education. He was going to a university – the university of the Harlem Streets. This was no ordinary time and these street speakers were no ordinary men  ...The streets of Harlem were open forums, presided over [by] master speakers like Arthur Reed and his protege Ira Kemp. The young Carlos Cook [ sic ], founder of the Garvey oriented African Pioneer Movement was on the scene, also bringing a nightly message to his street followers. Occasionally Suji Abdul Hamid [ sic ], a champion of Harlem labour, held a night rally and demanded more jobs for blacks in their own community  ...This is part of the drama on the Harlem streets as the student Kwame Nkrumah walked and watched.

[ 57 ] Nkrumah was an activist student, organizing a group of expatriate African students in Pennsylvania and building it into the African Students Association of America and Canada, becoming its president.

[ 56 ] Some members felt that the group should aspire for each colony to gain independence on its own; Nkrumah urged a Pan-African strategy.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] Nkrumah played a major role in the Pan-African conference held in New York in 1944, which urged the United States, at the end of the Second World War , to help ensure Africa became developed and free.

[ 60 ] His old teacher Aggrey had died in 1929 in the US, and in 1942, Nkrumah led traditional prayers for Aggrey at the graveside. This led to a break between him and Lincoln, though after he rose to prominence in the Gold Coast, he returned in 1951 to accept an honorary degree.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Nevertheless, Nkrumah's doctoral thesis remained uncompleted. He had adopted the forename Francis while at the Amissano seminary; in 1945, he took the name Kwame Nkrumah.

[ 59 ] Just as in the days of the Egyptians, so today God had ordained that certain among the African race should journey westwards to equip themselves with knowledge and experience for the day when they would be called upon to return to their motherland and to use the learning they had acquired to help improve the lot of their brethren. ...I had not realised at the time that I would contribute so much towards the fulfillment of this prophecy.

— Kwame Nkrumah, The Autobiography of Kwame Nkrumah (1957) [ 63 ] Nkrumah read books about politics and divinity, and tutored students in philosophy.

[ 64 ] In 1943 Nkrumah met Trinidadian Marxist C. L. R. James , Russian expatriate Raya Dunayevskaya , and Chinese-American Grace Lee Boggs , all of whom were members of an American-based Marxist intellectual cohort .

[ 65 ] Nkrumah later credited James with teaching him "how an underground movement worked".

[ 66 ] Federal Bureau of Investigation files on Nkrumah, kept from January to May 1945, identify him as a possible communist.

[ 67 ] Nkrumah was determined to go to London, wanting to continue his education there now that the Second World War had ended.

[ 68 ] James, in a 1945 letter introducing Nkrumah to Trinidad-born George Padmore in London, wrote: "This young man is coming to you. He is not very bright, but nevertheless do what you can for him because he's determined to throw Europeans out of Africa." [ 66 ] London [ edit ] 60 Burghley Road, Kentish Town, London, where Nkrumah lived when in London between 1945 and 1947 Nkrumah returned to London in May 1945 and enrolled at the London School of Economics as a PhD candidate in Anthropology . He withdrew after one term and the next year enrolled at University College London , with the intent to write a philosophy dissertation on "Knowledge and Logical Positivism".

[ 69 ] His supervisor, A. J. Ayer , declined to rate Nkrumah as a "first-class philosopher", saying, "I liked him and enjoyed talking to him but he did not seem to me to have an analytical mind. He wanted answers too quickly. I think part of the trouble may have been that he wasn't concentrating very hard on his thesis. It was a way of marking time until the opportunity came for him to return to Ghana." [ 70 ] Finally, Nkrumah enrolled in, but did not complete, a study in law at Gray's Inn .

[ 70 ] Nkrumah spent his time on political organizations. He and Padmore were among the principal organizers, and co-treasurers, of the Fifth Pan-African Congress in Manchester (15–19 October 1945).

[ 71 ] The Congress elaborated a strategy for supplanting colonialism with African socialism . They agreed to pursue a federal United States of Africa, with interlocking regional organizations, governing through separate states of limited sovereignty.

[ 72 ] They planned to pursue a new African culture without tribalism , democratic within a socialist system, synthesizing traditional aspects with modern thinking, and for this to be achieved by non-violent means if possible.

[ 73 ] Among those who attended the congress was the venerable W. E. B. Du Bois along with some who later took leading roles in leading their nations to independence, including Hastings Banda of Nyasaland (which became Malawi ), Jomo Kenyatta of Kenya and Obafemi Awolowo of Nigeria .

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] The congress sought to establish ongoing African activism in Britain in conjunction with the West African National Secretariat (WANS) to work towards the decolonisation of Africa . Nkrumah became the secretary of WANS. In addition to seeking to organize Africans to gain their nations' freedom, Nkrumah sought to succour the many West African seamen who had been stranded, destitute, in London at the end of the war, and established a Coloured Workers Association to empower and succour them.

[ 76 ] The U.S. State Department and MI5 watched Nkrumah and the WANS, focusing on their links with Communism.

[ 77 ] Nkrumah and Padmore established a group called The Circle to lead the way to West African independence and unity; the group aimed to create a Union of African Socialist Republics. A document from The Circle, setting forth that goal was found on Nkrumah upon his arrest in Accra in 1948, and was used against him by the British authorities.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ b ] Return to the Gold Coast [ edit ] United Gold Coast Convention [ edit ] The 1946 Gold Coast constitution gave Africans a majority on the Legislative Council for the first time. Seen as a major step towards self-government, [ 80 ] the new arrangement prompted the colony's first true political party, founded in August 1947, the United Gold Coast Convention (UGCC).

[ 81 ] The UGCC sought self-government as quickly as possible. Since the leading members were all successful professionals, they needed to pay someone to run the party, and their choice fell on Nkrumah at the suggestion of Ako Adjei . Nkrumah hesitated but realized that the UGCC was controlled by conservative interests and noted that the new post could open huge political opportunities for him and accepted. After being questioned by British officials about his communist affiliations, Nkrumah boarded the MV Accra at Liverpool in November 1947 for the voyage home.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] After brief stops in Sierra Leone , Liberia , and the Ivory Coast , he arrived in the Gold Coast where he briefly stayed and reunited with his mother in Tarkwa . He began work at the party's headquarters in Saltpond on 29 December 1947 where he worked as a general secretary.

[ 16 ] [ 84 ] Nkrumah quickly submitted plans for branches of the UGCC to be established colony-wide, and for strikes if necessary to gain political ends. This activist stance divided the party's governing committee, which was led by J. B. Danquah . Nkrumah embarked on a tour to gain donations for the UGCC and establish new branches.

[ 85 ] Although the Gold Coast was more developed politically than Britain's other West African colonies, there was considerable discontent. Postwar inflation had caused public anger at high prices, leading to a boycott of small businesses run by Arabs which began in January 1948. Local cocoa bean farmers were upset because trees exhibiting cacao swollen-shoot virus , but still capable of yielding a crop, were being destroyed by the colonial authorities.

[ 86 ] There were about 63,000 World War II veterans in the Gold Coast, many of whom had trouble obtaining employment and felt the colonial government was doing nothing to address their grievances. Nkrumah and Danquah addressed a meeting of the Ex-Service men's Union in Accra on 20 February 1948, which was made in advance of a planned march to present a petition to the governor. When the march took place on 28 February, three veterans were killed by police gunfire, prompting the 1948 Accra riots , which spread throughout the country.

[ 87 ] According to Nkrumah's biographer, David Birmingham, "West Africa's erstwhile "model colony" witnessed a riot and business premises were looted. The African Revolution had begun." [ 88 ] The colonial government assumed that the UGCC was responsible for the unrest, and arrested six leaders, including Nkrumah and Danquah.

The Big Six were incarcerated together in Kumasi , [ 89 ] increasing the rift between Nkrumah and the others, who blamed him for the riots and their detention. After the colonial government learned that there were plots to storm the prison, the six were separated, with Nkrumah sent to Lawra ; all six were freed in April 1948. Many students and teachers had demonstrated for their release and had been suspended; Nkrumah, using his own funds, began the Ghana National College .

[ 90 ] This among other activities, led UGCC committee members to accuse him of acting in the party's name without authority. Fearing he would harm them more outside the party than within, they agreed to make him honorary treasurer. Nkrumah's popularity, already large, was increased with his founding of the Accra Evening News , which was not a party organ but was owned by Nkrumah and others. He also founded the Committee on Youth Organization (CYO) as a youth wing for the UGCC. It soon broke away and adopted the motto "Self-Government Now".

[ 91 ] The CYO united students, ex-servicemen, and market women. Nkrumah recounted in his autobiography that he knew that a break with the UGCC was inevitable, and wanted the masses behind him when the conflict occurred.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Nkrumah's appeals for "Free-Dom" appealed to the great numbers of underemployed youths who had come from the farms and villages to the towns. "Old hymn tunes were adapted to new songs of liberation which welcomed traveling orators , and especially Nkrumah himself, to mass rallies across the Gold Coast." [ 94 ] According to a public speech delivered by Aaron Mike Oquaye , he claimed a meeting occurred in Saltpond , a town in the Central region, between Nkrumah and the members of UGCC where Nkrumah was said to have rejected a proposal for the promotion of fundamental human rights.

[ 95 ] Convention People's Party [ edit ] Red cockerel, "Forward Ever, Backward Never": Convention People's Party logo and slogan Beginning in April 1949, there was considerable pressure on Nkrumah from his supporters to leave the UGCC and form his own party.

[ 96 ] On 12 June 1949, he announced the formation of the Convention People's Party (CPP), with the word "convention" chosen, according to Nkrumah, "to carry the masses with us".

[ 97 ] There were attempts to heal the breach with the UGCC; at one July meeting, it was agreed to reinstate Nkrumah as secretary and disband the CPP. But Nkrumah's supporters would not have it, and persuaded him to refuse the offer and remain at their head.

[ 98 ] The CPP adopted the red cockerel as its symbol – a familiar icon for local ethnic groups, and a symbol of leadership, alertness, and masculinity.

[ 63 ] [ 99 ] Party symbols and colours (red, white, and green) appeared on clothing, flags, vehicles and houses.

[ 63 ] CPP operatives drove red-white-and-green vans across the country, playing music and rallying public support for the party and especially for Nkrumah. These efforts were wildly successful, especially because previous political efforts in the Gold Coast had focused exclusively on the urban intelligentsia.

[ 63 ] Kwame Nkrumah on the cover of Time , 9 February 1953 The British convened a selected commission of middle-class Africans, including all of the Big Six except Nkrumah, to draft a new constitution that would give the Gold Coast more self-government. Nkrumah saw, even before the commission reported, that its recommendations would fall short of full dominion status, and began to organize a Positive Action campaign.

[ 74 ] Nkrumah demanded a constituent assembly to write a constitution. When the governor, Charles Arden-Clarke , would not commit to this, Nkrumah called for positive action, with the unions beginning a general strike to begin on 8 January 1950. The strike quickly led to violence, and Nkrumah and other CPP leaders were arrested on 22 January, and the Evening News was banned.

[ 100 ] Nkrumah was sentenced to a total of three years in prison, and he was incarcerated with common criminals in Accra's Fort James .

[ 101 ] Nkrumah's assistant, Komla Agbeli Gbedemah , ran the CPP in his absence; the imprisoned leader was able to influence events through smuggled notes written on toilet paper. The British prepared for an election for the Gold Coast under their new constitution, and Nkrumah insisted that the CPP contest all seats.

[ 102 ] The situation had become calmer once Nkrumah was arrested, and the CPP and the British worked together to prepare electoral rolls. Nkrumah stood, from prison, for a directly elected Accra seat. Gbedemah worked to set up a nationwide campaign organization, using vans with loudspeakers to blare the party's message. The UGCC failed to set up a nationwide structure, and proved unable to take advantage of the fact that many of its opponents were in prison.

[ 103 ] In the February 1951 legislative election , the first general election to be held under universal franchise in colonial Africa, the CPP was elected in a landslide.

[ 104 ] The CPP secured 34 of the 38 seats contested on a party basis, with Nkrumah elected for his Accra constituency. The UGCC won three seats, and one was taken by an independent. Arden-Clarke saw that the only alternative to Nkrumah's freedom was the end of the constitutional experiment. Nkrumah was released from prison on 12 February, receiving a rapturous reception from his followers.

[ 105 ] The following day, Arden-Clarke sent for him and asked him to form a government.

[ 106 ] Nkrumah had stolen Arden-Clarke's secretary Erica Powell after she was dismissed and sent home for getting too close to Nkrumah. Powell returned to Ghana in January 1955 to be Nkrumah's private secretary, a position she held for ten years.

[ 107 ] Powell was very close to him and during their time together she largely wrote Nkrumah's (auto)biography, although this was not admitted until much later.

[ 108 ] Leader of Government Business and Prime Minister [ edit ] Nkrumah faced several challenges as he assumed office. He had never served in government, and needed to learn that art. The Gold Coast was composed of four regions, several former colonies amalgamated into one. Nkrumah sought to unite them under one nationality, and bring the country to independence.

[ 109 ] Key to meeting the challenges was convincing the British that the CPP's programmes were not only practical, but inevitable, and Nkrumah and Arden-Clarke worked closely together.

[ 96 ] The governor instructed the civil service to give the fledgling government full support, and the three British members of the cabinet took care not to vote against the elected majority.

[ 110 ] Prior to the CPP taking office, British officials had prepared a ten-year plan for development. With demands for infrastructure improvements coming in from all over the colony, Nkrumah approved it in general, but halved the time to five years.

[ 111 ] The colony was in good financial shape, with reserves from years of cocoa profit held in London, and Nkrumah was able to spend freely. Modern trunk roads were built along the coast and within the interior. The rail system was modernized and expanded. Modern water and sewer systems were installed in most towns, where housing schemes were begun.

[ 112 ] Construction began on a new harbour at Tema , near Accra, and the existing port, at Takoradi , was expanded. An urgent programme to build and expand schools, from primary to teacher and trade training, was begun.

[ citation needed ] From 1951 to 1956, the number of pupils being educated at the colony's schools rose from 200,000 to 500,000.

[ 113 ] Nevertheless, the number of graduates being produced was insufficient to the burgeoning civil service's needs, and in 1953, Nkrumah announced that though Africans would be given preference, the country would be relying on expatriate European civil servants for several years.

[ 114 ] Nkrumah's title was Leader of Government Business in a cabinet chaired by Arden-Clarke. Quick progress was made, and in 1952, the governor withdrew from the cabinet, leaving Nkrumah as his prime minister, with the portfolios that had been reserved for expatriates going to Africans.

[ 115 ] There were accusations of corruption, and of nepotism, as officials, following African custom, attempted to benefit their extended families and their tribes.

[ 116 ] The recommendations following the 1948 riots had included elected local government rather than the existing system dominated by the chiefs. This was uncontroversial until it became clear that it would be implemented by the CPP. That party's majority in the Legislative Assembly passed legislation in late 1951 that shifted power from the chiefs to the chairs of the councils, though there was some local rioting as rates were imposed.

[ 117 ] Nkrumah's re-titling as prime minister had not given him additional power, and he sought constitutional reform that would lead to independence. In 1952, he consulted with the visiting Colonial Secretary , Oliver Lyttelton , who indicated that Britain would look favorably on further advancement, so long as the chiefs and other stakeholders had the opportunity to express their views.

[ 37 ] Initially skeptical of Nkrumah's socialist policies, Britain's MI5 had compiled large amounts of intelligence on Nkrumah through several sources, including tapping phones and mail interception under the code name of SWIFT.

[ 118 ] Beginning in October 1952, Nkrumah sought opinions from councils and from political parties on reform, and consulted widely across the country, including with opposition groups. The result the following year was a White Paper on a new constitution, seen as a final step before independence.

[ 119 ] Published in June 1953, the constitutional proposals were accepted both by the assembly and by the British, and came into force in April of the following year. The new document provided for an assembly of 104 members, all directly elected, with an all-African cabinet responsible for the internal governing of the colony. In the election on 15 June 1954, the CPP won 71, with the regional Northern People's Party forming the official opposition.

[ 120 ] A number of opposition groups formed the National Liberation Movement . Their demands were for a federal, rather than a unitary government for an independent Gold Coast, and for an upper house of parliament where chiefs and other traditional leaders could act as a counter to the CPP majority in the assembly.

[ 121 ] They drew considerable support in the Northern Territory and among the chiefs in Ashanti, who petitioned the British queen, Elizabeth II , asking for a Royal Commission into what form of government the Gold Coast should have.

[ 122 ] This was refused by her government, who in 1955 stated that such a commission should only be used if the people of the Gold Coast proved incapable of deciding their own affairs. Amid political violence, the two sides attempted to reconcile their differences, but the NLM refused to participate in any committee with a CPP majority. The traditional leaders were also incensed by a new bill that had just been enacted, which allowed minor chiefs to appeal to the government in Accra, bypassing traditional chiefly authority.

[ 123 ] The British were unwilling to leave unresolved the fundamental question as to how an independent Gold Coast should be governed, and in June 1956, the Colonial Secretary, Alan Lennox-Boyd announced that there would be another general election in the Gold Coast, and if a "reasonable majority" took the CPP's position, Britain would set a date for independence.

[ 124 ] The results of the July 1956 election were almost identical to those from four years before, and on 3 August the assembly voted for independence under the name Nkrumah had proposed in April, Ghana . In September, the Colonial Office announced independence day would be 6 March 1957.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] The opposition was not satisfied with the plan for independence, and demanded that power be devolved to the regions. Discussions took place through late 1956 and into 1957. Although Nkrumah did not compromise on his insistence on a unitary state, the nation was divided into five regions, with power devolved from Accra, and the chiefs having a role in their governments.

[ 127 ] On 21 February 1957, the British prime minister , Harold Macmillan , announced that Ghana would be a full member of the Commonwealth of Nations with effect from 6 March.

[ 128 ] Ghanaian independence [ edit ] The old Gold Coast flag, symbolising the supremacy of the British Empire Nkrumah's new flag of Ghana , symbolising African nationalism and abundance Ghana became independent on 6 March 1957 as the Dominion of Ghana . As the first of Britain's African colonies to gain majority-rule independence, the celebrations in Accra were the focus of world attention; over 100 reporters and photographers covered the events.

[ 129 ] United States President Dwight D. Eisenhower sent congratulations and his vice president, Richard Nixon , to represent the U.S. at the event.

[ 115 ] The Soviet delegation urged Nkrumah to visit Moscow as soon as possible. Political scientist Ralph Bunche , an African American, was there for the United Nations, while the Duchess of Kent represented Queen Elizabeth II. Offers of assistance poured in from across the world. Even without them, the country seemed prosperous, with cocoa prices high and the potential of new resource development.

[ 130 ] As the fifth of March turned to the sixth, Nkrumah stood before tens of thousands of supporters and proclaimed, "Ghana will be free forever." [ 131 ] He spoke at the first session of the Ghana Parliament that Independence Day , telling his new country's citizens that "we have a duty to prove to the world that Africans can conduct their own affairs with efficiency and tolerance and through the exercise of democracy. We must set an example to all Africa." [ 132 ] As part of the ceremony, Nkrumah gave a speech to instill hope and ooze assurance.

[ 133 ] Nkrumah was hailed as the Osagyefo – which means "redeemer" in the Akan language .

[ 134 ] This independence ceremony included the Duchess of Kent and Governor General Charles Arden-Clarke . With more than 600 reporters in attendance, Ghanaian independence became one of the most internationally reported news events in modern African history.

[ 135 ] The flag of Ghana designed by Theodosia Okoh , inverting Ethiopia's green-yellow-red Lion of Judah flag and replacing the lion with a black star. Red symbolizes bloodshed; green stands for beauty, agriculture, and abundance; yellow represents mineral wealth; and the Black Star represents African freedom.

[ 136 ] The country's new coat of arms , designed by Amon Kotei , includes eagles, a lion, a St. George's Cross, and a Black Star, with copious gold and gold trim.

[ 137 ] Philip Gbeho was commissioned to compose the new national anthem, " God Bless Our Homeland Ghana ".

[ 138 ] As a monument to the new nation, Nkrumah opened Black Star Square near Osu Castle in the coastal district of Osu, Accra .

[ 6 ] This square would be used for national symbolism and mass patriotic rallies.

[ 139 ] Under Nkrumah's leadership, Ghana adopted some social democratic policies and practices. Nkrumah created a welfare system, started various community programs, and established schools.

[ 140 ] Ghana's leader (1957–1966) [ edit ] This article is part of a series about Kwame Nkrumah Early life and education Gold Coast Pan-African Congress United Gold Coast Convention The Big Six Convention People's Party Positive Action General elections 1951 1954 1956 1st Prime Minister of Ghana Dominion of Ghana Decolonisation of Africa Ghana Independence Act 1957 All-African Peoples' Conference 1st President of Ghana Nkrumah government 1960 constitutional referendum Congo Crisis Port Francqui incident CWAAD Winneba Ideological Institute Casablanca Group Non-Aligned Movement Kulungugu bomb attack 1964 constitutional referendum President for life 1965 parliamentary election Akosombo Dam National Liberation Council coup d'etat Nkrumaism African socialism Anti-imperialism Classless society Cult of personality Egalitarianism Marxism Leninism Neocolonialism One-party state Pan-Africanism Self-determination Social justice State ownership Legacy Death and state funeral Democratic People's Party Founders' Day Kwame Nkrumah Festival Mausoleum v t e Political developments and presidential election [ edit ] 25 pesewas (Ȼ0.25) coins depicting Nkrumah: " Civitatis Ghanensis Conditor " ("Founder of the Ghanaian State") Nkrumah had only a short honeymoon before there was unrest among his country's people. The government deployed troops to Togo-land to quell unrest following a disputed plebiscite on membership in the new country.

[ 141 ] A serious bus strike in Accra stemmed from resentments among the Ga people , who believed members of other tribes were getting preferential treatment in government promotion, and this led to riots there in August.

[ 142 ] Nkrumah's response was to repress local movements by the Avoidance of Discrimination Act (6 December 1957), which banned regional or tribal-based political parties. Another strike at tribalism fell in Ashanti, where Nkrumah and the CPP got most local chiefs who were not party supporters destooled .

[ 143 ] These repressive actions concerned the opposition parties, who came together to form the United Party under Kofi Abrefa Busia .

[ 144 ] In 1958, an opposition MP was arrested on charges of trying to obtain arms abroad for a planned infiltration of the Ghana Army (GA).

[ 145 ] Nkrumah was convinced there had been an assassination plot against him, and his response was to have the parliament pass the Preventive Detention Act, allowing for incarceration for up to five years without charge or trial, with only Nkrumah empowered to release prisoners early.

[ 8 ] According to Nkrumah's biographer, David Birmingham, "no single measure did more to bring down Nkrumah's reputation than his adoption of internment without trial for the preservation of security." [ 146 ] Nkrumah intended to bypass the British-trained judiciary, which he saw as opposing his plans when they subjected them to constitutional scrutiny.

[ 147 ] Another source of irritation was the regional assemblies, which had been organized on an interim basis pending further constitutional discussions. The opposition, which was strong in Ashanti and the north, proposed significant powers for the assemblies; the CPP wanted them to be more or less advisory.

[ 148 ] In 1959, Nkrumah used his majority in the parliament to push through the Constitutional Amendment Act, which abolished the assemblies and allowed the parliament to amend the constitution with a simple majority.

[ 149 ] Nkrumah (first in right, back row) at the 1960 Commonwealth Prime Minister's Conference Queen Elizabeth II remained sovereign over Ghana from 1957 to 1960.

William Hare, 5th Earl of Listowel was the Governor-General, and Nkrumah remained Prime Minister. On 6 March 1960, Nkrumah announced plans for a new constitution that would make Ghana a republic, headed by a president with broad executive and legislative powers.

[ 150 ] The draft included a provision to surrender Ghanaian sovereignty to a Union of African States . On 19, 23, and 27 April 1960 a presidential election and plebiscite on the constitution were held. The constitution was ratified and Nkrumah was elected president over J. B. Danquah , the UP candidate, 1,016,076 to 124,623. Ghana remained a part of the British-led Commonwealth of Nations .

[ 63 ] Opposition to tribalism [ edit ] Illegal Asante flag, with colours symbolizing gold, ancestral power, and the forest, and Golden Stool symbolizing Asante political authority [ 136 ] Porcupine emblem, symbolising Asante motto, "If you greet us with peace, we will greet you with peace. But if you greet us with war, then we will greet you with war." [ 136 ] Nkrumah also sought to eliminate " tribalism ", a source of loyalties held more deeply than those to the nation-state. Thus, as he wrote in Africa Must Unite : "We were engaged in a kind of war, a war against poverty and disease, against ignorance, against tribalism and disunity. We needed to secure the conditions which could allow us to pursue our policy of reconstruction and development." [ 151 ] To this end, in 1958, his government passed "An Act to prohibit organizations using or engaging in racial or religious propaganda to the detriment of any other racial or religious community, or securing the election of persons on account of their racial or religious affiliations, or for other purposes in connection therewith." [ 152 ] Nkrumah attempted to saturate the country in national flags, and declared a widely disobeyed ban on tribal flags.

[ 136 ] Kofi Abrefa Busia of the United Party (Ghana) gained prominence as an opposition leader in the debate over this Act, taking a more classically liberal position and criticizing the ban on tribal politics as repressive. Soon after, he left the country.

[ 153 ] Nkrumah was also a very flamboyant leader.

The New York Times in 1972 wrote: "During his high‐flying days as the leader of Ghana in the 1950s and early 1960s, Kwame Nkrumah was a flamboyant spellbinder.

[ 154 ] At home, he created a cult of personality and gloried in the title of Osagyefo ( Akan for 'Redeemer'). Abroad, he met with the world's leaders as the first man to lead an African colony to independence after World War II." [ 155 ] During his tenure as Prime Minister and then first President, Nkrumah succeeded in reducing the political importance of the local chieftaincy (e.g., the Akan chiefs and the Asantehene ).

[ 156 ] These chiefs had maintained authority during colonial rule through collaboration with the British authorities; in fact, they were sometimes favored over the local intelligentsia, who made trouble for the British with organizations like the Aborigines' Rights Protection Society .

[ 157 ] The Convention People's Party had a strained relationship with the chiefs when it came to power, and this relationship became more hostile as the CPP incited political opposition chiefs and criticized the institution as undemocratic. Acts passed in 1958 and 1959 gave the government more power to dis-stool chiefs directly, and proclaimed government of stool land – and revenues.

[ 158 ] These policies alienated the chiefs and led them to looking favorably on the overthrow of Nkrumah and his Party.

[ 159 ] Increased power of the Convention People's Party [ edit ] In 1962, three younger members of the CPP were brought up on charges of taking part in a plot to blow up Nkrumah's car in a motorcade. The sole evidence against the alleged plotters was that they rode in cars well behind Nkrumah's car.

[ 100 ] When the defendants were acquitted, Nkrumah sacked the chief judge of the state security court, then got the CPP-dominated parliament to pass a law allowing a new trial .

[ 160 ] At this second trial, all three men were convicted and sentenced to death, though these sentences were subsequently commuted to life imprisonment. Shortly afterward, the constitution was amended to give the president the power to summarily remove judges at all levels.

[ 161 ] In 1964, Nkrumah proposed a constitutional amendment that would make the CPP the only legal party , with Nkrumah as president for life of both nation and party. The amendment passed with 99.91 percent of the vote, [ 162 ] [ 163 ] [ 164 ] an implausibly high total that led observers to condemn the vote as "obviously rigged".

[ 165 ] Ghana had effectively been a one-party state since independence. The amendment transformed Nkrumah's presidency into a de facto legal dictatorship.

Civil service [ edit ] Arrival of the president of Ghana, Kwame Nkrumah, and president of Yugoslavia , Josip Broz Tito , to the first conference of the Non-Aligned Movement , Belgrade , 1961.

After substantial Africanization of the civil service in 1952–60, the number of expatriates rose again from 1960 to 1965. Many of the new outside workers came not from the United Kingdom but from the Soviet Union, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia , and Italy.

[ 166 ] [ 6 ] Education [ edit ] In 1951, the CPP created the Accelerated Development Plan for Education. This plan set up a six-year primary course, to be attended as close to universally as possible, with a range of possibilities to follow.

[ 167 ] All children were to learn arithmetic, as well as gain "a sound foundation for citizenship with permanent literacy in both English and the vernacular." Primary education became compulsory in 1962. The plan also stated that religious schools would no longer receive funding, and that some existing missionary schools would be taken over by government.

[ 168 ] We in Ghana, are committed to the building of an industrialised socialist society.  We cannot afford to sit still and be mere passive onlookers.  We must ourselves take part in the pursuit of scientific and technological research as a means of providing the basis for our socialist society, Socialism without science is void.… We need also to reach out to the mass of the people who have not had the opportunities of formal education.  We must use every means of mass communication – the press, the radio, television and films – to carry science to the whole population – to the people. ...

It is most important that our people should not only be instructed in science but that they should take part in it, apply it themselves in their own ways.  For science is not just a subject to be learned out of a book or from a teacher.   It is a way of life, a way of tackling any problem which one can only master by using it for oneself.  We must have science clubs in which our people can develop their own talents for discovery and invention.

— Kwame Nkrumah "Speech delivered by Osagyefo the President at the Laying of the Foundation Stone of Ghana's Atomic Reactor at Kwabenya on 25th November, 1964" [ 168 ] In 1961, Nkrumah laid the first stones in the foundation of the Kwame Nkrumah Ideological Institute created to train Ghanaian civil servants as well as promote Pan-Africanism. In 1964, all students entering college in Ghana were required to attend a two-week " ideological orientation " at the institute.

[ 169 ] Nkrumah remarked that "trainees should be made to realize the party's ideology is religion, and should be practiced faithfully and fervently." [ 170 ] In 1964, Nkrumah brought forth the Seven Year Development Plan for National Reconstruction and Development, which identified education as a key source of development and called for the expansion of secondary technical schools.

[ 171 ] Secondary education would also include "in-service training programmes". As Nkrumah told Parliament: "Employers, both public and private, will be expected to make a far greater contribution to labour training through individual factory and farm schools, industry-wide training schemes, day release, payment for attendance at short courses and evening classes." This training would be indirectly subsidized with tax credits and import allocations.

[ 172 ] [ 168 ] In 1952, the Artisan Trading Scheme, arranged with the Colonial Office and UK Ministry of Labour, provided for a few experts in every field to travel to Britain for technical education. Kumasi Technical Institute was founded in 1956.

[ 173 ] In September 1960, it added the Technical Teacher Training Centre. In 1961, the CPP passed the Apprentice Act, which created a general Apprenticeship Board along with committees for each industry.

[ 168 ] Culture [ edit ] Nkrumah with Egyptian Egyptologist Pahor Labib at the Coptic Museum , 1956 Nkrumah was an ardent promoter of pan-Africanism , seeing the movement as the "quest for regional integration of the whole of the African continent". The period of Nkrumah's active political involvement has been described as the "golden age of high pan-African ambitions"; the continent had experienced rising nationalist movements and decolonization by most European colonial powers , and historians have noted that "the narrative of rebirth and solidarity had gained momentum within the pan-Africanist movement". Reflecting his African heritage, Nkrumah frequently eschewed Western fashion , donning a fugu (a Northern attire) made with Southern-produced Kente cloth , a symbol of his identity as a representative of the entire country.

[ 174 ] He oversaw the opening of the Ghana Museum on 5 March 1957; the Arts Council of Ghana, a wing of the Ministry of Education and Culture, in 1958; the Research Library on African Affairs in June 1961; and the Ghana Film Corporation in 1964.

[ 153 ] [ 175 ] [ 176 ] In 1962, Nkrumah opened the Institute of African Studies .

[ 168 ] A campaign against nudity in the northern part of the country received special attention from Nkrumah, who reportedly deployed Propaganda Secretary Hannah Cudjoe to respond. Cudjoe also formed the Ghana Women's League, which advanced the Party's agenda on nutrition, raising children, and wearing clothing.

[ 177 ] The League also led a demonstration against the detonation of French nuclear weapons in the Sahara .

[ 178 ] [ 179 ] Cudjoe was eventually demoted with the consolidation of national women's groups, and marginalized within the Party structure.

[ 179 ] Laws passed in 1959 and 1960 designated special positions in parliament to be held by women . Some women were promoted to the CPP Central Committee. Women attended more universities, took up more professions including medicine and law, and went on professional trips to Israel, the Soviet Union, and the Eastern Bloc. Women also entered the army and air force. Most women remained in agriculture and trade; some received assistance from the Co-operative Movement .

[ 180 ] [ 63 ] [ 178 ] Nkrumah's image was widely disseminated, for example, on postage stamps and on money, in the style of monarchs – providing fodder for accusations of a Nkrumahist personality cult.

[ 181 ] Media [ edit ] In 1957, Nkrumah created a well-funded Ghana News Agency to generate domestic news and disseminate it abroad. In ten years time the GNA had 8045 km of domestic telegraph line, and maintained stations in Lagos, Nairobi, London and New York City.

[ 182 ] [ 183 ] To the true African journalist, his newspaper is a collective organiser, a collective instrument of mobilisation and a collective educator—a weapon, first and foremost, to overthrow colonialism and imperialism and to assist total African independence and unity.

— Kwame Nkrumah at the Second Conference of African Journalists; Accra, November 11, 1963 [ 183 ] [ 184 ] Nkrumah consolidated state control over newspapers, establishing the Ghanaian Times in 1958 and then in 1962 obtaining its competitor, the Daily Graphic , from the Mirror Group of London.

[ 185 ] As he wrote in Africa Must Unite : "It is part of our revolutionary credo that within the competitive system of capitalism, the press cannot function in accordance with a strict regard for the sacredness of facts, and that the press, therefore, should not remain in private hands." Starting in 1960, he invoked the right of pre-publication censorship of all news.

[ 183 ] The Gold Coast Broadcasting Service was established in 1954 and revamped as the Ghana Broadcasting Corporation (GBC). Many television broadcasts featured Nkrumah, commenting for example on the problematic "insolence and laziness of boys and girls".

[ 186 ] Before celebrations of May Day, 1963, Nkrumah went on television to announce the expansion of Ghana's Young Pioneers , the introduction of a National Pledge, the beginning of a National Flag salute in schools, and the creation of a National Training program to inculcate virtue and the spirit of service among Ghanaian youth.

[ 187 ] Nkrumah outlined his views on the role of Ghanaian television to Parliament on 15 October 1963 saying, "Ghana's television will not cater for cheap entertainment or commercialism; its paramount objective will be education in its broadest and purest sense." [ 188 ] [ 168 ] As per the 1965 Instrument of Incorporation of the Ghana Broadcasting Corporation, the Minister of Information and Broadcasting had "powers of direction" over the media, and the President had the power "at any time, if he is satisfied that it is in the national interest to do so, take over the control and management of the affairs or any part of the functions of the Corporation," hiring, firing, reorganizing, and making other commands at will.

[ 189 ] [ 183 ] Radio programmes, designed in part to reach non-reading members of the public, were a major focus of the Ghana Broadcasting Corporation. In 1961, the GBC formed an external service broadcasting in English, French, Arabic, Swahili, Portuguese and Hausa .

[ 190 ] Using four 100-kilowatt transmitters and two 250-kilowatt transmitters, the GBC External Service broadcast 110 hours of Pan-Africanist programming to Africa and Europe each week.

[ 183 ] He refused advertising in all media, beginning with the Evening News of 1948.

[ 183 ] Economic policy [ edit ] See also: Economy of Ghana Akosombo hydroelectric dam Nkrumah visits the Akosombo Dam under construction with his 1961 Chevrolet Impala presidential car, February 1962.

The Gold Coast had been among the wealthiest and most socially advanced areas in Africa, with schools, railways, hospitals, social security, and an advanced economy.

[ 191 ] Nkrumah attempted to rapidly industrialize Ghana's economy. He reasoned that if Ghana escaped the colonial trade system by reducing dependence on foreign capital , technology, and material goods, it could become truly independent.

[ 192 ] After the Ten Year Development Plan, Nkrumah brought forth the Second Development Plan in 1959. This plan called for the development of manufacturing: 600 factories producing 100 varieties of product.

[ 193 ] The Statutory Corporations Act, passed in November 1959 and revised in 1961 and 1964, created the legal framework for public corporations, which included state enterprises. This law placed the country's major corporations under the direction of government ministers. The State Enterprises Secretariat office was located in Flagstaff House and under the direct control of the president.

[ 194 ] [ 195 ] After visiting the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe and China in 1961, Nkrumah apparently became still more convinced of the need for state control of the economy.

[ 196 ] [ 195 ] During Nkrumah's time in office, free health care and education were introduced.

[ 197 ] [ 198 ] [ 199 ] A Seven-Year Plan introduced in 1964 focused on further industrialization, emphasizing domestic substitutes for common imports, modernization of the building materials industry, machine making, electrification and electronics.

[ 200 ] [ 193 ] Energy projects [ edit ] Nkrumah's advocacy of industrial development, with help of longtime friend and Minister of Finance, Komla Agbeli Gbedema , led to the Volta River Project: the construction of a hydroelectric power plant, the Akosombo Dam on the Volta River in eastern Ghana.

[ 201 ] The Volta River Project was the centrepiece of Nkrumah's economic programme. On 20 February 1958, he told the National Assembly: "It is my strong belief that the Volta River Project provides the quickest and most certain method of leading us towards economic independence." [ 202 ] Ghana used assistance from the United States, Israel and the World Bank in constructing the dam.

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] Kaiser Aluminum agreed to build the dam for Nkrumah, but restricted what could be produced using the power generated. Nkrumah borrowed money to build the dam, and placed Ghana in debt. To finance the debt, he raised taxes on the cocoa farmers in the south. This accentuated regional differences and jealousy. The dam was completed and opened by Nkrumah amidst global publicity on 22 January 1966.

Nkrumah initiated the Ghana Nuclear Reactor Project in 1961, created the Ghana Atomic Energy Commission in 1963, and in 1964 laid the first stone in the building of an atomic energy facility.

[ 205 ] [ 206 ] Cocoa [ edit ] In 1954 the world price of cocoa rose from £150 to £450 per ton. Rather than allowing cocoa farmers to keep the windfall, Nkrumah appropriated the increased revenue via central government levies, then invested the capital into various national development projects.

[ 207 ] This policy alienated one of the major constituencies that helped him come to power.

[ 208 ] Prices continued to fluctuate. In 1960 one ton of cocoa sold for £250 in London. By August 1965 this price had dropped to £91, one fifth of its value ten years before.

[ 73 ] The quick price decline caused the government's reliance on the reserves and forced farmers to take a portion of their earning in bonds.

[ 209 ] Foreign and military policy [ edit ] See also: Ghana and the Non-Aligned Movement Nkrumah and his family meeting Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser during the 1965 Organization of African Unity Summit in Accra.

Nkrumah actively promoted a policy of Pan-Africanism from the beginning of his presidency. This entailed the creation of a series of new international organizations, which held their inaugural meetings in Accra.

[ 210 ] These were: the First Conference of Independent States, in April 1958; [ 211 ] the more inclusive All-African Peoples' Conference , with representatives from 62 nationalist organizations from across the continent, in December 1958; [ 212 ] the All-African Trade Union Federation, meeting in November 1959, to coordinate the African labour movement; [ 213 ] the Positive Action and Security in Africa conference, in April 1960, discussing Algeria, South Africa, and French nuclear weapons testing; [ 214 ] the Conference of African Women, on 18 July 1960.

[ 73 ] [ 204 ] Meanwhile, Ghana withdrew from colonial organizations including West Africa Airways Corporation, the West African Currency Board , the West African Cocoa Research Institute and the West African Court of Appeal .

[ 215 ] [ 73 ] In the Year of Africa , 1960, Nkrumah negotiated the creation of a Union of African States , a political alliance between Ghana, Guinea, and Mali. Immediately, they formed a women's group called Women of the Union of African States.

[ 216 ] [ 178 ] Nkrumah was a leading figure in the short-lived Casablanca Group of African leaders, which sought to achieve pan-African unity and harmony through deep political, economic, and military integration of the continent in the early 1960s prior to the establishment of the Organization of African Unity (OAU).

[ 217 ] [ 218 ] In 1961, he was a participant in the 1st Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement in Belgrade , FPR Yugoslavia making Ghana one of the founding members of the Non-Aligned Movement .

Nkrumah was instrumental in the creation of the OAU in Addis Ababa in 1963.

[ 153 ] He aspired to create a united military force, the African High Command, which Ghana would substantially lead, and committed to this vision in Article 2 of the 1960 Republican Constitution : [ 219 ] "In the confident expectation of an early surrender of sovereignty to a union of African states and territories, the people now confer on Parliament the power to provide for the surrender of the whole or any part of the sovereignty of Ghana." [ 73 ] [ 220 ] He was also a proponent of the United Nations, but critical of the Great Powers' ability to control it.

[ 204 ] Nkrumah opposed the entry of African states into the Common Market of the European Economic Community , a status given to many former French colonies and considered by Nigeria. Instead, Nkrumah advocated, in a speech given on 7 April 1960, [ 221 ] an African common market, a common currency area and the development of communications of all kinds to allow the free flow of goods and services. International capital can be attracted to such viable economic areas, but it would not be attracted to a divided and balkanized Africa, with each small region engaged in senseless and suicidal economic competition with its neighbours.

[ 222 ] [ 204 ] Nkrumah sought to exploit the Cold War rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union in order to gain maximum concessions from both sides in their geopolitical attempts to outmanoeuvre one another in West Africa and elsewhere.

[ 223 ] This was exemplified by the Volta River Dam Project and its back-and-forth oscillation between Soviet and Western financial backing.

[ 224 ] Armed forces [ edit ] In 1956, the Gold Coast took control of the Royal West African Frontier Force (RWAFF), Gold Coast Regiment , from the British War Office. This force had formerly been deployed to quell internal dissent, and occasionally to fight in wars: most recently, in World War II, against the Japanese in India and Burma.

[ 225 ] The most senior officers in this force were British, and, although training of African officers began in 1947, only 28 of 212 officers in December 1956 were indigenous Africans. The British officers still received British salaries, which vastly exceeded those allotted to their Ghanaian counterparts. Concerned about a possible military coup, Nkrumah delayed the placement of African officers in top leadership roles.

[ 226 ] [ 227 ] Nkrumah quickly established the Ghanaian Air Force , acquiring 14 Beaver airplanes from Canada and setting up a flight school with British instructors.

Otters , Caribou , and Chipmunks were to follow.

[ 226 ] Ghana also obtained four Ilyushin-18 aircraft from the Soviet Union. Preparation began in April 1959 with assistance from India and Israel.

[ 228 ] Nkrumah also established a gliding school led by Hanna Reitsch and J.E.S. de Graft-Hayford .

The Ghanaian Navy received two inshore minesweepers with 40mm and 20mm guns, the Afadzato and the Yogaga , from Britain in December 1959. It subsequently received the Elmina and the Komenda , seaward defence boats with 40-millimetre guns.

[ 226 ] The Navy's flagship, and training ship, was the Achimota , a British yacht constructed during World War II. In 1961, the Navy ordered two 600-ton corvettes, the Keta and Kromantse, from Vosper & Company and received them in 1967. It also procured four Soviet patrol boats. Naval officers were trained at the Britannia Royal Naval College in Dartmouth.

[ 229 ] The Ghanaian military budget rose each year, from $9.35 million (US dollars) in 1958 to $47 million in 1965.

[ 230 ] The first international deployment of the Ghanaian armed forces was to the Congo (Léopoldville/Kinshasa) , where Ghanaian troops were airlifted in 1960 at the beginning of the Congo Crisis .

[ 226 ] One week after Belgian troops occupied the lucrative mining province of Katanga , Ghana dispatched more than a thousand of its own troops to join a United Nations force.

[ 231 ] The use of British officers in this context was politically unacceptable, and this event occasioned a hasty transfer of officer positions to Ghanaians.

[ 226 ] [ 232 ] The Congo war was long and difficult.

[ 231 ] On 19 January 1961 the Third Infantry Battalion mutinied. On 28 April 1961, 43 men were massacred in a surprise attack by the Congolese army.

[ 233 ] Ghana also gave military support to rebels fighting against Ian Smith 's white-minority government in Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe ), which had unilaterally declared independence from Britain in 1965.

[ 234 ] Relationship with Communist world [ edit ] Nkrumah with Ernesto "Che" Guevara , January 1965 In 1961, Nkrumah went on tour through Eastern Europe, proclaiming solidarity with the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China.

[ 73 ] Nkrumah's clothing changed to the Chinese-supplied Mao suit .

[ 235 ] [ 236 ] In 1962 Kwame Nkrumah was awarded the Lenin Peace Prize by the Soviet Union .

[ 237 ] Anti-Nkrumah placard at a demonstration after the coup.

1966 coup d'état [ edit ] Main article: National Liberation Council § 1966 coup Kwame Nkrumah with U.S. President John F. Kennedy, 8 March 1961 In February 1966, while Nkrumah was on a state visit to North Vietnam and China, his government was overthrown in a violent coup d'état led by the national military and police forces, with backing from the civil service .

[ 238 ] The conspirators, led by Joseph Arthur Ankrah , named themselves the National Liberation Council and ruled as a military government for three years. Nkrumah did not learn of the coup until he arrived in China. After the coup, Nkrumah stayed in Beijing for four days, and Premier Zhou Enlai treated him with courtesy.

[ 239 ] [ 240 ] Nkrumah alluded to American involvement in the coup in his 1969 memoir, Dark Days in Ghana ; he may have based this conclusion on documents shown to him by the KGB .

[ 241 ] [ 242 ] In 1978 John Stockwell , former Chief of the Angola Task Force of the CIA turned critic, wrote that agents at the CIA's Accra station "maintained intimate contact with the plotters as a coup was hatched". Afterward, "inside CIA headquarters the Accra station was given full, if unofficial credit for the eventual coup. ...None of this was adequately reflected in the agency's written records." [ 243 ] [ 244 ] Later that same year, Seymour Hersh , then at The New York Times , defended Stockwell's account, citing "first hand intelligence sources". He claimed that "many CIA operatives in Africa considered the agency's role in the overthrow of Dr. Nkrumah to have been pivotal." [ 245 ] [ 246 ] These claims have never been verified.

[ 247 ] [ 12 ] Following the coup, Ghana realigned itself internationally, cutting its close ties to Guinea and the Eastern Bloc, accepting a new friendship with the Western Bloc , and inviting the International Monetary Fund and World Bank to take a leading role in managing the economy.

[ 248 ] [ failed verification ] With this reversal, accentuated by the expulsion of immigrants and a new willingness to negotiate with apartheid South Africa, Ghana lost a good deal of its stature in the eyes of African nationalists.

[ 249 ] [ 73 ] In assessing Nkrumah's legacy, Edward Luttwak argued that he was undone by the growth of political consciousness and his inability to repress potential opponents: Nkrumah, in spite of his eccentricities, was largely defeated by his own success: the by-product of the considerable economic development achieved by Ghana was to stimulate and educate the masses and the new elite; their attitude to Nkrumah's regime became more and more critical in the light of the education the regime itself provided. When this happens, more and more repression and propaganda are needed to maintain political stability. In spite of considerable efforts, Nkrumah was unable to build a sufficiently ruthless police system. The cause of his downfall was not, therefore, the mismanagement of the economy—which was considerable—but rather the success of much of the development effort.

— Edward Luttwak, Coup d'État: A Practical Handbook (1968) Exile and death [ edit ] Main article: Death and state funeral of Kwame Nkrumah Nkrumah died on 27 April 1972, in Bucharest , the capital of Romania , [ 250 ] of an unknown but apparently incurable sickness. Since the coup, he had been living in the Guinean capital of Conakry , lying low.

Tributes and legacy [ edit ] Over his lifetime, Nkrumah was awarded honorary doctorates by many universities including Lincoln University (Pennsylvania) , Moscow State University (USSR), Cairo University ( Egypt ), Jagiellonian University ( Poland ), and Humboldt University ( East Germany ).

[ 251 ] Kwame Nkrumah Memorial Park and Mausoleum In 2000, he was voted African Man of the Millennium by listeners to the BBC World Service , being described by the BBC as a "Hero of Independence", and an "International symbol of freedom as the leader of the first black African country to shake off the chains of colonial rule." [ 252 ] [ 13 ] Kwame Nkrumah's grave inside the Kwame Nkrumah memorial in Accra According to intelligence documents released by the U.S. Department of State 's Office of the Historian , "Nkrumah was doing more to undermine [U.S. government] interests than any other black African." [ 253 ] Statue of Kwame Nkrumah in Owerri, Imo State , Nigeria In September 2009, President John Atta Mills declared 21 September (the 100th anniversary of Kwame Nkrumah's birth) to be Founders' Day , a statutory holiday in Ghana to celebrate the legacy of Kwame Nkrumah.

[ 254 ] In April 2019, President Akufo-Addo approved the Public Holidays (Amendment) Act 2019 which changed 21 September from Founders' Day to Kwame Nkrumah Memorial Day .

[ 255 ] Nkrumah generally took a non-aligned Marxist perspective on economics, and believed capitalism had malignant effects that were going to stay with Africa for a long time.

[ 256 ] Although he was clear on distancing himself from the African socialism of many of his contemporaries, Nkrumah argued that socialism was the system that would best accommodate the changes that capitalism had brought, while still respecting African values.

[ 257 ] He specifically addresses these issues and his politics in a 1967 essay entitled "African Socialism Revisited": We know that the traditional African society was founded on principles of egalitarianism. In its actual workings, however, it had various shortcomings. Its humanist impulse, nevertheless, is something that continues to urge us towards our all-African socialist reconstruction. We postulate each man to be an end in himself, not merely a means; and we accept the necessity of guaranteeing each man equal opportunities for his development. The implications of this for sociopolitical practice have to be worked out scientifically, and the necessary social and economic policies pursued with resolution. Any meaningful humanism must begin from egalitarianism and must lead to objectively chosen policies for safeguarding and sustaining egalitarianism . Hence, socialism. Hence, also, scientific socialism .

[ 258 ] Nkrumah was also best-known politically for his strong commitment to and promotion of pan-Africanism . He was inspired by the writings of black intellectuals such as Marcus Garvey , W. E. B. Du Bois , and George Padmore , and his relationships with them. Much of his understanding and relationship to these men was created during his years in America as a student.

[ 259 ] Some would argue that his greatest inspiration was Marcus Garvey, [ 260 ] although he also had a meaningful relationship with C. L. R. James . Nkrumah looked to these men to craft a general solution to the ills of Africa. To follow in these intellectual footsteps Nkrumah had intended to continue his education in London, but found himself involved in direct activism.

[ 261 ] Then, motivated by advice from Du Bois, Nkrumah decided to focus on creating peace in Africa. He became a passionate advocate of the "African Personality", embodied in the slogan "Africa for the Africans", earlier popularised by Edward Wilmot Blyden , and he viewed political independence as a prerequisite for economic independence.

[ 71 ] Nkrumah's dedications to pan-Africanism in action attracted these intellectuals to his Ghanaian projects. Many Americans, such as Du Bois and Kwame Ture , moved to Ghana to join him in his efforts. Du Bois and Ture are buried there today.

[ 262 ] His press officer for six years was the Grenadian anticolonialist Sam Morris . Nkrumah's biggest success in this area was his significant influence in the founding of the Organisation of African Unity .

[ 263 ] Nkrumah also became a symbol for black liberation in the United States. When in 1958 the Harlem Lawyers Association had an event in Nkrumah's honour, diplomat Ralph Bunche told him: We salute you, Kwame Nkrumah, not only because you are Prime Minister of Ghana, although this is cause enough. We salute you because you are a true and living representation of our hopes and ideals, of the determination we have to be accepted fully as equal beings, of the pride we have held and nurtured in our African origin, of the freedom of which we know we are capable, of the freedom in which we believe, of the dignity imperative to our stature as men.

[ 264 ] [ 204 ] In 1961, Nkrumah delivered a speech called "I Speak Of Freedom". During this speech he talked about how "Africa could become one of the greatest forces for good in the world".

[ 265 ] He mentions how Africa is a land of "vast riches" with mineral resources from that "range from gold and diamonds to uranium and petroleum".

[ 265 ] Nkrumah says that the reason Africa is not thriving right now is because the European powers have been taking all the wealth for themselves. If Africa could be independent of European rule, he said, then it could truly flourish and contribute positively to the world. In the ending words of this speech Nkrumah calls his people to action by saying "This is our chance.

[ 266 ] We must act now. Tomorrow may be too late and the opportunity will have passed, and with it the hope of free Africa's survival".

[ 265 ] This rallied the nation in a nationalistic movement.

[ citation needed ] In his honour, an annual event called "Journey to Nkroful" was set up to celebrate his birthday.

[ 267 ] Mausoleum and Museum at Nkroful , Western Region have been named after him that showcase some of the artifacts he used when alive.

[ 268 ] Kwame Nkrumah Memorial Park & Museum, Accra has been there to keep memory of him. Also, University of Science and Technology was changed to Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology to recognise his support building a strong education system in the country.

[ 269 ] [ 270 ] [ 271 ] Personal life [ edit ] Kwame Nkrumah married Fathia Ritzk , an Egyptian Coptic bank worker and former teacher, on the evening of her arrival in Ghana: New Year's Eve, 1957–1958.

[ 272 ] Fathia's mother refused to bless their marriage, after another one of her children left with a foreign husband.

[ 273 ] [ 274 ] As a married couple, Fathia and Nkrumah had three children: Gamal (born 1958), Samia (born 1960) and Sekou (born 1964). Gamal is a newspaper journalist, while Samia and Sekou are politicians. Nkrumah also has another son, Francis, a paediatrician (born 1935).

[ 275 ] [ 276 ] [ 277 ] [ 278 ] [ 279 ] Cultural depictions [ edit ] In the 2010 book The Other Wes Moore , Nkrumah, during his time in the United States, is noted to have served as a mentor to the author's grandfather for several months upon the immigration of the author's family into the country.

[ 280 ] Nkrumah is played by Danny Sapani in the Netflix television series The Crown (season 2, episode 8 "Dear Mrs Kennedy"). The show's portrayal of the historical significance of the Queen's visit to Ghana and dance with Nkrumah has been described as exaggerated in one source interviewing Nat Nuno-Amarteifio, later mayor of Accra, who was a teenage student at the time.

[ 281 ] African's Black Star: The Legacy of Kwame Nkrumah is a 2011 film about the rise and fall of this colonial rebellion leader.

A golden statue of Nkrumah is a centrepiece in Ghanaian rapper Serious Klein 's 2021 video "Straight Outta Pandemic".

[ 282 ] Honours and awards [ edit ] Foreign honours [ edit ] Ribbon Distinction Country Date Reference Grand Cordon of the Order of the Nile Egypt 1957 [ 283 ] Grand Cordon of the National Order of the Cedar Lebanon 1957 [ 283 ] Order of the Yugoslav Great Star Yugoslavia 2 March 1961 [ 284 ] Collar of the Order of the White Lion Czechoslovakia 2 August 1961 [ 285 ] Lenin Peace Prize Soviet Union 30 April 1962 [ 286 ] Knight Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic Italy 25 September 1963 [ 287 ] Grand Cross of the Order of Polonia Restituta Poland 1965 [ 288 ] Supreme Companion of the Order of the Companions of O. R. Tambo South Africa 16 June 2004 (posthumously) [ 289 ] Works by Kwame Nkrumah [ edit ] A postage stamp from the Soviet Union marking the 80th anniversary of his birth Independence Arch in Accra "Negro History: European Government in Africa", The Lincolnian , 12 April 1938, p. 2 (Lincoln University, Pennsylvania) – see Special Collections and Archives, Lincoln University Archived 17 August 2009 at the Wayback Machine [ 290 ] "Primitive Education in West Africa," Educational Outlook, January 1941 (University of Pennsylvania).

See Archived 3 March 2024 at the Wayback Machine "Education and Nationalism in Africa," Educational Outlook, November 1943 (University of Pennsylvania).

See Archived 3 March 2024 at the Wayback Machine Ghana: The Autobiography of Kwame Nkrumah (1957).

ISBN 0-901787-60-4 [ 291 ] Africa Must Unite (1963).

ISBN 0-901787-13-2 [ 292 ] African Personality (1963) [ 293 ] The essence of neo-colonialism is that the State which is subject to it is, in theory, independent and has all the outward trappings of international sovereignty. In reality its economic system and thus its political policy is directed from outside.

— Introduction Neo-Colonialism, the Last Stage of Imperialism (1965) [ 294 ] [ 295 ] Axioms of Kwame Nkrumah (1967).

ISBN 0-901787-54-X [ 296 ] African Socialism Revisited (1967) [ 297 ] Challenge of the Congo Archived 5 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine (1967) Voice From Conakry (1967).

ISBN 90-17-87027-3 Dark Days in Ghana (1968).

ISBN 0-7178-0046-6 [ 298 ] Handbook of Revolutionary Warfare (1968).

ISBN 0-7178-0226-4 [ 299 ] The Way Out, "Civilian Rule" Fraud and A  Call for Positive Action and Armed Struggle (1970) [ 300 ] Consciencism: Philosophy and Ideology for De-Colonisation (1970).

ISBN 0-901787-11-6 [ 301 ] Class Struggle in Africa (1970).

ISBN 0-901787-12-4 [ 302 ] The Struggle Continues (1973).

ISBN 0-901787-41-8 [ 303 ] I Speak of Freedom (1973).

ISBN 0-901787-14-0 [ 304 ] Revolutionary Path (1973).

ISBN 978-0-901787-22-4 [ 305 ] Festival [ edit ] For details see Kwame Nkrumah Festival See also [ edit ] Nkrumah government Notes [ edit ] ^ Nyanibah survived her son, watching over him throughout his life. For a time after his death, she guarded his tomb. See Birmingham , p. 3.

^ Members swore an oath of secrecy, pledging to "irrevocably obey" orders from the group, to "help a member brother of THE CIRCLE in all things and in all difficulties", to avoid the use of violence, to fast on the twenty-first day of the month, and finally, to "accept the leadership of Kwame Nkrumah".  See: " The Circle " in Nationalism in Asia and Africa by Elie Kedourie, 1970.

References [ edit ] ^ o'Hara, Glen (11 April 2012), "President Kennedy, Prime Minister Macmillan and the Gold Market, 1960–63", Governing Post-War Britain , Palgrave Macmillan, pp.

53– 72, doi : 10.1057/9780230361270_4 , ISBN 978-0-230-36127-0 ^ Rathbone, Richard (23 September 2004). "Nkrumah, Kwame (1909?–1972), president of Ghana".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography . Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/31504 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ Hsü, Leonard Shihlien (5 November 2013), "Political Progress" , The Political Philosophy of Confucianism , Routledge, pp.

258– 273, doi : 10.4324/9781315018775 , ISBN 978-1-315-01877-5 ^ Proceedings of the convention at which the American federation of arts was formed . B. S. Adams. 1909.

doi : 10.5479/sil.380651.39088006011662 .

^ "Prime Minister 1957–60", Kwame Nkrumah. Vision and Tragedy , Sub-Saharan Publishers, pp.

192– 214, 15 November 2007, doi : 10.2307/j.ctvk3gm60.17 , ISBN 978-9988-647-81-0 ^ a b c Stanek, Łukasz (2020).

Architecture in global socialism: Eastern Europe, West Africa, and the Middle East in the Cold War . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-19455-4 .

OCLC 1134854794 .

^ Nkrumah, Kwame (1953).

[Letter: Kwamé Nkrumah to Richard Wright] .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 .

^ a b Ninsin, Kwame A. (4 February 2016), "The Nkrumah Government and Its Opposition", The Ghana Reader , Duke University Press, pp.

303– 306, doi : 10.2307/j.ctv125jqp2.66 , ISBN 978-0-8223-7496-1 ^ Mazrui, Ali (1966). "Nkrumah: The Leninist Czar".

Transition (26): 9– 17.

doi : 10.2307/2934320 .

ISSN 0041-1191 .

JSTOR 2934320 .

Kilson, Martin L. (1963).

"Authoritarian and Single-Party Tendencies in African Politics" .

World Politics .

15 (2): 262– 294.

doi : 10.2307/2009376 .

ISSN 1086-3338 .

JSTOR 2009376 .

S2CID 154624186 .

Archived from the original on 1 February 2023 . Retrieved 19 February 2022 .

Bretton, Henry L. (1958).

"Current Political Thought and Practice in Ghana*" .

American Political Science Review .

52 (1): 46– 63.

doi : 10.2307/1953012 .

ISSN 1537-5943 .

JSTOR 1953012 .

S2CID 145766298 .

Archived from the original on 1 February 2023 . Retrieved 19 February 2022 .

Fischer, Hilke (2016).

"Ghana's Kwame Nkrumah: visionary, authoritarian ruler and national hero" .

Deutsche Welle .

Archived from the original on 1 February 2023 . Retrieved 19 February 2022 .

"Portrait of Nkrumah as Dictator" .

The New York Times . 3 May 1964.

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 1 February 2023 . Retrieved 19 February 2022 .

^ Zolberg, Aristide R. (31 December 1964). "VII. The Reluctant Nation".

One-Party Government in the Ivory Coast . Princeton: Princeton University Press . pp.

219– 249.

doi : 10.1515/9781400876563-012 .

ISBN 978-1-4008-7656-3 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Commanding Heights, 1998 ^ a b John Prados, Safe For Democracy: The Secret Wars of the CIA (Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 2006), p. 329.

^ a b "Kwame Nkrumah's Vision of Africa" Archived 25 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine , BBC World Service , 14 September 2000.

^ "Kwame Nkrumah: Non-Violence of Mahatma Gandhi in Ghana" .

www.mkgandhi.org .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 .

^ "Dr Kwame Nkrumah's History & LSE Application Form" .

London School of Economics . 10 October 2018.

Archived from the original on 22 November 2019 . Retrieved 22 November 2019 .

^ a b "Man in the News; An African Enigma; Kwame Nkrumah" .

The New York Times . 3 January 1964.

Archived from the original on 1 November 2018 . Retrieved 19 February 2020 .

^ a b c Botwe-Asamoah, Kwame (2005).

Kwame Nkrumah's Politico-cultural Thought and Policies: An African-centered Paradigm for the Second Phase of the African Revolution .

Psychology Press . p. 1.

ISBN 978-0-415-94833-3 .

Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 12 February 2020 .

^ Berry, LaVerle Bennette; Library of Congress, Federal Research Division (1995).

Ghana: a country study . Washington DC: Federal Research Division, Library of Congress. p.

27 .

ISBN 0844408352 . Retrieved 21 January 2018 .

^ "Ghana: The Autobiography of Kwame Nkrumah | University of Education, Winneba" .

www.uew.edu.gh . Archived from the original on 5 February 2023 . Retrieved 29 September 2023 .

^ "Athelstan 'Half King' and his Family", The Danelaw , Bloomsbury Academic, 1992, doi : 10.5040/9781472598837.ch-021 , ISBN 978-1-4725-9883-7 ^ Rooney , p. 7.

^ "Annan, Kofi Atta, (born 1938), President, Kofi Annan Foundation, since 2007; Secretary-General, United Nations, 1997–2006", Who's Who , Oxford University Press , 1 December 2007, doi : 10.1093/ww/9780199540884.013.u5557 ^ Yakubu, Mutala (21 September 2019).

"Kwame Nkrumah Memorial Day: Dr Kwame Nkrumah 'A son of the soil' " .

Prime New Ghana .

Archived from the original on 24 September 2019 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 .

^ a b c d "Biography of Ghana's first President, Dr Kwame Nkrumah" . Graphic Online. 8 March 2016.

Archived from the original on 19 June 2018 . Retrieved 21 August 2017 .

^ Service, Support.

"Kwame Nkrumah" .

TV Afrique . Archived from the original on 18 October 2020 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 .

^ "Details of Opanyin Kofi Nwiana Ngolomah, father of Dr. Kwame Nkrumah" .

GhanaWeb . 21 September 2021. Archived from the original on 21 October 2023 . Retrieved 29 September 2023 .

^ a b "From Ngolomah To Nkrumah" . Peace FM. 21 September 2009.

Archived from the original on 20 August 2017 . Retrieved 20 August 2017 .

^ "Nkrumah's Family" . Osagyefo Dr. Kwame Nkrumah Infobank. Archived from the original on 17 August 2017 . Retrieved 27 August 2017 .

^ Addo , pp. 50–51.

^ a b Rooney , pp. 7–8.

^ "Fathia Nkrumah: Farewell to all that" .

Al-Ahram Weekly . 20 September 2009. Archived from the original on 21 August 2017 . Retrieved 21 September 2017 .

Grandmother Nyaneba, then well into her 90s, waited patiently for her son. Mother stood by her side. Grandmother was determined to remain alive to witness Nkrumah's triumphant return to Ghana. Only after her hand was placed on his coffin did the old woman at last accept that he was dead. Grandmother was to pass away seven years later in my mother's arms, aged 102.

^ "Nkrumah, Dr Kwame, ((21 Sept. 2009 – 27 April 1972)", Who Was Who , Oxford University Press, 1 December 2007, doi : 10.1093/ww/9780199540884.013.u158013 ^ Brooks, E. C. (1913).

"Seven, Eight, and Nine Years in the Elementary School" .

The Elementary School Teacher .

14 (1): 20– 28.

doi : 10.1086/454260 .

ISSN 1545-5858 .

S2CID 144643192 .

^ Owusu-Ansah , p. 239.

^ Rooney , p. 9.

^ Addo , pp. 53–54.

^ a b Biney, Barbara Ama (April 2007).

"Kwame Nkrumah: An Intellectual Biography" (PDF) .

University of London .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 June 2020 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 .

^ a b c "WOMEN, TRUE FIGHTERS OF FREEDOM – AFRICA NAKUA" . Archived from the original on 21 April 2020 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 .

^ "Azikiwe, Nnamdi", African American Studies Center , Oxford University Press, 7 April 2005, doi : 10.1093/acref/9780195301731.013.40103 , ISBN 978-0-19-530173-1 ^ Rahman, Ahmad A. (2007).

The Regime Change of Kwame Nkrumah .

doi : 10.1057/9780230603486 .

ISBN 978-1-349-52903-2 .

^ "Kwame Nkrumah: Ghana's first president and a revered panafrican" .

The New Times | Rwanda . 31 October 2017.

Archived from the original on 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 .

^ Rooney , pp. 9–12.

^ Clarke , pp. 9–10.

^ Clarke , p. 10.

^ Rooney , p. 12.

^ "Ghana: The Autobiography of Kwame Nkrumah | University of Education, Winneba" .

www.uew.edu.gh . Archived from the original on 5 February 2023 . Retrieved 2 October 2023 .

^ Birmingham , p. 4.

^ Opoku Mensah, Eric (February 2014).

The Rhetoric of Kwame Nkrumah: an analysis of his political speeches (PDF) (PhD thesis). University of Cape Town.

hdl : 11427/9290 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 .

^ "Kwame Nkrumah" .

The Mt Kenya Times . Archived from the original on 2 June 2020 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 .

^ Amoh, Emmanuella (March 2019).

Kwame Nkrumah, His Afro-American Network and the Pursuit of an African Personality (MS thesis). Illinois State University.

doi : 10.30707/ETD2019.Amoh.E .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2021 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 .

^ Rooney , pp. 13–14.

^ Welmers, William Everett (1946).

A Descriptive Grammar of Fanti . Linguistic Society of America. p. 7.

^ Rahman, Ahmad (January 2009).

African American Freemasonry and African Liberation: An Unknown History . American Historical Association 123rd Annual Meeting. New York.

Archived from the original on 2 September 2022 . Retrieved 31 May 2024 .

^ Sakyi, Kwesi Atta (22 September 2013).

"Special Tribute to Dr Kwame Nkrumah" .

GhanaWeb .

^ "US Speaker Nancy Pelosi & members of Congressional Black Caucus lays wreath at Kwame Nkrumah Mausoleum and Memorial Park – Friends of the African Union" . 31 July 2019.

Archived from the original on 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 .

^ a b Clarke, John Henrik (October 1974).

"Kwame Nkrumah: His Years in America" .

The Black Scholar .

6 (2): 9– 16.

doi : 10.1080/00064246.1974.11431459 .

ISSN 0006-4246 .

JSTOR 41065759 .

S2CID 141785632 .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 .

^ Clarke , p. 11.

^ Grischow, Jeff D. (2011). "Kwame Nkrumah, Disability, and Rehabilitation in Ghana, 1957—66".

The Journal of African History .

52 (2): 179– 199.

doi : 10.1017/S0021853711000260 .

ISSN 0021-8537 .

JSTOR 23017675 .

S2CID 162695973 .

^ a b Rooney , pp. 14–15.

^ Rooney , p. 16.

^ Addo , pp. 62–65.

^ Owusu-Ansah , p. 32.

^ a b c d e f George P. Hagan, "Nkrumah's Leadership Style—An Assessment from a Cultural Perspective", in Arhin (1992), The Life and Work of Kwame Nkrumah .

^ "Kwame Nkrumah | Biography, Education, | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 27 September 2023.

Archived from the original on 5 October 2023 . Retrieved 2 October 2023 .

^ "Kwame Nkrumah • Africanglobe" .

AfricanGlobe.Net . 8 September 2012.

Archived from the original on 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 27 May 2020 .

^ a b Sherwood , p. 114.

^ Sherwood , pp. 106–107.

^ Addo , p. 70.

^ Matera, Marc (2010). "Colonial Subjects: Black Intellectuals and the Development of Colonial Studies in Britain".

Journal of British Studies .

49 (2): 388– 418.

doi : 10.1086/649838 .

ISSN 0021-9371 .

JSTOR 23265207 .

S2CID 143861344 .

^ a b Sherwood , p. 115.

^ a b Martin, G. (2012).

African Political Thought . Palgrave Macmillan US.

ISBN 978-1-137-06205-5 .

Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 31 August 2017 .

^ Fulcher, James (1 November 2000). "Globalisation, the Nation-State and Global Society".

The Sociological Review .

48 (4): 522– 543.

doi : 10.1111/1467-954X.00231 .

ISSN 0038-0261 .

S2CID 145019590 .

^ a b c d e f g Gebe, Boni Yao (March 2008).

"Ghana's Foreign Policy at Independence and Implications for the 1966 Coup D'état" (PDF) .

Journal of Pan African Studies .

2 (3).

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 June 2014.

^ a b "Running away from our own shadows" .

www.ippmedia.com . 23 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 27 May 2020 .

^ Rooney , p. 23.

^ Rooney , pp. 24–25.

^ Sherwood , pp. 173–178.

^ Rooney , p. 25.

^ Sherwood , pp. 125–126.

^ Rooney , pp. 26–27.

^ "Ghana pays tribute to founders' – Graphic Online" .

www.graphic.com.gh . 4 August 2020.

Archived from the original on 14 February 2021 . Retrieved 5 August 2020 .

^ Owusu-Ansah , p. 316.

^ Rooney , pp. 27–28.

^ Rooney , pp. 30–31.

^ Rooney , pp. 36–37.

^ "VIII. "And although these men were rare and wonderful, they were nevertheless but men, and the opportunities which they had were far less favorable than the present; nor were their undertakings more just or more easy than this; neither was God more a friend of them than of you." ", How to Choose a Leader , Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp.

37– 41, 31 December 2016, doi : 10.1515/9781400880409-009 , ISBN 978-1-4008-8040-9 ^ Rooney , pp. 38–39.

^ Birmingham , pp. 18–19.

^ Addo , p. 85.

^ Rathbone, Richard (23 September 2004). "Nkrumah, Kwame (1909?–1972), president of Ghana".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography . Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/31504 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ "Secretary of the Ugcc", Kwame Nkrumah. Vision and Tragedy , Sub-Saharan Publishers, pp.

52– 72, 15 November 2007, doi : 10.2307/j.ctvk3gm60.9 , ISBN 978-9988-647-81-0 ^ Rooney , pp. 40–43.

^ Addo , pp. 86–87.

^ Birmingham , p. 24.

^ "Sekou Nkrumah Fights Oquaye Over Founders' Day" .

DailyGuide Network . 6 August 2020.

Archived from the original on 26 September 2020 . Retrieved 7 August 2020 .

^ a b "Kwame Nkrumah: Non-Violence of Mahatma Gandhi in Ghana | Articles : On and By Gandhi" .

www.mkgandhi.org .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 27 May 2020 .

^ Addo , p. 88.

^ Addo , pp. 88–89.

^ Fuller , pp. 24–26.

^ a b "Birth of the CPP", Kwame Nkrumah. Vision and Tragedy , Sub-Saharan Publishers, pp.

74– 90, 15 November 2007, doi : 10.2307/j.ctvk3gm60.10 , ISBN 978-9988-647-81-0 ^ Rooney , pp. 55–56.

^ "The Gold Coast General Election of 1954".

Parliamentary Affairs . 1 October 1953.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordjournals.pa.a053198 .

ISSN 1460-2482 .

^ Rooney , pp. 56–57.

^ Birmingham , pp. 34–35.

^ Bourret , pp. 175–177.

^ Rooney , p. 61.

^ "Erica Powell" .

The Times . 23 June 2007.

ISSN 0140-0460 .

Archived from the original on 1 November 2019 . Retrieved 2 November 2019 .

^ Luscombe, Stephen.

"Private Secretary (Female)/Gold Coast" .

britishempire.co.uk .

Archived from the original on 25 October 2019 . Retrieved 2 November 2019 .

^ "Table B.1.6. Acquisition of nationality by country of former nationality, Denmark".

International Migration Outlook: SOPEMI - 2008 Edition - OECD 2008 – ISBN 9789264045651 .

doi : 10.1787/432756801382 .

^ Birmingham , pp. 37–38.

^ Cipriani, Ralph J. (1 December 2014). SNL Five-Year Facilities & Infrastructure Plan FY2015-2019 (Report).

doi : 10.2172/1173199 .

OSTI 1173199 .

^ Sidiropoulos, Elizabeth (2005).

"External Engagement Experiences from Ghana and Mozambique" (PDF) .

Media Africa . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 August 2020 . Retrieved 27 May 2020 .

^ Rooney , pp. 82–83.

^ Bourret , p. 178.

^ a b Grimm, Kevin E., Symbol of Modernity: Ghana, African Americans, and the Eisenhower Administration. A dissertation: the College of Arts and Sciences of Ohio University. 27 May 2020 ^ Birmingham , pp. 40–43.

^ Rooney , pp. 181–182.

^ Walton, Calder (29 October 2014).

British Intelligence, the Cold War, and the Twilight of Empire .

The Overlook Press .

ISBN 978-1468307153 .

Archived from the original on 27 January 2017 . Retrieved 18 January 2017 .

^ Manning, Carrie; Smith, Ian (7 December 2018), "Political party formation by former armed opposition groups after civil war" , From Bullets to Ballots , Routledge, pp.

4– 21, doi : 10.4324/9781315112206-2 , ISBN 978-1-315-11220-6 , S2CID 239577237 , archived from the original on 18 October 2021 , retrieved 5 September 2021 ^ Bourret , pp. 183–186.

^ Ferrell, Thomas H. (24 February 2015), "What If There Were a Unitary Rather Than a Federal System?", What if the American Political System Were Different?

, Routledge, pp.

23– 44, doi : 10.4324/9781315698212 , ISBN 978-1-315-69821-2 ^ Ninsin, Kwame A. (1991).

Ghana'a Transition to Constitutional rule . Accra: Ghana Universities Press. pp.

35– 58.

ISBN 9964-3-0199-5 .

^ Vogel, Gretchen (19 April 2018). "A new dengue vaccine should only be used in people who were previously infected, WHO says".

Science .

doi : 10.1126/science.aat9362 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

^ Bourret , pp. 187–191.

^ Birmingham , p. 58.

^ Owusu-Ansah , p. lii.

^ Mills, James H. (29 November 2012), " 'The British Compromise': Devolved Power and the Domestic Consumer, 1971–1997", Cannabis Nation , Oxford University Press, pp.

155– 185, doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199283422.003.0007 , ISBN 978-0-19-928342-2 ^ Bourret , pp. 200–201.

^ "Accra, Ghana", The Statesman's Yearbook Companion , London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, p. 444, 2019, doi : 10.1057/978-1-349-95839-9_890 , ISBN 978-1-349-95838-2 , S2CID 40162723 ^ Rooney , pp. 4–6.

^ Rooney , p. 5.

^ Bourret , p. 202.

^ Brown, Agyei (6 March 2025).

"What Exactly Did Kwame Nkrumah Say on the 6th of March 1957? Here's the Full Speech | Now Accra" . Retrieved 6 March 2025 .

^ Zimmerman, Jonathan (23 October 2008).

"The ghost of Kwame Nkrumah" .

International Herald Tribune .

Archived from the original on 10 February 2009 . Retrieved 23 October 2008 .

^ Rooney (1988), Kwame Nkrumah , pp. 4–5.

^ a b c d Fuller, Building the Ghanaian Nation-State , pp. 29–33.

^ Fuller, Building the Ghanaian Nation-State , pp. 37–38.

^ Fuller, Building the Ghanaian Nation-State , pp. 34–37.

^ Fuller, Building the Ghanaian Nation-State , pp. 121–122.

^ "Put Some Clothes On or Nkrumah Will Get You!", Undesirable Practices , UNP – Nebraska, pp.

163– 190, 2016, doi : 10.2307/j.ctt1d4v0qj.11 , ISBN 978-0-8032-8696-2 ^ Kofi Amenyo, " Trans Volta Togoland and the refuseniks of the union with Ghana Archived 3 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine ", GhanaWeb , 9 May 2008.

^ " 'I believed that Russians were our friends, that they were brave people who fight huge numbers of Germans'. Interview with R. Inglehart".

Historical Expertise .

4 (21): 9– 18. 25 December 2019.

doi : 10.31754/2409-6105-2019-4-9-18 (inactive 1 July 2025).

ISSN 2409-6105 .

S2CID 243560299 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Biney, Ama (2011), "Nkrumah and the Opposition, 1954–1957", The Political and Social Thought of Kwame Nkrumah , New York: Palgrave Macmillan US, pp.

65– 79, doi : 10.1057/9780230118645_5 , ISBN 978-1-349-29513-5 ^ Rooney , pp. 138–139.

^ Kaplan, Frederick I.; Adamovich, Anthony; Winner, Thomas G. (1958). "Opposition to Sovietization in Belorussian literature (1917–1957)".

Books Abroad .

32 (4): 442.

doi : 10.2307/40098174 .

ISSN 0006-7431 .

JSTOR 40098174 .

^ Birmingham , pp. 84–87.

^ Birmingham , pp. 85–86.

^ Alawattage, Chandana; Hopper, Trevor; Wickramasinghe, Danture (2007).

Management accounting in less developed countries . Emerald.

ISBN 978-1-84663-619-6 .

OCLC 182539917 .

^ Rooney , pp. 143–144.

^ Rathbone, Richard (23 September 2004). "Nkrumah, Kwame (1909?–1972), president of Ghana".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography . Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/31504 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ Cullather, Nick (2010). "We Shall Release the Waters".

The Hungry World: America's Cold War Battle against Poverty in Asia . Harvard University Press. pp.

108– 133.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctvjnrv65.9 .

ISBN 978-0-674-05882-8 .

^ Kwame Nkrumah, Africa Must Unite (1983), p. 74; quoted by George P. Hagan, "Nkrumah's Cultural Policy", in Arhin (1992), The Life and Work of Kwame Nkrumah .

^ a b c Hagan, George P., "Nkrumah's Cultural Policy", in Arhin (1992), The Life and Work of Kwame Nkrumah .

^ Rathbone, Richard (23 September 2004). "Nkrumah, Kwame (1909?–1972), president of Ghana".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography . Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/31504 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ "The World" Archived 1 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times Archive, 30 April 1972.

^ Axworthy, Lloyd (1 March 2013). "The Political Actors: President, Prime Minister, and Minister of Foreign Affairs".

Oxford Handbooks Online : 90– 105.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199588862.013.0005 .

ISBN 978-0-19-958886-2 .

^ Geschiere, Peter (1993). "Chiefs and colonial rule in Cameroon: inventing chieftaincy, French and British Style".

Africa .

63 (2): 151– 175.

doi : 10.2307/1160839 .

ISSN 0001-9720 .

JSTOR 1160839 .

S2CID 145559044 .

^ Kwame Arhin, "The Search For 'Constitutional Chieftancy'", in Arhin (1992), The Life and Work of Kwame Nkrumah .

^ Pinkney (1972), Ghana Under Military Rule , p. 25.

^ Kayaoglu, Barin (12 April 2017). "Turkey's last Ergenekon trial ends as all defendants acquitted".

Al-Monitor .

doi : 10.26598/auis_ug_is_2017_04_12 .

^ Almost a Third of All Convicted State Felons Were Sentenced for Drug Trafficking or Possession , 1997, doi : 10.1037/e562732006-001 .

^ Wingo, Ajume H. (2016).

"A Matter of Unbound Leaders in the Lives of Africans" .

Theoria: A Journal of Social and Political Theory .

63 (148): 53– 71.

doi : 10.3167/th.2016.6314804 .

ISSN 0040-5817 .

JSTOR 44647335 .

^ "Elections in Ghana" .

africanelections.tripod.com . Archived from the original on 27 April 2024 . Retrieved 25 September 2024 .

^ "Ghana Voters Back Nkrumah Proposal For One-Party Rule" .

The New York Times . 26 January 1964. Archived from the original on 26 September 2024 . Retrieved 25 September 2024 .

^ Anthony, S. (1969). "The State of Ghana".

African Affairs .

68 (273): 337– 39.

JSTOR 720657 .

^ Joseph R. A. Ayee, "Public Sector Manpower Development During the Nkrumah Period 1951–1966", in Arhin (1992), The Life and Work of Kwame Nkrumah .

^ Franker, Karen; James, Dennis (2016). "The Course Development Plan: Macro-Level Decisions and Micro-Level Processes".

New Directions for Higher Education .

2016 (173): 43– 53.

doi : 10.1002/he.20178 .

ISSN 0271-0560 .

^ a b c d e f E. A. Haizel, "Education in Ghana, 1951 – 1966", in Arhin (1992), The Life and Work of Kwame Nkrumah .

^ National Reconciliation Commission Report (Report). 2004. p. 251.

^ Nkrumah's Deception of Africa . Ghana Ministry of Information. 1967.

^ First seven year economic and social development plan, 1355–1361 (Mar. 76-Mar. 83) (Report). 1976.

doi : 10.2458/azu_acku_hc417_a57_1976_v2 (inactive 1 July 2025).

{{ cite report }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ "IN PARLIAMENT".

Education + Training .

6 (3): 120. 1964.

doi : 10.1108/eb015403 .

ISSN 0040-0912 .

^ "Technical Education in Great Britain" .

Nature .

169 (4310): 952– 953. 1952.

Bibcode : 1952Natur.169S.952.

.

doi : 10.1038/169952c0 .

ISSN 0028-0836 .

S2CID 37785421 .

^ Mkandawire, P. (2005).

African Intellectuals: Rethinking Politics, Language, Gender and Development , Dakar: Codesria/London: Zed Books, p. 58. Retrieved 23 March 2017.

Archived 4 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Smith-Asante, E., "Biography of Ghana's first President, Dr Kwame Nkrumah" Archived 13 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine , Graphic Online , 8 March 2016. Retrieved 23 March 2017.

^ Legum, C. (1965).

Pan-Africanism: a short political guide , New York, etc.: Frederick A. Praeger, p. 41.

^ Robinson, Alonford James (7 April 2005), "Cudjoe", African American Studies Center , Oxford University Press, doi : 10.1093/acref/9780195301731.013.40911 , ISBN 978-0-19-530173-1 ^ a b c Manuh, Takiwah, "Women and their Organisations during the Convention Peoples' Party Period", in Arhin (1992), The Life and Work of Kwame Nkrumah .

^ a b Allman, Jen, "The Disappearing of Hannah Kudjoe: Nationalism, Feminism, and the Tyrannies of History" , Journal of Women's History 21.3, 2009.

Archived 2 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "7.2. More Women in Parliaments".

Trends Shaping Education . OECD. 2008.

doi : 10.1787/404512666002 .

ISBN 9789264046610 .

^ Fuller, Building the Ghanaian Nation-State , pp. 39–80.

^ "CHAPTER TEN. Domestic News and the News Services", The News in America , Harvard University Press, pp.

97– 105, 31 December 1952, doi : 10.4159/harvard.9780674182578.c10 , ISBN 978-0-674-18257-8 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b c d e f P. A. V. Ansah, "Kwame Nkrumah and the Mass Media", in Arhin (1992), The Life and Work of Kwame Nkrumah . Also see: "Media", in Owusu-Ansah (2014), Historical Dictionary of Ghana , pp.

211–213 Archived 1 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine .

^ " Opening of the Second Conference of African Journalists: November 11, 1963 Archived 18 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine ", Osagyefo Dr. Dwame Nkrumah Infobank .

^ "Haines, Joseph Thomas William, (born 29 Jan. 1928), Assistant Editor, The Daily Mirror, 1984–90; Group Political Editor, Mirror Group Newspapers, 1984–90", Who's Who , Oxford University Press, 1 December 2007, doi : 10.1093/ww/9780199540884.013.18570 ^ "Lambert, Richard Stanton, (1894–27 Nov. 1981), Supervisor of Educational Broadcasts, Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, 1943–60", Who Was Who , Oxford University Press, 1 December 2007, doi : 10.1093/ww/9780199540884.013.u166154 ^ Rathbone, Richard (23 September 2004). "Nkrumah, Kwame (1909?–1972), president of Ghana".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography . Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/31504 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ "Economic(al) geology in its broadest sense", Dictionary Geotechnical Engineering/Wörterbuch GeoTechnik , Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, p. 455, 2014, doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-41714-6_50467 , ISBN 978-3-642-41713-9 ^ Hirst, Homer T. (1965). "Our motive had much to do with self-interest".

Journal of Broadcasting .

9 (3): 215– 216.

doi : 10.1080/08838156509386153 .

ISSN 0021-938X .

^ Brevini, Benedetta (2013), "Theorizing Public Service Broadcasting Online", Public Service Broadcasting Online , Palgrave Macmillan, pp.

19– 29, doi : 10.1057/9781137295101_3 , ISBN 978-1-137-29510-1 ^ "Employment has been recovering strongly in most advanced economies" .

Economic Policy Reforms 2019 (graph). Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2019.

doi : 10.1787/888933954135 .

ISBN 9789264842267 .

Archived from the original on 25 November 2023 . Retrieved 25 November 2023 .

^ Nimoh, Fred; Richmond Anaman, R; Asiamah, MT; Yeboah, B; Agyekum, I; Kpe, PDK; Kouao, DK (22 July 2020).

"Financial performance and constraints in gari production in Kumasi, Ghana" .

African Journal of Food, Agriculture, Nutrition and Development .

20 (4): 16085– 16098.

doi : 10.18697/ajfand.92.18410 .

ISSN 1684-5374 .

S2CID 225445873 .

^ a b S. Asamoah Darko, "The Development and Patterns of Manufacturing Industries in Ghana, 1951–1965", in Arhin (1992), The Life and Work of Kwame Nkrumah .

^ "Chapter IV. The State Regulates Government Corporations", Government Corporations and State Law , Columbia University Press, pp.

95– 118, 31 December 1939, doi : 10.7312/wein91324-006 , ISBN 978-0-231-88317-7 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b K. B. Asante, "Nkrumah and State Enterprises", in Arhin (1992), The Life and Work of Kwame Nkrumah .

^ Zwass, Adam (16 September 2016).

From Failed Communism to Underdeveloped Capitalism: Transformation of Eastern Europe, the Post-Soviet Union and China .

doi : 10.4324/9781315482859 .

ISBN 9781315482859 .

^ "Figure 1.1. Jobs were destroyed in manufacturing and created in education, social and health care services and public administration".

Back to Work: Finland . OECD.

doi : 10.1787/888933426286 .

^ "The Road to Ghana's Healthcare Financing – From Nkrumah to Health Insurance" .

Archived 2 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ Bouman, Martine (1999).

The turtle and the peacock : collaboration for prosocial change: the entertainment-education strategy on television . s.n.

ISBN 90-5485-995-4 .

OCLC 782888250 .

^ Karotamm, N. (1959). "Electrification of Agriculture During the Seven Year Plan".

Problems in Economics .

2 (6): 20– 21.

doi : 10.2753/pet1061-199120620 .

ISSN 0032-9436 .

^ Ly, Cheng K (1980). "The role of the Akosombo Dam on the Volta river in causing coastal erosion in central and eastern Ghana (West Africa)".

Marine Geology .

37 ( 3– 4): 323– 332.

Bibcode : 1980MGeol..37..323L .

doi : 10.1016/0025-3227(80)90108-5 .

ISSN 0025-3227 .

^ "The Volta River Project", Kwame Nkrumah. Vision and Tragedy , Sub-Saharan Publishers, pp.

216– 234, 15 November 2007, doi : 10.2307/j.ctvk3gm60.18 , ISBN 978-9988-647-81-0 ^ World Bank Group Assistance to Low-Income Fragile and Conflict-Affected States: An Independent Evaulation . 9 February 2015.

doi : 10.1596/978-1-4648-0218-8 .

ISBN 978-1-4648-0218-8 .

^ a b c d e Obed Asamoah, "Nkrumah's Foreign Policy, 1951–1966", in Arhin (1992), The Life and Work of Kwame Nkrumah .

^ GAEC Documentation Committee (July 1998).

Ghana Atomic Energy Commission: At a Glance (PDF) (Third ed.). Kwabenya: RPB, GAEC. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 August 2017.

^ " Nkrumah lays foundation for atomic reactor .. in 1964 Archived 3 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine ", Ghana Review International 120, March 2007 (on GhanaWeb , 11 April 2007). Also see text of speech [ usurped ] hosted by Ghana Atomic Energy Commission.

^ Pakaya, Abdurrahman; Halid, Amir; Payuyu, Hermanto (18 November 2018).

"Development and supply strategy of cocoa commodity effect to cocoa farmers revenue in Boalemo District" .

Jurnal Perspektif Pembiayaan Dan Pembangunan Daerah .

6 (2): 223– 234.

doi : 10.22437/ppd.v6i2.5212 .

ISSN 2355-8520 .

S2CID 169596736 .

^ "Cocoa Price Issue Splits Gold Coast" .

The New York Times . 30 December 1954.

Archived from the original on 5 March 2016.

^ Kolavalli, Shashi, and Marcella Vigneri. COCOA IN GHANA: SHAPING THE SUCCESS OF AN ECONOMY – World Bank. World Bank, World Bank/AFRICAEXT/Resources/258643-1271798012256/ghana_cocoa.pdf.

^ Grilli, Matteo (30 April 2020), "Kwame Nkrumah and Pan-Africanism in West Africa", Routledge Handbook of Pan-Africanism , Routledge, pp.

289– 301, doi : 10.4324/9780429020193-19 , ISBN 978-0-429-02019-3 , S2CID 219067589 ^ Hofstadter, Richard (1958).

Great issues in American history: a documentary record . Vintage Books.

OCLC 265633 .

^ "Conference in Athens: A Speech at a Conference in Athens attended by Representatives from all Greek Parties December 26, 1944", The Dawn of Liberation : War Speeches , Cassell and Company Ltd, 1945, doi : 10.5040/9781472582935.0061 , ISBN 978-1-4725-8293-5 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ "Trade Union Education and Culture".

South African Labour Bulletin . Vol. 9, no. 8. July 1984.

doi : 10.1163/2210-7975_hrd-1304-0028 .

^ Tawfik, Rawia (2018), "South Africa in North Africa: Egypt, Algeria, Libya and Tunisia", Foreign Policy in Post-Apartheid South Africa , I.B. Tauris, doi : 10.5040/9781350986480.ch-010 , ISBN 978-1-78673-332-0 ^ Shabaka (2016). "Chocolate Islands: Cocoa, Slavery, and Colonial Africa".

Journal of West African History .

2 (1): 202– 204.

doi : 10.14321/jwestafrihist.2.1.0202 .

ISSN 2327-1868 .

^ "Ghana-Guinea-Mali Union (Union of African States)".

International Organization .

16 (2): 443– 444. 1962.

doi : 10.1017/s0020818300011206 .

ISSN 0020-8183 .

S2CID 249407946 .

^ Martin, Guy (2012), "Pan-Africanism and African Unity", African Political Thought , Palgrave Macmillan, pp.

55– 70, doi : 10.1057/9781137062055_5 , ISBN 978-1-137-06205-5 ^ Pierre Englebert & Kevin C. Dunn (2013), Inside African Politics , London: Lynne Reinner, pp. 320–321.

^ "Appendix Ii . The Republican Constitution of Ghana. Government Proposals for a Republican Constitution . Selected Legislation", Law and Social Change in Ghana , Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp.

390– 448, 31 December 1966, doi : 10.1515/9781400875580-012 , ISBN 978-1-4008-7558-0 ^ Egon Schwelb, "The Republican Constitution of Ghana"; American Journal of Comparative Law [ usurped ] 9.4, Autumn 1960.

^ Pardo, Sharon (20 June 2013). "The Year that Israel Considered Joining the European Economic Community".

JCMS: Journal of Common Market Studies .

51 (5): 901– 915.

doi : 10.1111/jcms.12036 .

ISSN 0021-9886 .

S2CID 142802033 .

^ Seck, Diery (2016), "Impact of Common Currency Membership on West African Countries' Enhanced Economic Growth", Accelerated Economic Growth in West Africa , Advances in African Economic, Social and Political Development, Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

3– 18, doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-16826-5_1 , ISBN 978-3-319-16825-8 ^ Gerits, Frank (6 August 2015).

" 'When the Bull Elephants Fight': Kwame Nkrumah, Non-Alignment, and Pan-Africanism as an Interventionist Ideology in the Global Cold War (1957–66)" .

The International History Review .

37 (5): 951– 969.

doi : 10.1080/07075332.2015.1064465 .

S2CID 153623049 .

Archived from the original on 9 March 2023 . Retrieved 8 March 2023 .

^ Byrne, Jeffrey James (10 June 2015).

"Beyond Continents, Colours, and the Cold War: Yugoslavia, Algeria, and the Struggle for Non-Alignment" .

The International History Review .

37 (5): 912– 932.

doi : 10.1080/07075332.2015.1051569 .

S2CID 154033045 .

Archived from the original on 14 March 2023 . Retrieved 14 March 2023 .

^ "Butler, Captain John Fitshardinge Paul, ((20 Dec. 1888 – 4 Sept. 1916), KRRC; attached Pioneer Company, Gold Coast Regiment, West African Frontier Force", Who Was Who , Oxford University Press, 1 December 2007, doi : 10.1093/ww/9780199540884.013.u194250 ^ a b c d e Eboe Hutchful, "The Development of the Army Officer Corps in Ghana, 1956–1955", Journal of African Studies 12.3, Fall 1985.

^ Baynham (1988), Military and Politics in Nkrumah's Ghana , pp. 22–32.

^ Baynham (1988), Military and Politics in Nkrumah's Ghana , p. 75.

^ Baynham (1988), Military and Politics in Nkrumah's Ghana , p. 74.

^ Baynham (1988), Military and Politics in Nkrumah's Ghana , pp. 67–68.

^ a b Baynham (1988), Military and Politics in Nkrumah's Ghana , p. 93. "Within a week, 1,193 Ghanaian soldiers were in Léopoldvile and 192 more were waiting for transport in Accra with 156 trucks and 160 tons of stores. In terms of its resources, Ghana made one of the heaviest manpower contributions to the Congo. By the end of August 1960, she had 2,394 army officers and men in the country. The Ghana contingent remained for three of the four years of the UN operations, contributing a total of more than 39,000-man-months." ^ Baynham (1988), Military and Politics in Nkrumah's Ghana , p. 94.

^ Baynham (1988), Military and Politics in Nkrumah's Ghana , pp. 95–97.

^ Michel, Eddie (17 July 2018), "From Rhodesia to Zimbabwe", The White House and White Africa , Routledge, pp.

183– 244, doi : 10.4324/9780429453632-5 , ISBN 978-0-429-45363-2 , S2CID 188418568 ^ " "老外经"心中的周恩来总理" .

Ministry of Commerce (China) . 12 May 2014. Archived from the original on 28 June 2018 . Retrieved 2 February 2020 .

^ 杨明伟; 陈扬勇. 周恩来外交风云. 解放军文艺出版社. 1995.

ISBN 9787503306907 . p.357 ^ "European Union Awarded 2012 Nobel Peace Prize: December 10 2012", Historic Documents of 2012 , Washington DC: CQ Press, pp.

606– 618, 2013, doi : 10.4135/9781452282046.n66 , ISBN 978-1-4522-8206-0 ^ "Kwame Nkrumah, a biography of Ghana's first president" .

GhanaRemembers . Retrieved 9 May 2025 .

^ Nkrumah, Kwame (1972). "On the Coup in Ghana".

The Black Scholar .

3 (9): 23– 26.

doi : 10.1080/00064246.1972.11431232 .

ISSN 0006-4246 .

^ "The Confused Moments of Nkrumah in China After The Coup" .

modernghana.com .

Archived from the original on 27 April 2019 . Retrieved 19 August 2018 .

^ Keith Lamont Scott's Disability May Have Gotten Him Killed, and He's Not The Only One.

American Civil Liberties Union (Report).

doi : 10.1163/2210-7975_hrd-9970-2016059 .

^ Andrew, Christopher; Mitrohkin, Vasili (2006).

The World Was Going Our Way: The KGB and the Battle for the Third World .

Basic Books . p. 437.

ISBN 978-0465003136 .

cf.

"C.I.A.: Maker of Policy, or Tool?; Survey Finds Widely Feared Agency Is Tightly Controlled" .

The New York Times . 25 April 1966.

Archived from the original on 12 May 2016 . Retrieved 27 April 2016 .

, which cites "authoritative officials outside the CIA" as claiming that allegations of CIA involvement in Nkrumah's ouster, plots to assassinate Jawaharlal Nehru , the 30 September Movement , and the assassination of Patrice Lumumba , among others, "are fabrications".

^ Greece ::Implications of the Coup, December 7, 1973, Secret/NOFORN, CIA.

Central Intelligence Agency (Report).

doi : 10.1163/9789004287648.useo_b07301 .

^ Stockwell, John (1978).

In Search of Enemies: A CIA Story . New York: W.W. Norton & Company. p. 201n.

ISBN 0-393-00926-2 .

^ Murisa, Tendai (6 October 2016), "Re-imagining Agency in Africa", Claiming Agency , Weaver Press, pp.

128– 143, doi : 10.2307/j.ctvh8r3dp.12 , ISBN 978-1-77922-302-9 ^ Hersh, Seymour (9 May 1978), "CIA Said to Have Aided Plotters Who Overthrew Nkrumah in Ghana", The New York Times . Reprinted in: Ray, Ellen; Schaap, William; Van Meter, Karl; Wolf, Louis (1979).

Dirty Work 2: The CIA in Africa . Secaucus, N.J.: Lyle Stuart Inc. pp.

159 –162.

ISBN 0-8184-0294-6 .

^ Dutfield, Graham (27 November 2017), "If we have never been modern, they have never been traditional", Routledge Handbook of Biodiversity and the Law , Routledge, pp.

276– 290, doi : 10.4324/9781315530857-18 , ISBN 978-1-315-53085-7 ^ Guinea – Joint World Bank-IMF Debt Sustainability Analysis Update (PDF) . World Bank. August 2019.

doi : 10.1596/32560 .

S2CID 242680046 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 July 2020 . Retrieved 25 August 2020 .

^ Kihato, Caroline (August 2007). "Governing the city? South Africa's struggle to deal with urban immigrants after apartheid".

African Identities .

5 (2): 261– 278.

doi : 10.1080/14725840701403556 .

ISSN 1472-5843 .

S2CID 145020873 .

^ "Kwame Nkrumah | Biography, Education, | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 5 January 2024.

Archived from the original on 5 October 2023 . Retrieved 27 February 2024 .

^ "Education For Leadership: The Vision of Kwame Nkrumah" . kwamenkrumahcentenary.orgm . Retrieved 9 January 2012 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "BBC World Service Network Africa".

African Studies Companion Online .

doi : 10.1163/1872-9037_afco_asc_853 .

^ "Foreign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968, Volume XXVI, Indonesia; Malaysia-Singapore; Philippines – Office of the Historian" .

Archived from the original on 28 September 2015 . Retrieved 24 January 2016 .

^ "Nkrumah's birthday declared a holiday" . modernghana.com. 4 September 2009.

Archived from the original on 15 December 2013 . Retrieved 5 January 2013 .

^ "President Akufo-Addo assents to Public Holidays Amendment Act 2019" .

ghanaweb.com . 9 May 2019.

Archived from the original on 23 September 2019 . Retrieved 23 September 2019 .

^ Catephores, George (1989), "Capitalism and crisis", An Introduction to Marxist Economics , London: Macmillan Education UK, pp.

127– 146, doi : 10.1007/978-1-349-19707-1_6 , ISBN 978-0-333-46102-0 ^ Ackerman, Frank (2000). "If we had a theory of political ecology, what would it look like?".

Capitalism Nature Socialism .

11 (2): 77– 82.

doi : 10.1080/10455750009358916 .

ISSN 1045-5752 .

S2CID 143879004 .

^ Kwame Nkrumah, "African Socialism Revisited", 1967.

Archived 27 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine ^ "In The Shadow Of His Father", S/He Created Them , Piscataway, NJ, USA: Gorgias Press, pp.

43– 52, 31 December 2003, doi : 10.31826/9781463209193-011 , ISBN 978-1-4632-0919-3 ^ Getachew, Adom (2019).

Worldmaking after Empire: The Rise and Fall of Self-Determination . Princeton University Press. p. 8.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv3znwvg .

ISBN 978-0-691-17915-5 .

JSTOR j.ctv3znwvg .

S2CID 242525007 .

^ "How, when he had besieged Chambly, another castle of the same Matthew, a sudden storm forced his host to flee, so that if Louis himself had not bravely fought back, the host would have nearly been destroyed; and how Matthew himself gave satisfaction to him with humility", The Deeds of Louis the Fat , Catholic University of America Press, pp.

32– 34, 2012, doi : 10.2307/j.ctt3fgq60.12 , ISBN 978-0-8132-2094-9 ^ Afari-Gyan, Kwadwo. "Kwame Nkrumah, George Padmore and W. E. B. Du Bois", Research Review (NS) vol. 7 (1991): 1–5. Print.

^ Sheehan, Michael (1990). "Organisation of African Unity 25 years on: essays in honour of Kwame Nkrumah".

International Affairs .

66 (2): 426.

doi : 10.2307/2621454 .

ISSN 1468-2346 .

JSTOR 2621454 .

^ "The More We Typed, the Better We Felt", Because You Have To , University of Notre Dame Press, pp.

103– 106, 15 September 2012, doi : 10.2307/j.ctvpj74n2.16 , ISBN 978-0-268-07984-0 ^ a b c "Modern History Sourcebook: Kwame Nkrumah: I Speak of Freedom, 1961" Archived 31 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine . Fordham University.

^ Nkrumah, Bright (1 December 2018).

"Words that Wound: Rethinking Online Hate Speech in South Africa" .

Alternation: Interdisciplinary Journal for the Study of the Arts and Humanities in Southern Africa .

SP23 : 108– 133.

doi : 10.29086/2519-5476/2018/sp23a6 .

ISSN 1023-1757 .

S2CID 187741200 .

^ Foster, Ayisah (26 September 2023).

"Journey to Nkroful has come to stay - Joana Gyan-Cudjoe declares" .

GhanaWeb .

Archived from the original on 21 October 2023 . Retrieved 28 September 2023 .

^ "Visit Ghana - Kwame Nkrumah Memorial Park" .

Visit Ghana .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2024 . Retrieved 6 March 2024 .

^ Ferdinand, Ellis (18 July 2021).

"History of Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST)" .

Archived from the original on 7 March 2024 . Retrieved 6 March 2024 .

^ "A Public University is created and named by an Act of Parliament - MyJoyOnline" .

www.myjoyonline.com . 12 August 2019.

Archived from the original on 7 March 2024 . Retrieved 6 March 2024 .

^ "University History | Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology" .

www.knust.edu.gh .

Archived from the original on 6 March 2024 . Retrieved 6 March 2024 .

^ Fathia Nkrumah by her son Gamal Nkrumah .

Ahram Weekly , 14 - 20 September 2000.

Archived 24 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Here are all the First Ladies of Ghana since independence" .

Pulse Gh . 2 September 2019. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020 . Retrieved 27 May 2020 .

^ "Fathia: The Rock Of The Nkrumah Family" .

Modern Ghana .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 30 May 2020 .

^ Yankson, Nathaniel (22 September 2014).

"Africa must re-examine, implement Nkrumah's ideas – Francis Nkrumah" .

MyJoyOnline . Multimedia Group Ltd. Archived from the original on 19 October 2018 . Retrieved 19 October 2018 .

^ "Kwame Nkrumah's unknown son surfaces" .

Ghanaweb . 4 April 2012. Archived from the original on 6 April 2019 . Retrieved 19 October 2018 .

^ "Confirmed! Onsy is Kwame Nkrumah's Son" .

PeaceFMOnline . Peace FM. 31 July 2015.

Archived from the original on 4 September 2019 . Retrieved 19 October 2018 .

^ Doe, Esther Eyra (31 July 2015).

" "My Father Would Not Have Denied Onsy"- Samia Nkrumah" .

yen.com.gh .

Archived from the original on 5 April 2019 . Retrieved 19 October 2018 .

^ Mubarik, Abu (24 September 2017).

"Sekou Nkrumah threatens to throw 'brother' in jail" .

pulse.com.gh . Pulse Ghana.

Archived from the original on 19 October 2018 . Retrieved 19 October 2018 .

^ Moore, Wes (2010).

The other Wes Moore: one name, two fates (First ed.). New York, New York: Spiegel & Grau.

ISBN 978-0-385-52819-1 .

OCLC 430839083 .

^ " 'The Crown' Says One Dance Changed History. The Truth Isn't So Simple" . Goats and Soda: Stories of Life in a Changing World (blog). NPR.

Archived from the original on 29 May 2019 . Retrieved 24 March 2018 .

^ Serious Klein – Straight Outta Pandemic (ft. anaiis) .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2021.

^ a b Danquah, Moses, ed. (1958).

Ghana: One Year Old. A First Independence Anniversary Review . Accra: Publicity Promotions. p. 32 . Retrieved 5 May 2025 .

^ "Председник Тито предао председнику Нкрумаху Ореден велике југословенске звезде" .

Borba (in Serbian). 3 March 1961 . Retrieved 6 May 2025 .

^ "Československý řád Bílého lva 1923–1990" (PDF) (in Czech). Archivu Kanceláře prezidenta republiky. p. 130 . Retrieved 5 May 2025 .

^ "Picasso Gets Lenin Prize" .

Daytona Beach Morning Journal . 1 May 1962 . Retrieved 6 May 2025 .

^ "Elenco dei Cavalieri di Gran Croce, decorati di Gran Cordone dell'Ordine, defunti" (PDF) (in Italian). Portale storico della Presidenza della Repubblica . Retrieved 5 May 2025 .

^ Stela, Wojciech (2008).

Polskie ordery i odznaczenia (Vol. I) . Warsaw. p. 49.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "2004 National Orders awards" .

SouthAfrica.info . Archived from the original on 4 February 2016 . Retrieved 5 May 2025 .

^ Bontemps, Arna (20 April 2017). "Lincoln and the Negro".

University of Illinois Press .

1 .

doi : 10.5406/illinois/9780252037696.003.0005 .

^ Nkrumah, Kwame (2002).

Ghana: the autobiography of Kwame Nkrumah (Africa's 100 best books ed.). London: Panaf.

ISBN 0-901787-60-4 .

OCLC 51932153 .

^ Nkrumah, Kwame (1963).

Africa must unite . London: Panaf.

ISBN 0-901787-13-2 .

OCLC 6567302 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Mead, Margaret (1963).

Technique & personality . Museum of Primitive Art.

OCLC 603547274 .

^ Tiger, Lionel; Nkrumah, Kwame (1966). "Neo-Colonialism. The Last Stage of Imperialism".

International Journal .

22 (1): 161.

doi : 10.2307/40199801 .

ISSN 0020-7020 .

JSTOR 40199801 .

S2CID 143584107 .

^ Nkrumah, Kwame (1990).

Neo-colonialism: the last stage of imperialism . Panaf.

OCLC 59982527 .

^ Nkrumah, Kwame (1990).

Kwame Nkrumah: the Conakry years, his life and letters . Milne, June 1920–. London: PANAF.

ISBN 0-901787-53-1 .

OCLC 22733303 .

^ "African Socialism".

International Affairs .

43 (4): 779. October 1967.

doi : 10.1093/ia/43.4.779 .

ISSN 1468-2346 .

^ Nkrumah, Kwame (1972).

Dark days in Ghana (Repr ed.). New York: Internat. Publ.

ISBN 0-7178-0046-6 .

OCLC 796074108 .

^ Nkrumah, Kwame (1975).

Handbook of revolutionary warfare: a guide to the armed phase of the African revolution (1st U.S. ed.). New York: International Publishers.

ISBN 0-7178-0226-4 .

OCLC 8095708 .

^ Nkrumah, Kwame (1970).

The Way Out, "Civilian Rule" Fraud and A Call for Positive Action and Armed Struggle (Reprinted ed.). University of London, Senate House Library: Panaf Books.

^ Nkrumah, Kwame (1978).

Consciencism: philosophy and ideology for decolonisation . London: Panaf.

ISBN 0-901787-11-6 .

OCLC 16613918 .

^ Nkrumah, Kwame (1970).

Class struggle in Africa . London: Panaf Books Ltd.

ISBN 0-901787-12-4 .

OCLC 153293 .

^ Nkrumah, Kwame (1973).

The struggle continues: six ... pamphlets . London: Panaf Books Ltd.

ISBN 0-901787-41-8 .

OCLC 3073780 .

^ Nkrumah, Kwame (1973).

I speak of freedom . London: Panaf Books Ltd.

ISBN 0-901787-14-0 .

OCLC 16236424 .

^ Nkrumah, Kwame (1973).

Revolutionary path . London: Panaf Books Ltd.

ISBN 0-901787-22-1 .

OCLC 764869 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Addo, Ebenezer Obiri (1997).

Kwame Nkrumah: A Case Study of Religion and Politics in Ghana . University Press of America.

ISBN 978-0-7618-0785-8 .

Birmingham, David (1998).

Kwame Nkrumah: The Father of African Nationalism . Ohio University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8214-1242-8 .

Bourret, F. M. (1960) [1949].

Ghana—The Road to Independence (Revised ed.). Stanford University Press.

OCLC 414362 .

Clarke, John Henrik (October 1974). "Kwame Nkrumah: His years in America".

The Black Scholar .

6 (2): 9– 16.

doi : 10.1080/00064246.1974.11431459 .

JSTOR 41065759 .

S2CID 141785632 .

Fuller, Harcourt (2014).

Building the Ghanaian Nation-State . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1-137-44856-9 .

Mazrui, Ali (2004).

Nkrumah's Legacy and Africa's Triple Heritage Between Globalization and Counter Terrorism . Ghana Universities Press.

ISBN 978-9964-3-0296-2 .

Owusu-Ansah, David (2014).

Biographical Dictionary of Ghana (4th ed.). Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-8108-7242-4 .

Rooney, David (1988).

Kwame Nkrumah: The Political Kingdom in the Third World . St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 978-0-312-02479-6 .

Sherwood, Marika (1996).

Kwame Nkrumah: The Years Abroad 1935–1947 . Freedom Publications.

ISBN 978-9988-7716-0-7 .

Thompson, W. Scott (1969).

Ghana's Foreign Policy 1957–1966 . Princeton University Press.

OCLC 2616 .

Further reading [ edit ] Arhin, Kwame (1993).

The Life and Work of Kwame Nkrumah . Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, Inc.

ISBN 9780865433953 (08543395X) Baynham, Simon (1988).

The Military and Politics in Nkrumah's Ghana . Westview Special Studies on Africa. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, Inc. (Frederick A. Praeger), ISBN 0-8133-70639 Biney, Ama. "The Legacy of Kwame Nkrumah in Retrospect." Journal of Pan African Studies 2.3 (2008).

online Archived 5 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine , historiography Biney, Ama.

The political and social thought of Kwame Nkrumah (2011).

Biney, Ama. "The Development of Kwame Nkrumah's Political Thought in Exile, 1966–1972." Journal of African History 50.1 (2009): 81–100.

Bretton, Henry L.

The rise and fall of Kwame Nkrumah: a study of personal rule in Africa (1967).

Davidson, Basil (2007) [1973].

Black Star: A View of the Life and Times of Kwame Nkrumah . Oxford, UK: James Currey.

ISBN 978-1-84701-010-0 .

Defense Intelligence Agency , " Supplement, Kwame Nkrumah, President of Ghana Archived 7 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine ", 12-January-1966.

Gerits, Frank. "'When the Bull Elephants Fight': Kwame Nkrumah, Non-Alignment, and Pan-Africanism as an Interventionist Ideology in the Global Cold War (1957–66)." International History Review 37.5 (2015): 951–969.

Gocking, Roger S.

The History of Ghana (2005).

James, C. L. R. (1977).

Nkrumah and the Ghana Revolution . London: Allison & Busby .

ISBN 0-85031-461-5 .

Mazrui, Ali (1966). "Nkrumah: The Leninist Czar".

Transition (26): 8– 17.

doi : 10.2307/2934320 .

JSTOR 2934320 .

Milne, June.

Kwame Nkrumah: a biography (1999).

Mwakikagile, Godfrey (2006). "Nyerere and Nkrumah: Towards African Unity".

Nyerere and Africa: End of an Era (Third ed.). Pretoria, South Africa: New Africa Press. pp.

347– 355.

ISBN 0-9802534-1-1 .

Mwakikagile, Godfrey (2015), Western Involvement in Nkrumah's Downfall . Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: New Africa Press.

ISBN 9789987160044 Omari, T. Peter.

Kwame Nkrumah: The anatomy of an African dictatorship (1970).

Pinkney, Robert (1972).

Ghana Under Military Rule 1966–1969 . London: Methuen & Co Ltd.

ISBN 0-41675080X Poe, D. Zizwe (2003).

Kwame Nkrumah's Contribution to Pan-African Agency . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 0-203-50537-9 .

Rooney, David.

Kwame Nkrumah: The Political Kingdom in the Third World (1988).

Rui Lopes & Víctor Barros (2019) " Amílcar Cabral and the Liberation of Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde: International, Transnational, and Global Dimensions Archived 1 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine ." The International History Review.

Sanders, Charles L. (September 1966).

"Kwame Nkrumah: the Fall of a Messiah" .

Ebony . USA.

Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 27 June 2015 .

Smertin, Yuri.

Kwame Nkrumah . Moscow: Progress Publishers . 1987.

Sonderegger, Arno (2016). "How the Empire Wrote Back: Notes on the Struggle of George Padmore and Kwame Nkrumah". In: Kwame Nkrumah 1909-1972: A Controversial African Visionary. Edited by Bea Lundt and Christoph Marx . Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag: 19-38.

Tuchscherer, Konrad (2006). "Kwame Francis Nwia Kofie Nkrumah". In Coppa, Frank J (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Modern Dictators . New York: Peter Lang. pp.

217– 20.

ISBN 0-8204-5010-3 .

"Godfrey Mwakikagile: Eurocentric Africanist?" . Intercontinental Book Centre.

Archived from the original on 20 February 2022 . Retrieved 8 December 2021 .

Žák, Tomáš František (2016). "Applying the Weapon of Theory: Comparing the Philosophy of Julius Kambarage Nyerere and Kwame Nkrumah".

Journal of African Cultural Studies . 28 (2): 147–160.

doi:10.1080/13696815.2015.1053798 Archived 18 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine . S2CID 146709996.

External links [ edit ] Kwame Nkrumah at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Faces of Africa Kwame Nkrumah Archived 5 September 2019 at the Wayback Machine Kwame Nkrumah Mausoleum and Museum at Nkroful, Western Region Kwame Nkrumah Memorial Park & Museum, Accra Archived 22 January 2015 at the Wayback Machine Ghana-pedia Kwame Nkrumah Ghana-pedia Operation Cold Chop : The Fall Of Kwame Nkrumah [ permanent dead link ] Excerpt from Commanding Heights Archived 22 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine by Daniel Yergin and Joseph Stanislaw Timeline of events related to the overthrow of Kwame Nkrumah The Kwame Nkrumah Lectures at the University of Cape Coast, Ghana, 2007 Archived 27 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine Kwame Nkrumah Information and Resource Site Archived 16 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine Ghana re-evaluates Nkrumah Archived 5 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine by The Global Post Dr Kwame Nkrumah's Midnight Speech on the day of Ghana's independence – 6 March 1957.

Newsreel on First Conference of Independent African States Archived 9 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine "Father of Ghana's independence Kwame Nkrumah died 50 years ago • FRANCE 24 English" Archived 28 April 2024 at the Wayback Machine Party political offices New office Leader of the Convention People's Party 1948–66 Succeeded by Position abolished Political offices New office Prime Minister of the Gold Coast 1952–57 Succeeded by Himself as Prime Minister of Ghana Preceded by Himself as Prime Minister of the Gold Coast Prime Minister of Ghana 1957–60 Vacant Title next held by Kofi Abrefa Busia New office Minister for Foreign Affairs 1957–58 Succeeded by Kojo Botsio Minister for Defence 1957–60 Succeeded by Charles de Graft Dickson Preceded by Krobo Edusei Minister for the Interior 1958 Succeeded by Ashford Emmanuel Inkumsah Preceded by Elizabeth II as Queen of Ghana President of Ghana 1960–66 Succeeded by Joseph Arthur Ankrah Preceded by Ebenezer Ako-Adjei Minister for Foreign Affairs 1962–63 Succeeded by Kojo Botsio Diplomatic posts Preceded by Gamal Abdel Nasser Chairperson of the Organisation of African Unity 1965–66 Succeeded by Joseph Arthur Ankrah v t e Heads of state of Ghana Queen (1957–1960) Elizabeth II President of the First Republic (1960–1966) Nkrumah Military regime (1966–1969) Ankrah Afrifa President of the Second Republic (1969–1972) Afrifa Ollennu * E. Akufo-Addo Military regime (1972–1979) Acheampong Akuffo Rawlings President of the Third Republic (1979–1981) Limann Military regime (1981–1993) Rawlings President of the Fourth Republic (from 1993) Rawlings Kufuor Mills Mahama N. Akufo-Addo Mahama *Acting President v t e The Big Six (Ghana) Ebenezer Ako-Adjei Edward Akufo-Addo J. B. Danquah Kwame Nkrumah Emmanuel Obetsebi-Lamptey William Ofori Atta v t e Ghana articles History Historical timeline Early history Bono state Ashanti Empire Gold Coast First Republic (1960–1966) National Liberation Council Kofi Busia Ignatius Kutu Acheampong Armed Forces Revolutionary Council Hilla Limann Provisional National Defence Council Jerry Rawlings John Kufuor John Mills John Mahama Nana Akufo-Addo John Mahama By topic Economic Political Postal Geography Borders Cities Climate ( Climate change ) Forests Mountains National parks Protected areas Rivers Wildlife Politics Administrative divisions Constitution Cabinet Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT Judiciary Law enforcement Military Political parties Parliament President Prime Minister Economy Agriculture Cedi (currency) Central Bank Energy Fishing Labor Manufacturing Mining Oil Stock Exchange Telecommunications Tourism Transport Water and sanitation Society Abortion Crime Cybercrime Demographics Discrimination Domestic violence Education Ethnic groups Health Human trafficking Illegal immigration Languages Mob justice Polygamy Prostitution Religion Street children Squatting Women Culture Architecture Cultural heritage Flag Cuisine Festivals Media Music National anthem National pledge Public holidays Sports Social conduct Video games Witchcraft Outline Index Bibliography Category v t e Chairpersons of the Organisation of African Unity and the African Union Organisation of African Unity Selassie Nasser Nkrumah Ankrah Selassie Mobutu Boumédiène Ahidjo Kaunda Daddah Hassan II Gowon Barre Amin Ramgoolam Bongo Nimeiry Tolbert Senghor Stevens Moi Mengistu Nyerere Diouf Nguesso Kaunda Traoré Mubarak Museveni Babangida Diouf Mubarak Ben Ali Meles Biya Mugabe Compaoré Bouteflika Eyadéma Chiluba Mwanawasa African Union Mbeki Chissano Obasanjo Nguesso Kufuor Kikwete Gaddafi Mutharika Obiang Boni Hailemariam Abdel Aziz Mugabe Déby Condé Kagame Sisi Ramaphosa Tshisekedi Sall Assoumani Ghazouani Lourenço v t e Pan-Africanism Ideology Variants African nationalism African socialism Afrocentrism Anti-imperialism Anti-Western sentiment Black nationalism Garveyism Nkrumaism Sankarism Uhuru Movement Zikism Concepts African century Black power Négritude Ubuntu Ujamaa United States of Africa Proponents Politicians Dennis Akumu Idi Amin Nnamdi Azikiwe Amílcar Cabral David Comissiong Jean-Jacques Dessalines Anténor Firmin Muammar Gaddafi Marcus Garvey Alieu Ebrima Cham Joof Kenneth Kaunda Modibo Keïta Jomo Kenyatta Toussaint Louverture Patrice Lumumba Samora Machel Ochola Ogaye Mak'Anyengo Thabo Mbeki Tom Mboya Robert Mugabe Abdias do Nascimento Gamal Abdel Nasser Kwame Nkrumah Julius Nyerere John Nyathi Pokela Thomas Sankara Ahmed Sékou Touré Haile Selassie Robert Sobukwe I. T. A. Wallace-Johnson Others Marimba Ani Molefi Kete Asante Steve Biko Edward Wilmot Blyden Stokely Carmichael Aimé Césaire John Henrik Clarke Martin R. Delany Cheikh Anta Diop W. E. B. Du Bois Frantz Fanon Amy Ashwood Garvey John G. Jackson Leonard Jeffries Yosef Ben-Jochannan Maulana Karenga Alice Kinloch Fela Kuti Malcolm X Archie Mafeje Ali Mazrui Zephania Mothopeng George Padmore Motsoko Pheko Runoko Rashidi Paul Robeson Randall Robinson Walter Rodney Burning Spear Issa Laye Thiaw Frances Cress Welsing Henry Sylvester Williams Amos N. Wilson Omali Yeshitela Organizations Educational African Leadership Academy African Leadership University Political African Unification Front African Union All-African People's Revolutionary Party All-African Trade Union Federation Conseil de l'Entente Convention People's Party East African Community Economic Freedom Fighters First Pan-African Conference International African Service Bureau Organisation of African Trade Union Unity Organisation of African Unity Pan African Association Pan-African Freedom Movement for East and Central Africa Pan-African Congress Pan Africanist Congress of Azania Popular and Social League of the Great Sahara Tribes Rassemblement Démocratique Africain Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League ZANU–PF Symbols Black Star of Africa Le Marron Inconnu Lion of Judah Pan-African colours Pan-African flag Dynamics Ethnic groups of Africa Languages of Africa Religion in Africa Conflicts in Africa Related African philosophy African-American leftism Africanization All-African Peoples' Conference East African Federation Kwanzaa Union of African States United States of Africa United States of Latin Africa Year of Africa Pan-Africanism category Africa category Pan-Africanism portal Africa portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz Victoria People Trove 2 Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kwame_Nkrumah&oldid=1306472088 " Categories : Kwame Nkrumah 1909 births 1972 deaths African revolutionaries Chairpersons of the African Union African anti-imperialists Alumni of Achimota School Alumni of the London School of Economics Convention People's Party (Ghana) politicians Deaths from prostate cancer in Romania Ministers for defence of Ghana Exiled politicians Ministers for foreign affairs of Ghana Ghanaian Christian socialists Ghanaian expatriates in the United States Ghanaian MPs 1951–1954 Ghanaian MPs 1954–1956 Ghanaian MPs 1956–1965 Ghanaian MPs 1965–1966 Ghanaian pan-Africanists Ghanaian Roman Catholics Ministers for the interior of Ghana Leaders ousted by a coup Recipients of the Lenin Peace Prize Lincoln University (Pennsylvania) alumni Members of Gray's Inn Members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom Presidents for life Presidents of Ghana Prime ministers of Ghana United Gold Coast Convention politicians University of Pennsylvania alumni University of Pennsylvania Graduate School of Education alumni Ghanaian independence activists Ghanaian Marxists Ghanaian expatriates in Romania Akan people Imperialism studies Fellows of the Ghana Academy of Arts and Sciences Presidents of Guinea 20th-century presidents in Africa Ghanaian Freemasons Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 Serbian-language sources (sr) CS1 Czech-language sources (cs) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Ghanaian English from January 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in Ghanaian English Use dmy dates from July 2025 Articles containing Akan-language text Pages with Nzema IPA All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from June 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from August 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with dead external links from July 2017 S-aft: 'after' parameter includes the word 'abolished' This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 22:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kwame Nkrumah 141 languages Add topic

