Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition and scope 2 Methodology Toggle Methodology subsection 2.1 Digital fieldwork 2.2 Digital technology as a tool of anthropology 3 Ethics 4 Prominent figures 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Notes 6.2 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Digital anthropology 15 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Italiano Македонски Polski Português Русский Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subdiscipline of anthropology "Cyberanthropology" redirects here. For other uses, see Cyborg anthropology .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Digital anthropology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Anthropology of nature, science, and technology Basic concepts Ecogovernmentality Nature–culture divide Major theorists Tom Boellstorff Ray Brassier Benjamin H. Bratton Gabriella Coleman Roy Ellen Mark Fisher Donna Haraway Mizuko Ito Nick Land Bruno Latour Daniel Miller Ted Nelson Reza Negarestani Sadie Plant Paul Virilio Mike Wesch Leslie White Related articles Capitalist Realism (2009) Cultural ecology Cybernetic Culture Research Unit (CCRU) Cybertext Cyborg anthropology Digital anthropology Ecological anthropology Environmental anthropology Fanged Noumena (2011) Hari Kunzru Hypermedia Hypertext Hypertext fiction Literary Machines (1981) Political ecology Rave culture Science, technology and society Social and cultural anthropology v t e Part of a series on Anthropology Outline History Types Archaeological Biological Cultural Linguistic Social Archaeological Aerial Aviation Battlefield Biblical Bioarchaeological Environmental Ethnoarchaeological Experimental Feminist Forensic Maritime Paleoethnobotanical Zooarchaeological Biological Anthrozoological Biocultural Evolutionary Forensic Molecular Neurological Nutritional Paleoanthropological Primatological Social Cultural Applied Art Cognitive Cyborg Development Digital Ecological Environmental Economic Political economy Feminist Food Historical Institutional Kinship Legal Media Medical Museums Musical Political Psychological Public Religion Symbolic Transpersonal Urban Visual Linguistic Anthropological Descriptive Ethnological Ethnopoetical Historical Ideology Semiotic Sociological Research framework Anthropometry Ethnography cyber Ethnology Cross-cultural comparison Participant observation Holism Reflexivity Thick description Cultural relativism Ethnocentrism Emic and etic Key concepts Culture Development Ethnicity Evolution sociocultural Gender Kinship and descent Meme Prehistory Race Society Value Colonialism / Postcolonialism Key theories Actor–network theory Alliance theory Boasian anthropology Cross-cultural studies Cultural materialism Culture theory Diffusionism Feminism Functionalism Historical particularism Interpretive Performance studies Political economy Practice theory Structuralism Post-structuralism Systems theory Lists Anthropologists by nationality Anthropology by year Bibliography Journals List of indigenous peoples Organizations v t e Digital anthropology is the anthropological study of the relationship between humans and digital-era technology.  The field is new, and thus has a variety of names with a variety of emphases. These include techno-anthropology, [ 1 ] digital ethnography, cyberanthropology, [ 2 ] and virtual anthropology.

[ 3 ] Definition and scope [ edit ] Most anthropologists who use the phrase "digital anthropology" are specifically referring to online and Internet technology. The study of humans' relationship to a broader range of technology may fall under other subfields of anthropological study, such as cyborg anthropology .

The Digital Anthropology Group (DANG) is classified as an interest group in the American Anthropological Association . DANG's mission includes promoting the use of digital technology as a tool of anthropological research, encouraging anthropologists to share research using digital platforms, and outlining ways for anthropologists to study digital communities.

Cyberspace or the "virtual world" itself can serve as a "field" site for anthropologists, allowing the observation, analysis, and interpretation of the sociocultural phenomena springing up and taking place in any interactive space.

National and transnational communities, enabled by digital technology, establish a set of social norms, practices, traditions, storied history and associated collective memory , [ 4 ] migration periods, internal and external conflicts, potentially subconscious language features [ 5 ] [ 6 ] and memetic dialects comparable to those of traditional, geographically confined communities. This includes the various communities built around free and open-source software , online platforms such as Facebook, Twitter/X, Instagram, 4chan and Reddit and their respective sub-sites, and politically motivated groups like Anonymous , WikiLeaks , or the Occupy movement .

[ 7 ] A number of academic anthropologists have conducted traditional ethnographies of virtual worlds, such as Bonnie Nardi 's study of World of Warcraft [ 8 ] or Tom Boellstorff 's study of Second Life .

[ 9 ] Academic Gabriella Coleman has done ethnographic work on the Debian software community [ 10 ] and the Anonymous hacktivist network.

[ 11 ] Theorist Nancy Mauro-Flude conducts ethnographic field work on computing arts and computer subcultures such as systerserver.net a part of the communities of feminist web servers [ 12 ] and the Feminist Internet network.

[ 13 ] Eitan Y. Wilf [ 14 ] examines the intersection of artists' creativity and digital technology and artificial intelligence.

[ 15 ] Yongming Zhou studied how in China the internet is used to participate in politics.

[ 16 ] Eve M. Zucker and colleagues study the shift to digital memorialization of mass atrocities and the emergent role of artificial intelligence in these processes.

[ 4 ] [ 17 ] Victoria Bernal conducted ethnographic research on the themes of nationalism and citizenship among Eritreans participating in online political engagement with their homeland.

[ 18 ] Anthropological research can help designers adapt and improve technology. Australian anthropologist Genevieve Bell did extensive user experience research at Intel that informed the company's approach to its technology, users, and market.

[ 19 ] Methodology [ edit ] Digital fieldwork [ edit ] Many digital anthropologists who study online communities use traditional methods of anthropological research. They participate in online communities in order to learn about their customs and worldviews, and back their observations with private interviews, historical research, and quantitative data. Their product is an ethnography, a qualitative description of their experience and analyses.

Other anthropologists and social scientists have conducted research that emphasizes data gathered by websites and servers. However, academics often have trouble accessing user data on the same scale as social media corporations like Facebook and data mining companies like Acxiom .

In terms of method, there is a disagreement in whether it is possible to conduct research exclusively online or if research will only be complete when the subjects are studied holistically, both online and offline.

Tom Boellstorff , who conducted a three-year research as an avatar in the virtual world Second Life , defends the first approach, stating that it is not just possible, but necessary to engage with subjects “in their own terms”.

[ 20 ] [ citation needed ] [ 21 ] Others, such as Daniel Miller , have argued that an ethnographic research should not exclude learning about the subject's life outside the internet.

[ 9 ] Digital technology as a tool of anthropology [ edit ] The American Anthropological Association offers an online guide for students using digital technology to store and share data. Data can be uploaded to digital databases to be stored, shared, and interpreted. Text and numerical analysis software can help produce metadata , while a codebook may help organize data.

Ethics [ edit ] Online fieldwork offers new ethical challenges. According to the American Anthropological Association 's ethics guidelines, anthropologists researching a community must make sure that all members of that community know they are being studied and have access to data the anthropologist produces. However, many online communities' interactions are publicly available for anyone to read, and may be preserved online for years. Digital anthropologists debate the extent to which lurking in online communities and sifting through public archives is ethical.

[ 22 ] The Association also asserts that anthropologists' ability to collect and store data at all is "a privilege", and researchers have an ethical duty to store digital data responsibly. This means protecting the identity of participants, sharing data with other anthropologists, and making backup copies of all data.

[ 23 ] Prominent figures [ edit ] Genevieve Bell is an Australian cultural anthropologist credited for pioneering the User Experience field. During her time working for Intel Corporation, Bell studied how various cultures from around the world interacted with and experienced technology. Researching and improving user experience allows companies and designers to gather data regarding how users utilize their digital products and what requires improvement or expansion.

Tom Boellstorff is an anthropologist known for Coming of Age in Second Life: An Anthropologist Explores the Virtually Human where he conducted research on how engaging in virtual worlds affects the player’s sense of self.

Gabriella Coleman is an American anthropologist concerned with the politics, ethics, and culture of hacking and online activism. Coleman’s most notable ethnography features the hacktivist collective Anonymous, where she argues that various genres of hacking exist according to the social conditions at play. Coleman is dedicated to making her ethnography accessible to a diverse audience, including academics and non-academics.

Diana E. Forsythe was an American anthropologist of science and technology and the author of the essays featured in Studying Those Who Study Us: An Anthropologist in the World of Artificial Intelligence . She asked relevant questions such as how should humans interact with computers and how gender roles are maintained in technology-oriented occupations.

Heather Horst is a sociocultural anthropologist interested in the relationship between digital social relations and material culture.

Mizuko Ito is a Japanese cultural anthropologist specializing in technology use and the intersection between computers and the social sciences. Her primary interest is in how young people utilize media technology and how it can be used to engage students in education.

Daniel Miller is an anthropologist with a concentration in digital anthropology. His research includes the smartphone and perpetual opportunism, the intent and consequences of posting on social media in various geographical locations, and how hospice patients use media to socialize in the last stage of their lives.

Mike Wesch is a cultural anthropologist interested in how people share their lives, cultures, and beliefs through digital media.

See also [ edit ] Sociology of the Internet List of important publications in anthropology References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ "Techno-Anthropology course guide" . Aalborg University . Retrieved 14 March 2013 .

^ Knorr, Alexander (August 2011).

Cyberanthropology . Peter Hammer Verlag Gmbh.

ISBN 978-3779503590 . Retrieved March 14, 2013 .

^ Weber, Gerhard; Bookstein, Fred (2011).

Virtual Anthropology: A guide to a new interdisciplinary field . Springer.

ISBN 978-3211486474 .

^ a b Zucker, Eve Monique; Simon, David J. (2020).

Mass Violence and Memory in the Digital Age: memorialization unmoored . Palgrave Macmillan Memory Studies.

ISBN 978-3-030-39395-3 .

^ Bryden, John; Funk, Sebastian; Jansen, Vincent AA (25 February 2013).

"Word usage mirrors community structure in the online social network Twitter" .

EPJ Data Science .

2 .

doi : 10.1140/epjds15 .

^ Rodrigues, Jason (15 March 2013).

"Twitter users forming tribes with own language, tweet analysis shows" .

The Guardian .

^ "Abstract of 'The social construction of freedom in free and open source software: Hackers, ethics, and the liberal tradition' " . FlossHub. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017 . Retrieved 11 March 2013 .

^ Nardi, Bonnie (2010).

My Life as a Night Elf Priest: An Anthropological Account of World of Warcraft . University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 978-0472050987 .

^ a b Boellstorff, Tom (2010).

Coming of Age in Second Life: An Anthropologist Explores the Virtually Human . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0691146270 .

^ Coleman, Gabriella (2010).

"The Hacker Conference: A Ritual Condensation and Celebration of a Lifeworld" .

Anthropological Quarterly .

83 (1): 47– 72.

doi : 10.1353/anq.0.0112 .

ISSN 0003-5491 .

JSTOR 20638699 .

S2CID 142356750 .

^ Coleman, G. (2014).

Hacker, hoaxer, whistleblower, spy: The many faces of Anonymous (PDF) . Verso Books.

^ Mauro-Flude, Nancy (2022). "A feminist server stack".

Codesign .

18 (1): 48– 62.

doi : 10.1080/15710882.2021.2021243 .

ISSN 1571-0882 .

S2CID 245719879 .

^ Mauro-Flude, Nancy (2021).

"Chthonian Feminist Internet Theory for the twenty first century" .

Continuum: Journal of Media and Cultural Studies .

35 (1): 788– 804.

doi : 10.1080/10304312.2021.1983260 .

ISSN 1469-3666 .

S2CID 244577481 .

^ "Prof. Eitan Wilf" . The Department of Sociology and Anthropology.

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem .

^ Wilf, Eitan Y.

The Inspiration Machine: Computational Creativity in Poetry and Jazz . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

^ Zhou, Yongming (2006).

Historicizing Online Politics: Telegraphy, the Internet, and Political Participation in China . Stanford: Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8047-5127-8 .

^ Makhortykh, Mykola; Zucker, Eve M.; Simon, David J.; Bultmann, Daniel; Ulloa, Roberto (2023-07-18).

"Shall androids dream of genocides? How generative AI can change the future of memorialization of mass atrocities" .

Discover Artificial Intelligence .

3 (1): 28.

arXiv : 2305.14358 .

doi : 10.1007/s44163-023-00072-6 .

ISSN 2731-0809 .

^ Bernal, Victoria.

Nation as Network: Diaspora, Cyberspace, and Citizenship . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

^ "Intel's cultural anthropologist" .

^ Boellstorff, Tom (2015-12-31).

Coming of Age in Second Life . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

doi : 10.1515/9781400874101 .

ISBN 978-1-4008-7410-1 .

^ Boellstorff, Tom (2021).

Digital Anthropology (2nd ed.). California: Routledge. pp.

39– 60.

ISBN 9781350078840 .

^ Varis, Piia (2014). "Digital Ethnography".

Tilburg Papers in Cultural Studies : 1– 21 – via Tilburg University.

^ "Digital Data Management - Cultural Module - Learn and Teach" .

www.americananthro.org . Retrieved 2017-01-30 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Bernal, Victoria. 2014.

Nation as Network: Diaspora, Cyberspace, and Citizenship . University of Chicago Press, Budka, Philipp and Manfred Kremser . 2004.

"CyberAnthropology—Anthropology of CyberCulture" , in Contemporary issues in socio-cultural anthropology: Perspectives and research activities from Austria edited by S. Khittel, B. Plankensteiner and M. Six-Hohenbalken, pp. 213–226. Vienna: Loecker.

Escobar, Arturo. 1994. "Welcome to Cyberia: notes on the anthropology of cyberculture." Current Anthropology 35(3): 211–231.

Fabian, Johannes. 2002. Virtual archives and ethnographic writing: "Commentary" as a new genre?

Current Anthropology 43(5): 775–786.

Gershon, Ilana. 2010.

The Break-up 2.0: Disconnecting over new media . Cornell University Press Ginsburg, Faye. 2008. Rethinking the Digital Age. In The Media and Social Theory . Edited by Desmond Hesmondhalgh and Jason Toynbee. New York: Routledge Hine, Christine. 2000.

Virtual ethnography . London, Thousand Oaks, New Delhi: Sage.

Horst, Heather and Daniel Miller. 2012.

Digital Anthropology.

London and New York: Berg Jarzombek, Mark (2016).

Digital Stockholm Syndrome in the Post-Ontological Age . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Kremser, Manfred. 1999. CyberAnthropology und die neuen Räume des Wissens.

Mitteilungen der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien 129: 275–290.

Ito, Mizuko, Sonja Baumer, Matteo Bittanti, danah boyd, Rachel Cody, Rebecca Herr-Stephenson, Heather A. Horst, Patricia G. Lange, Dilan Mahendran, Katynka Z. Martinez, C.J. Pascoe, Dan Perkel, Laura Robinson, Christo Sims and Lisa Tripp. (2010) Hanging Out, Messing Around, and Geeking Out: Kids Living and Learning with New Media. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Paccagnella, Luciano. 1997.

Getting the seats of your pants dirty: Strategies for ethnographic research on virtual communities Archived 2013-02-13 at the Wayback Machine .

Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 3(1).

Sugita, Shigeharu. 1987. "Computers in ethnological studies: As a tool and an object," in Toward a computer ethnology: Proceedings of the 8th International Symposium at the Japan National Museum of Ethnology edited by Joseph Raben, Shigeharu Sugita, and Masatoshi Kubo, pp. 9–40. Osaka: National Museum of Ethnology. (Senri Ethnological Studies 20) Wilf, Eitan Y. 2023. The Inspiration Machine: Computational creativity in poetry and jazz. University of Chicago Press.

Wittel, Andreas. 2000.

Ethnography on the move: From field to net to Internet .

Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum: Qualitative Social Research 1(1).

Zhou, Yongming. 2006.

Historicizing Online Politics: Telegraphy, the internet, and political participation in China.

Stanford University Press.

Zucker, Eve M. and David J. Simon. 2020.

Mass Violence and Memory in the Digital Age: memorialization unmoored . Palgrave-MacMillan.

External links [ edit ] Computer Mediated Anthropology Cyber Studies WebRing Archived 2017-07-13 at the Wayback Machine Centre for Digital Anthropology (University College London) Digital Ethnography Research Centre (RMIT University, Melbourne) Intel Science & Technology Centre (University of California, Irvine) v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Digital_anthropology&oldid=1297024074 " Categories : Cultural anthropology Cyberspace Digital media Digital technology Technology in society Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2020 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2020 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 19:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Digital anthropology 15 languages Add topic

