Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Student editors 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents The Mays Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Annual anthology This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "The Mays" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Mays Literary Anthology (or just The Mays ) is an annual anthology of new writing by students from the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge .

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Anthologies of poetry by undergraduates from the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge were first published in 1913, with Cambridge Poets: 1910–1913 and Oxford Poetry: 1910–1913 being produced respectively by Arthur Quiller-Couch and Gilbert Murray .

[ 2 ] Many years later in 1992, Peter Ho Davies, Adrian Woolfson, and Ron Dimant, who met while working together at the Cambridge University Student Newspaper, Varsity, independently established a totally new publication concept known as The May Anthology of Poetry and The May Anthology of Short Stories , originally published as two separate anthologies: one devoted to poetry and the other to prose. The idea came about when the three friends were standing outside Queens College one evening, and realized that they all aspired to publishing books. Once they had resolved to set up the anthologies, Adrian Woolfson pulled in Ian Critchley - who was at the time a student editor on the Oxford University Student Newspaper, Cherwell - as his Oxford co-editor. The nucleus of the Cambridge team, who led the project, was Woolfson's attic room at 5 Harvey Road, where the editorial team would meet weekly to review the submitted materials. In 2003 The May Anthologies became a single publication.

[ 3 ] Each year, the Mays receives hundreds of submissions from students at Oxford and Cambridge.

[ citation needed ] The Editorial Committee (composed of students from both universities) review the submissions.

Zadie Smith The Mays is often noted for launching the career of novelist Zadie Smith .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Her work appears in two of the short story editions (1996 and 1997). Literary agencies first took notice of Smith after seeing her story "Mrs. Begum's Son and the Private Tutor" in the 1997 collection. Smith guest edited the Mays in 2001. Her quip "maybe in a few years this lot will have me out of a job" has become a catch phrase for the publication.

[ 6 ] The Mays is broader in scope than most university literary projects: it is sold in bookstores and by delivery nationwide; it is distributed to every major literary agent; and each year a guest editor — usually a prominent author, poet, or artist — writes an introduction to the anthology.

[ 3 ] Previous guest editors include: Margaret Drabble and Jon Stallworthy (1992), Michael Dibdin and Seamus Heaney (1993), Stephen Fry (1994), Ted Hughes (1995), Penelope Fitzgerald (1996), Christopher Reid and Jill Paton Walsh (1997), Sebastian Faulks and J.H. Prynne (1998), Penelope Lively and John Kinsella (1999), Paul Muldoon and Lawrence Norfolk (2000), Zadie Smith and Michael Donaghy (2001), Andrew Motion and Nick Cave (2002), Ali Smith (2003), Philip Pullman (2004), Robert Macfarlane (2005), Don Paterson and Jeanette Winterson (2006), Colm Toibin (2007), Ian Patterson (2008), Patti Smith (2009), Amit Chaudhuri , Tom Raworth (2010), [ citation needed ] , Jarvis Cocker (2011), John Darnielle , Tao Lin , Toby Litt (2012), Michael Frayn , David Harsent , Tom Phillips (2013), John Fuller , Paul Farley , Ben Okri , Prajwal Parajuly , Emma Chichester Clark and Alexander Gilkes (2014), Roger Mcgough and Rupi Kaur (2016).

[ 7 ] The Mays is associated with Varsity Publications Ltd, which publishes Varsity .

[ 8 ] The cost of publication is funded in part by donations from various Oxford and Cambridge colleges.

Student editors [ edit ] Ruth Scurr Juliet Lapidos Adrian Woolfson and Ian Critchley (1992) Rebecca James (1993) Dorothea Gartland and Jason Thompson (1994) Ruth Scurr and Chris Tayler (1995) Nick Laird (1996) Martha Kelly (1997) Adam Whitefield, Aleksander Keenan, Turin Munthe and Jonty Claypole (1998) Benjamin Yeoh , Sophie Craig, Matt Edwards and Chris Tryhorn (1999) Sophy Levy, Tom Rob Smith, Catherine Shoard, and Peter Robons (2000) Tom Hill and Benjamin Hewitt (2001) Tom Hill, Benjamin Hewitt, Rachel Aspden and Tim Martin (2002) Jodie Greenwood and Rachael Marsh (2003) Mark Richards and James Purdon (2004) Jonathan Beckman and Arthur House (2005) Torsten Henricson-Bell , Juliet Lapidos , Imogen Walford (2006) Catherine Duric, Iain Mobbs and Ryan Roark (2007) Erica Mena and Deborah Smith (2008) Peter Morelli and Decca Muldowney (2009) Lizzie Alice Robinson and Elliot Ross (2010) Catriona Gray and Philip Maughan (2011) Andrew Griffin (2012) Chloe Stopa-Hunt and Hugo Havranek (2013) Camille Ralphs and Andrew Wynn Owen (2014) Emily Fitzell (2015) Rebekah Miron Clayton (2016) Sabhbh Curran (2017) Elizabeth Huang and Eimear Ní Chathail (2018) Zoe Matt-Williams (2019) Ceci Browning (2020) Isabel Marisol Sebode and Nick Bartlett (2022) References [ edit ] ^ Shaw, William (17 July 2016).

"Review: 'The Mays 24' " .

The Oxford Culture Review .

^ Milbank, Arabella (15 February 2013).

"A Brief History of The Mays" .

Varsity . Retrieved 6 October 2021 .

^ a b "About the Mays" .

The Mays XIX . Archived from the original on 30 August 2011 . Retrieved 7 June 2011 .

^ Ryan, Alice, "Books: Collated in lockdown, The Mays 28 is a gem," Velvet , 4 July 2020.

^ Edemariam Aida , "Learning Curve," The Guardian , 3 September 2005.

^ Bragoli, Caterina (25 January 2020).

"The Mays 2020 : More revolutionary than ever" .

Varsity Online .

^ "The Mays XIX" . Archived from the original on 13 April 2014.

^ "Cambridge Student Marketing" .

Varsity Publications .

External links [ edit ] The Mays : a literary anthology Past guest-editors: The Mays : Guest Editors v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category v t e University of Oxford Leadership Chancellor William Hague Vice-Chancellor Irene Tracey Registrar Heads of houses Colleges All Souls Balliol Brasenose Christ Church Corpus Christi Exeter Green Templeton Harris Manchester Hertford Jesus Keble Kellogg Lady Margaret Hall Linacre Lincoln Magdalen Mansfield Merton New College Nuffield Oriel Pembroke Queen's Reuben St Anne's St Antony's St Catherine's St Cross St Edmund Hall St Hilda's St Hugh's St John's St Peter's Somerville Trinity University College Wadham Wolfson Worcester Permanent private halls Blackfriars Hall Campion Hall Regent's Park Wycliffe Hall Divisions and departments Humanities Asian and Middle Eastern Studies American Institute Art Classics History Linguistics, Philology & Phonetics Medieval and Modern Languages Music Philosophy Theology and Religion Medical Sciences Biochemistry Human Genetics Medical School Pathology Population Health Mathematical, Physical and Life Sciences Biology Chemistry Computer Science Earth Sciences Engineering Science Materials Mathematical Institute Physics Social Sciences Archaeology Business Continuing Education Economics Government International Development Law Politics & International Relations Social Policy and Intervention Gardens, Libraries and Museums Ashmolean Museum Bodleian Libraries Botanic Garden History of Science Natural History Pitt Rivers Institutes and affiliates Begbroke Science Park Big Data Institute Ineos Oxford Institute Jenner Institute Internet Institute Oxford-Man Institute Martin School Oxford University Innovation Oxford University Press Ripon College Cuddesdon Smith School Independent centres Buddhist Studies Energy Studies Hebrew and Jewish Studies Hindu Studies Islamic Studies Sports Australian rules football Boxing Cricket Cycling Dancesport Football Women's Handball Ice hockey Mountaineering Quidditch Polo Rowing Men's Women's Men's Lightweight Women's Lightweight Rugby Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races Polo Varsity Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Venues Bullingdon Green Christ Church Ground Magdalen Ground New College Ground Roger Bannister running track University Parks Student life Cherwell The Isis Magazine The Mays The Oxford Student Oxford Union Student Union Related People fictional colleges fictional people First women graduates Association for the Education of Women Delegacy for Women Students The Oxford Magazine Oxford University Gazette Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Mays&oldid=1241660282 " Categories : Publications established in 1993 Publications associated with the University of Oxford Publications associated with the University of Cambridge Fiction anthologies Poetry anthologies Anthology series Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2010 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from February 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2010 This page was last edited on 22 August 2024, at 13:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Mays Add languages Add topic

