Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics 2 Disposition 3 Fox hunting 4 Most common causes of death 5 Respiratory disease in foxhounds 6 Registrations 7 Notable foxhounds 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Foxhound 13 languages العربية Български Català Ελληνικά Español Gaeilge 한국어 Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For other uses, see Foxhound (disambiguation) .

Type of hunting dog breed An American Foxhound A foxhound is a type of large hunting hound bred for strong hunting instincts, a keen sense of smell, and their barking, energy, drive, and speed.

[ 1 ] In fox hunting , the foxhound's namesake, packs of foxhounds track quarry, followed—usually on horseback—by the hunters, sometimes for several miles at a stretch; moreover, foxhounds also sometimes guard sheep and houses.

There are different breeds of foxhound, each having slightly different characteristics and appearances, and each often called simply Foxhound in their native countries: American Foxhound Dumfriesshire Black and Tan Foxhound (extinct) English Foxhound Welsh Foxhound The American Masters of Foxhounds Association recognizes these breeds of foxhounds:
American, Penn-Marydel, English, and crossbred foxhounds.

[ 2 ] The International Foxhound Association was created in 2012 for the international promotion of the Foxhound as a breed.

[ 3 ] Characteristics [ edit ] Foxhounds are medium-large dogs and males typically weigh 29-32 kg (65-70 lb) and females 27-29 kg (60-65 lb). Height for males measures 55-63 cm (22-25 in) and females 53-60 cm (21-24 in).

[ 4 ] Foxhounds have a short coat, and long, strong legs, as well as deep chests for lots of lung space.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Physically, a foxhound resembles a large beagle .

Disposition [ edit ] Foxhounds generally display a gentle and affectionate temperament. Foxhounds are highly active and energetic, and therefore require activity and exercise. Foxhounds are sociable and these dogs have great stamina, sense of smell, and enjoy being in a pack, as they are bred for hunting in packs.

[ 4 ] Fox hunting [ edit ] In fox hunting , the foxhound's namesake, packs of foxhounds track and chase fox while hunters follow along on horseback. Fox hunting has shifted over the years and may differ depending on the country. Some changes over time include focusing on chasing rather than killing, and chasing other creatures, such as the coyote, instead of only the fox.

[ 7 ] Most common causes of death [ edit ] Most common causes of death among Foxhound puppies are respiratory disease, anorexia and dehydration, skin disorders, and gastrointestinal disease.

[ 8 ] Respiratory disease in foxhounds [ edit ] A kennel of working, hunting English Foxhounds in the south of England, had an outbreak of tuberculosis (TB) that impacted 180 dogs in late 2016 and early 2017. The kennel housed Foxhound puppies to adults, up to 8 years old. The Foxhounds work among six counties and some of the six counties are in the "Edge Area" that is impacted by bovine tuberculosis.

An investigation occurred which consisted of testing the dogs and looking deeper into the regional area, diet of the dogs, and even more factors while conducting tests and gathering information. The dogs eat raw meat and there was speculation about the diet containing the M. bovis that causes TB as the meat comes from areas impacted by M. bovis.

[ 9 ] Registrations [ edit ] In 2005, the American Kennel Club reported that the English and American Foxhounds were their least and fourth least registered breeds in North America with 22 and 44 registrations, respectively; the top registered breed, the Labrador Retriever , had 137,867 registrations during the same year.

[ 10 ] Notable foxhounds [ edit ] Sweet Lips and the Virginia Hounds - George Washington bred foxhounds and enjoyed fox hunting. He called his pack of dogs the Virginia Hounds. Sweet Lips was a female foxhound, a product of his vision to breed his pack to produce a "superior dog" who is fast and intelligent.

[ 11 ] The state of Virginia's "state dog" is the American Foxhound.

[ 4 ] Old Drum - said to have been the inspiration for the phrase "Man's Best Friend", which arose from an 1870 court case regarding him.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Mountain and Muse - In 1814 the Duke of Leeds gave two Irish foxhounds, Mountain and Muse, to a visiting guest, Bolton Jackson. This famous pair of hounds changed hands several times before going to Charles Carroll at his Homewood estate.  Descendants of Mountain and Muse still hunt territories in Maryland that were once hunted by George Washington, Thomas Jefferson , Charles Carroll, and the Marquis de Lafayette .

[ 14 ] Colonel - In 2011, Baron von Pfetten's Colonel was Champion of the World Dog Show in Paris and was the first ever English Foxhound invited to compete in the final Champion of Champions competition in Bruxelles that same year.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] American Foxhound Anglo-Français and Français (hound) English Foxhound References [ edit ] ^ "MFHA Kids" (PDF) .

Masters of Foxhounds Association of North America . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2022-10-24 . Retrieved 2020-11-06 .

^ "MFHA - Foxhound Registration" .

Mfha.org . Archived from the original on 17 May 2014 . Retrieved 11 December 2017 .

^ "International Foxhound Association (IFA)" .

Net1901.org .

^ a b c "American Foxhound" .

American Kennel Club .

^ "English Foxhound" .

American Kennel Club .

^ "Official Standard for the American Foxhound" (PDF) .

American Kennel Club .

^ "History of American Foxhunting" .

Masters of Foxhounds Association of North America . Archived from the original on 2020-11-01 . Retrieved 2020-11-06 .

^ Potkay, S.; Bacher, J. D. (February 1977). "Morbidity and mortality in a closed foxhound breeding colony".

Laboratory Animal Science .

27 (1): 78– 84.

ISSN 0023-6764 .

PMID 557706 .

^ O'Halloran C, Hope JC, Dobromylskyj M, et al. An outbreak of tuberculosis due to Mycobacterium bovis infection in a pack of English Foxhounds (2016–2017). Transbound Emerg Dis. 2018;65:1872–1884.

https://doi.org/10.1111/tbed.12969 ^ American Kennel Club.

"Registration Statistics" . Archived from the original on 2007-07-16.

^ Flaim, Denise (May 18, 2020).

"By George: A Founding Father and his American Foxhounds" .

American Kennel Club .

^ Coren, Stanley (2009-10-21).

" "A Man's Best Friend is his Dog": The Senator, the Dog, and the Trial" . Psychology Today . Retrieved 2010-09-27 .

^ The Trial of Old Drum – New York Times Television Review – June 9, 2000 ^ Fine, Norman (2010).

Foxhunting Adventures: Chasing the Story . Derrydale Press. pp. 24/30.

ISBN 978-1461661399 .

^ Poole, Clare.

"The World Salutes "Colonel" " .

Ecovertside.net . Archived from the original on 12 December 2017 . Retrieved 11 December 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Masters of Foxhounds Association of America, US Masters of Foxhounds Association, UK Archived 2018-05-06 at the Wayback Machine International Foxhound Association "Fox hound" .

Collier's New Encyclopedia . 1921.

"Fox-hound" .

Encyclopedia Americana . 1920.

v t e Dogs Types African village dog Free-ranging dog Pye-dog Street dog Hairless dog Herding dog Collie Livestock guardian dog Sheep dog Hunting dog Cur Feist Lurcher Gun dog Pointer Retriever Setter Spaniel Water dog Hound Scenthound Basset Coonhound Foxhound Sighthound Longdog Terrier Bull-type terrier Pinscher Schnauzer Mastiff Bulldog Spitz Husky Laika Tugou Toy dog Bichon Turnspit dog Breeds List of breeds List of crossbreeds Mixed-breed dog Crossbreed Extinct breeds Most popular Roles Assistance dog Autism dog Guide dog Hearing dog Medical response dog Seizure dog Mobility assistance dog Therapy dog Psychiatric assistance dog Attack dog Bay dog Carriage dog Catch dog Companion dog Detection dog Fighting dog Guard dog Lap dog Meat dog Mercy dog Police dog usage by country Search and rescue dog Sled dog War dog Behavior Communication Barking Body language Howling Intelligence Dog–cat relationship Human–dog interaction Animal testing Baiting Breed-specific legislation Cynanthropy Dog bite Dog beach Dog daycare Dog fighting Dog food dog biscuit 2007 recalls Dog grooming Dogs in religion Dogs in space Dog licence Dog meat Dog park Dog show Dog theft Dog sports Dog walking Fear of dogs Human–canine bond Origin of the domestic dog Therapy Health Aging ( List of longest-living dogs ) Anatomy Breeding Coat Conformation Diseases Dog food Odor Rabies in animals Rage syndrome Reproduction Skin disorders Vaccination Training Clicker Crate training Housebreaking Socialization Related Domesticated silver fox List of individual dogs List of fictional dogs Lists of dogs Category Portal v t e Hounds Scenthounds Alpine Dachsbracke American Foxhound Anglo-Français de Petite Vénerie Ariégeois Artois Hound Austrian Black and Tan Hound Basset Artésien Normand Basset Bleu de Gascogne Basset Fauve de Bretagne Basset Hound Bavarian Mountain Hound Beagle Beagle-Harrier Billy Black and Tan Coonhound Bloodhound Bluetick Coonhound Bosnian Broken-haired Hound Briquet de Provence Briquet Griffon Vendéen Bruno Jura Hound Chien Français Blanc et Noir Chien Français Blanc et Orange Chien Français Tricolore Colombian Fino Hound Dachshund Drever Dunker English Coonhound English Foxhound Erbi Txakur Estonian Hound Finnish Hound Gascon Saintongeois German Hound Grand Anglo-Français Blanc et Noir Grand Anglo-Français Blanc et Orange Grand Anglo-Français Tricolore Grand Basset Griffon Vendéen Grand Bleu de Gascogne Grand Griffon Vendéen Greek Harehound Griffon Bleu de Gascogne Griffon Fauve de Bretagne Griffon Nivernais Halden Hound Hamiltonstövare Hanover Hound Harrier Hygen Hound Istrian Coarse-haired Hound Istrian Shorthaired Hound Kerry Beagle Liangshan Dog Lithuanian Hound Montenegrin Mountain Hound Otterhound Petit Basset Griffon Vendéen Petit Bleu de Gascogne Plott Hound Poitevin Polish Hound Polish Hunting Dog Porcelaine Posavac Hound Rastreador Brasileiro Redbone Coonhound Sarail Hound Sabueso Español Schillerstövare Schweizer Laufhund Schweizerischer Niederlaufhund Segugio dell'Appennino Segugio Italiano Segugio Maremmano Serbian Hound Serbian Tricolour Hound Slovenský Kopov Smalandstõvare Styrian Coarse-Haired Hound Tarsus çatalburun Transylvanian Hound Treeing Walker Coonhound Trigg Hound Tyrolean Hound Valdueza Welsh Foxhound West Country Harrier Westphalian Dachsbracke Sighthounds Afghan Hound American Staghound Azawakh Bakhmull Banjara Hound Borzoi Chippiparai Chortai Galgo Español Greyhound Hortaya borzaya Irish Wolfhound Italian Greyhound Kaikadi Kangaroo dog Kanni Kombai Levriero Sardo Longdog Magyar agár Mahratta Hound Mudhol Hound Polish Greyhound Rajapalayam Rampur Greyhound Saluki Scottish Deerhound Silken Windhound Sloughi Taigan Whippet Xigou Cur-type hunting breeds Black Mouth Cur Blue Lacy Catahoula Leopard Dog Florida Brown Dog Feist Lurcher Mountain Cur Mountain Feist Stephens Stock Treeing Cur Treeing Tennessee Brindle Miscellaneous American Leopard Hound Basenji Cirneco dell'Etna Cretan Hound Haofa Tangkhul Hui Ibizan Hound Maneto Pampas Deerhound Pharaoh Hound Phu Quoc Ridgeback Podenco Andaluz Podenco Canario Portuguese Podengo Rhodesian Ridgeback Thai Ridgeback Xarnego Valenciano Xiasi Dog Extinct Buckhound Celtic Hound Chien-gris Dumfriesshire Black and Tan Foxhound Grand Fauve de Bretagne King's White Hound Laconian Limer Norman Hound North Country Beagle Old Croatian Sighthound Potsdam Greyhound Rache Sleuth hound Southern Hound Staghound Talbot Hound Types: Anglo-French hounds , bassets , coonhounds , feists , lurchers Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Foxhound&oldid=1291864299 " Categories : Hounds Scent hounds Hunting dogs Hunting with hounds Fox hunting Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Collier's Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 21:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Foxhound 13 languages Add topic

