Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Petroleum drilling industry 3 Mining drilling industry 4 Mobile drilling rigs 5 Automated drill rig 6 Auger drills Toggle Auger drills subsection 6.1 Drill buckets 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Drilling rig 22 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Latina Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский தமிழ் Türkmençe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Integrated system to drill wells This article is about onshore equipment for boring holes into the ground. For offshore oil rig, see Oil platform . For drilling tunnels, see Tunnel boring machine . For handheld drilling tool, see Drill .

Drilling the Bakken Formation in the Williston Basin Large hole drilling rig for blast-hole drilling A drilling rig is an integrated system that drills wells , such as oil or water wells, or holes for piling and other construction purposes, into the earth's subsurface. Drilling rigs can be massive structures housing equipment used to drill water wells , oil wells , or natural gas extraction wells, or they can be small enough to be moved manually by one person and such are called augers . Drilling rigs can sample subsurface mineral deposits, test rock, soil and groundwater physical properties, and also can be used to install sub-surface fabrications, such as underground utilities, instrumentation, tunnels or wells. Drilling rigs can be mobile equipment mounted on trucks, tracks or trailers, or more permanent land or marine-based structures (such as oil platforms , commonly called 'offshore oil rigs' even if they don't contain a drilling rig). The term "rig" therefore generally refers to the complex equipment that is used to penetrate the surface of the Earth's crust .

Small to medium-sized drilling rigs are mobile, such as those used in mineral exploration drilling, blast-hole, water wells and environmental investigations. Larger rigs are capable of drilling through thousands of metres of the Earth 's crust, using large " mud pumps " to circulate drilling fluid (slurry) through the bit and up the casing annulus , for cooling and removing the "cuttings" while a well is drilled. Hoists in the rig, a derrick , can lift hundreds of tons of pipe . Other equipment can force acid or sand into reservoirs to facilitate extraction of the oil or natural gas; and in remote locations there can be permanent living accommodation and catering for crews (which may be more than a hundred). Marine rigs may operate thousands of miles distant from the supply base with infrequent crew rotation or cycle.

History [ edit ] Antique drilling rig now on display at Western History Museum in Lingle, Wyoming. It was used to drill many water wells in that area—many of those wells are still in use.

Antique drilling rigs in Zigong, China Until internal combustion engines were developed in the late 19th century, the main method for drilling rock was muscle power of man or animal. The technique of oil drilling through percussion or rotary drilling has its origins dating back to the ancient Chinese Han dynasty in 100 BC, where percussion drilling was used to extract natural gas in the Sichuan province.

[ 1 ] Early oil and gas drilling methods were seemingly primitive as it required several technical skills.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The skills involved the availability of heavy iron bits and long bamboo poles, the manufacturing of long and sturdy cables woven from bamboo fiber, and levers. Heavy iron bits were attached to long bamboo cables suspended from bamboo derricks and then were repeatedly raised and dropped into a manually dug hole by having two to six men jumping on a lever.

[ 1 ] Han dynasty oil wells made by percussion drilling were effective but only reached 10 meters deep and 100 meters by the 10th century.

[ 1 ] By the 16th century, the Chinese were exploring and drilling oil wells more than 2,000 feet (610 m) deep.

[ 2 ] Chinese well drilling technology was introduced to Europe in 1828.

[ 3 ] A modernized variant of the ancient Chinese drilling technique was used by American businessman Edwin Drake to drill Pennsylvania's first oil well in 1859 using small steam engines to power the drilling process rather than by human muscle.

[ 1 ] Cable tool drilling was developed in ancient China and was used for drilling brine wells.  The salt domes also held natural gas, which some wells produced and which was used for evaporation of the brine. 
Drake learned of cable tool drilling from Chinese laborers in the U.S.

[ 4 ] The first primary product was kerosene for lamps and heaters.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Similar developments around Baku fed the European market.

In the 1970s, outside of the oil and gas industry, roller bits using mud circulation were replaced by the first pneumatic reciprocating piston Reverse Circulation (RC) drills, and became essentially obsolete for most shallow drilling, and are now only used in certain situations where rocks preclude other methods. RC drilling proved much faster and more efficient, and continues to improve with better metallurgy, deriving harder, more durable bits, and compressors delivering higher air pressures at higher volumes, enabling deeper and faster penetration. Diamond drilling has remained essentially unchanged since its inception.

Discoverer Inspiration delivers new containment cap to the Deepwater Horizon oil spill on 10 July 2010. In the background are the Discoverer Enterprise , GSF Development Driller II , and Helix Producer I Petroleum drilling industry [ edit ] Oil rigs operational Natural gas rigs operational Oil and natural gas drilling rigs are used not only to identify geologic reservoirs, but also used to create holes that allow the extraction of oil or natural gas from those reservoirs. Primarily in onshore oil and gas fields once a well has been drilled, the drilling rig will be moved off of the well and a service rig (a smaller rig) that is purpose-built for completions will be moved on to the well to get the well on line.

[ 7 ] This frees up the drilling rig to drill another hole and streamlines the operation as well as allowing for specialization of certain services, i.e. completions vs. drilling.

Mining drilling industry [ edit ] Mining drilling rigs are used for two main purposes, exploration drilling which aims to identify the location and quality of a mineral, and production drilling, used in the production-cycle for mining. Drilling rigs used for rock blasting for surface mines vary in size dependent on the size of the hole desired, and is typically classified into smaller pre-split and larger production holes.

Underground mining (hard rock) uses a variety of drill rigs dependent on the desired purpose, such as production, bolting, cabling, and tunnelling.

Mobile drilling rigs [ edit ] Mobile drilling rig mounted on a truck In early oil exploration , drilling rigs were semi-permanent in nature and the derricks were often built on site and left in place after the completion of the well. In more recent times drilling rigs are expensive custom-built machines that can be moved from well to well. Some light duty drilling rigs are like a mobile crane and are more usually used to drill water wells. Larger land rigs must be broken apart into sections and loads to move to a new place, a process which can often take weeks.

Small mobile drilling rigs are also used to drill or bore piles . Rigs can range from 100 short tons (91,000 kg) continuous flight auger (CFA) rigs to small air powered rigs used to drill holes in quarries, etc. These rigs use the same technology and equipment as the oil drilling rigs, just on a smaller scale.

The drilling mechanisms outlined below differ mechanically in terms of the machinery used, but also in terms of the method by which drill cuttings are removed from the cutting face of the drill and returned to surface.

Automated drill rig [ edit ] An automated drill rig (ADR) is an automated full-sized walking land-based drill rig that drills long lateral sections in horizontal wells for the oil and gas industry.

[ 8 ] ADRs are agile rigs that can move from pad to pad to new well sites faster than other full-sized drilling rigs. Each rig costs about  $25 million. ADR is used extensively in the Athabasca oil sands . According to the "Oil Patch Daily News", "Each rig will generate 50,000 man-hours of work during the construction phase and upon completion, each operating rig will directly and indirectly employ more than 100 workers." Compared to conventional drilling rigs", Ensign, an international oilfield services contractor based in Calgary, Alberta, that makes ADRs claims that they are "safer to operate,  have "enhanced controls intelligence," "reduced environmental footprint, quick mobility and advanced communications between field and office." [ 8 ] In June 2005 the first specifically designed slant automated drilling rig (ADR), Ensign Rig No. 118, for steam assisted gravity drainage (SAGD) applications was mobilized by Deer Creek Energy Limited, a Calgary-based oilsands company.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Auger drills [ edit ] See also: Earth auger An auger drill is a spiral-shaped tool. Its main function is the drilling of holes in the ground and other materials - or surfaces such as ice, wood, etc. The design of an auger depends on the kind of material it's meant to drill into, hence there are different types of auger drills.

[ 11 ] Auger drills come in varying sizes and can drill holes up to a depth of 95 feet below the ground. They are known to be quite versatile, saving time and energy during construction work or even personal projects. The auger is a helical screw made of steel casing with curved flights that rotates as it's pushed into the ground by a drill head. As the auger rotates, it brings excavated material to the surface, which helps keep the borehole open and prevents it from collapsing. Augers can be mounted on trucks or other machines and come in different lengths and diameters. Auger drilling is used in many fields, including construction, environmental studies , and geotechnical investigations. It can also be used for a variety of other purposes, such as: Installing auger piles for foundation engineering Drilling holes for industrial applications like telephone poles , solar posts, and deck posts Small home projects like gardening, building fences, and planting crops Ice fishing There are different auger drilling methods, including hand auger drilling and hollow stem auger drilling. Hand auger drilling is a cost-effective method that's often used in areas with shallow soil, but it can be time-consuming and labor-intensive. Hollow stem auger drilling uses a large, hollow auger that removes soil as it drills.

Auger drilling is often quieter and less vibration-prone than other drilling methods, like drive drilling, so it can also be used in urban areas. When using an auger, it's important to take safety precautions, such as wearing protective equipment like gloves, eye and ear protectors, and closed-toe boots. You should also make sure the auger and attachments are secure, engage the drill's high torque gear, and start drilling slowly.

Drill buckets [ edit ] A drill bucket, or auger bucket, is a drilling head that accumulates spoil inside and can be lifted from the hole periodically to be emptied.

[ 12 ] This method is particularly effective for drilling through hard and compacted soils, as well as rocks, due to the bucket's cylindrical design with cutting teeth at the base, which excavates and retains soil or rock as it rotates. Drill buckets are commonly used in foundation drilling for constructing deep piles and shafts.

[ 13 ] They come in various sizes and configurations, tailored to specific ground conditions and project requirements, and can be equipped with wear-resistant components to enhance durability in abrasive environments. Additionally, modern drill buckets may include a vented bottom to release trapped air and facilitate faster spoil removal.

[ 13 ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( November 2022 ) See also [ edit ] Boring – Process of enlarging an already-drilled hole with a single-point cutting tool Casing cutter – Oil drilling equipment Laser drilling – Process of creating thru-holes using laser cutting methods List of components of oil drilling rigs Enhanced geothermal system – Type of electricity generation system Flame jet drill – Technology for rock driling Mineral exploration – Finding commercially viable concentrations of minerals to mine.

Oil platform – Offshore ocean structure with oil drilling and related facilities Oil well – Well drilled to extract crude oil and/or gas Pumpjack – Drive for a reciprocating piston pump in an oil well Subsea technology – Technology of submerged operations in the sea Big Stan (drill rig) – Large vehicle mounted drill rig Horizontal directional drilling – Method of installing underground utilities Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Smil, Vaclav (2017).

Oil - A Beginner's Guide . Oneworld Publications.

ISBN 978-1786072863 .

^ a b Heshelow, Kathy (2010).

Investing in Oil and Gas: The ABC's of DPPs . Iuniverse. p. 52.

ISBN 978-1450261715 .

^ Temple, Robert (1986).

The Genius of China: 3000 years of science, discovery and invention . Joseph Needham. New York: Simon and Schuster. pp.

52– 54.

^ Temple 1986 , p. 54 ^ McNeil, Ian (1990).

An Encyclopedia of the History of Technology . London: Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-14792-1 .

^ Yergin, Daniel (1992).

The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money & Power .

^ Baars, D.L.; Watney, W.L.; Steeples, D.W.; Brostuen, E.A (1989).

Petroleum; a primer for Kansas (Educational Series, no. 7 ed.). Kansas Geological Survey. p. 40.

Archived from the original on 8 November 2020 . Retrieved 18 April 2011 .

After the cementing of the casing has been completed, the drilling rig, equipment, and materials are removed from the drill site. A smaller rig, known as a workover rig or completion rig, is moved over the well bore. The smaller rig is used for the remaining completion operations.

^ a b "Ensign Launches Newest And Most Powerful Automated ADR 1500S Pad Drill Rigs In Montney Play" , New Tech Magazine , Calgary, Alberta, 21 November 2014, archived from the original on 10 December 2014 , retrieved 6 December 2014 ^ "Deer Creek And Ensign Spud First SAGD Wells Using Slant Automated Drilling Rig" .

newtechmagazine.com . Archived from the original on 2014-12-10.

^ Well Drilling Experts ^ "What Is an Auger, and What Are They Typically Used For? | TFGUSA" .

www.tfgusa.com . 2021-06-28 . Retrieved 2023-11-22 .

^ "Bucket Auger Drilling Method" .

wellowner.org . Retrieved 8 November 2022 .

^ a b Buck, Pile (2023-12-10).

"Complete Guide to Foundation Drilling Augers" .

Pile Buck Magazine . Retrieved 2024-11-02 .

External links [ edit ] OSHA guide for drilling rigs NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐srjnm
Cached time: 20250814220956
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.444 seconds
Real time usage: 0.589 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2887/1000000
Revision size: 18085/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 27077/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 932/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 10/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 44627/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.315/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22436004/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  536.684      1 -total
 34.03%  182.613     13 Template:Annotated_link
 33.15%  177.911      1 Template:Reflist
 18.54%   99.506      6 Template:Cite_book
 12.03%   64.572      1 Template:Short_description
  8.68%   46.577      1 Template:Expand_section
  7.96%   42.746      1 Template:Ambox
  7.12%   38.202      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.02%   37.690      1 Template:Harvnb
  4.66%   24.996      2 Template:Convert Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1241965:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220956 and revision id 1305350462. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Drilling_rig&oldid=1305350462 " Categories : Drilling rigs American inventions Chinese inventions Petroleum engineering Petroleum geology Oilfield terminology Hole making Machining Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles to be expanded from November 2022 All articles to be expanded Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 15:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Drilling rig 22 languages Add topic

