Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Apostolic Fathers Toggle Apostolic Fathers subsection 1.1 Clement of Rome 1.2 Ignatius of Antioch 1.3 Polycarp of Smyrna 1.4 Papias of Hierapolis 2 Greek Fathers Toggle Greek Fathers subsection 2.1 Justin Martyr 2.2 Irenaeus of Lyons 2.3 Clement of Alexandria 2.4 Origen of Alexandria 2.5 Athanasius of Alexandria 2.6 Cappadocian Fathers 2.7 John Chrysostom 2.8 Theodore of Mopsuestia 2.9 Cyril of Alexandria 2.10 Maximus the Confessor 2.11 John of Damascus 3 Latin Fathers Toggle Latin Fathers subsection 3.1 Tertullian 3.2 Cyprian of Carthage 3.3 Hilary of Poitiers 3.4 Ambrose of Milan 3.5 Pope Damasus I 3.6 Jerome of Stridonium 3.7 Augustine of Hippo 3.8 Pope Leo the Great 3.9 Pope Gregory the Great 3.10 Isidore of Seville 4 Syriac Fathers Toggle Syriac Fathers subsection 4.1 Aphrahat 4.2 Ephrem the Syrian 4.3 Isaac of Antioch 4.4 Isaac of Nineveh 5 Desert Fathers 6 Modern positions Toggle Modern positions subsection 6.1 Catholicism 6.2 Eastern Orthodoxy 6.3 Protestantism 7 Patristics 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Church Fathers 75 languages Afrikaans العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Picard Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Early influential Christian theologians "Fathers of the Church" redirects here. For the book series, see The Fathers of the Church .

"Ante-Nicene Fathers" redirects here. For the book, see Ante-Nicene Fathers (book) .

The Church Fathers , an 11th-century Kievan Rus' miniature from Svyatoslav's miscellany Part of a series on Christianity Jesus Christ Nativity Baptism Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Ascension Bible Foundations Old Testament New Testament Gospel Canon Church Creed New Covenant Theology God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Apologetics Baptism Christology History of theology Mission Salvation Universalism History Tradition Apostles Peter Paul Mary Early Christianity Church Fathers Constantine Councils Augustine Ignatius East–West Schism Crusades Aquinas Reformation Luther Denominations (full list) Nicene Catholic Latin Eastern Old Catholic Palmarian Catholic Independent Catholic Sedevacantism Eastern Orthodox Oriental Orthodox Church of the East Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Free Evangelical Lutheran Methodist Moravian [Hussite] Pentecostal Plymouth Brethren Quaker Reformed United Protestant Waldensian Non-denominational Christianity Restorationist Christadelphians Iglesia ni Cristo Irvingians Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saints The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Members Church of God International The New Church (Swedenborgian) Unitarians and Universalists Related topics Civilization Criticism Culture Ecumenism Glossary Index Liturgy Other religions Prayer Sermon Symbolism Worship Glossary Index Outline Christianity portal v t e The Church Fathers , Early Church Fathers , Christian Fathers , or Fathers of the Church were ancient and influential Christian theologians and writers who established the intellectual and doctrinal foundations of Christianity . The historical period in which they worked became known as the Patristic Era and spans approximately from the late 1st to mid-8th centuries, [ a ] flourishing in particular during the 4th and 5th centuries, when Christianity was in the process of establishing itself as the state church of the Roman Empire .

For many denominations of Christianity, the writings of the Ante-Nicene Fathers , Nicene Fathers and Post-Nicene Fathers are included in Sacred Tradition .

[ 1 ] As such, in traditional dogmatic theology, authors considered Church Fathers are treated as authoritative for the establishment of doctrine.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The academic field of patristics , the study of the Church Fathers, has extended the scope of the term, and there is no definitive list.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ better source needed ] Some, such as Origen and Tertullian , made major contributions to the development of later Christian theology, but certain elements of their teaching were later condemned.

Apostolic Fathers [ edit ] Main article: Apostolic Fathers The Apostolic Fathers were Christian theologians who lived in the 1st and 2nd centuries AD, who are believed to have personally known some of the Twelve Apostles , or to have been significantly influenced by them.

[ 6 ] Their writings, though popular in Early Christianity , were ultimately not included in the canon of the New Testament once it reached its final form. Many of the writings derive from the same time period and geographical location as other works of early Christian literature that did come to be part of the New Testament, and some of the writings found among the Apostolic Fathers' seem to have been just as highly regarded as some of the writings that became the New Testament.

[ 7 ] The first three, Clement, Ignatius, and Polycarp, are considered the chief ones.

Clement of Rome [ edit ] Main article: Pope Clement I Clement of Rome (also known as Pope Clement I) was a late 1st-century bishop of Rome who, according to Tertullian , was ordained by Saint Peter . According to Irenaeus , Clement was the fourth bishop of Rome after Anacletus .

Eusebius described him as the "co-laborer" of Paul and identified him with the Clement mentioned in Philippians 4:3 .

[ 8 ] The First Epistle of Clement ( c.

96 ) [ 9 ] is the earliest extant epistle from a Church Father.

[ 10 ] In the epistle, Clement calls on the Christians of Corinth to maintain harmony and order.

[ 9 ] Copied and widely read in the Early Church , [ 11 ] First Clement had been considered by some as part of the New Testament canon , e.g., listed as canonical in Canon 85 of the Canons of the Apostles , [ 12 ] among other early canons of the New Testament, showing that it had canonical rank in at least some regions of early Christendom . As late as the 14th century Ibn Khaldun mentions it as part of the New Testament.

[ 13 ] Ignatius of Antioch [ edit ] Main article: Ignatius of Antioch Ignatius of Antioch (also known as Theophorus) ( c.

35 – c.

110 ) [ 14 ] was the third bishop of Antioch , and was said to be a student of the Apostle John . En route to his martyrdom in Rome, Ignatius wrote a series of letters which have been preserved. Important topics addressed in these letters include ecclesiology , the sacraments , the role of bishops , and the incarnation of Christ . He is the second after Clement to mention Paul's epistles.

[ 9 ] Polycarp of Smyrna [ edit ] Main article: Polycarp Polycarp of Smyrna ( c.

69 – c.

155 ) was a Christian bishop of Smyrna (now İzmir in Turkey). It is recorded that he had been a disciple of "John". The options/possibilities for this John are John, the son of Zebedee , traditionally viewed as the author of the Gospel of John , or John the Presbyter .

[ 15 ] Traditional advocates follow Eusebius of Caesarea in insisting that the apostolic connection of Polycarp was with John the Evangelist and that he was the author of the Gospel of John, and thus the Apostle John.

Polycarp tried and failed to persuade Pope Anicetus to have the West celebrate Passover on the 14th of Nisan , as in the Eastern calendar. Around AD 155, the Smyrnans of his town demanded Polycarp's execution as a Christian, and he died a martyr . The story of his martyrdom describes how the fire built around him would not burn him, and that when he was stabbed to death, so much blood issued from his body that it quenched the flames around him.

[ 9 ] Papias of Hierapolis [ edit ] Main article: Papias of Hierapolis Very little is known of Papias apart from what can be inferred from his own writings. He is described as "an ancient man who was a hearer of John and a companion of Polycarp" by Polycarp's disciple Irenaeus ( c.

180 ). Eusebius adds that Papias was Bishop of Hierapolis around the time of Ignatius of Antioch . In this office, Papias was presumably succeeded by Abercius of Hierapolis . The name Papias was very common in the region, suggesting that he was probably a native of the area. The work of Papias is dated by most modern scholars to about AD 95–120.

Despite indications that the work of Papias was still extant in the Late Middle Ages , the full text is now lost; however, extracts appear in a number of other writings, some of which cite a book number.

Greek Fathers [ edit ] The Three Holy Hierarchs of the Eastern Church: Basil of Caesarea (left), John Chrysostom (center) and Gregory of Nazianzus (right) Part of a series on the Eastern Orthodox Church Mosaic of Christ Pantocrator , Hagia Sophia Overview Structure Theology ( History of theology ) Liturgy Church history Holy Mysteries View of Salvation View of Mary View of icons Background Crucifixion / Resurrection / Ascension of Jesus Christianity Christian Church Apostolic succession Four Marks of the Church Orthodoxy Organization Autonomy Autocephaly Patriarchate Ecumenical Patriarch Episcopal polity Canon law Clergy Bishops Priests Deacons Monasticism Degrees Bratstvo Autocephalous jurisdictions Autocephalous Churches who are officially part of the communion: Constantinople Alexandria Antioch Jerusalem Russia Serbia Romania Bulgaria Georgia Cyprus Greece Poland Albania Czech Lands and Slovakia Autocephaly recognized by some autocephalous Churches de jure : America North Macedonia Autocephaly and canonicity recognized by Constantinople and 3 other autocephalous Churches: Ukraine (OCU) Spiritual independence recognized by Georgian Orthodox Church: Ukraine (UOC) Autonomous jurisdictions Sinai (JP) Finland (EP) Estonia (EP) Japan (MP) China (MP) Americas (RP) Bessarabia (RP) Moldova (MP) Semi-Autonomous: Crete (EP) Estonia (MP) ROCOR (MP) Episcopal assemblies Australia, New Zealand, and Oceania Austria Belgium, Holland, and Luxembourg Canada France Germany Great Britain and Ireland Italy and Malta Latin America Scandinavia Spain and Portugal Switzerland and Liechtenstein United States of America Noncanonical jurisdictions Old Believers Spiritual Christianity True Orthodoxy Catacomb Church Old Calendarists American Orthodox Catholic Church American World Patriarchs National churches: Abkhazia Belarus Italy Latvia Montenegro Turkey UOC–KP Evangelical Orthodox Ecumenical councils First Seven Ecumenical Councils : Nicaea I Constantinople I Ephesus Chalcedon Constantinople II Constantinople III Nicaea II Other possible ecumenical councils: Constantinople IV Constantinople V Other important councils: Quinisext Council Jassy Moscow Jerusalem Constantinople (1872) History Church Fathers Pentarchy Byzantine Empire Christianization of Georgia Christianization of Bulgaria Christianization of Kievan Rus' Great Schism Russia Ottoman Empire North America Moscow–Constantinople schism 15th–16th c.

1996 2018 Theology History of Eastern Orthodox theology ( 20th century (Neo-Palamism) ) Apophaticism Chrismation Contemplative prayer Essence vs. Energies Hesychasm Holy Trinity Hypostatic union Icons Metousiosis Mystical theology Nicene Creed Nepsis Oikonomia vs Akribeia Ousia Palamism Philokalia Phronema Sin Theosis Theotokos Differences from the Catholic Church Opposition to the Filioque Opposition to papal supremacy Liturgy and worship Divine Liturgy Divine Services Akathist Apolytikion Artos Ectenia Euchologion Holy Water Iconostasis Jesus Prayer Aprakos Kontakion Liturgical entrances Liturgical fans Lity Memorial service Memory Eternal Omophorion Eastern Orthodox bowing Eastern Orthodox marriage Praxis Paraklesis Paschal greeting Paschal Homily Paschal troparion Prayer rope Prosphora Russian bell ringing Semantron Sign of the cross Sticheron Troparion Vestments Use of incense Liturgical calendar Paschal cycle 12 Great Feasts Other feasts: Feast of Orthodoxy Intercession of the Theotokos The four fasting periods: Nativity Fast Great Lent Apostles' Fast Dormition Fast Major figures Saints ( Russian (until 15th century) , Russian (post-15th century) , Serbian , American ) Justin Martyr Athanasius of Alexandria Ephraim the Syrian Basil of Caesarea Cyril of Jerusalem Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa John Chrysostom Cyril of Alexandria John Climacus Maximus the Confessor John of Damascus Theodore the Studite Kassia Cyril and Methodius Photius I of Constantinople Vladimir the Great Sava I of Serbia Gregory Palamas Innocent of Alaska Other topics Architecture Folk Encyclical of the Eastern Patriarchs Cross Saint titles Statistics by country v t e Those who wrote in Greek are called the Greek (Church) Fathers. In addition to the Apostolic Fathers, famous Greek Fathers include: Justin Martyr , Irenaeus of Lyons , Clement of Alexandria , Origen of Alexandria , Athanasius of Alexandria , the Cappadocian Fathers ( Basil of Caesarea , Gregory Nazianzus , Gregory of Nyssa ), Peter of Sebaste , Diodorus of Tarsus , Theodore of Mopsuestia , John Chrysostom , Cyril of Alexandria , Maximus the Confessor , and John of Damascus .

In the Catholic Church tradition, Athanasius of Alexandria ( c.

296 or 298 – 373), Basil of Caesarea ( c.

330 – 379), Gregory of Nazianzus (329 – c.

390 ), and John Chrysostom (347–407) are four Greek Church Fathers who are called the "Great Church Fathers", and in the Eastern Orthodox Church , three of these (Basil of Caesarea, Gregory of Nazianzus and John Chrysostom) are honored as the " Three Holy Hierarchs ".

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] Justin Martyr [ edit ] Main articles: Justin Martyr and First Apology of Justin Martyr Justin Martyr was an early Christian apologist , and is regarded as the foremost interpreter of the theory of the Logos in the 2nd century.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] He was martyred , alongside some of his students, and is considered a saint by the Catholic Church , [ 21 ] Anglicanism , [ 22 ] the Eastern Orthodox Church , [ 23 ] and the Oriental Orthodox Churches .

Irenaeus of Lyons [ edit ] Main article: Irenaeus Irenaeus was bishop of Lugdunum in Gaul , which is now Lyon (s), France. His writings were formative in the early development of Christian theology, and he is recognized as a saint by both the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Catholic Church. He was a notable early Christian apologist . He was also a disciple of Polycarp.

In his best-known book, Against Heresies (c. 180), he enumerated heresies and attacked them. Irenaeus wrote that the only way for Christians to retain unity was to humbly accept one doctrinal authority—episcopal councils.

[ 9 ] Irenaeus proposed that the Gospels of Matthew , Mark , Luke and John all be accepted as canonical .

Clement of Alexandria [ edit ] Main article: Clement of Alexandria Clement of Alexandria (c. 150–215) was the first member of the church of Alexandria whose writings have survived, and was one of its most distinguished teachers. He saw wisdom in Greek philosophy and sought to harmonize it with Christian doctrine. Clement opposed Gnosticism , and yet used some of its terminology; for instance, he valued gnosis that with communion for all people could be held by common Christians. He developed a Christian Platonism [ 9 ] and has been described by scholars as "the founder of what was to become the great tradition of Christian philosophical theology." [ 24 ] Due to his teaching on salvation and divine judgement in passages such as Paedagogus 1.8 and Stromata 7.2, Clement is often regarded as one of the first Christian universalists .

[ 25 ] Like Origen, he arose from the Catechetical School of Alexandria and was well-versed in pagan and biblical literature.

[ 9 ] Origen of Alexandria [ edit ] Main article: Origen Origen, or Origen Adamantius ( c.

185 – c.

254 ) was a scholar and theologian. According to tradition, he was an Egyptian [ 26 ] who taught in Alexandria, reviving the Catechetical School where Clement had taught. The patriarch of Alexandria at first supported Origen but later expelled him for being ordained without the patriarch's permission. He relocated to Caesarea Maritima and died there [ 27 ] after being tortured during a persecution. He later became a controversial figure and some of his writings were condemned as heretical.
Using his knowledge of Hebrew, he produced a corrected Septuagint .

[ 9 ] He wrote commentaries on all the books of the Bible.

[ 9 ] In Peri Archon ( First Principles ), he articulated a systematic philosophical exposition of Christian doctrine.

[ 9 ] He at times employed an allegorical hermeneutic in his interpretation of the Old Testament, and was partly influenced by Stoic , Neo-Pythagorean , and Platonist thought.

[ 9 ] Like Plotinus , he has been thought to believe that the soul passes through successive stages before incarnation as a human and after death, eventually reaching God.

[ 9 ] However, more recent scholarship has concluded that Origen actually denied the preexistence of disembodied souls, and simply taught the preexistence of individuals' logoi in the mind of God.

[ 28 ] Yet Origen did suggest, based on 1 Corinthians 15:22–28, that all creatures, possibly including even the fallen angels, will eventually be restored and reunited to God when evil is finally eradicated. For Origen, God was the First Principle , and Christ , the Logos [ 9 ] through whom salvation is accomplished. Origen's various writings were interpreted by some to imply a hierarchical structure in the Trinity , the temporality of matter, "the fabulous preexistence of souls", and "the monstrous restoration which follows from it." These alleged "Origenist errors" were declared anathema by a council in 553, three centuries after Origen had died in the peace of the church.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Athanasius of Alexandria [ edit ] St. Athanasius, depicted with a gospel book, an iconographic symbol used mostly for priests and bishops as preachers of the gospel Main article: Athanasius of Alexandria Athanasius of Alexandria ( c.

293 – 373) was a theologian, Pope of Alexandria , and a noted Egyptian leader of the 4th century. He is remembered for his role in the conflict with Arianism and for his affirmation of the Trinity. At the First Council of Nicaea (325), Athanasius argued against the Arian doctrine that Christ is of a distinct substance from the Father.

[ 9 ] Cappadocian Fathers [ edit ] Main article: Cappadocian Fathers The Cappadocian Fathers are Basil the Great (330–379), who was bishop of Caesarea ; Basil's younger brother Gregory of Nyssa ( c.

332 – 395), who was bishop of Nyssa ; and a close friend, Gregory of Nazianzus (329–389), who became Patriarch of Constantinople .

[ 31 ] The Cappadocians promoted early Christian theology and are highly respected in both Western and Eastern churches as saints. They were a 4th-century monastic family, led by Macrina the Younger (324–379) to provide a central place for her brothers to study and meditate, and also to provide a peaceful shelter for their mother. Abbess Macrina fostered the education and development of her three brothers Basil the Great, Gregory of Nyssa and Peter of Sebaste ( c.

340 – 391) who became bishop of Sebaste.

These scholars set out to demonstrate that Christians could hold their own in conversations with learned Greek-speaking intellectuals. They argued that Christian faith, while it was against many of the ideas of Plato and Aristotle (and other Greek philosophers), was an almost scientific and distinctive movement with the healing of the soul of man and his union with God at its center. They made major contributions to the definition of the Trinity finalized at the First Council of Constantinople in 381 and the final version of the Nicene Creed .

Subsequent to the First Council of Nicea, Arianism did not simply disappear. The semi-Arians taught that the Son is of like substance with the Father ( homoiousios ), as against the outright Arians who taught that the Son was unlike the Father ( heterousian ). So the Son was held to be like the Father but not of the same essence as the Father.
The Cappadocians worked to bring these semi-Arians back to the Orthodox cause. In their writings they made extensive use of the formula "three substances ( hypostases ) in one essence ( homoousia )", and thus explicitly acknowledged a distinction between the Father and the Son (a distinction that Nicea had been accused of blurring) but at the same time insisting on their essential unity.

John Chrysostom [ edit ] Main article: John Chrysostom John Chrysostom ( c.

347 – c.

407 ), archbishop of Constantinople , is known for his eloquence in preaching and public speaking ; his denunciation of abuse of authority by both ecclesiastical and political leaders, recorded sermons and writings making him the most prolific of the eastern fathers, and his ascetic sensibilities. After his death (or according to some sources, during his life) he was given the Greek epithet chrysostomos , meaning "golden mouthed", rendered in English as Chrysostom.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Chrysostom is known within Christianity chiefly as a preacher and theologian, particularly in the Eastern Orthodox Church; he is the patron saint of orators in the Catholic Church. Chrysostom is also noted for eight of his sermons that played a considerable part in the history of Christian antisemitism , diatribes against Judaizers composed while a presbyter in Antioch, which were extensively exploited and misused by the Nazis in their ideological campaign against the Jews.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Patristic scholars such as Robert L Wilken point out that applying modern understandings of antisemitism back to Chrysostom is anachronistic due to his use of the Psogos. The Psogos, along with the encomium, were both rhetorical techniques used in the ancient world in a polemical context. With the encomium "one passes over a man's faults in order to praise him, and in a psogos, one passed over his virtues to defame him. Such principles are explicit in the handbooks of the rhetors, but an interesting passage from the church historian Socrates, writing in the mid-fifth century, shows that the rules for invective were simply taken for granted by men and women of the late Roman world." [ 36 ] Chrysostom's sermons along with Basil the Great's have greatly influenced the Christian Church's understanding of economic and distributive justice for the poor, being cited extensively by the Catechism of the Catholic Church [ 37 ] as well as Pope Francis in his own sermons critiquing modern-day forms of capitalism.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Theodore of Mopsuestia [ edit ] Main article: Theodore of Mopsuestia Theodore of Mopsuestia ( c.

350 – 428 ) was a Christian theologian, and Bishop of Mopsuestia (as Theodore II) from 392 to 428 AD. He is also known as Theodore of Antioch, from the place of his birth and presbyterate. He is the best known representative of the middle Antioch School of hermeneutics .

[ 40 ] He is known to be a prolific writer and exegete with strong emphases on the literal, historical and rational interpretation of Christian scriptures. Throughout his lifetime, he was hailed as one of the outstanding, prolific biblical theologians and staunch defender of Christ's humanity. More than a century after his death, he was condemned in person in the Chalcedonian Church at the Second Council of Constantinople .

[ 41 ] However he continues to be recognised as a Greek Doctor in the Church of the East, which honours him with the title 'Theodore the Interpreter'.

[ 42 ] In 394, he attended a synod at Constantinople on a question which concerned the see of Bostra in the patriarchate of Antioch. While there, Theodore had the opportunity to preach before the emperor Theodosius I , who was then starting for his last journey to the West. The sermon made a deep impression, and Theodosius, who had sat at the feet of Ambrose and Gregory Nazianzus , declared that he had never met with such a teacher (John of Antioch, ap. Facund. ii.2).

Theodosius II inherited his grandfather's respect for Theodore, and often wrote to him. Another glimpse of Theodore's episcopal life is supplied by a letter of Chrysostom to him from Cucusus (AD 404–407) (Chrys. Ep. 212). The exiled patriarch "can never forget the love of Theodore, so genuine and warm, so sincere and guileless, a love maintained from early years, and manifested but now." Chrysostom (Ep. 204) thanks him profoundly for frequent though ineffectual efforts to obtain his release, and praises their friendship in such glowing terms that Theodore's enemies at the fifth Ecumenical Council made unsuccessful efforts to deny the identity of Chrysostom's correspondent with the bishop of Mopsuestia.

[ 43 ] Cyril of Alexandria [ edit ] Main article: Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria ( c.

378 – 444) was the Bishop of Alexandria when the city was at its height of influence and power within the Roman Empire . Cyril wrote extensively and was a leading protagonist in the Christological controversies of the late 4th and early 5th centuries. He was a central figure in the First Council of Ephesus in 431, which led to the deposition of Nestorius as Archbishop of Constantinople . Cyril's reputation within the Christian world has resulted in his titles "Pillar of Faith" and "Seal of all the Fathers".

Maximus the Confessor [ edit ] Main article: Maximus the Confessor Maximus the Confessor (also known as Maximus the Theologian and Maximus of Constantinople) ( c.

580 – 662) was a Christian monk, theologian, and scholar. In his early life, he was a civil servant and an aide to the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius ; however, he gave up this life in the political sphere to enter into the monastic life.

After moving to Carthage , Maximus studied several Neo-Platonist writers and became a prominent author. When one of his friends began espousing the Christological position known as Monothelitism , Maximus was drawn into the controversy, in which he supported the Chalcedonian position that Jesus had both a human and a divine will. Maximus is venerated in both Eastern Christianity and Western Christianity. His Christological positions eventually resulted in his torture and exile, soon after which he died; however, his theology was vindicated by the Third Council of Constantinople , and he was venerated as a saint soon after his death. His feast day is celebrated twice during the year: on 21 January and on 13 August. His title of Confessor means that he suffered for the faith, but not to the point of death, and thus is distinguished from a martyr. His Life of the Virgin is thought to be the earliest complete biography of Mary, the mother of Jesus.

John of Damascus [ edit ] Main article: John of Damascus John of Damascus ( c.

676 – 749) was a Syrian Christian monk, priest, hymnographer and apologist. Born and raised in Damascus , he died at his monastery, Mar Saba , near Jerusalem.

A polymath whose fields of interest and contribution included law, theology, philosophy, and music, he was given the by-name of Chrysorrhoas (Χρυσορρόας, literally "streaming with gold", i.e. "the golden speaker"). He wrote numerous works expounding the Christian faith, and composed hymns which are still used both liturgically in Eastern Christian practice throughout the world as well as in western Lutheranism at Easter.

[ 44 ] He was particularly known for his defense of icons .

[ 45 ] The Catholic Church regards him as a Doctor of the Church , often referred to as the Doctor of the Assumption because of his writings on the Assumption of Mary.

Latin Fathers [ edit ] The four Great Latin  Fathers. From the left: Augustine of Hippo , Pope Gregory I , Jerome , and Ambrose .

Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Those fathers who wrote in Latin are called the Latin (Church) Fathers. In the Catholic Church tradition, Ambrose (AD 340–397), Jerome (347–420), Augustine of Hippo (354–430), and Pope Gregory I (540–604) are four Latin Church Fathers each who are called the "Great Church Fathers".

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Tertullian [ edit ] Main article: Tertullian Quintus Septimius Florens Tertullianus ( c.

155 – c.

222 ), who was converted to Christianity before 197, was a prolific writer of apologetic, theological, controversial and ascetic works.

[ 46 ] He was born in Carthage, the son of a Roman centurion.

Tertullian denounced Christian doctrines he considered heretical, such as allowing widows to remarry and permitting Christians to flee from persecution, but later in life adopted Montanism , regarded as heretical by the mainstream Church, which prevented his canonization. He wrote three books in Greek and was the first great writer of Latin Christianity, thus sometimes known as the "Father of the Latin Church".

[ 47 ] He was evidently a lawyer in Rome.

[ 48 ] He is said to have introduced the Latin term trinitas with regard to the Divine ( Trinity ) to the Christian vocabulary [ 49 ] (but Theophilus of Antioch had already written of "the Trinity, of God, and His Word, and His Wisdom", which is similar but not identical to the Trinitarian wording), [ 50 ] and also probably the formula "three Persons, one Substance" as the Latin " tres Personae , una Substantia " (itself from the Koine Greek "τρεῖς ὑποστάσεις, ὁμοούσιος; treís hypostasis , Homoousios "), and also the terms vetus testamentum ( Old Testament ) and novum testamentum ( New Testament ).

In his Apologeticus , he was the first Latin author who qualified Christianity as the vera religio , and systematically relegated the classical Roman imperial religion and other accepted cults to the position of mere "superstitions".

He used the early church's symbol for fish—the Greek word for "fish" being ΙΧΘΥΣ , which is an acronym for Ἰησοῦς Χριστός, Θεοῦ Υἱός, Σωτήρ (Jesus Christ, God's Son, Saviour)—to explain the meaning of baptism, since fish are born in water. He wrote that human beings are like little fish.

Cyprian of Carthage [ edit ] Main article: Cyprian of Carthage Cyprian ( c.

200 – 258) was bishop of Carthage and an important early Christian writer. He was born in North Africa , probably at the beginning of the 3rd century, perhaps at Carthage, where he received an excellent classical ( pagan ) education. After converting to Christianity, he became a bishop and eventually died a martyr at Carthage. He emphasized the necessity of the unity of Christians with their bishops, and also the authority of the Roman See, which he claimed was the source of "priestly unity"'.

Hilary of Poitiers [ edit ] Main article: Hilary of Poitiers Hilary of Poitiers ( c.

300 – c.

368 ) was Bishop of Poitiers and is a Doctor of the Church. He was sometimes referred to as the "Hammer of the Arians" ( Latin : Malleus Arianorum ) and the "Athanasius of the West". His name comes from the Graeco-Latin word for happy or cheerful. His optional memorial in the General Roman Calendar is 13 January. In the past, when this date was occupied by the Octave Day of the Epiphany, his feast day was moved to 14 January.

Ambrose of Milan [ edit ] Main article: Ambrose of Milan Ambrose [ b ] was an archbishop of Milan who became one of the most influential ecclesiastical figures of the 4th century. He was a governor before becoming bishop. He is counted as one of the four original doctors of the Church. He offered a new perspective on the theory of atonement .

[ which?

] Pope Damasus I [ edit ] Pope Damasus I (305–384) was active in defending the Catholic Church against the threat of schisms. In two Roman synods (368 and 369) he condemned the heresies of Apollinarianism and Macedonianism, and sent legates (papal representatives) to the First Council of Constantinople that was convoked in 381 to address these heresies. He also wrote in defense of the Roman See's authority, and inaugurated use of Latin in the Mass , instead of the Koine Greek that was still being used throughout the Church in the west in the liturgy.

Jerome of Stridonium [ edit ] Main article: Jerome Print of Jerome in his study. Preserved in the Ghent University Library .

[ 51 ] Jerome ( c.

347 – 420) is best known as the translator of the Bible from Greek and Hebrew into Latin. He also was a Christian apologist. Jerome's edition of the Bible, the Vulgate , is still an important text of Catholicism . He is recognised by the Catholic Church as a Doctor of the Church.

Augustine of Hippo [ edit ] Main article: Augustine of Hippo Augustine (354–430), Bishop of Hippo, was a philosopher and theologian. Augustine, a Latin Father and Doctor of the Church, is one of the most important figures in the development of Western Christianity . In his early life, Augustine read widely in Greco-Roman rhetoric and philosophy, including the works of Platonists such as Plotinus .

[ 52 ] He framed the concepts of original sin and just war as they are understood in the West. When Rome fell and the faith of many Christians was shaken, Augustine wrote The City of God , in which he defended Christianity from pagan critics and developed the concept of the Church as a spiritual City of God , distinct from the material City of Man.

[ 9 ] Augustine's work defined the start of the medieval worldview , an outlook that would later be firmly established by Pope Gregory the Great .

[ 9 ] Augustine was born in present-day Algeria to a Christian mother, Monica of Hippo . He was educated in North Africa and resisted his mother's pleas to become Christian. He took a concubine and became a Manichean . He later converted to Christianity, became a bishop, and opposed heresies, such as Pelagianism . His many works—including The Confessions , which is often called the first Western autobiography —have been read continuously since his lifetime. The Catholic religious order, the Order of Saint Augustine , adopted his name and way of life. Augustine is also the patron saint of many institutions and a number have been named after him.

Pope Leo the Great [ edit ] Pope Leo I ( c.

400 – 461) was pope from 29 September 440 until his death. He was active in defending the Latin Church against the threat of schism associated with Monophysitism , Miaphysitism and Dyophysitism , most remembered theologically for issuing the Tome of Leo , a document which was a major foundation to the debates of the Council of Chalcedon , the fourth ecumenical council .

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] Pope Gregory the Great [ edit ] Main article: Gregory the Great Gregory I the Great ( c.

540 – 604) was pope from 3 September 590 until his death.
He is also known as Gregorius Dialogus ( Gregory the Dialogist ) in Eastern Orthodoxy because of the Dialogues he wrote. He was the first of the popes from a monastic background. Gregory is a Doctor of the Church and one of the four great Latin Fathers of the Church (the others being Ambrose, Augustine, and Jerome). Of all popes, Gregory I had the most influence on the early medieval church.

[ 57 ] Isidore of Seville [ edit ] Main article: Isidore of Seville Isidore of Seville ( c.

560 – 636) was Archbishop of Seville for more than three decades and is considered, as the historian Montalembert put it in an oft-quoted phrase, "le dernier savant du monde ancien" ("the last scholar of the ancient world"). Indeed, all the later medieval history-writing of Hispania (the Iberian Peninsula, comprising modern Spain and Portugal) was based on his histories.

At a time of disintegration of classical culture and aristocratic violence and illiteracy, he was involved in the conversion of the royal Visigothic Arians to Nicene Christianity, both assisting his brother Leander of Seville and continuing after his brother's death. He was influential in the inner circle of Sisebut, Visigothic king of Hispania. Like Leander, he played a prominent role in the Councils of Toledo and Seville. The Visigothic legislation which resulted from these councils is regarded by modern historians as exercising an important influence on the beginnings of representative government.

Syriac Fathers [ edit ] A few Church Fathers wrote in Syriac ; many of their works were also widely translated into Latin and Greek. This includes Aphrahat , Jacob of Nisibis , Ephrem , Narsai , Jacob of Serug , Henana , Aba , Abraham of Izla , Babai , Hormizd and Isaac of Nineveh .

Aphrahat [ edit ] Main article: Aphrahat Aphrahat ( c.

270 – c.

345 was a Syriac-Christian author of the 3rd century from the Adiabene region of Northern Mesopotamia , which was within the Persian Empire , who composed a series of twenty-three expositions or homilies on points of Christian doctrine and practice. He was born in Persia around 270, but all his known works, the Demonstrations , come from later on in his life. He was an ascetic and celibate , and was almost definitely a son of the covenant (an early Syriac form of communal monasticism ). He may have been a bishop , and later Syriac tradition places him at the head of Mar Matti monastery near Mosul , in what is now northern Iraq . He was a near contemporary to the slightly younger Ephrem the Syrian , but the latter lived within the sphere of the Roman Empire . Called the Persian Sage ( Syriac : ܚܟܝܡܐ ܦܪܣܝܐ , ḥakkîmâ p̄ārsāyā), Aphrahat witnesses to the concerns of the early church beyond the eastern boundaries of the Roman Empire.

Ephrem the Syrian [ edit ] Main article: Ephrem the Syrian Ephrem the Syrian (c. 306 – 373) was a Syriac deacon and a prolific Syriac-language hymnographer and theologian of the 4th century from the region of Syria .

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] [ 61 ] His works are hailed by Christians throughout the world, and many denominations venerate him as a saint . He has been declared a Doctor of the Church in the Catholic Church. He is especially beloved in the Syriac Orthodox Church and in the Church of the East .

Ephrem wrote a wide variety of hymns, poems , and sermons in verse, as well as prose biblical exegesis . These were works of practical theology for the edification of the church in troubled times. So popular were his works, that, for centuries after his death, Christian authors wrote hundreds of pseudepigraphal works in his name. He has been called the most significant of all of the fathers of the Syriac-speaking church tradition.

[ 62 ] Isaac of Antioch [ edit ] Main article: Isaac of Antioch Isaac of Antioch (451–452), one of the stars of Syriac literature , is the reputed author of a large number of metrical homilies (The fullest list, by Gustav Bickell , contains 191 which are extant in MSS), many of which are distinguished by an originality and acumen rare among Syriac writers.

Isaac of Nineveh [ edit ] Main article: Isaac of Nineveh Isaac of Nineveh was a 7th-century Syriac bishop and theologian best remembered for his written work. He is also regarded as a saint in the Church of the East , the Catholic Church , the Eastern Orthodox Church and among the Oriental Orthodox Churches, making him the last saint chronologically to be recognised by every apostolic Church. His feast day falls on January 28 and in the Syriac Orthodox calendar on March 14. Isaac is remembered for his spiritual homilies on the inner life, which have a human breadth and theological depth that transcends the Nestorian Christianity of the Church to which he belonged. They survive in Syriac manuscripts and in Greek and Arabic translations.

Desert Fathers [ edit ] Coptic icon depicting Anthony the Great (left) and Paul of Thebes (right) See also: Desert Mothers The Desert Fathers were early monastics living in the Egyptian desert. Although they did not write as much as other Church Fathers, their influence was also great, and they are credited with beginning the practice of monasticism , and codifying many of its features. Among them are Paul of Thebes , Anthony the Great and Pachomius . Many of their, usually short, sayings are collected in the Apophthegmata Patrum ("Sayings of the Desert Fathers").

Modern positions [ edit ] Main article: Consensus Patrum Catholicism [ edit ] In the Catholic Church, the patristic era is believed to have passed. On account of their proximity to ancient sources and particular way of doing theology, John of Damascus and Bernard of Clairvaux are among those considered to be the last of the Church Fathers. However, the Church does grant the similar title of Doctor of the Church to notable post-patristic saints who have made significant contributions to Catholic theology or doctrine.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Eastern Orthodoxy [ edit ] The Eastern Orthodox Church does not consider the age of Church Fathers to be over and includes later influential writers up to the present day. The Orthodox view is that men do not have to agree on every detail, much less be infallible, to be considered Church Fathers. Rather, Orthodox doctrine is determined by the consensus of the Holy Fathers—those points on which they do agree. This consensus guides the church in questions of dogma , the correct interpretation of scripture , and to distinguish the authentic sacred tradition of the Church from false teachings.

[ 65 ] Protestantism [ edit ] The original Lutheran Augsburg Confession of 1530 and the later Formula of Concord of 1576–1584, both begin with the mention of the doctrine professed by the Fathers of the First Council of Nicaea.

[ citation needed ] Though much Protestant theology is based on sola scriptura (the principle that the Bible itself is the ultimate authority in doctrinal matters), the first Protestant reformers, like the Catholic and Orthodox churches, used the theological interpretations of scripture set forth by the early Church Fathers.

[ citation needed ] John Calvin 's French Confession of Faith of 1559 states, "And we confess that which has been established by the ancient councils, and we detest all sects and heresies which were rejected by the holy doctors, such as St. Hilary, St. Athanasius, St. Ambrose and St. Cyril." [ page needed ] [ 66 ] The Scots Confession of 1560 deals with general councils in its 20th chapter. The Thirty-nine Articles of the Church of England , both the original of 1562–1571 and the American version of 1801, explicitly accept the Nicene Creed in Article VII. Even when a particular Protestant confessional formula does not mention the Nicene Council or its creed, its doctrine is nonetheless always asserted, as, for example, in the Presbyterian Westminster Confession of 1647. Many Protestant seminaries provide courses on patristics as part of their curriculum, and many historic Protestant churches emphasize the importance of tradition and of the fathers in scriptural interpretation. Such an emphasis is even more pronounced in certain streams of Protestant thought, such as Paleo-Orthodoxy .

[ citation needed ] Patristics [ edit ] Main article: Patristics The study of the Church Fathers is known as patristics .

Works of fathers in early Christianity , prior to Nicene Christianity , were translated into English in a 19th-century collection Ante-Nicene Fathers . Those of the First Council of Nicaea and continuing through the Second Council of Nicea (787) are collected in Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers .

See also [ edit ] Christian apologetics Confessor of the Faith Great Church Historiography of early Christianity List of Church Fathers List of Christian women of the patristic age List of Eastern Orthodox saint titles Patron Saints of Europe Sacred tradition Clavis Patrum Graecorum Notes [ edit ] ^ Byzantine Iconoclasm began in AD 726, John of Damascus died in AD 749; the last of the seven ecumenical councils took place in AD 787.

^ Known in Latin and Low Franconian as Ambrosius , in Italian as Ambrogio and in Lombard as Ambroeus .

References [ edit ] ^ Plekon, Michael (2003).

Tradition Alive: On the Church and the Christian Life in Our Time : Readings from the Eastern Church . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 70.

ISBN 978-0-7425-3163-5 .

^ Brown, Stephen F. (2011). "Church Fathers".

Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy . Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy. pp.

209– 216.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4_125 .

ISBN 978-1-4020-9728-7 .

These teachers, both in the East and the West, manifested the strength of Christian truth and the power of Christian life in their writings that marked this period as the Golden Age of the Fathers. The end of the Patristic era is generally marked in the West with the death of St. Isidore of Seville (d. c. 636) and in the East with the death of St. John of Damascus (d. c. 750). The writings of the Fathers have been given great respect both in their role of establishing the Christian tradition of beliefs and patterns of living and also as works that provide a deeper grasp of the meaning of Christian truths or provoke questions that lead Christians to a deeper understanding of their beliefs.

^ Preus, J.A.O. (1984). "The Use of the Church Fathers in the Formula of Concord".

Concordia Theological Quarterly .

48 ( 2– 3): 97—112.

^ Kelly, John N. D.

"Patristic literature" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 3 December 2019 . Retrieved 11 May 2018 .

^ Rasmussen, Adam (10 June 2011).

"Who are the Fathers of the Church? A chronological list" .

Catholic Theology .

Archived from the original on 15 July 2023 . Retrieved 11 May 2018 .

^ Peterson, John Bertram (1913).

"The Apostolic Fathers" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Wolfson, Harry Austryn (1956).

The Philosophy of the Church Fathers: Faith, Trinity, Incarnation . Harvard University Press.

^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Pope St. Clement I" .

www.newadvent.org .

Archived from the original on 2017-12-26 . Retrieved 2024-07-18 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Durant, Will (1972).

Caesar and Christ . New York: Simon and Schuster.

^ Di Berardino, Angelo (2014).

Encyclopedia of Ancient Christianity . IVP Academic. p. 1:549.

^ Elliott, John.

1 Peter . Doubleday, Toronto, 2000. Page 138.

^ "The Ecclesiastical Canons of the Same Holy Apostles" .

Christian Classics Ethereal Library . Ante-Nicene Fathers.

Grand Rapids, Michigan , U.S.A.: Eerdmans Pub Co.

Archived from the original on 2019-05-15 . Retrieved 2020-10-09 .

^ Ibn Khaldun (1958) [1377].

"Chapter 3.31. Remarks on the words "Pope" and "Patriarch" in the Christian religion and on the word "Kohen" used by the Jews" .

Muqaddimah . Translated by Rosenthal, Franz.

Archived from the original on 2023-07-25 . Retrieved 2020-10-13 .

.

^ See "Ignatius" in The Westminster Dictionary of Church History , ed. Jerald Brauer (Philadelphia:Westminster, 1971) and also David Hugh Farmer, "Ignatius of Antioch" in The Oxford Dictionary of the Saints (New York:Oxford University Press, 1987).

^ Polycarp of Smyrna; Ignatius of Antioch; Clement of Rome (1912).

The Apostolic Fathers . Loeb classical library. Translated by Lake, Kirsopp. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. p. 280.

hdl : 2027/hvd.32044016963696 .

ISBN 9780674990289 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b Hall, Christopher A. (August 17, 1998).

Reading Scripture with the Church Fathers . InterVarsity Press. p. 55.

ISBN 0830815007 .

^ a b MacDonald, Paul S. (March 2003).

History of the Concept of Mind . Ashgate. p. 124.

ISBN 0754613658 .

^ Parry, David (1999).

The Blackwell Dictionary of Eastern Christianity . Oxford: Blackwell. pp.

491– 492.

ISBN 0-631-18966-1 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Rokeah (2002) Justin Martyr and the Jews p.22.

^ Philippe Bobichon, Dialogue with Trypho , critical edition and French translation, vol. 1 Archived 2021-04-02 at the Wayback Machine ; vol. 2 Archived 2021-04-11 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Lebreton, Jules (1910). " St. Justin Martyr ". In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 7. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ "For All the Saints" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-05-24 . Retrieved 2012-11-08 .

^ "Justin the Philosopher & Martyr and his Companions" .

Archived from the original on 2010-06-20 . Retrieved 2011-04-02 .

^ Bray .

God Has Spoken . p. 202.

^ Ramelli .

The Christian Doctrine of Apokatastasis . pp.

119– 136.

^ Sarton, George (1936). "The Unity and Diversity of the Mediterranean World".

Osiris .

2 : 430.

doi : 10.1086/368462 .

S2CID 143379839 .

^ "About Caesarea" .

Archived from the original on 2022-06-22 . Retrieved 2008-02-16 .

^ Ramelli (2019).

A Larger Hope, Volume 1 . Cascade Books. pp.

226– 227.

^ The Anathemas Against Origen Archived 2023-07-26 at the Wayback Machine , by the Fifth Ecumenical Council (Schaff, Philip, "The Seven Ecumenical Councils", Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers , Series 2, Vol. 14. Edinburgh: T&T Clark) ^ The Anathematisms of the Emperor Justinian Against Origen Archived 2013-10-21 at the Wayback Machine (Schaff, op. cit.

) ^ "Commentary on Song of Songs; Letter on the Soul; Letter on Ascesis and the Monastic Life" .

World Digital Library .

Archived from the original on 26 November 2011 . Retrieved 6 March 2013 .

^ Pope Vigilius , Constitution of Pope Vigilius , 553 ^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"St. John Chrysostom" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Walter Laqueur, The Changing Face of Antisemitism: From Ancient Times To The Present Day , (Oxford University Press: 2006), p.48.

ISBN 0-19-530429-2 .  48 ^ Yohanan (Hans) Lewy (1997). "John Chrysostom". In Roth, Cecil (ed.).

Encyclopaedia Judaica (CD-ROM version 1.0 ed.). Keter Publishing House.

ISBN 965-07-0665-8 .

^ John Chrysostom and the Jews: Rhetoric and Reality in the Late 4th Century, by Robert L. Wilken (University of California Press: Berkeley, 1983), p. 112.

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church – The seventh commandment" .

www.vatican.va . Archived from the original on 2002-09-10.

^ "St. John Chrysostom and Pope Francis: What they have in common" . 12 September 2014.

Archived from the original on 25 July 2023 . Retrieved 11 August 2019 .

^ "What St. John Chrysostom Can Teach Us About Social Justice" . 6 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 25 July 2023 . Retrieved 11 August 2019 .

^ "Theodore Of Mopsuestia | Syrian theologian | Britannica" .

Archived from the original on 2023-03-12 . Retrieved 2023-03-12 .

^ McLeod 2009 .

^ "ഗ്രീക്ക് സഭാപിതാക്കന്മാരുടെ ഓർമ്മ" (PDF) .

syromalabarliturgy.org (in Malayalam).

^ McLeod, Frederick (2009). Harrison, Carol (ed.).

Theodore of Mopsuestia . The Early Church Fathers. United Kingdom: Routledge.

ISBN 9781134079278 .

^ Lutheran Service Book (Concordia Publishing House, St. Louis, 2006), pp. 478, 487.

^ Aquilina, Mike (1999).

The Fathers of the Church: An Introduction to the First Christian Teachers (illustrated ed.). Our Sunday Visitor Publishing. p. 222.

ISBN 978-0-87-973689-7 .

^ Cross, F. L., ed. (2005). "Tertullian".

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . New York: Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acref/9780192802903.001.0001 .

ISBN 9780192802903 .

^ Vincent of Lerins in 434 AD Archived 2023-06-03 at the Wayback Machine , Commonitorium , 17, describes Tertullian as 'first of us among the Latins' (Quasten IV, p.549) ^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Tertullian" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ A History of Christian Thought , Paul Tillich , Touchstone Books, 1972.

ISBN 0-671-21426-8 (p. 43) ^ "To Autolycus, Book 2, chapter XV" .

Archived from the original on 2023-02-08 . Retrieved 2008-03-24 .

^ "Hiëronymus in zijn studeervertrek" .

lib.ugent.be .

Archived from the original on 2023-10-06 . Retrieved 2020-10-02 .

^ Cross, F. L., ed.

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . New York: Oxford University Press. 2005, article Platonism ^ Neil, B. (2009).

Leo the Great . The Early Church Fathers. Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-1-135-28408-4 .

^ Davis, SJ , Leo Donald (1990).

The First Seven Ecumenical Councils (325–787): Their History and Theology (Theology and Life Series 21) . Collegeville, MN: Michael Glazier/Liturgical Press. pp.

342 .

ISBN 978-0-8146-5616-7 .

^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Pope St. Leo I (The Great)" .

Newadvent.org .

Archived from the original on 9 September 2012 . Retrieved 24 January 2022 .

^ "Philip Schaff: NPNF2-14. The Seven Ecumenical Councils - Christian Classics Ethereal Library" .

Ccel.org .

Archived from the original on 24 July 2012 . Retrieved 24 January 2022 .

^ Pope St. Gregory I Archived 2007-02-27 at the Wayback Machine at about.com ^ Karim, Cyril Aphrem (December 2004).

Symbols of the cross in the writings of the early Syriac Fathers . Gorgias Press LLC. p. 3.

ISBN 978-1-59333-230-3 . Retrieved 8 June 2011 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Lipiński, Edward (2000).

The Aramaeans: their ancient history, culture, religion . Peeters Publishers. p. 11.

ISBN 978-90-429-0859-8 . Retrieved 8 June 2011 .

^ Possekel, Ute (1999).

Evidence of Greek philosophical concepts in the writings of Ephrem the Syrian . Peeters Publishers. p. 1.

ISBN 978-90-429-0759-1 . Retrieved 8 June 2011 .

^ Cameron, Averil; Kuhrt, Amélie (1993).

Images of women in antiquity . Psychology Press. p. 288.

ISBN 978-0-415-09095-7 . Retrieved 8 June 2011 .

^ Parry, Ken, ed. (1999).

The Blackwell Dictionary of Eastern Christianity . Malden: Blackwell Publishing. p. 180.

doi : 10.1002/9781405166584 .

ISBN 9781405166584 .

Archived from the original on 2022-11-08 . Retrieved 2022-11-08 .

^ Pius XII.

"Doctor Mellifluus" .

The Holy See .

Archived from the original on 21 April 2023 . Retrieved 6 August 2020 .

^ Stephen Beale (20 February 2018).

"Who Was the Last of the Church Fathers?" .

National Catholic Register .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2023 . Retrieved 26 February 2023 .

^ Pomazansky, Michael (1984) [1973, in Russian], Orthodox Dogmatic Theology (English trans.) , Platina CA: Saint Herman of Alaska Brotherhood, pp. 37, ff, archived from the original on 2023-04-04 , retrieved 2015-06-18 ^ Henry Beveridge , trans.

Calvin's Tracts (Calvin Translation Society, Edinburgh. 1849) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Church Fathers .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Church Fathers .

ChurchFathers.org – All of the Church Fathers' writings broken down by topic. Find writings by the Fathers on everything from the Eucharist, to baptism, to the Virgin Mary, to the Pope Church Fathers' works in English edited by Philip Schaff , at the Christian Classics Ethereal Library Church Fathers at the Patristics In English Project Site Early Church Fathers Additional Texts Part of the Tertullian corpus .

Excerpts from Defensor Grammaticus Excerpts from the Church Fathers The Fathers, the Scholastics, and Ourselves by von Balthasar Faulkner University Patristics Project A growing collection of English translations of patristic texts and high-resolution scans from the comprehensive Patrologia compiled by J. P. Migne.

Early Church Fathers Writings Ante Nicene, Nicene and Post Nicene Fathers Writings from the church fathers at www.goarch.com.

Archived 2008-09-22 at the Wayback Machine The Fathers of the Church: A New Translation , by Dr. Roy Joseph Deferrari and Dr. Ludwig Schopp. Works hosted at the Internet Archive Migne Patrologia Latina and Graeca : a free digital edition of almost all the original texts.

Catholic Encyclopedia: The Fathers of the Church v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e Eastern Orthodox Church Autocephalous and autonomous churches of Eastern Orthodoxy Autocephalous churches Four ancient patriarchates Constantinople Bartholomew I Alexandria Theodore II Antioch John X Jerusalem Theophilos III Junior patriarchates Russia [ a ] Kirill Serbia Porfirije Bulgaria Daniil Romania Daniel Georgia Ilia II Autocephalous archdioceses / metropolises Cyprus George Greece Ieronymos II Albania John Poland Sawa Czech Lands and Slovakia Rastislav America [ b ] Tikhon Ukraine [ b ] Epiphanius Ohrid [ b ] Stefan Autonomous churches Sinai (Jerusalem Patriarchate) Finland (Ecumenical Patriarchate) Estonian AOC (Ecumenical Patriarchate) [ b ] Estonian COC (Moscow Patriarchate) [ b ] Japan (Moscow Patriarchate) [ b ] China (Moscow Patriarchate) [ b ] Ukraine (Moscow Patriarchate) [ c ] Americas (Romanian Patriarchate) Bessarabia (Romanian Patriarchate) [ b ] Moldova (Moscow Patriarchate) [ b ] Semi-autonomous churches Crete (Ecumenical Patriarchate) Russian Orthodox Church Outside of Russia (Moscow Patriarchate) [ d ] North America (Antiochian Patriarchate) Diaspora Assemblies Australia, New Zealand, and Oceania Austria Belgium, Holland, and Luxembourg Canada France Germany Great Britain and Ireland Italy and Malta Latin America Scandinavia Spain and Portugal Switzerland and Liechtenstein United States of America History Apostles in the New Testament First seven ecumenical councils Church Fathers Great Church State church of the Roman Empire East–West Schism Raskol Old Believers Catacomb Church Old Calendarists Moscow–Constantinople schisms 15th–16th c.

1996 2018 Liturgy Byzantine Rite Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom Liturgy of Saint Basil Liturgy of Saint James Liturgy of Saint Mark Western Rite Other Unrecognized Eastern Orthodox churches Eastern Orthodoxy by country Canon law of the Eastern Orthodox Church Christianity portal ^ The ROC severed full communion with the Ecumenical Patriarchate in 2018, and later severed full communion with the primates of the Church of Greece, the Patriarchate of Alexandria, and the Church of Cyprus in 2020.

^ a b c d e f g h i Autocephaly or autonomy is not universally recognized.

^ UOC-MP was moved to formally cut ties with the ROC as of May 27th 2022.

^ Semi-autonomous part of the Russian Orthodox Church whose autonomy is not universally recognized.

v t e History of Christianity Spread History of theology Historicity of the Bible List of martyrs Timeline Centuries 1st 2nd and 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st Early Christianity Origins and Apostolic Age Background Chronology of Jesus birth baptism ministry crucifixion resurrection Great Commission ascension historical Jesus Holy Spirit Apostles in the New Testament Jewish Christianity Split Paul the Apostle Council of Jerusalem Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period Diversity Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Donatism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Canon development Persecution Apostolic / Church Fathers Clement of Rome Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Tertullian Origen Great Church Early African Late antiquity Constantine Constantinian shift Roman state religion Monasticism Councils Nicaea I Creed Christianity Athanasius Jerome Augustine Constantinople I Ephesus I Chalcedon Chalcedonian / Non-Chalcedonian Biblical canon Catholicism ( Timeline ) Papacy Development of primacy Eastern Orthodox opposition Peace and Truce of God Crusading movement Lateran IV Art patronage of Julius II Leo X Counter-Reformation Trent Art Catholic Reformation Jesuits Xavier Thomas More Monastery dissolution Wars Mass rocks and priest holes Guadalupe Jansenists Molinists Neo-Scholasticism Teresa Modernism Independent Catholics Vatican I and Vatican II Ecclesial community Eastern Christianity Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Church of the East Chrysostom Nestorianism Icons Iconodulism Iconoclasm Great Schism Fall of Constantinople Armenia Georgia Greece Egypt Syriac Ethiopia Ottoman Empire Bulgaria Russia Serbia North America Middle Ages Pelagianism Gregory I Celtic Germanic Anglo-Saxon Franks Gothic Scandinavian Iceland Slavs Bohemia Bulgaria Kievan Rus' Moravia Poland Pomerania Investiture Anselm Abelard Bernard Bogomils Bosnian Cathars Apostolic Brethren Dulcinian Crusades Waldensians Inquisition Early Scholasticism Christian mysticism Dominic Francis Bonaventure Aquinas Five Ways Wycliffe Avignon Papal Schism Bohemian Reformation Hus Conciliarism Synods Reformation and Protestantism Erasmus Eucharist Calvinist–Arminian debate Arminianism Wars Resistance theories Separation of church and state Nicodemites Hymnody of continental Europe Formal and material principles Law and Gospel Literature Protestant work ethic Lutheranism Luther Ninety-five Theses Diet of Worms Theology Bible Melanchthon Book of Concord Orthodoxy Eucharist Art Calvinism Zwingli Calvin Huguenots Presbyterianism Scotland Knox TULIP Baptism Dort Three Forms of Unity Westminster Orthodoxy Metrical psalters Anglicanism ( Timeline ) Henry VIII Cranmer Elizabethan 39 Articles Puritans Civil War Church music Book of Common Prayer King James Version Anabaptism Theology Radical Reformation Grebel Swiss Brethren Müntzer Martyrs' Synod Menno Simons Smyth Martyrs Mirror Ausbund 1640–1789 Revivalism Missionaries timeline Baptists Separation of church and state Edicts of toleration Congregationalism First Great Awakening Methodism Millerism Pietism Fostering of early experimental science Neo- and Old Lutherans 1789–present Camp meeting Holiness movement Second Great Awakening Restorationists Jehovah's Witnesses Mormonism Seventh-day Adventist Adventism Oxford Movement Laestadianism Finnish Awakening Christian existentialism Third Great Awakening Azusa Revival Gospel music Fundamentalist – Modernist controversy Pacifism Ecumenism Five solae Jesus movement Pentecostalism Charismatics Liberation theology Reformed epistemology Fourth Great Awakening Evangelical and Mainline Protestants Christian right and left Political influence of Evangelicalism in Latin America v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Church_Fathers&oldid=1306075778 " Categories : Church Fathers 1st-century establishments 8th-century disestablishments Ancient Christianity Christian terminology Christianity in late antiquity Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: publisher location Webarchive template wayback links Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 Malayalam-language sources (ml) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from September 2020 Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2021 Articles containing Syriac-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing Tagalog-language text This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 20:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Church Fathers 75 languages Add topic

