Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Anthropological causes 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Ancient Near East 2.2 Ancient Greco-Roman world 2.3 Middle Ages 2.3.1 Christianisation in the Early Middle Ages 2.3.2 Later Middle Ages 2.3.3 Transition to the early modern witch-hunts 2.4 Early Modern Europe and Colonial America 2.4.1 Execution statistics 2.5 End of European witch-hunts in the 18th century 2.6 India 3 Modern cases Toggle Modern cases subsection 3.1 Middle East 3.1.1 Levant 3.1.2 Saudi Arabia 3.2 Oceania 3.2.1 Papua New Guinea 3.3 Indian Subcontinent 3.3.1 India 3.3.1.1 Recent cases 3.3.2 Nepal 3.4 Sub-Saharan Africa 4 Use of the term in other contexts 5 List of witch trials 6 See also 7 Footnotes 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Witch hunt 52 languages Afrikaans العربية অসমীয়া বাংলা Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Къарачай-малкъар Latina Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ଓଡ଼ିଆ Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Search for witchcraft or subversive activity "Witch trial" redirects here. For other uses, see Witch trial (disambiguation) and Witch hunt (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Witch hunt" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The torture used against accused witches, 1577 Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e A witch hunt , or a witch purge , is a search for people who have been labeled witches or a search for evidence of witchcraft . Practicing evil spells or incantations was proscribed and punishable in early human civilizations in the Middle East . In medieval Europe , witch-hunts often arose in connection to charges of heresy from Catholics and Protestants . An intensive period of witch-hunts occurring in Early Modern Europe and to a smaller extent Colonial America , took place from about 1450 to 1750, spanning the upheavals of the Counter Reformation and the Thirty Years' War , resulting in an estimated 35,000 to 60,000 executions.

[ a ] [ 1 ] The last executions of people convicted as witches in Europe took place in the 18th century. In other regions, like Africa and Asia , contemporary witch-hunts have been reported from sub-Saharan Africa and Papua New Guinea , and official legislation against witchcraft is still found in Saudi Arabia , Cameroon and South Africa today.

In contemporary English, "witch-hunt" metaphorically means an investigation that is usually conducted with much publicity, supposedly to uncover subversive activity, disloyalty, and so on, but with the real purpose of harming opponents.

[ 2 ] It can also involve elements of moral panic , [ 3 ] as well as mass hysteria .

[ 4 ] Anthropological causes [ edit ] Further information: Anthropology of religion , Human sacrifice , Witch trials in the early modern period § Causes and interpretations , and Caliban and the Witch The wide distribution of the practice of witch hunts in geographically and culturally separated societies (Europe, Africa, New Guinea) since the 1960s has triggered interest in the anthropological background of this behaviour. The belief in magic and divination , and attempts to use magic to influence personal well-being (to increase life, win love, etc.) are universal across human cultures.

Belief in witchcraft has been shown to have similarities in societies throughout the world. It presents a framework to explain the occurrence of otherwise random misfortunes such as sickness or death, and the witch sorcerer provides an image of evil.

[ 5 ] Reports on indigenous practices in the Americas, Asia and Africa collected during the early modern Age of Exploration have been taken to suggest that not just the belief in witchcraft but also the periodic outbreak of witch-hunts are a human cultural universal.

[ 6 ] One study finds that witchcraft beliefs are associated with antisocial attitudes: lower levels of trust, charitable giving and group participation.

[ 7 ] Another study finds that income shocks (caused by extreme rainfall) lead to a large increase in the murder of "witches" in Tanzania.

[ 8 ] Silvia Federici posits this expanding violence against women as stemming from dispossession of land and female autonomy. A clear separation from mystical mythologies. She names it as both as a historical phenomenon, as well as one that continues today as capitalism and privatization spreads into the global south.

[ 9 ] History [ edit ] Further information: Magic in the ancient world Ancient Near East [ edit ] Punishment for malevolent magic is addressed in the earliest law codes which were preserved, in both ancient Egypt and Babylonia , where it played a conspicuous part. The Code of Hammurabi (18th century BC short chronology ) prescribes that If a man has put a spell upon another man and it is not yet justified, he upon whom the spell is laid shall go to the holy river ; into the holy river shall he plunge. If the holy river overcomes him and he is drowned, the man who put the spell upon him shall take possession of his house. If the holy river declares him innocent and he remains unharmed the man who laid the spell shall be put to death. He that plunged into the river shall take possession of the house of him who laid the spell upon him.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The Hebrew Bible condemns sorcery.

Deuteronomy 18:10–12 states: "No one shall be found among you who makes a son or daughter pass through fire, who practices divination, or is a soothsayer, or an augur , or a sorcerer , or one that casts spells, or who consults ghosts or spirits, or who seeks oracles from the dead. For whoever does these things is abhorrent to the Lord"; and Exodus 22:18 prescribes: "thou shalt not suffer a witch to live".

[ 12 ] Tales like that of 1 Samuel 28, reporting how Saul "hath cut off those that have familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land", [ 13 ] suggest that in practice sorcery could at least lead to exile, and the Hebrew verb הכרית , translated in the King James Version as "cut off", can also be translated as "kill wholesale" or "exterminate"..

[ 14 ] In the Judaean Second Temple period , Rabbi Simeon ben Shetach in the 1st century BC is reported to have sentenced to death eighty women who had been charged with witchcraft on a single day in Ascalon . Later the women's relatives took revenge by bringing false witnesses against Simeon's son and causing him to be executed in turn.

[ 15 ] Ancient Greco-Roman world [ edit ] No laws concerning magic survive from Classical Athens.

[ 16 ] : 133 However, cases concerning the harmful effects of pharmaka – an ambiguous term that might mean "poison", "medicine", or "magical drug" – do survive, especially those where the drug caused injury or death.

[ 16 ] : 133–134 Antiphon 's speech " Against the Stepmother for Poisoning " tells of the case of a woman accused of plotting to murder her husband with a pharmakon ; a slave had previously been executed for the crime, but the son of the victim claimed that the death had been arranged by his stepmother.

[ 16 ] : 135 The most detailed account of a trial for witchcraft in Classical Greece is the story of Theoris of Lemnos , who was executed along with her children some time before 338 BC, supposedly for casting incantations and using harmful drugs.

[ 17 ] Caius Furius Cressinus Accused of Sorcery , Jean-Pierre Saint-Ours , 1792 During the pagan era of ancient Rome , there were laws against harmful magic.

[ 18 ] According to Pliny , the 5th century BC laws of the Twelve Tables laid down penalties for uttering harmful incantations and for stealing the fruitfulness of someone else's crops by magic.

[ 18 ] The only recorded trial involving this law was that of Gaius Furius Cresimus .

[ 18 ] The Classical Latin word veneficium meant both poisoning and causing harm by magic (such as magic potions), although ancient people would not have distinguished between the two.

[ 19 ] In 331 BC, a deadly epidemic hit Rome and at least 170 women were executed for causing it by veneficium .

[ 20 ] In 184–180 BC, another epidemic hit Italy, and about 5,000 people were brought to trial and executed for veneficium .

[ 19 ] If the reports are accurate, writes Hutton , "then the Republican Romans hunted witches on a scale unknown anywhere else in the ancient world".

[ 19 ] Under the Lex Cornelia de sicariis et veneficis of 81 BC, killing by veneficium carried the death penalty.

[ 19 ] This law banned the trading and possession of harmful drugs and poisons, possession of magical books and other occult paraphernalia. Emperor Augustus strengthened laws to curb these practices, for instance in 31 BC, by burning over 2,000 magical books in Rome, except for certain portions of the hallowed Sibylline Books .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] While Tiberius Claudius was emperor, 85 women and 45 men accused of sorcery were executed.

[ 23 ] By the 3rd century AD, the Lex Cornelia had begun to be used more broadly against other kinds of magic deemed harmful.

[ 19 ] The magicians were to be burnt at the stake.

[ 18 ] Persecution of witches continued in the Roman Empire until the late 4th century AD and abated only after the introduction of Christianity as the Roman state religion in the 390s.

[ 24 ] Middle Ages [ edit ] Further information: European witchcraft § History Christianisation in the Early Middle Ages [ edit ] The German author Wilhelm Gottlieb Soldan argued in History of the Witchcraft Trials that the philosopher and mathematician Hypatia , murdered by a mob in 415 AD for threatening the influence of Cyril of Alexandria , may have been, in effect, the first famous "witch" to be punished by Christian authorities.

[ 25 ] Cyril's alleged role in her murder, however, was already controversial among contemporary sources, [ 26 ] and the surviving primary account by Socrates Scholasticus makes no mention of religious motivations.

[ 27 ] The 6th century AD Getica of Jordanes records a persecution and expulsion of witches among the Goths in a mythical account of the origin of the Huns . The ancient fabled King Filimer is said to have found among his people certain witches, whom he called in his native tongue Haliurunnae . Suspecting these women, he expelled them from the midst of his race and compelled them to wander in solitary exile afar from his army. There the unclean spirits, who beheld them as they wandered through the wilderness, bestowed their embraces upon them and begat this savage race, which dwelt at first in the swamps, a stunted, foul and puny tribe, scarcely human, and having no language save one which bore but slight resemblance to human speech.

[ 28 ] The Councils of Elvira (306 AD), Ancyra (314 AD), and Trullo (692 AD) imposed certain ecclesiastical penances for devil-worship. This mild approach represented the view of the Church for many centuries. The general desire of the Catholic Church 's clergy to check fanaticism about witchcraft and necromancy is shown in the decrees of the Council of Paderborn , which, in 785 AD, explicitly outlawed condemning people as witches and condemned to death anyone who burnt a witch. The Lombard code of 643 AD states: Let nobody presume to kill a foreign serving maid or female servant as a witch, for it is not possible, nor ought to be believed by Christian minds.

[ 29 ] This conforms to the teachings of the Canon Episcopi of circa 900 AD (alleged to date from 314 AD), which, stated that witchcraft did not exist and that to teach that it was a reality was, itself, false and heterodox teaching. Other examples include an Irish synod in 800 AD, [ 30 ] and a sermon by Agobard of Lyons (810 AD).

[ b ] Burning witches, with others held in stocks, 14th century King Kálmán (Coloman) of Hungary , in Decree 57 of his First Legislative Book (published in 1100), banned witch-hunting because he said, "witches do not exist".

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] The "Decretum" of Burchard, Bishop of Worms (about 1020), and especially its 19th book, often known separately as the "Corrector", is another work of great importance. Burchard was writing against the superstitious belief in magical potions , for instance, that may produce impotence or abortion. These were also condemned by several Church Fathers.

[ 34 ] But he altogether rejected the possibility of many of the alleged powers with which witches were popularly credited. Such, for example, were nocturnal riding through the air, the changing of a person's disposition from love to hate, the control of thunder, rain, and sunshine, the transformation of a man into an animal, the intercourse of incubi and succubi with human beings, and other such superstitions. Not only the attempt to practice such things, but the very belief in their possibility, is treated by Burchard as false and superstitious.

Pope Gregory VII , in 1080, wrote to King Harald III of Denmark forbidding witches to be put to death upon being suspected of having caused storms or failure of crops or pestilence. There were many such efforts to prevent unjust treatment of innocent people.

[ c ] On many occasions, ecclesiastics who spoke with authority did their best to disabuse the people of their superstitious belief in witchcraft.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] A comparable situation in Russia is suggested in a sermon by Serapion of Vladimir (written in 1274~1275), where the popular superstition of witches causing crop failures is denounced.

[ d ] Condemnations of witchcraft are nevertheless found in the writings of Augustine of Hippo and early theologians, who made little distinction between witchcraft and the practices of pagan religions.

[ 39 ] Many believed witchcraft did not exist in a philosophical sense: Witchcraft was based on illusions and powers of evil, which Augustine likened to darkness, a non-entity representing the absence of light.

[ 39 ] Augustine and his adherents like Saint Thomas Aquinas nevertheless promulgated elaborate demonologies, including the belief that humans could enter pacts with demons, which became the basis of future witch hunts.

[ 40 ] Ironically, many clerics of the Middle Ages openly or covertly practiced goetia , believing that as Christ granted his disciples power to command demons, to summon and control demons was not, therefore, a sin.

[ 39 ] Whatever the position of individual clerics, witch-hunting seems to have persisted as a cultural phenomenon. Throughout the early medieval period, notable rulers prohibited both witchcraft and pagan religions, often on pain of death. Under Charlemagne, for example, Christians who practiced witchcraft were enslaved by the Church, while those who worshiped the Devil (Germanic gods) were killed outright.

[ 39 ] Witch-hunting also appears in period literature. According to Snorri Sturluson , King Olaf Trygvasson furthered the Christian conversion of Norway by luring pagan magicians to his hall under false pretenses, barring the doors and burning them alive. Some who escaped were later captured and drowned.

[ 41 ] Early secular laws against witchcraft include those promulgated by King Athelstan (924–939): And we have ordained respecting witch-crafts, and lybacs [read lyblac "sorcery"] , and morthdaeds ["murder, mortal sin"] : if any one should be thereby killed, and he could not deny it, that he be liable in his life. But if he will deny it, and at threefold ordeal shall be guilty; that he be 120 days in prison: and after that let kindred take him out, and give to the king 120 shillings, and pay the wer to his kindred, and enter into borh for him, that he evermore desist from the like.

[ 42 ] In some prosecutions for witchcraft, torture (permitted by the Roman civil law ) apparently took place. However, Pope Nicholas I (866 AD), prohibited the use of torture altogether, and a similar decree may be found in the Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals .

[ 10 ] Later Middle Ages [ edit ] The burning of a woman in Willisau , Switzerland , 1447 The manuals of the Roman Catholic Inquisition remained highly skeptical of witch accusations, although there was sometimes an overlap between accusations of heresy and of witchcraft, particularly when, in the 13th century, the newly formed Inquisition was commissioned to deal with the Cathars of Southern France, whose teachings were charged with including witchcraft and magic. Although it has been proposed that the witch-hunt developed in Europe from the early 14th century, after the Cathars and the Knights Templar were suppressed, this hypothesis has been rejected independently by virtually all academic historians (Cohn 1975; Kieckhefer 1976).

In 1258, Pope Alexander IV declared that Inquisition would not deal with cases of witchcraft unless they were related to heresy.

[ e ] [ 44 ] Although Pope John XXII had later authorized the Inquisition to prosecute sorcerers in 1320, [ 45 ] inquisitorial courts rarely dealt with witchcraft save incidentally when investigating heterodoxy.

In the case of the Madonna Oriente , the Inquisition of Milan was not sure what to do with two women who, in 1384, confessed to have participated in the society around Signora Oriente or Diana . Through their confessions, both of them conveyed the traditional folk beliefs of white magic. The women were accused again in 1390, and condemned by the inquisitor. They were eventually executed by the secular arm.

[ 46 ] In a notorious case in 1425, Hermann II, Count of Celje accused his daughter-in-law Veronika of Desenice of witchcraft – and, though she was acquitted by the court, he had her murdered by drowning. The accusations of witchcraft are, in this case, considered to have been a pretext for Hermann to get rid of an "unsuitable match," Veronika being born into the lower nobility and thus "unworthy" of his son.

A Catholic figure who preached against witchcraft was popular Franciscan preacher Bernardino of Siena (1380–1444). Bernardino's sermons reveal both a phenomenon of superstitious practices and an over-reaction against them by the common people.

[ 47 ] However, it is clear that Bernardino had in mind not merely the use of spells and enchantments and such like fooleries but much more serious crimes, chiefly murder and infanticide. This is clear from his much-quoted sermon of 1427, in which he says: One of them told and confessed, without any pressure, that she had killed thirty children by bleeding them ... [and] she confessed more, saying she had killed her own son ... Answer me: does it really seem to you that someone who has killed twenty or thirty little children in such a way has done so well that when finally they are accused before the Signoria you should go to their aid and beg mercy for them?

Perhaps the most notorious witch trial in history was the trial of Joan of Arc . Although the trial was politically motivated, and the verdict later overturned, the position of Joan as a woman and an accused witch became significant factors in her execution.

[ 48 ] Joan's punishment of being burned alive (victims were usually strangled before burning) was reserved solely for witches and heretics, the implication being that a burned body could not be resurrected on Judgment Day .

[ 48 ] Transition to the early modern witch-hunts [ edit ] The Malleus Maleficarum (the 'Hammer of Witches'), published in 1487, accused women of destroying men by planting bitter herbs throughout the field.

Burning of three witches in Baden , Switzerland (1585), by Johann Jakob Wick The resurgence of witch-hunts at the end of the medieval period, taking place with at least partial support or at least tolerance on the part of the Church, was accompanied with a number of developments in Christian doctrine, for example, the recognition of the existence of witchcraft as a form of Satanic influence and its classification as a heresy. As Renaissance occultism gained traction among the educated classes, the belief in witchcraft, which in the medieval period had been part of the folk religion of the uneducated rural population at best, was incorporated into an increasingly comprehensive theology of Satan as the ultimate source of all maleficium .

[ f ] [ g ] These doctrinal shifts were completed in the mid-15th century, specifically in the wake of the Council of Basel and centered on the Duchy of Savoy in the western Alps, [ h ] leading to an early series of witch trials by both secular and ecclesiastical courts in the second half of the 15th century.

[ i ] In 1484, Pope Innocent VIII issued Summis desiderantes affectibus , a Papal bull authorizing the "correcting, imprisoning, punishing and chastising" of devil-worshippers who have "slain infants", among other crimes. He did so at the request of inquisitor Heinrich Kramer , who had been refused permission by the local bishops in Germany to investigate.

[ 52 ] However, historians such as Ludwig von Pastor insist that the bull neither allowed anything new, nor was necessarily binding on Catholic consciences.

[ j ] Three years later in 1487, Kramer published the notorious Malleus Maleficarum (lit., 'Hammer against the Evildoers') which, because of the newly invented printing presses, enjoyed a wide readership. It was reprinted in 14 editions by 1520 and became unduly influential in the secular courts.

[ 54 ] In Europe, the witch-hunt craze was negligible in Spain, Poland, and Eastern Europe; conversely, it was intense in Germany, Switzerland, and France.

[ 55 ] Early Modern Europe and Colonial America [ edit ] Main article: Witch trials in the early modern period The witch trials in Early Modern Europe came in waves and then subsided. There were trials in the 15th and early 16th centuries, but then the witch scare went into decline, before becoming a major issue again and peaking in the 17th century; particularly during the Thirty Years' War . What had previously been a belief that some people possessed supernatural abilities (which were sometimes used to protect the people), now became a sign of a pact between the people with supernatural abilities and the devil. To justify the killings, some Christians of the time and their proxy secular institutions deemed witchcraft as being associated to wild Satanic ritual parties in which there was naked dancing and cannibalistic infanticide .

[ 56 ] It was also seen as heresy for going against the first of the Ten Commandments ("You shall have no other gods before me") or as violating majesty , in this case referring to the divine majesty, not the worldly.

[ 57 ] Further scripture was also frequently cited, especially the Exodus decree that "thou shalt not suffer a witch to live" (Exodus 22:18), which many supported.

Examination of a Witch in the 17th century (1853), by T. H. Matteson Witch-hunts were seen across early modern Europe, but the most significant area of witch-hunting in modern Europe is often considered to be central and southern Germany.

[ 58 ] Germany was a late starter in terms of the numbers of trials, compared to other regions of Europe. Witch-hunts first appeared in large numbers in southern France and Switzerland during the 14th and 15th centuries. The peak years of witch-hunts in southwest Germany were from 1561 to 1670.

[ 59 ] The first major persecution in Europe, when witches were caught, tried, convicted, and burned in the imperial lordship of Wiesensteig in southwestern Germany, is recorded in 1563 in a pamphlet called "True and Horrifying Deeds of 63 Witches".

[ 60 ] Witchcraft persecution spread to all areas of Europe. Learned European ideas about witchcraft and demonological ideas, strongly influenced the hunt for witches in the North.

[ 61 ] These witch-hunts were at least partly driven by economic factors since a significant relationship between economic pressure and witch hunting activity can be found for regions such as Bavaria and Scotland.

[ 62 ] In Denmark, the burning of witches increased following the reformation of 1536.

Christian IV of Denmark , in particular, encouraged this practice, and hundreds of people were convicted of witchcraft and burnt. In the district of Finnmark, northern Norway, severe witchcraft trials took place during the period 1600–1692.

[ 63 ] A memorial of international format, Steilneset Memorial , has been built to commemorate the victims of the Finnmark witchcraft trials.

[ 64 ] In England, the Witchcraft Act 1541 regulated the penalties for witchcraft. In the North Berwick witch trials in Scotland, over 70 people were accused of witchcraft on account of bad weather when James VI of Scotland , who shared the Danish king's interest in witch trials, sailed to Denmark in 1590 to meet his betrothed Anne of Denmark . According to a widely circulated pamphlet, "Newes from Scotland," James VI personally presided over the torture and execution of Doctor Fian.

[ 65 ] Indeed, James published a witch-hunting manual, Daemonologie , which contains the famous dictum: "Experience daily proves how loath they are to confess without torture." Later, the Pendle witch trials of 1612 joined the ranks of the most famous witch trials in English history.

[ 66 ] The Malefizhaus of Bamberg, Germany , where suspected witches were held and interrogated. 1627 engraving.

In England, witch-hunting would reach its apex in 1644 to 1647 due to the efforts of Puritan Matthew Hopkins . Although operating without an official Parliament commission, Hopkins (calling himself Witchfinder General) and his accomplices charged hefty fees to towns during the English Civil War . Hopkins' witch-hunting spree was brief but significant: 300 convictions and deaths are attributed to his work.

[ 67 ] [ failed verification ] Hopkins wrote a book on his methods, describing his fortuitous beginnings as a witch-hunter, the methods used to extract confessions, and the tests he employed to test the accused: stripping them naked to find the Witches' mark , the "swimming" test , and pricking the skin . The swimming test, which included throwing a witch, who was strapped to a chair, into a bucket of water to see if she floated, was discontinued in 1645 due to a legal challenge. The 1647 book, The Discovery of Witches , soon became an influential legal text. The book was used in the American colonies as early as May 1647, when Margaret Jones was executed for witchcraft in Massachusetts , [ 68 ] the first of 17 people executed for witchcraft in the Colonies from 1647 to 1663.

[ 69 ] lithograph depicting Salem witch trials, 1892 Witch-hunts began to occur in North America while Hopkins was hunting witches in England. In 1645, forty-six years before the notorious Salem witch trials , Springfield, Massachusetts experienced America's first accusations of witchcraft when husband and wife Hugh and Mary Parsons accused each other of witchcraft. In America's first witch trial, Hugh was found innocent, while Mary was acquitted of witchcraft but she was still sentenced to be hanged as punishment for the death of her child. She died in prison.

[ 70 ] About eighty people throughout England's Massachusetts Bay Colony were accused of practicing witchcraft; thirteen women and two men were executed in a witch-hunt that occurred throughout New England and lasted from 1645 to 1663.

[ 69 ] The Salem witch trials followed in 1692–1693.

Once a case was brought to trial, the prosecutors hunted for accomplices. The use of magic was considered wrong, not because it failed, but because it worked effectively for the wrong reasons. Witchcraft was a normal part of everyday life. Witches were often called for, along with religious ministers, to help the ill or deliver a baby. They held positions of spiritual power in their communities. When something went wrong, no one questioned either the ministers or the power of the witchcraft. Instead, they questioned whether the witch intended to inflict harm or not.

[ 71 ] Current scholarly estimates of the number of people who were executed for witchcraft vary from about 35,000 to 60,000.

[ a ] The total number of witch trials in Europe which are known to have ended in executions is around 12,000.

[ 72 ] Prominent contemporaneous critics of witch-hunts included Gianfrancesco Ponzinibio (fl. 1520), Johannes Wier (1515–1588), Reginald Scot (1538–1599), Cornelius Loos (1546–1595), Anton Praetorius (1560–1613), Alonso Salazar y Frías (1564–1636), Friedrich Spee (1591–1635), and Balthasar Bekker (1634–1698).

[ 73 ] Among the largest and most notable of these trials were the Trier witch trials (1581–1593), the Fulda witch trials (1603–1606), the Würzburg witch trial (1626–1631) and the Bamberg witch trials (1626–1631).

[ citation needed ] In addition to known witch trials, witch hunts were often conducted by vigilantes, who may or may not have executed their victims. In Scotland, for example, cattle murrains were blamed on witches, usually peasant women, who were duly punished. A popular method called "scoring above the breath" meant slashing across a woman's forehead in order to remove the power of her magic. This was seen as a kind of emergency procedure which could be performed in absence of judicial authorities.

[ 74 ] Witness testimony from the witch trial against Katharina Kepler, 14 July 1621 Another important element of the persecution of witches were denunciations . "In England, most of the accusers and those making written complaints against witches were women." [ 75 ] Informers did not have to be revealed to the accused, which was important for the success of the witch trials. In practice, appeals were made to other witnesses to the crimes, so that the first informer was followed by others. In the event of a conviction, the informer sometimes received a third of the accused's assets, but at least 2 guilders . A well-known and well-documented example is the case of Katharina Kepler , the mother of the astronomer Johannes Kepler , for being in a pact with the devil and using witchcraft. In 1615, she was called a witch by a female neighbor in the duchy of Württemberg following a dispute with her of having given her a bitter drink that had made her ill. She was held captive for over a year and threatened with torture, but was finally acquitted thanks to her son's efforts.

[ 76 ] Execution statistics [ edit ] An image of suspected witches being hanged in England, published in 1655 The Witch Trial by William Powell Frith (1848) Modern scholarly estimates place the total number of executions for witchcraft in the 300-year period of European witch-hunts in the five digits, mostly at roughly between 35,000 and 60,000 (see table below for details), [ a ] The majority of those accused were from the lower economic classes in European society, although in rarer cases high-ranking individuals were accused as well. On the basis of this evidence, Scarre and Callow asserted that the "typical witch was the wife or widow of an agricultural labourer or small tenant farmer, and she was well known for a quarrelsome and aggressive nature." According to Julian Goodare, in Europe overall, 80% of those who were persecuted as witches were women, although there were countries and regions like Estonia, Normandy and Iceland, that targeted men more.

[ 85 ] In Iceland 92% of the accused were men, in Estonia 60%, and in Moscow two-thirds of those accused were male.

[ citation needed ] In Finland, a total of more than 100 death row inmates were roughly equal in both men and women, but all Ålanders sentenced to witchcraft were only women.

[ 86 ] At one point during the Würzburg trials of 1629, children made up 60% of those accused, although this had declined to 17% by the end of the year.

[ 87 ] Rapley (1998) claims that "75 to 80 percent" of a total of "40,000 to 50,000" victims were women.

[ 88 ] The claim that "millions of witches" (often: " nine million witches ") were killed in Europe is spurious, even though it is occasionally found in popular literature, and it is ultimately due to a 1791 pamphlet by Gottfried Christian Voigt .

[ 89 ] Prosecution of witchcraft in regions of Europe 1450–1750 [ 90 ] Region Trials (approx) Executions (approx) British Isles 5,000 1,500–2,000 Holy Roman Empire (Germany, Netherlands, Switzerland, Lorraine, Austria, Czechia) 50,000 25,000–30,000 France 3,000 1,000 Scandinavia 5,000 1,700–2,000 Central & Eastern Europe (Poland-Lithuania, Hungary, Russia) 7,000 2,000 Southern Europe (Spain, Portugal, Italy) 10,000 1,000 Total 80,000 35,000 End of European witch-hunts in the 18th century [ edit ] The drowning of an alleged witch, with Thomas Colley as the incitor.

In England and Scotland between 1542 and 1735, a series of Witchcraft Acts enshrined into law the punishment (often with death, sometimes with incarceration ) of individuals practising or claiming to practice witchcraft and magic.

[ 91 ] The last executions for witchcraft in England had taken place in 1682, when Temperance Lloyd, Mary Trembles, and Susanna Edwards were executed at Exeter. In 1711, Joseph Addison published an article in the highly respected The Spectator journal (No. 117) criticizing the irrationality and social injustice in treating elderly and feeble women (dubbed "Moll White") as witches.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Jane Wenham was among the last subjects of a typical witch trial in England in 1712, but was pardoned after her conviction and set free.

Janet Horne was executed for witchcraft in Scotland in 1727. The final act, the Witchcraft Act 1735 , led to prosecution for fraud rather than witchcraft since it was no longer believed that the individuals had actual supernatural powers or traffic with Satan . The 1735 act continued to be used until the 1940s to prosecute individuals such as spiritualists and gypsies . The act was finally repealed in 1951.

[ 91 ] The last execution of a witch in the Dutch Republic was probably in 1613.

[ 94 ] In Denmark, this took place in 1693 with the execution of Anna Palles [ 95 ] and in Norway the last witch execution was of Johanne Nilsdatter in 1695, [ 96 ] and in Sweden Anna Eriksdotter in 1704. In other parts of Europe, the practice died down later. In France the last person to be executed for witchcraft was Louis Debaraz in 1745.

[ 97 ] In Croatia the last person condemned for witchcraft to the death penalty was Magda Logomer in 1758. She was acquitted by Maria Theresa in 1758, putting an end to the witch trials in Croatia.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] In Germany the last death sentence was that of Anna Schwegelin in Kempten in 1775 (although not carried out).

[ 100 ] The last known official witch-trial was the Doruchów witch trial in Poland in 1783. The result of the trial is questioned by Prof. Janusz Tazbir in his book.

[ 101 ] No reliable sources had been found confirming any executions after the trial. In 1793, two unnamed women were executed in proceedings of dubious legitimacy in Poznań , Poland.

[ 102 ] Anna Göldi was executed in Glarus , Switzerland in 1782 [ 103 ] and Barbara Zdunk [ 104 ] in Prussia in 1811. Both women have been identified as the last women executed for witchcraft in Europe, but in both cases, the official verdict did not mention witchcraft, as this had ceased to be recognized as a criminal offense.

[ citation needed ] India [ edit ] There is no documented evidence of witch-hunting in India before 1792.
The earliest evidence of witch-hunts in India can be found in the Santhal Witch Trials in 1792.

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] In the Singhbhum District of the Chota Nagpur Division in Company-ruled India , not only were those accused of being witches murdered, but also those related to the accused to ensure that they would not avenge the deaths (Roy Choudhary 1958: 88). The Chhotanagpur region was majorly populated by an adivasi population called the Santhals . The existence of witches was a belief central to the Santhals. Witches were feared and were supposed to be engaged in anti-social activities. They were also supposed to have the power to kill people by feeding on their entrails, and causing fevers in cattle among other evils. Therefore, according to the adivasi population the cure to their disease and sickness was the elimination of these witches who were seen as the cause.

[ 107 ] The practice of witch-hunt among Santhals was more brutal than that in Europe. Unlike Europe, where witches were strangulated before being burnt, the santhals forced them "..to eat human excreta and drink blood before throwing them into the flames." [ 108 ] The East India Company (EIC) banned the persecution of witches in Gujarat , Rajputana and Chota Nagpur Division in the 1840s–1850s. Despite the ban, very few cases were reported as witch-hunting was not seen as a crime. The Santhals believed that the ban in fact allowed the activities of witches to flourish. Thus, the effect of the ban was contrary to what the EIC had intended. During 1857–58, there was a surge in witch-hunting; coinciding during the period of the Indian Rebellion of 1857 , which has led some scholars to see the resurgence of the activity as a form of resistance to Company rule.

[ 107 ] Modern cases [ edit ] Main article: Modern witch-hunts Monument for the victims of the witch-hunts of 16th- and 17th-century Bernau, Germany by Annelie Grund [ 109 ] Witch-hunts still occur today in societies where belief in magic is prevalent. In most cases, these are instances of lynching and burnings, reported with some regularity from much of Sub-Saharan Africa , from Saudi Arabia and from Papua New Guinea. In addition, there are some countries that have legislation against the practice of sorcery. The only country where witchcraft remains legally punishable by death is Saudi Arabia.

Witch-hunts in modern times are continuously reported by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees as a massive violation of human rights. Most of the accused are women and children but can also be elderly people or marginalised groups of the community such as albinos and the HIV -infected.

[ 110 ] These victims are often considered burdens to the community, and as a result are often driven out, starved to death, or killed violently, sometimes by their own families in acts of social cleansing .

[ 111 ] The causes of witch-hunts include poverty, epidemics, social crises and lack of education. The leader of the witch-hunt, often a prominent figure in the community or a "witch doctor", may also gain economic benefit by charging for an exorcism or by selling body parts of the murdered.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] Middle East [ edit ] Levant [ edit ] On 29 and 30 June 2015, militants of the terrorist group ISIS beheaded two couples on accusations of sorcery and using "magic for medicine" in Deir ez-Zor province.

[ 114 ] [ better source needed ] Earlier on, the ISIL militants beheaded several "magicians" and street illusionists in Syria, Iraq and Libya.

[ 115 ] [ better source needed ] Saudi Arabia [ edit ] Witchcraft or sorcery remains a criminal offense in Saudi Arabia , although the precise nature of the crime is undefined.

[ 116 ] The frequency of prosecutions for this in the country as whole is unknown. However, in November 2009, it was reported that 118 people had been arrested in the province of Makkah that year for practicing magic and "using the Book of Allah in a derogatory manner", 74% of them being female.

[ 117 ] According to Human Rights Watch in 2009, prosecutions for witchcraft and sorcery are proliferating and "Saudi courts are sanctioning a literal witch hunt by the religious police." [ 118 ] In 2006, an illiterate Saudi woman, Fawza Falih , was convicted of practising witchcraft, including casting an impotence spell, and sentenced to death by beheading, after allegedly being beaten and forced to fingerprint a false confession that had not been read to her.

[ 119 ] After an appeal court had cast doubt on the validity of the death sentence because the confession had been retracted, the lower court reaffirmed the same sentence on a different basis.

[ 120 ] In 2007, Mustafa Ibrahim, an Egyptian national, was executed, having been convicted of using sorcery in an attempt to separate a married couple, as well as of adultery and of desecrating the Quran.

[ 121 ] Also in 2007, Abdul Hamid Bin Hussain Bin Moustafa al-Fakki, a Sudanese national, was sentenced to death after being convicted of producing a spell that would lead to the reconciliation of a divorced couple.

[ 122 ] In 2009, Ali Sibat , a Lebanese television presenter who had been arrested whilst on a pilgrimage in Saudi Arabia, was sentenced to death for witchcraft arising out of his fortune-telling on an Arab satellite channel.

[ 123 ] His appeal was accepted by one court, but a second in Medina upheld his death sentence again in March 2010, stating that he deserved it as he had publicly practised sorcery in front of millions of viewers for several years.

[ 124 ] In November 2010, the Supreme Court refused to ratify the death sentence, stating that there was insufficient evidence that his actions had harmed others.

[ 125 ] On 12 December 2011, Amina bint Abdulhalim Nassar was beheaded in Al Jawf Province after being convicted of practicing witchcraft and sorcery.

[ 126 ] Another very similar situation occurred to Muree bin Ali bin Issa al-Asiri and he was beheaded on 19 June 2012 in the Najran Province .

[ 127 ] Oceania [ edit ] Papua New Guinea [ edit ] Main article: Witch-hunts in Papua New Guinea Though the practice of "white" magic (such as faith healing ) is legal in Papua New Guinea, the 1976 Sorcery Act imposed a penalty of up to 2 years in prison for the practice of "black" magic , until the Act was repealed in 2013. In 2009, the government reports that extrajudicial torture and murder of alleged witches – usually lone women – are spreading from the highland areas to cities as villagers migrate to urban areas.

[ 128 ] For example, in June 2013, four women were accused of witchcraft because the family "had a 'permanent house' made of wood, and the family had tertiary educations and high social standing". All of the women were tortured and Helen Rumbali was beheaded. Helen Hakena, chairwoman of the North Bougainville Human Rights Committee, said that the accusations started because of economic jealousy born of a mining boom.

[ 129 ] Reports by U.N. agencies, Amnesty International, Oxfam and anthropologists show that "attacks on accused sorcerers and witches – sometimes men, but most commonly women – are frequent, ferocious and often fatal." [ 130 ] It's estimated about 150 cases of violence and killings are occurring each year in just the province of Simbu in Papua New Guinea alone.

[ 131 ] Reports indicate this practice of witch-hunting has in some places evolved into "something more malignant, sadistic and voyeuristic." [ 130 ] One woman who was attacked by young men from a nearby village "had her genitals burned and fused beyond functional repair by the repeated intrusions of red-hot irons." [ 130 ] Few incidents are ever reported, according to the 2012 Law Reform Commission which concluded that they have increased since the 1980s.

Indian Subcontinent [ edit ] India [ edit ] Main articles: Witch-hunts in India and Dayan (witch) Some people in India , mostly in villages, have the belief that witchcraft and black magic are effective. On one hand, people may seek advice from witch doctors for health, financial or marital problems.

[ 132 ] On the other hand, people, especially women, are accused of witchcraft and attacked, occasionally killed.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] It has been reported that mostly widows or divorcees are targeted to rob them of their property.

[ 135 ] Reportedly, revered village witch-doctors are paid to brand specific persons as witches ( dayan ), so that they can be killed without repercussions. The existing laws have been considered ineffective in curbing the murders.

[ 136 ] In June 2013, National Commission for Women (NCW) reported that according to National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) statistics, 768 women had been murdered for allegedly practising witchcraft since 2008 and announced plans for newer laws.

[ 137 ] Recent cases [ edit ] Between 2001 and 2006, an estimated 300 people were killed in the state of Assam .

[ 138 ] Between 2005 and 2010, about 35 witchcraft related murders reportedly took place in Odisha 's Sundergarh district .

[ 139 ] In October 2003, three women were branded as witch and humiliated, afterwards they all committed suicide in Kamalpura village in Muzaffarpur district in Bihar .

[ 140 ] In August 2013, a couple were hacked to death by a group of people in Kokrajhar district in Assam.

[ 141 ] In September 2013, in the Jashpur district of Chhattisgarh , a woman was murdered and her daughter was raped on the allegation that they were practising black magic.

[ 142 ] A 2010 estimate places the number of women killed as witches in India at between 150 and 200 per year, or a total of 2,500 in the period of 1995 to 2009.

[ 143 ] The lynchings are particularly common in the poor northern states of Jharkhand , [ 144 ] Bihar and the central state of Chhattisgarh .
Witch hunts are also taking place among the tea garden workers in Jalpaiguri district , West Bengal .

[ 145 ] The witch hunts in Jalpaiguri are less known, but are motivated by the stress in the tea industry on the lives of the Adivasi (tribal) workers.

[ 146 ] In India, labeling a woman as a witch is a common ploy to grab land, settle scores or even to punish her for turning down sexual advances. In a majority of the cases, it is difficult for the accused woman to reach out for help and she is forced to either abandon her home and family or driven to commit suicide. Most cases are not documented because it is difficult for poor and illiterate women to travel from isolated regions to file police reports. Less than 2 percent of those accused of witch-hunting are actually convicted, according to a study by the Free Legal Aid Committee, a group that works with victims in the state of Jharkhand.

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] Nepal [ edit ] Main articles: Witch-hunts in Nepal and Boksi Witch-hunts in Nepal are common, and are targeted especially against low-caste women.

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] The main causes of witchcraft-related violence include widespread belief in superstition, lack of education, lack of public awareness, illiteracy, caste system , male domination, and economic dependency of women on men. The victims of this form of violence are often beaten, tortured, publicly humiliated, and murdered. Sometimes, the family members of the accused are also assaulted.

[ 150 ] In 2010, Sarwa Dev Prasad Ojha, Minister for Women and Social Welfare, said, "Superstitions are deeply rooted in our society, and the belief in witchcraft is one of the worst forms of this." [ 151 ] Sub-Saharan Africa [ edit ] Further information: Witchcraft accusations against children in Africa In many societies of Sub-Saharan Africa , the fear of witches drives periodic witch-hunts during which specialist witch-finders identify suspects, with death by lynching often the result.

[ 152 ] Countries particularly affected by this phenomenon include South Africa , [ 153 ] Cameroon , the Democratic Republic of the Congo , the Gambia , Ghana , Kenya , Sierra Leone , Tanzania , and Zambia .

[ 154 ] Witch-hunts against children were reported by the BBC in 1999 in the Congo [ 155 ] and in Tanzania, where the government responded to attacks on women accused of being witches for having red eyes.

[ 156 ] A lawsuit was launched in 2001 in Ghana, where witch-hunts are also common, by a woman accused of being a witch.

[ 156 ] Witch-hunts in Africa are often led by relatives seeking the property of the accused victim.

Audrey I. Richards , in the journal Africa , relates in 1935 an instance when a new wave of witchfinders, the Bamucapi , appeared in the villages of the Bemba people of Zambia.

[ 157 ] They dressed in European clothing, and would summon the headman to prepare a ritual meal for the village. When the villagers arrived they would view them all in a mirror , and claimed they could identify witches with this method. These witches would then have to "yield up his horns"; i.e. give over the horn containers for curses and evil potions to the witch-finders. The bamucapi then made all drink a potion called kucapa which would cause a witch to die and swell up if he ever tried such things again.

The villagers related that the witch-finders were always right because the witches they found were always the people whom the village had feared all along. The bamucapi utilised a mixture of Christian and native religious traditions to account for their powers and said that God (not specifying which God) helped them to prepare their medicine. In addition, all witches who did not attend the meal to be identified would be called to account later on by their master, who had risen from the dead, and who would force the witches by means of drums to go to the graveyard, where they would die. Richards noted that the bamucapi created the sense of danger in the villages by rounding up all the horns in the village, whether they were used for anti-witchcraft charms, potions, snuff or were indeed receptacles of black magic.

The Bemba people believed misfortunes such as wartings , hauntings and famines to be just actions sanctioned by the High-God Lesa. The only agency which caused unjust harm was a witch, who had enormous powers and was hard to detect. After white rule of Africa, beliefs in sorcery and witchcraft grew, possibly because of the social strain caused by new ideas, customs and laws, and also because the courts no longer allowed witches to be tried.

[ citation needed ] Amongst the Bantu tribes of Southern Africa, the witch smellers were responsible for detecting witches. In parts of Southern Africa, several hundred people have been killed in witch-hunts since 1990.

[ 158 ] Cameroon has re-established witchcraft-accusations in courts after its independence in 1967.

[ k ] It was reported on 21 May 2008 that in Kenya a mob had burnt to death at least 11 people accused of witchcraft.

[ 162 ] In March 2009, Amnesty International reported that up to 1,000 people in the Gambia had been abducted by government-sponsored "witch doctors" on charges of witchcraft, and taken to detention centers where they were forced to drink poisonous concoctions.

[ 163 ] On 21 May 2009, The New York Times reported that the alleged witch-hunting campaign had been sparked by the Gambian President, Yahya Jammeh .

[ 164 ] In Sierra Leone, the witch-hunt is an occasion for a sermon by the kɛmamɔi (native Mende witch-finder) on social ethics : "Witchcraft ... takes hold in people's lives when people are less than fully open-hearted. All wickedness is ultimately because people hate each other or are jealous or suspicious or afraid. These emotions and motivations cause people to act antisocially".

[ 165 ] The response by the populace to the kɛmamɔi is that "they valued his work and would learn the lessons he came to teach them, about social responsibility and cooperation." [ 166 ] Use of the term in other contexts [ edit ] See also: Siege mentality and Victimisation The term 'witch-hunt' can be used in contexts other than witchcraft, to describe an irrational search for alleged offenders who then become the victims of the witch-hunt. Examples include Stalinist witch-hunts [ 167 ] and McCarthyite witch-hunts.

[ 168 ] Researcher James Morone wrote that "What makes a witch hunt is not the witches (or the communists or the child molesters). Rather, it is the hunters' willingness to toss aside the normal rules of justice." [ 169 ] In politics, the term may be used to suggest that a person or group is being oppressed or ostracised .

The Telegraph has compared cancel culture to "modern-day witch trials".

[ 170 ] 45th and current U.S. President Donald Trump frequently used the term on Twitter , referring to various investigations [ 171 ] [ 172 ] and the impeachment proceedings against him as witch-hunts.

[ 173 ] [ 174 ] [ 175 ] During his presidency he used the phrase over 330 times.

[ 176 ] The National Rifle Association of America used the term in an unsuccessful bid to dismiss the New York attorney general 's lawsuit against the organization for alleged fraud.

[ 177 ] List of witch trials [ edit ] This list is incomplete ; you can help by adding missing items .

( March 2017 ) See also: List of people executed for witchcraft and Category:Witch trials Aberdeen witch trials of 1596–1597 Akershus witch trials Amersfoort and Utrecht witch trials Baden-Baden witch trials Basque witch trials Bideford witch trial Bo'ness witches Bredevoort witch trials Bury St Edmunds witch trials Channel Islands Witch Trials Copenhagen witch trials Derenburg witch trials Doruchów witch trial Eichstätt witch trials Ellwangen witch trial Esslingen witch trials Fulda witch trials Fürsteneck witch trial Geneva witch trials Great Scottish Witch Hunt of 1597 Great Scottish witch hunt of 1649–50 Great Scottish Witch Hunt of 1661–62 Islandmagee witch trial Kasina Wielka witch trial Kastelholm witch trials Katarina witch trials Kirkjuból witch trial Liechtenstein witch trials Lisbon witch trial Lukh witch trials Mergentheim witch trials Mirandola witch trials Mora witch trial Newcastle witch trials Nogaredo witch trial North Berwick witch trials Northamptonshire witch trials Northern Moravia witch trials Orkney witch trials Paisley witches Pappenheimer witch trial Peelland witch trials [ nl ] Pittenweem witches Pendle witches Põlula witch trials Ramsele witch trial Roermond witch trial Rosborg witch trials Rottenburg witch trials Rottweil Witch Trials Rugård witch trials Salem witch trials Spa witch trial St Osyth Witches Szeged witch trials Terrassa witch trials Thisted witch trial Torsåker witch trials Trier witch trials Valais witch trials Val Camonica witch trials Vardø witch trials (1621) Vardø witch trials (1651–1653) Vardø witch trials (1662–1663) as part of the Christianization of the Sámi people Wiesensteig witch trial Witches of Warboys Würzburg witch trials See also [ edit ] Ecclesiastical court – Court having jurisdiction in Christian religious matters Femicide – Murder of women or girls because of their gender Gendercide – Systematic killing of members of a specific gender Feminist interpretations of the Early Modern witch trials European witchcraft – Belief in witchcraft in Europe Execution by burning – Execution or murder method Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Christianity and paganism Christian views on magic Conspiracy theory – Attributing events to improbable causes Divine retribution – Supernatural punishment by a deity Magic and religion Moral panic – Fear that some evil threatens society Satanic panic – Widespread moral panic alleging abuse Scapegoating – Practice of singling out any party for unmerited negative treatment or blame Trial by ordeal – Medieval judicial practice to determine guilt through a life-threatening experience Medical explanations of bewitchment – Reported symptom of bewitchment Auto-da-fé – Public penance imposed during the Inquisition Donas de fuera – Figures in Sicilian folklore Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Marie-Josephte Corriveau – Woman from New France who murdered her second husband (1733–1763) Pierre de Lancre – French judge and witchhunter (1553–1631) "The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street" West Memphis Three – Men convicted of 1993 murders in Arkansas, United States Witch trials in the early modern period – Prosecutions for witchcraft in Europe Salem witch trials – Legal proceedings in Massachusetts (1692–93) Modern witch-hunts Witch-hunts in Nepal – Practice of witch-hunts in Nepal Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Women and religion – Women's roles and history surrounding religion Women in Christianity The Dark Pictures Anthology: Little Hope – 2020 interactive drama video game Kiki's Delivery Service – 1989 Japanese animated film Laws against witchcraft Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b c The Encyclopedia Britannica sets a limit of "no more than 40,000 to 60,000." [ 77 ] The high end of that range originates with Brian P. Levack 's first edition of The Witch-Hunt in Early Modern Europe , which he revised down to 45,000 in the third edition.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] William Monter estimates 35,000 deaths; Malcolm Gaskill and Richard Golden both estimate 40,000–50,000.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] [ 1 ] Anne Lewellyn Barstow adjusted Levack's first estimate to account for lost records, estimating 100,000 deaths.

[ 82 ] Ronald Hutton argues that Levack's estimate had already been adjusted for these, and revises the figure to approximately 40,000.

[ 83 ] James Sharpe concurs: "The current consensus is that 40,000 people were executed as witches in the period of the witch persecutions, between about 1450 and 1750." [ 84 ] ^ A crown witness of 'Carolingian skepticism', Archbishop Agobard of Lyon (769–840 AD), reports witch panics during the reign of Charlemagne. In his sermon on hailstorms he reports frequent lynchings of supposed weather magicians ( tempestarii ), as well as of sorcerers, who were made responsible for a terrible livestock mortality in 810 AD. According to Agobard, the common people in their fury over crop failure had developed the extravagant idea that foreigners were secretly coming with airships to strip their fields of crops, and transmit it to Magonia. These anxieties resulted in severe aggression, and on one occasion around 816 AD, Agobard could hardly prevent a crowd from killing three foreign men and women, perceived as Magonian people. As their supposed homeland's name suggests, the crop failure was associated with magic. The bishop emphasized that thunderstorms were caused exclusively by natural or divine agencies.

[ 31 ] ^ See, for example, the Weihenstephan case discussed by Weiland in the Zeitschrift für Kirchengeschichte , IX, 592.
"In 1080 Harold of Denmark (r. 1076–80) was admonished not to hold old women and Christian priests responsible for storms and diseases, or to slaughter them in the cruelest manner. Like Agobard before him, Pope Gregory VII (r. 1073–85) declared in his letter to the Danish king that these catastrophes were caused by God alone, that they were God's punishment for human sins, and that the killing of the innocent would only increase His fury." [ 35 ] ^ "Witches were executed at Novgorod in 1227, and after a severe famine in the years 1271–1274 Bishop Serapion of Vladimir asked in a sermon: 'you believe in witchcraft and burn innocent people and bring down murder upon earth and the city ... Out of what books or writings do you learn that famine in earth is brought about by witchcraft?'" [ 38 ] ^ "There would be no witch persecutions of the sort he envisaged. The Gregorian Inquisition had been established to deal with the religious matter of heresy, not the secular issue of witchcraft. Pope Alexander IV spelled this out clearly in a 1258 canon which forbade inquisitions into sorcery unless there was also manifest heresy. And this view was even confirmed and acknowledged by the infamous inquisitor Bernard Gui (immortalised by Umberto Eco in The Name of the Rose ), who wrote in his influential inquisitors' manual that, by itself, sorcery did not come within the Inquisition's jurisdiction. In sum, the Church did not want the Inquisition sucked into witch trials, which were for the secular courts." [ 43 ] ^ Early Christian theologians attributed to the Devil responsibility for persecution, heresy, witchcraft, sin, natural disasters, human calamities, and whatever else went wrong. One tragic consequence of this was a tendency to demonize people accused of wrongs. At the instance of ecclesiastical leaders, the state burned heretics and witches, burning symbolizing the fate deserved by the demonic. Popular fears, stirred to fever pitch in the 14th and 15th centuries, sustained frenzied efforts to wipe out heretics, witches, and unbelievers, especially Jews.

[ 49 ] ^ Trevor-Roper has said that it was necessary for belief in the Kingdom of Satan to die before the witch theory could be discredited.

[ 50 ] ^ We are reasonably confident today that the 'classical' doctrine of witchcraft crystallized during the middle third of the 15th century, shortly after the Council of Basel, primarily within a western Alpine zone centred around the duchy of Savoy (Ostorero et al. 1999).

[ 51 ] ^ By the end of the 15th century, scattered trials for witchcraft by both secular and ecclesiastical courts occurred in many places from the Pyrenees, where the Spanish Inquisition had become involved, to the North Sea.

[ 51 ] ^ "The Bull contains no dogmatic decision of any sort on witchcraft. It assumes the possibility of demoniacal influences on human beings which the Church has always maintained, but claims no dogmatic authority for its pronouncement on the particular cases with which it was dealing at the moment. The form of the document, which refers only to certain occurrences which had been brought to the knowledge of the Pope, sh[o]ws that it was not intended to bind any one to believe in the things mentioned in it. The question whether the Pope himself believed in them has nothing to do with the subject. His judgment on this point has no greater importance than attaches to a Papal decree in any other undogmatic question, e.g., on a dispute about a benefice. The Bull introduced no new element into the current beliefs about witchcraft. It is absurd to accuse it of being the cause of the cruel treatment of witches, when we see in the Sachsenspiegel that burning alive was already the legal punishment for a witch. All that Innocent VIII. did was to confirm the jurisdiction of the inquisitors over these cases. The Bull simply empowered them to try all matters concerning witchcraft, without exception, before their own tribunals, by Canon-law; a process which was totally different from that of the later trials. Possibly the Bull, in so far as it admonished the inquisitors to be on the alert in regard to witchcraft may have given an impetus to the prosecution of such cases; but it affords no justification for the accusation that it introduced a new crime, or was in any way responsible for the iniquitous horrors of the witch-harrying of later times." [ 53 ] ^ Levack, Brian P. (26 August 2004).

401–422 Section 251 of the Cameroonian penal code . Routledge.

ISBN 9780815336709 .

(introduced 1967).

[ 159 ] Two other provisions of the penal code [translation] "state that witchcraft may be an aggravating factor for dishonest acts" (Afrik.com 26 August 2004). A person convicted of witchcraft may face a prison term of 2 to 10 years and a fine.

[ 160 ] Whereas witchcraft cases in the colonial era, especially in former British Central Africa, were based on the official dogma that witchcraft is an illusion (so that people invoking witchcraft would be punished as either impostors or slanderers), in contemporary legal practice in Africa witchcraft appears as a reality and as an actionable offence in its own right.

[ 161 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Golden, Richard M. (1997). "Satan in Europe: The Geography of Witch Hunts". In Wolfe, Michael (ed.).

Changing Identities in Early Modern France . Duke University Press. p. 234.

^ "witch hunt".

New Dictionary of the American Language . Simon & Schuster. p. 1633.

^ Goode, Erich; Ben-Yehuda, Nachman (2010).

Moral Panics: The Social Construction of Deviance . Wiley. p. 195.

ISBN 9781444307931 .

^ Martin, Lois (2010).

A Brief History of Witchcraft . Running Press. p. 5.

ISBN 9780762439898 . Archived from the original on 21 June 2013.

^ La Fontaine, Jean Sybil (1998).

Speak of the Devil: Tales of satanic abuse in contemporary England . Cambridge University Press. pp.

34– 37.

ISBN 978-0-521-62934-8 .

^ Behringer, Wolfgang (2004).

Witches and Witch-Hunts: A global history . Wiley. p. 50.

ISBN 9780745627175 .

^ Gershman, Boris (2016).

"Witchcraft Beliefs and the Erosion of Social Capital: Evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa and Beyond" .

Journal of Development Economics .

120 : 182– 208.

doi : 10.1016/j.jdeveco.2015.11.005 . Archived from the original on 18 July 2021 . Retrieved 18 July 2021 .

^ Miguel, Edward (1 October 2005). "Poverty and witch killing".

The Review of Economic Studies .

72 (4): 1153– 1172.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.370.6294 .

doi : 10.1111/0034-6527.00365 .

ISSN 0034-6527 .

^ Gotby, Alva (1 March 2020).

"Book Review: Witches, Witch-Hunting and Women by Silvia Federici and Re-Enchanting the World: Feminism and the Politics of the Commons by Silvia Federici" .

Feminist Review .

124 (1): 204– 206.

doi : 10.1177/0141778919887930 .

ISSN 0141-7789 .

^ a b "Witchcraft".

Catholic Encyclopedia .

^ "The Avalon Project: Documents in Law, History, and Diplomacy" . Archived from the original on 16 September 2007.

^ "witch" here translates the Hebrew מכשפה , and is rendered φαρμακός in the Septuagint .

^ "those that have familiar spirits": Hebrew אוב , or ἐγγαστρίμυθος "ventriloquist, soothsayer" in the Septuagint; "wizards": Hebrew ידעני or γνώστης "diviner" in the Septuagint.

^ "Strong's Hebrew Lexicon :: Strong's H3772 - kāraṯ" .

Blue Letter Bible . Retrieved 23 May 2025 .

^ Yerushalmi Sanhedrin , 6:6.

^ a b c Collins, Derek (2008).

Magic in the Ancient Greek World . Malden: Blackwell.

^ Collins, Derek (2001). "Theoris of Lemnos and the Criminalization of Magic in Fourth-Century Athens".

The Classical Quarterly .

5 (1): 477.

doi : 10.1093/cq/51.2.477 .

^ a b c d Dickie, Matthew (2003).

Magic and Magicians in the Greco-Roman World . Routledge. pp.

138– 142.

^ a b c d e Hutton, Ronald (2017).

The Witch: A History of Fear, from Ancient Times to the Present .

Yale University Press . pp.

59– 66.

^ Livy.

History of Rome, Book VIII, Chapter xviii . Retrieved 15 January 2021 .

^ Suetonius.

The Life of Augustus .

^ Garnsey, Peter; Saller, Richard P. (1987).

The Roman Empire: Economy, Society, and Culture . Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. pp.

168 –174.

ISBN 978-0-520-06067-8 .

^ Ogden, Daniel (2002).

Magic, Witchcraft, and Ghosts in the Greek and Roman Worlds: A Sourcebook . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 283.

ISBN 978-0-19-513575-6 .

^ Behringer, Wolfgang (2004).

Witches and Witch-Hunts: A Global History . Cambridge: Polity Press. pp.

48– 50.

ISBN 978-0745627175 .

^ Soldan, Wilhelm Gottlieb (1843), Geschichte der Hexenprozesse: aus dem Qvellen Dargestellt , Cotta, p. 82 .

^ Watts, Edward J.

(2008) [2006], City and School in Late Antique Athens and Alexandria , Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, p. 200, ISBN 978-0520258167 ^ Cameron, Alan ; Long, Jacqueline; Sherry, Lee (1993), Barbarians and Politics at the Court of Arcadius , Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, p. 59, ISBN 978-0-520-06550-5 ^ Jordanes .

The Origin and Deeds of the Goths . Translated by Charles C. Mierow . § 24.

^ Hutton, Ronald (1993) [1991]. "The Clash of Faiths (AD c. 300– c.

1000 )".

The Pagan Religions of the Ancient British Isles: Their Nature and Legacy (pbk. ed.). Oxford, UK: Blackwell. p. 257.

ISBN 0-631-18946-7 .

^ Behringer (2004).

Witches and Witch-hunts: a Global History . Wiley-Blackwell. pp.

30– 31.

Likewise, an Irish synod at around 800 AD condemned the belief in witches, and in particular those who slandered people for being lamias ( que interpretatur striga ).

^ Behringer (2004).

Witches and Witch-hunts: a Global History . Wiley-Blackwell. pp.

54– 55.

^ "witch hunts" .

Bible Apologetics .

^ "A decree of King Coloman of Hungary (c. 1074–1116, r. 1095–1116) against the belief in the existence of strigae ( De strigis vero que non sunt, ne ulla questio fiat ) suggests that they were thought to be human beings with demonic affiliation: witches.", Behringer, "Witches and Witch-hunts: a Global History", p. 32 (2004). Wiley-Blackwell.

^ "Abortion, Contraception and the Church Fathers" .

National Catholic Register . 16 February 2012.

^ Behringer, "Witches and Witch-hunts: a Global History", p. 55 (2004). Wiley-Blackwell.

^ This, for instance, is the general purport of the book Agobard (c. 800s).

Contra insulsam vulgi opinionem de grandine et tonitruis [ Against the foolish belief of the common sort concerning hail and thunder ]. Lyons, FR: Archbishop of Lyons .

^ Migne , Patrologia Latina , CIV, 147 ^ Behringer (2004).

Witches and Witch-hunts: a Global History . Wiley-Blackwell. p. 56.

^ a b c d Kieckhefer, Richard (2014).

Magic in the Middle Ages (2nd ed.). Cambridge.

ISBN 9781139923484 .

OCLC 889521066 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ The Oxford illustrated history of witchcraft and magic . Davies, Owen (1st ed.). Oxford. 2017.

ISBN 9780199608447 .

OCLC 972537073 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ "Heimskringla: King Olaf Trygvason's Saga" .

Sacred Texts .

^ "Internet History Sourcebooks Project" .

www.fordham.edu .

^ Selwood, Dominic (16 March 2016).

"How Protestantism fuelled Europe's deadly witch craze" .

The Telegraph . Archived from the original on 28 May 2014.

^ Cross, Livingstone (2005).

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . Oxford University Press. p. 1769.

ISBN 9780192802903 .

^ Jeffrey Burton Russell , A History of Medieval Christianity (173).

^ Cohn, Norman (2000) [1993].

Europe's Inner Demons: The Demonization of Christians in Medieval Christendom (Revised ed.). University of Chicago Press. pp.

173 –174.

^ See Franco Mormando, The Preacher's Demons: Bernardino of Siena and the Social Underworld of Early Renaissance Italy , Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999, Chapter 2.

^ a b Harrison, Kathryn (2014).

Joan of Arc : a life transfigured (1st ed.). New York.

ISBN 9780385531207 .

OCLC 876833154 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Hinson (Fall 1992). "Historical and Theological Perspectives on Satan".

Review & Expositor . Vol. 89, no. 4. p. 475.

^ Larner (2002). "Crime of witchcraft in early modern Europe". In Oldridge (ed.).

The Witchcraft Reader . Routledge. p. 211.

^ a b Behringer (2004).

Witches and Witch-hunts: A global history . Wiley-Blackwell. pp.

18– 19.

^ Levack, The Witch-Hunt in Early Modern Europe , (49) ^ von Pastor, Ludwig .

The History of the Popes, from the Close of the Middle Ages . Vol. 5. pp.

349– 350.

^ Jolly; Raudvere; Peters, eds. (2002).

Witchcraft and magic in Europe: the Middle Ages . p. 241.

^ Nachman Ben-Yehuda (July 1980).

"The European Witch Craze of the 14th to 17th Centuries: A Sociologist's Perspective' " .

American Journal of Sociology .

86 (1).

University of Chicago Press : 6– 7.

ISSN 0002-9602 . Retrieved 8 April 2023 .

he witch-hunts were conducted in their most intense form in those regions where the Catholic church was weakest (Lea 1957; Rose 1962) (Germany, Switzerland, France). In areas with a strong church (Spain, Poland, and eastern Europe) the witch craze was negligible.

^ Ellerbe, Helen (1995).

The Dark Side of Christian History . Morningstar & Lark.

^ Meewis, Wim (1992).

De Vierschaar . Uitgevering Pelckmans. p. 115.

^ "The History Today Archive" . Archived from the original on 12 November 2007.

^ Midelfort, H.C. Erik (1972).

Witch Hunting in Southwestern Germany 1562–1684 . Stanford, Calif., Stanford University Press. p.

71 .

ISBN 9780804708050 .

^ Behringer (2004), p. 83.

^ Willumsen, Liv Helene (2013).

Witches of the North . Leiden: Brill. pp.

1– 13.

ISBN 9789004252912 .

^ Baten, Joerg; Woitek, Ulrich. "Economic determinants of witch-hunting".

University of Tübingen Research Paper .

^ Willumsen, Liv Helene (2010).

The Witchcraft Trials in Finnmark, northern Norway . Bergen: Skald. p. 13.

ISBN 978-82-7959-152-8 .

^ Andreassen; Willumsen (2014). " 'Introduction' ".

Steilneset Memorial. Art Architecture History . Stamsund: Orkana. pp.

1– 10.

ISBN 978-82-8104-245-2 .

^ "Daemonlologie by King James the First and Newes from Scotland" .

Sacred Texts .

^ "Follow the Pendle Witches trail" . 21 October 2009 – via news.bbc.co.uk.

^ Sharpe, James (2002). "The Lancaster witches in historical context". In Poole, Robert (ed.).

The Lancashire Witches: Histories and Stories . Manchester University Press. pp.

1– 18.

ISBN 978-0-7190-6204-9 .

^ Jewett, Clarence F. (1881).

The Memorial History of Boston: Including Suffolk County, Massachusetts. 1630–1880 . Ticknor and Company. pp.

133 –137.

^ a b Fraden, Judith Bloom; Fraden, Dennis Brindell (2008).

The Salem Witch Trials . Marshall Cavendish. p. 15.

^ "Springfield's 375th: From Puritans to presidents" .

masslive.com . 10 May 2011.

^ Wallace, Peter G. (2004).

The Long European Reformation . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

210 –215.

ISBN 978-0-333-64451-5 .

^ "Estimates of executions" .

Based on Ronald Hutton 's essay Counting the Witch Hunt .

^ Charles Alva Hoyt, Witchcraft , Southern Illinois University Press, 2nd ed., 1989, pp. 66–70, ISBN 0-8093-1544-0 .

^ Westwood, Jennifer (2011).

The lore of Scotland: A guide to Scottish legends . Kingshill, Sophia. London: Arrow.

ISBN 9780099547167 .

OCLC 712624576 .

^ "Witchcraft: Eight Myths and Misconceptions" .

English Heritage . Retrieved 8 August 2024 .

^ Akademie Schloss Solitude : On the Occult and the Supernatural: Kepler's Witch Trial , pages:25 ff. retrieved: 11 July 2025 ^ Russell, Jeffrey Burton; Lewis, Ioan M. (2000).

"Witchcraft" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 27 August 2021 .

^ Levack, Brian P.

(1987).

The Witch Hunt in Early Modern Europe . p. 21.

^ Levack, Brian P.

(2006).

The Witch Hunt in Early Modern Europe (3rd ed.). Pearson Longman. p. 23.

ISBN 9780582419018 .

^ Monter, William (2002). "Witch Trials in Continental Europe". In Ankarloo, Bengst; Clark, Stuart (eds.).

Witchcraft and Magic in Europe . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 12 ff.

ISBN 0-8122-1787-X .

^ Gaskill, Malcolm (2010).

Witchcraft, a very short introduction . Oxford University Press. p.

76 .

ISBN 978-0-19-923695-4 .

^ Barstow, Anne Lewellyn (1994).

Witchcraze .

^ Hutton, Ronald (1999).

Triumph of the Moon . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-820744-3 .

^ Sharpe, James (2001).

Witchcraft in Early Modern England . Harlow, UK: Pearson. p. 6.

^ Goodare, Julian (2016).

The European Witch-Hunt . Routledge. pp. 267, 268.

ISBN 978-1-317-19831-4 . Retrieved 21 December 2021 .

^ Noituus – Kuolemantuomiot Archived 1 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine (in Finnish) ^ Scarre, Geoffrey; Callow, John (2001). Witchcraft and Magic in Sixteenth and Seventeenth-Century Europe (second ed.). Basingstoke: Palgrave, pp. 29–33.

^ Rapley, Robert (1998).

A Case of Witchcraft: The Trial of Urbain Grandier . Manchester University Press. p. 99.

ISBN 978-0-7190-5528-7 .

[ unreliable source?

] ^ Gaskill, Malcolm Witchcraft, a very short introduction , Oxford University Press, 2010, p. 65 ^ William Monter: Witch trials in Continental Europe , (in:) Witchcraft and magic in Europe , ed. Bengst Ankarloo & Stuart Clark, University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia 2002, pp 12 ff.

ISBN 0-8122-1787-X ; and Levack, Brian P. The witch hunt in early modern Europe, 3rd ed., London and New York: Longman, 2006.

^ a b Gibson, M (2006). "Witchcraft in the Courts". In Gibson, Marion (ed.).

Witchcraft And Society in England And America, 1550–1750 .

Continuum International Publishing Group . pp.

1– 18.

ISBN 978-0-8264-8300-3 .

^ Addison, Joseph (1711).

"Their own imaginations they deceive" .

The Spectator .

2 (117): 208– 212.

^ Summers, Montague (2003).

Geography of Witchcraft . Kessinger Publishing. pp.

153– 160.

doi : 10.4324/9781315822334 .

ISBN 978-0-7661-4536-8 .

^ "Laatste executie van heks in Borculo" (in Dutch). Archeonnet.nl. 11 October 2003. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007 . Retrieved 22 September 2010 .

^ "Last witch executed in Denmark" . executedtoday.com. 4 April 2010 . Retrieved 22 September 2010 .

^ Hagen, Rune Blix (28 May 2018).

"Johanne Nielsdatter" .

Snl.no . Retrieved 8 January 2019 .

^ "Timeline The Last Witchfinder" . Archived from the original on 20 November 2011 . Retrieved 22 September 2010 .

^ Kern, Edmund M. (January 1999).

"An End to Witch Trials in Austria: Reconsidering the Enlightened State" .

Austrian History Yearbook .

30 : 159– 185.

doi : 10.1017/S006723780001599X .

ISSN 1558-5255 .

PMID 21180204 .

^ Balog, Zdenko (1 February 2017).

"Magda Logomer Herucina" .

Cris XVIII .

^ Wolfgang Petz (11 December 2007).

"Anna Maria Schwägelin (Schwägele)" .

Historicum.net (in German). Archived from the original on 31 May 2008.

^ Tazbir, Janusz (1994).

Opowieści prawdziwe i zmyślone . Twój Styl.

ISBN 9788385083368 .

^ Gijswijt-Hofstra, Marijke (1999).

Witchcraft and Magic in Europe, Volume 5 . A&C Black. p. 88.

ISBN 9780485890051 .

^ "Last witch in Europe cleared" . Swissinfo.ch. 27 August 2008 . Retrieved 22 September 2010 .

^ Klimczak, Natalia.

"Barbara Zdunk – The Last Executed Slavic Witch By Authorities In Prussia" . Archived from the original on 27 October 2017 . Retrieved 27 October 2017 .

^ Archer, W G (1979).

The Santals: Readings in Tribal Life . New Delhi: Concept Publishing Company.

^ Crooke, W (1969).

The Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India . Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.

^ a b Sinha, Shashank (2007). "Witch hunts, Adivasis, and the Uprising in Chhotanagpur".

Economic and Political Weekly .

42 (19): 1672– 1676.

JSTOR 4419566 .

^ Varma, Daya (2007). "Witch-Hunt among Santhals".

Economic & Political Weekly .

42 (23): 2130.

JSTOR 4419670 .

^ "Entschuldigung" (PDF) .

anton-praetorius.de .

^ United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

"UNHCR Research Paper No. 169 Witchcraft allegations, refugee protection and human rights: a review of the evidence, January 2009" .

UNHCR .

^ Miguel, Edward. "Poverty and Witch Killing." The Review of Economic Studies 72, no. 4 (1 October 2005): 1153–72 ^ United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

"UNHCR Research Paper No. 197 Breaking the spell: responding to witchcraft accusations against children, January 2011" .

UNHCR .

^ United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

"UNHCR Research Paper No. 235 Seeking meaning: an anthropological and community-based approach to witchcraft accusations and their prevention in refugee situations, May 2012" .

UNHCR .

^ Mezzofiore, Gianluca (30 June 2015).

"Isis in Syria: Islamic State beheads 2 women for sorcery reports Syrian Observatory for Human Rights" .

International Business Times . Retrieved 30 June 2015 .

^ Armstrong, Jeremy (6 January 2015).

"ISIS behead street magician for entertaining crowds in Syria with his tricks" .

Daily Mirror . Retrieved 30 June 2015 .

^ "Precarious Justice – Arbitrary Detention and Unfair Trials in the Deficient Criminal Justice System of Saudi Arabia" .

Human Rights Watch : 143. 2008.

^ "Distance witch finally caught; 118 detained this year" .

Saudi Gazette . 4 November 2009. Archived from the original on 10 January 2012 . Retrieved 6 February 2011 .

^ "Saudi Arabia: Witchcraft and Sorcery Cases on the Rise" (Press release). 24 November 2009 . Retrieved 6 February 2011 .

^ "King Abdullah urged to spare Saudi 'witchcraft' woman's life".

The Times . 16 February 2008.

^ "Letter to HRH King Abdullah bin Abd al-'Aziz Al Saud on "Witchcraft" Case" (Press release). Human Rights Watch. 12 February 2008 . Retrieved 6 February 2011 .

^ "Saudi executes Egyptian for practising 'witchcraft' " .

ABC News . 3 November 2007. Archived from the original on 3 November 2007 . Retrieved 6 February 2011 .

^ "Sudanese man facing execution in Saudi Arabia over 'sorcery' charges" .

Afrik News . 15 May 2010 . Retrieved 6 February 2011 .

^ "Lebanese TV host Ali Hussain Sibat faces execution in Saudi Arabia for sorcery" .

The Times . 2 April 2010 . Retrieved 18 January 2025 .

^ "Lebanese PM should step in to halt Saudi Arabia 'Sorcery' execution" (Press release). Amnesty International. 1 April 2010 . Retrieved 6 February 2011 .

^ "Saudi court rejects death sentence for TV psychic" . CTV News. Associated Press. 13 November 2010. Archived from the original on 20 November 2011 . Retrieved 6 February 2011 .

^ "Saudi Arabia: Woman Is Beheaded After Being Convicted of Witchcraft" .

The New York Times . Agence France-Presse. 12 December 2011 . Retrieved 13 December 2011 .

^ "Saudi man executed for 'witchcraft and sorcery' " .

BBC News . 19 June 2012.

^ "Unreported World" .

Channel 4 .

^ McGuirk, Rod (10 June 2013).

"Witch hunts in Papua New Guinea linked to jealousy" . Associated Press. Archived from the original on 17 May 2021 . Retrieved 10 June 2013 .

^ a b c Chandler, Jo (24 October 2017).

"It's 2013, and they're burning 'witches' " .

The Global Mail . Archived from the original on 2 October 2013.

^ Gibbs, Philip (2012). "Engendered Violence and Witch-killing in Simbu".

Engendering Violence in Papua New Guinea . ANU Press: 107– 136.

ISBN 9781921862854 .

JSTOR j.ctt24hcwt.10 .

^ "Black Magic practices in India" .

Deutsche Welle . 23 May 2012 . Retrieved 13 September 2013 .

^ "Village 'witches' beaten in India" .

BBC News . 20 October 2009 . Retrieved 13 September 2013 .

^ " 'Witch' family killed in India" .

BBC News . 12 June 2008 . Retrieved 13 September 2013 .

^ "Bengal tribesmen kill 'witches' " .

BBC News . 27 March 2003 . Retrieved 13 September 2013 .

^ Jill Schnoebelen.

"Witchcraft allegations, refugee protection and human rights:a review of the evidence" (PDF) .

UNHRC . Retrieved 13 September 2013 .

^ "NCW demands stringent law against witch-hunts" .

The Hindu . 4 June 2013 . Retrieved 14 September 2013 .

^ "Killing of women, child "witches" on rise, U.N. told" .

Reuters . 23 September 2009 . Retrieved 13 September 2013 .

^ "Witch Killings in Orissa District Cause Concern" .

Outlook . 21 December 2010. Archived from the original on 2 February 2014 . Retrieved 12 September 2021 .

^ "Three 'witches' kill themselves" . 24 October 2003 . Retrieved 13 September 2013 .

^ "In Assam, a rising trend of murders on allegations of witchcraft" .

NDTV . 4 September 2013 . Retrieved 13 September 2013 .

^ "Girl raped, mom killed for her alleged indulgence in black magic in Chhattisgarh" .

The Times of India . 3 September 2013. Archived from the original on 6 September 2013 . Retrieved 13 September 2013 .

^ The Hindu , Nearly 200 women killed every year after being branded witches , 26 July 2010.

Herald Sun , 200 'witches' killed in India each year – report , 26 July 2010.

^ A Jharkhand case publicized in international media in 2009 concerned five Muslim women.

BBC News , 30 October 2009.

^ "Witch hunts targeted by grassroots women's groups" .

^ Witches, Tea Plantations, and Lives of Migrant Laborers in India: Tempest in a Teapot .

^ Womensnews.org .

^ Bailey, Frederick George 1994: The Witch-Hunt, or the Triumph of Morality. New York: Cornell University Press.

^ Deepesh Shrestha; in Pyutar for AFP (15 February 2010).

"Witch-hunts of low-caste women in Nepal" .

Telegraph.co.uk .

Archived from the original on 12 January 2022.

^ a b "Nepal – A study on violence due to witchcraft allegation and sexual violence" .

WHRIN . 31 July 2013 . Retrieved 26 August 2019 .

^ "Witch-hunt victim recounts torture ordeal" .

ABC News . 7 February 2010.

^ Diwan, Mohammed (1 July 2004).

"Conflict between State Legal Norms and Norms Underlying Popular Beliefs: Witchcraft in Africa as a Case Study" .

Duke Journal of Comparative & International Law .

14 (2): 351– 388.

ISSN 1053-6736 .

^ Ally, Yaseen (2014).

Witchcraft accusations in South Africa: A feminist psychological exploration (Doctorate of Psychology thesis). University of South Africa.

^ de Waal, Mandy (30 May 2012).

"Witch-hunts: The darkness that won't go away" .

Daily Maverick . Retrieved 9 December 2013 .

^ "Congo witch-hunt's child victims" .

BBC News . 22 December 1999 . Retrieved 16 April 2007 .

^ a b "Tanzania arrests 'witch killers' " .

BBC News . 23 October 2003 . Retrieved 16 April 2007 .

It is believed that any aged, old woman with red eyes is a witch ^ A Modern Movement of Witch Finders Audrey I Richards (Africa: Journal of the International Institute of African Languages and Cultures, Ed. Diedrich Westermann.) Vol VIII, 1935, published by Oxford University Press, London.

^ Stephen Hayes (November 1995).

"Christian responses to witchcraft and sorcery" .

Missionalia . Vol. 23, no. 3. pp.

339– 354. Archived from the original on 3 July 2006.

^ Fisiy, Cyprian F. (2001). "Containing occult practices: Witchcraft trials in Cameroon". In Levack, Brian P. (ed.).

New Perspectives on Witchcraft, Magic, and Demonology: Witchcraft in the modern world . Vol. 6.

^ "Cameroon: Witchcraft in Cameroon; tribes or geographical areas in which witchcraft is practised; the government's attitude" .

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees . 2004. Archived from the original on 14 September 2012.

^ van Binsbergen, Wim (2002).

"Witchcraft in Modern Africa" . Shikanda.net. Archived from the original on 11 May 2003.

^ "Mob burns to death 11 Kenyan "witches" " .

Reuters . 21 May 2008.

^ "The Gambia: Hundreds accused of "witchcraft" and poisoned in government campaign" . 18 March 2009. Archived from the original on 23 December 2014.

^ Nossiter, Adam (20 May 2009).

"Witch Hunts and Foul Potions Heighten Fear of Leader in Gambia" .

The New York Times .

^ Studia Instituti Anthropos , Vol. 41. Anthony J. Gittins : Mende Religion . Steyler Verlag, Nettetal, 1987. p. 197.

^ Studia Instituti Anthropos , Vol. 41. Anthony J. Gittins : Mende Religion . Steyler Verlag, Nettetal, 1987. p. 201.

^ Jackie Mansky , 'The True Story of the Death of Stalin', Smithsonian.com , 10 October 2017 ^ Arthur Miller , "Why I wrote 'The Crucible'", The New Yorker , 13 October 1996 ^ James Morone (2022).

"Conspiracies and American Democracy: What's Old? What's New? And What's Dangerous?" .

University of St. Thomas Journal of Law & Public Policy .

15 (2): 412– 432.

^ Telegraph Video (5 February 2021).

"Is cancel culture the modern-day witch trials?" .

The Telegraph .

ISSN 0307-1235 .

Archived from the original on 12 January 2022 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 .

^ Al-Arshani, Sarah (25 May 2021).

"Trump calls New York criminal probe a 'witch hunt' and claims a poll shows he is the frontrunner in 2024" .

Business Insider . Retrieved 19 September 2021 .

^ Shear, Michael D.; Savage, Charlie; Haberman, Maggie (16 June 2017).

"Trump Attacks Rosenstein in Latest Rebuke of Justice Department" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 19 September 2021 .

^ "Trump calls impeachment effort 'greatest witch hunt' " .

www.aa.com.tr . Retrieved 19 September 2021 .

^ "Trump calls impeachment case a 'witch hunt' and hints at a political return" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 19 September 2021 .

^ Markham-Cantor, Alice (28 October 2019).

"What Trump Really Means When He Cries 'Witch Hunt' " .

The Nation .

ISSN 0027-8378 . Retrieved 19 September 2021 .

^ Almond, Philip C. (20 January 2020).

"You think this is a witch hunt, Mr President? That's an insult to the women who suffered" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 19 September 2021 .

^ Gregorian, Dareh (10 June 2022).

"Judge dismisses NRA's claims that it's the victim of NY AG 'witch hunt' " .

NBC News . Retrieved 11 June 2022 .

Further reading [ edit ] Hutton, Ronald (2017).

The Witch: A History of Fear, from Ancient Times to the Present . New Haven: Yale University Press.

ISBN 9780300229042 .

OCLC 984511945 .

Andreassen, Reidun Laura and Liv Helene Willumsen (eds.), Steilneset Memorial. Art Architecture History . Stamsund: Orkana, 2014.

ISBN 978-82-8104-245-2 Behringer, Wolfgang.

Witches and Witch Hunts: A Global History.

Malden Massachusetts: Polity Press, 2004.

Briggs, K.M.

Pale Hecate's Team, an Examination of the Beliefs on Witchcraft and Magic among Shakespeare's Contemporaries and His Immediate Successors . New York: The Humanities Press, 1962.

Briggs, Robin. 'Many reasons why': witchcraft and the problem of multiple explanation, in Witchcraft in Early Modern Europe. Studies in Culture and Belief , ed. Jonathan Barry, Marianne Hester, and Gareth Roberts, Cambridge University Press, 1996.

Burns, William E.

Witch hunts in Europe and America: an encyclopedia (2003) Cohn, Norman.

Europe's Inner Demons: An Enquiry Inspired by the Great Witch-Hunt (1975), Revised Edition: Europe's Inner Demons: The Demonization of Christians in Medieval Christendom, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1993.

Durrant, Jonathan B.

Witchcraft, Gender, and Society in Early Modern Germany , Leiden: Brill, 2007.

Federici, Silvia (2004).

Caliban and the Witch: Women, the Body, and Primitive Accumulation . Brooklyn, NY: Autonomedia.

ISBN 1-57027-059-7 .

Golden, William, ed.

Encyclopedia of Witchcraft: The Western Tradition (4 vol. 2006) 1270pp; 758 short essays by scholars.

Goode, Erich; Ben-Yahuda, Nachman (1994).

Moral Panics: The Social Construction of Deviance . Cambridge, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0-631-18905-3 .

Gouges, Linnea de, Witch hunts and State Building in Early Modern Europe (2018) Klaits, Joseph.

Servants of Satan: The Age of the Witch Hunts.

Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1985 Levack, Brian P.

The Great Scottish Witch Hunt of 1661–1662 , The Journal of British Studies , Vol. 20, No, 1. (Autumn, 1980), pp. 90–108.

Levack, Brian P.

The witch hunt in early modern Europe , 3rd ed., London and New York: Longman, 2006.

Macfarlane, Alan.

Witchcraft in Tudor and Stuart England: A regional and Comparative Study . New York and Evanston: Harper & Row Publishers, 1970.

Midlefort, Erick H.C.

Witch Hunting in Southeastern Germany 1562–1684: The Social and Intellectual Foundation.

California: Stanford University Press, 1972.

ISBN 0-8047-0805-3 Monter, William (1972). "The Historiography of European Witchcraft: Progress and Prospect".

Journal of Interdisciplinary History .

2 (4): 435– 451.

doi : 10.2307/202315 .

JSTOR 202315 .

Oberman, H. A., J. D. Tracy, Thomas A. Brady (eds.), Handbook of European History, 1400–1600: Visions, Programs, Outcomes (1995) ISBN 90-04-09761-9 Oldridge, Darren (ed.), The Witchcraft Reader (2002) ISBN 0-415-21492-0 Poole, Robert.

The Lancashire Witches: Histories and Stories (2002) ISBN 0-7190-6204-7 Purkiss, Diane. "A Holocaust of One's Own: The Myth of the Burning Times." Chapter in The Witch and History: Early Modern and Twentieth Century Representatives New York: Routledge, 1996, pp. 7–29.

Robisheaux, Thomas.

The Last Witch of Langenburg: Murder in a German Village.

New York: W.W. Norton & Co. (2009) ISBN 978-0-393-06551-0 Sagan, Carl.

The Demon-Haunted World , Random House, 1996.

ISBN 0-394-53512-X David W. Thompson, "Sister Witch: The Life of Moll Dyer" (2017 Solstice Publishing) ISBN 978-1973105756 Thurston, Robert.

The Witch Hunts: A History of the Witch Persecutions in Europe and North America . Pearson/Longman, 2007.

Purkiss, Diane.

The Bottom of the Garden, Dark History of Fairies, Hobgoblins, and Other Troublesome Things.

Chapter 3 Brith and Death: Fairies in Scottish Witch-trials New York: New York University Press, 2000, pp. 85–115.

West, Robert H.

Reginald Scot and Renaissance Writings . Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1984.

Willumsen, Liv Helene.

The Witchcraft Trials in Finnmark, Northern Norway . Bergen: Skald, 2010.

ISBN 978-82-7959-152-8 Willumsen, Liv Helene.

Witches of the North:Scotland and Finnmark . Leiden: Brill, 2013.

ISBN 9789004252912 . E- ISBN 9789004252929 Winkler, Albert (2023) "Judicial Murder: The Witch-Craze in Germany and Switzerland," Swiss American Historical Society Review , Vol. 59: No. 1, Available at: https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/sahs_review/vol59/iss1/2 External links [ edit ] Witch hunt at Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Data from Wikidata 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia entry on "Witchcraft" Douglas Linder (2005), A Brief History of Witchcraft Persecutions before Salem v t e Witch trials In the British Isles Witchcraft in early modern Britain Channel Islands Witch Trials Witch trials in England Witchcraft in Orkney Witch trials in early modern Scotland Witchcraft in early modern Wales Windsor Witches (1579) St Osyth Witches (1582) Witches of Warboys (1589–1593) North Berwick witch trials (1590) Great Scottish Witch Hunt of 1597 Pendle witches (1612) Northamptonshire witch trials (1612) Samlesbury witches (1612) Witches of Belvoir (1619) Bury St Edmunds witch trials (1645, 1662, 1655, 1694) Great Scottish witch hunt of 1649–50 Alloa witch trials (1658) Great Scottish Witch Hunt of 1661–62 Bute witches (1662) Bideford witch trial (1682) Paisley witches (1696) Pittenweem witches (1704) Islandmagee witch trial (1711) In Eastern Europe Witch trials in Hungary Witch trials in Poland Kasina Wielka witch trial (1634) Northern Moravia witch trials (1678) Szeged witch trials (1728–29) Doruchowo witch trial (1783) In France Witch trials in France Labourd witch-hunt of 1609 Aix-en-Provence possessions (1611) Loudun possessions (1633–34) Louviers possessions (1647) Normandy witch trials (1669–70) Affair of the Poisons (1679–1682) Trial of the Wizards of Lyon (1742–1745) In Germany Witch trials in the Holy Roman Empire Rottweil Witch Trials Derenburg witch trials (1555) Wiesensteig witch trial (1562–1563) Rottenburg witch trials (1578–1613) Trier witch trials (1581–1593) Pappenheimer family witch trial (1600) Fulda witch trials (1603–1606) Ellwangen witch trial (1611–1618) Eichstätt witch trials (1617–1630) Würzburg witch trials (1626–1631) Bamberg witch trials (1626–1631) Baden-Baden witch trials (1627–1631) Mergentheim witch trials (1628–1631) Esslingen witch trials (1662–1666) Witch trial of Fuersteneck (1703) In Northern Europe Witch trials in Denmark Witch trials in Estonia and Latvia Witch trials in Finland Witch trials in Iceland Witch trials in Norway Witch trials in Sweden Põlula witch trials (1542) Copenhagen witch trials (1590) Gyldenstierne-sagen (1596) Køge Huskors (1608–1615) Finspång witch trial (1617) Vardø witch trials (1621) Akershus witch trials (1624) Ramsele witch trial (1634) Rosborg witch trials (1639–1642) Vardø witch trials (1651–1653) Kirkjuból witch trial (1656) Vardø witch trials (1662–63) Kastelholm witch trials (1665–1668) Mora witch trial (1669) Torsåker witch trials (1675) Katarina witch trials (1676) Rugård witch trials (1685–86) Thisted witch trial (1696–1698) In Southern Europe Witch trials in Italy Witch trials in Catalonia Witch trials in Portugal Witch trials in Sicily Witch trials in Spain Val Camonica witch trials (1505, 1518) Mirandola witch trials (1522–1525) Navarre witch trials (1525–26) Lisbon witch trial (1559–60) Benandanti (1575–1650) Witches of Laspaúles (1593) Basque witch trials (1609) Terrassa witch trials (1615–1619) Witch trial of Nogaredo (1646–47) Elsewhere in Europe Witch trials in the Netherlands Witch trials in the Spanish Netherlands Stedelen witch trial (1397–1407) Valais witch trials (1428–1447) Geneva witch trials (1571) Amersfoort and Utrecht witch trials (1591–1595) Bredevoort witch trials (1610) Roermond witch trial (1613) Spa witch trial (1616) Lukh witch trials (1656–1660) Salzburg witch trials (1675–1681) Liechtenstein witch trials (1679–1682) Outside of Europe Witch trials in Virginia (1626–1730) Connecticut Witch Trials (1647–1663) Maryland Witch Trials (1654–1712) Witch trials in New York (1642–1790) Salem witch trials (1692–1693) Texts Witchcraft and divination in the Old Testament (8th–2nd centuries BC) Directorium Inquisitorum (1376) De maleficis mulieribus (1440) Formicarius (1475) Summis desiderantes affectibus (1484) Malleus Maleficarum (1487) De Lamiis et Pythonicis Mulieribus (1489) Laienspiegel (1509) De praestigiis daemonum (1563) The Discoverie of Witchcraft (1584) Newes from Scotland (1591) A Dialogue Concerning Witches and Witchcrafts (1593) Daemonolatreiae libri tres (1595) Daemonologie (1597) Magical Investigations (1599) Compendium Maleficarum (1608) A Guide to Grand-Jury Men (1627) The Discovery of Witches (1647) Treatises on the Apparitions of Spirits and on Vampires or Revenants (1751) Related Witch hunt accusations against children Drudenhaus Werewolf witch trials Witchcraft Acts Witchcraft Act 1735 (Great Britain) v t e Magic and witchcraft Types Region Africa Azande Ghana Witch smeller Asia Jhākri Philippines Europe Italy Akelarre Benandanti Cunning folk Greece and Rome Seiðr Völva Witch-cult hypothesis Anglo-Saxon England Britain Latin America Middle East Oceania Mākutu Form Chaos magic Goetia Hoodoo Medieval Neopagan Wicca Renaissance Solitary practitioner Warlock Witch doctor Practices Animism Apotropaic magic Black magic Ceremonial magic Magical formula Coven Curse Anathema Damnation Jinx Demon Divination Entheogen Evocation Familiar Gray magic Incantation Jinn Love magic Mediumship Moon magic Necromancy Occultism Shamanism Black Regional Yellow Sex magic Sigils Spiritism Spiritualism Sympathetic magic Witches' Sabbath White magic Objects Amulet Athame Broom besom Censer Cloak of invisibility Crystal ball Flying ointment Goofer dust Grimoire Incense Julleuchter Kitchen witch Love charm Magic carpet Magic circle Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Mojo bag Nkisi Nkondi Poppet Potions Sator Square Talisman Wand Witch ball Witch's ladder Folklore and mythology Agamede Aradia Baba Yaga Circe Dayan Drude Elbow witch Hecate Huld Kalku Medea Morgan le Fay Muma Pădurii Nine sorceresses Obayifo Pasiphaë Sebile Sorginak Spearfinger Three Witches Witches of Benevento Witch of Endor Yama-uba Major historic treatises Witchcraft and divination in the Old Testament (8th–2nd centuries BC) Directorium Inquisitorum (1376) De maleficis mulieribus (1440) Formicarius (1475) Summis desiderantes affectibus (1484) Malleus Maleficarum (1487) De Lamiis et Pythonicis Mulieribus (1489) Laienspiegel (1509) De praestigiis daemonum (1563) The Discoverie of Witchcraft (1584) Newes from Scotland (1591) A Dialogue Concerning Witches and Witchcrafts (1593) Daemonolatreiae libri tres (1595) Daemonologie (1597) Magical Investigations (1599) Compendium Maleficarum (1608) A Guide to Grand-Jury Men (1627) The Discovery of Witches (1647) Treatise on the Apparitions of Spirits and on Vampires or Revenants (1751) Persecution Modern Jamyi Witch hiring controversy accusations against children India Nepal Papua New Guinea Witch camp Early Modern Americas Maryland New York Salem Virginia Eastern Europe Hungary Northern Moravia Poland Russia Northern Europe Baltic Denmark England Finland Iceland Norway Scotland Sweden Western Europe France Geneva Italy Spain Basque Classical Witch trials in the Holy Roman Empire Related Witch hunt Witch's mark Pricking List of people executed for witchcraft In popular culture Magic in fiction Witches in fiction Related Witch (word) Witch (archetype) Christian views on magic Magical organization Maleficium Left-hand path and right-hand path Feminist interpretations of witch trials in the early modern period Folk religion Adept v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Witch_hunt&oldid=1305831149 " Categories : Witch hunting History of magic Informal legal terminology Crowd psychology Femicide Christianity-related controversies Modern witch hunts Moral panic Hidden categories: Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: others Webarchive template wayback links All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from April 2015 CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2024 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use dmy dates from October 2018 Articles with excerpts Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from July 2017 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2019 Articles lacking reliable references from February 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2008 Incomplete lists from March 2017 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 09:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Witch hunt 52 languages Add topic

