Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 IAFF mission and history 2 IAFF Center of Excellence for Behavioral Health Treatment and Recovery 3 IAFF Legislative Conference 4 Membership restrictions 5 IAFF Fire Fighters Interested in Registration and Education Political Action Committee 6 IAFF Charitable Foundation 7 IAFF Fallen Fire Fighter Memorial 8 Muscular Dystrophy Association support 9 Leadership Toggle Leadership subsection 9.1 Presidents 9.2 Secretary-Treasurers 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents International Association of Fire Fighters 6 languages Esperanto עברית Română Simple English ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Labor union in the United States and Canada This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( January 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) IAFF International Association of Fire Fighters Founded 1918 ( 1918 ) Headquarters Washington, D.C.

, U.S.

Location United States , Canada Members 344,440 (2024) [1] Key people Edward Kelly , General President Frank Lima , General Secretary/Treasurer [2] Affiliations AFL–CIO , CLC Website www .iaff .org The International Association of Fire Fighters ( IAFF ) is a labor union representing paid full-time firefighters and emergency medical services personnel in the United States and Canada . The IAFF was formed in 1918 and is affiliated with the AFL–CIO in the United States and the Canadian Labour Congress in Canada. The IAFF has more than 344,440 members in its more than 3,500 affiliate organizations.

[3] Its political action committee, FIREPAC, is one of the most active PACs in the country.

[4] IAFF mission and history [ edit ] The IAFF was formed in 1918. The IAFF has fought for better wages, benefits, working conditions and improved safety for union members. The IAFF has also pushed for more full-time union firefighters.

IAFF Center of Excellence for Behavioral Health Treatment and Recovery [ edit ] The IAFF has announced plans to open the Center of Excellence for Behavioral Health Treatment and Recovery in 2017 located in Upper Marlboro, Maryland (outside Washington, DC). The IAFF Center of Excellence is intended for union members only and will offer treatment for recovery from post-traumatic stress and co-occurring addictions in hopes to help members return to the job. The center also will serve to train and educate peer support members in the treatment of post-traumatic stress and substance abuse in the fire fighter population. The ultimate goal is to develop protocols for fire departments to use to help fire fighters.

IAFF Legislative Conference [ edit ] Each year the IAFF hosts a national legislative conference in Washington, DC that is open to any IAFF member who wishes to register. The IAFF legislative conference is the largest legislative conference of any union in the country.  Over the years, attendees have heard from President Bill Clinton , Vice President Joe Biden , members of the Cabinet of both Republican and Democratic administrations, numerous members of Congress, including the Leadership of the Senate and House of Representatives, and key congressional staff.

Membership restrictions [ edit ] IAFF as a union represents full-time paid firefighters and emergency medical technicians, and membership is not open to volunteer firefighters . Its bylaws do not allow members to work or volunteer with any other emergency service organization beyond their full-time employer, and can have their membership revoked if they do, though in practice this rarely, if ever happens.

[5] IAFF Fire Fighters Interested in Registration and Education Political Action Committee [ edit ] FIREPAC (Fire Fighters Interested in Registration and Education Political Action Committee) is the federally registered political action committee of the IAFF.  FIREPAC was established in 1978 and has grown into the top one percent of all federally registered PACs.  During the 2009 – 2010 election cycle FIREPAC raised $5.3 million and was the tenth largest PAC in terms of donations to federal candidates.  Within organized labor, FIREPAC has been the most bi-partisan PAC during the last decade, contributing a larger percent of its donations to Republican candidates than any other union.  The IAFF follows a simple philosophy when it supporting candidates – they support those who support fire fighters, regardless of party affiliation or political leanings.

IAFF Charitable Foundation [ edit ] The IAFF Charitable Foundation was formed in 2011 to assist IAFF union members and their families if affected by natural disaster (including hurricanes, earthquakes, floods) promotes fire and burn prevention, advocates for fire fighter health and safety, and provides public education on how to prevent and recover from burn trauma.

IAFF Fallen Fire Fighter Memorial [ edit ] The IAFF Fallen Fire Fighter Memorial is a permanent remembrance of IAFF members and emergency medical services personnel who have lost their lives in the line of duty. An annual Fallen Firefighters memorial ceremony is held each year in September in Colorado Springs, Colorado (with the exception of 2020 and 2021 due to the Coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic). More than 8,800 names of fallen IAFF members are etched on the wall.

Muscular Dystrophy Association support [ edit ] The IAFF is the largest national sponsor of the Muscular Dystrophy Association (MDA). Members raise funds primarily through the "Fill the Boot" campaign, which helps fund MDA summer camps for children, professional and public health education and other programs. Total donations since 1954 are over $558 million.

Since 1966 the International Association of Fire Fighters has appeared on and co-sponsored The Jerry Lewis MDA Labor Day Telethon .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Leadership [ edit ] Presidents [ edit ] 1918: Thomas G. Spellacy 1919: Fred Baer 1946: John P. Redmond 1957: William D. Buck 1968: William H. McClennan 1980: Jack Gannon 1988: Alfred K. Whitehead 2000: Harold A. Schaitberger 2021: Edward Kelly Baer and Richardson in 1925 Secretary-Treasurers [ edit ] 1918: William Smith 1920: George J. Richardson 1956: William D. Buck 1957: John C. Kabachus (acting) 1958: Albert E. Albertoni 1972: Frank A. Palumbo 1980: Martin E. Pierce 1982: Alfred K. Whitehead 1988: Vincent J. Bollon 2010: Thomas H. Miller 2016: Edward A. Kelly 2021: Frank V. Lima References [ edit ] ^ "IAFF News: Osceola Professional Firefighters" . September 10, 2020. Archived from the original on November 13, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2020 .

^ "IAFF Raises Record-Breaking Donation For MDA Telethon" .

Firehouse . September 2, 2003.

^ "About Us" . IAFF. Archived from the original on November 12, 2016 . Retrieved August 20, 2018 .

^ "Constitution and By-Laws of the International Association of Fire Fighters" . August 2016. Archived from the original on August 16, 2018 . Retrieved August 20, 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Organized labour portal Official website Firefighters flex their political power, Teddy Davis, ABCnews.com, March 12, 2007 International Association of Fire Fighters Launches Thousands of Fill the Boot Fundraisers for the Muscular Dystrophy Association International Association of Fire Fighters Collection at Florida International University v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline v t e AFL-CIO Governance Presidents George Meany (1955–1979) Lane Kirkland (1979–1995) Thomas R. Donahue (1995) John J. Sweeney (1995–2009) Richard Trumka (2009–2021) Liz Shuler (2021–present) Departments Building Trades Maritime Trades Metal Trades Professional Employees Transportation Trades Union Label Constituency groups A. Philip Randolph Institute Alliance for Retired Americans Asian Pacific American Labor Alliance Coalition of Black Trade Unionists Coalition of Labor Union Women Labor Council for Latin American Advancement Pride at Work Union Veterans Council Allied organizations International Labor Communications Association Solidarity Center Working for America Institute Allied groups American Rights at Work International Rescue Committee Jewish Labor Committee Labor and Working-Class History Association Working America Programs AFL–CIO Employees Federal Credit Union National Labor College Affiliated unions AAAA AGMA AGVA GIAA AEA AFGE AFM AFSA AFSCME AFT ALPA APWU ARA ATDA ATU AWIU BAC BCTGM BRS CSEA CWA AFA IUE NABET PPMW TNG Locals FLOC GMPIU IAFF IAM NFFE TCIU IATSE IBB IBEW IFPTE ILA Ironworkers IUANPW IUEC IUOE IUPA IUPAT LIUNA NPMHU MEBA PASS NALC NATCA NFLPA NNU NTWA NWSLPA OPCMIA OPEIU Printers & Engravers SAG-AFTRA SIU SEIU CIR NAGE NCFO Workers United SMART TWU UA UAW UFCW DWAW RWDSU UMWA UNITE HERE USW UURWAW UWUA WGAE State federations and central labor councils California ( Los Angeles , South Bay ) Florida Indiana Maine Massachusetts New York ( New York City ) Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island Washington State ( King ) West Virginia See also American Federation of Labor Congress of Industrial Organizations Directly affiliated local union v t e Canadian Labour Congress Provincial and territorial federations Alberta British Columbia Manitoba New Brunswick Newfoundland and Labrador Northwest/Nunavut Nova Scotia Ontario Prince Edward Island Quebec Saskatchewan Yukon National affiliates ACPA ACTRA BCTF CAPE CFNU COPE CPAA CUPE CUPW DGC ETFO NUCAUT NUPGE OECTA OSSTF PIPSC PSAC International affiliates AFM ALPA ATU AWIU BAC BCTGM Boilermakers CWA Laborers IAFF IAM IATSE IBEW IFPTE ILA ILWU IPP Ironworkers IUOE IUPAT OPEIU SEIU WUCC SIU SMART UA UAW UFCW UMW UNITE HERE USW Presidents Claude Jodoin (1956–1966) Donald MacDonald (1967–1974) Joe Morris (1974–1978) Dennis McDermott (1978–1986) Shirley Carr (1986–1992) Bob White (1992–1999) Ken Georgetti (1999–2014) Hassan Yussuff (2014–2021) Bea Bruske (2021–present) See also Canadian Congress of Labour International Labor Communications Association One Big Union Trades and Labor Congress Union Retirees Workers' Unity League Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Association_of_Fire_Fighters&oldid=1291327928 " Categories : International Association of Fire Fighters 1918 establishments in the United States AFL-CIO affiliates Canadian Labour Congress affiliates Firefighters associations Fire protection organizations Firefighting in the United States Trade unions established in 1918 Firefighting in Canada Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations Use mdy dates from April 2024 This page was last edited on 20 May 2025, at 14:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International Association of Fire Fighters 6 languages Add topic

