Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of the museum 2 Collections 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Cambridge University Museum of Zoology 4 languages Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°12′12″N 0°07′13″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.2033°N 0.1204°E ﻿ / 52.2033; 0.1204 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia University Museum in Downing Street, Cambridge University Museum of Zoology, Cambridge Giant Finback whale at the Museum of Zoology Location Museum of Zoology, Downing Street, Cambridge. CB2 3EJ Type University Museum Accreditation Arts Council England accredited Collections Fossils , Vertebrates , Birds , Insects , Molluscs , Invertebrates Visitors 103,604 (2022) [ 1 ] Museum Manager Jack Ashby Director Professor Rebecca Kilner Owner University of Cambridge University of Cambridge Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Whipple Museum of the History of Science Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences The Polar Museum Museum of Zoology The University Museum of Zoology is a museum of the University of Cambridge and part of the research community of the Department of Zoology. The public is welcome and admission is free (2018).

[ 2 ] The Museum of Zoology is in the David Attenborough Building, formerly known as the Arup Building, on the New Museums Site , just north of Downing Street in central Cambridge , England.

[ 3 ] The building also provides a home for the Cambridge Conservation Initiative, a biodiversity project.

The museum houses an extensive collection of scientifically important zoological material.  The collections were designated in 1998 by the Museums, Libraries and Archives Council (now managed by the Arts Council England ) as being of outstanding historical and international importance.

[ 4 ] The museum reopened on 23 June 2018 after a major redevelopment [ 2 ] [ 5 ] for which it had been awarded a grant of £1.8m by the Heritage Lottery Fund .

The redevelopment aimed to create a "green" building" and to create displays and new interpretation to engage people with the wonders of animal diversity; create new stores to care for the museum's internationally significant collections to the highest standards and expand the museum's learning programmes, reaching out to wider audiences and increasing online resources.

[ 6 ] The museum is one of the eight museums of the University of Cambridge Museums consortium.

[ 7 ] History of the museum [ edit ] Much of the museum's material derives from the great collecting expeditions of the 19th century, which provided the first documentation of the fauna in many parts of the world.

[ 8 ] The earliest exhibits come from the Harwood anatomical collection which was purchased in 1814. The museum added further collections including birds from William Swainson and animals from the Cambridge Philosophical Society , to which Charles Darwin himself had contributed.

[ 9 ] Past superintendents of the museum include:
William Clark 1817–1866, John Willis Clark 1866–1892, Sidney Frederic Harmer 1892–1908, Reginald Crundall Punnett 1908–1909,
and Leonard Doncaster 1909–1914.

[ 10 ] The museum was moved into the current purpose-designed building during 1968–70.

[ 11 ] Five separate stores currently house the collection of specimens. Small refurbishments were made in 2017.

Collections [ edit ] Many of the collections were assembled during the nineteenth century, which was a key period for the development of modern biology. Much of the material was accumulated between 1865 and 1915 through private collections and expeditions. Cambridge was a centre of major importance for the development of biology, and several of the individuals associated with the museum were central figures in the most active areas of scientific debate.

[ 12 ] Collections and letters from various collectors are on display, including collections of: F.M. Balfour , Professor of Zoology George Robert Crotch , entomologist Charles Darwin , Naturalist Sir Clive Forster-Cooper , former director of the museum John Henry Gurney Sr.

, banker and amateur ornithologist James Hepburn , Ornithologist Reverend Leonard Jenyns , originally chosen as the naturalist for the voyage of HMS Beagle Robert MacAndrew , amateur naturalist and shell-collector Alfred Newton , zoologist and ornithologist.

Hugh Strickland , ornithologist William Swainson , ornithologist Alfred Russel Wallace , co-originator of the theory of natural selection Henry Woodward , geologist Fin whale skeleton, Museum of Zoology Cambridge Before the redevelopment a 21.3 m (70 ft) finback whale skeleton, colloquially known as Bobby, was displayed at the entrance of the museum; it was dismantled and stored during the redevelopment. The new interior entrance hall now contains this skeleton which was extensively cleaned before being reassembled. Skeletons and preserved skins of many extinct animals are housed in the museum. Most of the fish specimens are stored in spirit, some of them having been collected by Darwin himself on the voyage of HMS Beagle from 1831 - 1836. The bird collection consists of skins, eggs and skeletal material. There are skeletal remains from extinct birds such as the dodo from Mauritius and the Rodrigues solitaire from Rodrigues in the collection. The insect collection contains specimens collected by Darwin from around Cambridge . Collections of molluscs, corals and other sea-dwellers offer insight into the biological diversity of the oceans.

Left to right: Bornean orangutan , female and male western gorilla , chimpanzee , human See also [ edit ] Natural history museums References [ edit ] ^ "ALVA - Association of Leading Visitor Attractions" .

www.alva.org.uk . Retrieved 30 June 2023 .

^ a b "Cambridge zoology museum to reopen after £4.1m revamp - Maev Kennedy - The Guardian" .

guardian.com . Retrieved 29 August 2018 .

^ "University Museum of Zoology, Cambridge: About us " .

Museum.zoo.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 10 May 2019 .

^ "University Museum of Zoology, Cambridge: Collections " .

Museum.zoo.cam.asc.uk . Archived from the original on 22 March 2013 . Retrieved 6 February 2016 .

^ "University Museum of Zoology, Cambridge | Welcome" .

Museum.zoo.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 6 February 2016 .

^ "Museum of Zoology" . Retrieved 27 June 2016 .

^ "Our Museums | University of Cambridge" .

Cam.ac.uk . 6 August 2013. Archived from the original on 20 May 2014 . Retrieved 6 February 2016 .

^ "University Museum of Zoology, Cambridge: Historical Significance " .

Museum.zoo.cam.asc.uk . Archived from the original on 19 November 2010 . Retrieved 6 February 2016 .

^ "University Museum of Zoology, Cambridge: Our History " .

Museum.zoo.cam.asc.uk . Archived from the original on 23 March 2013 . Retrieved 6 February 2016 .

^ "Cambridge University Museum of Zoology: Histories & Archives" . Archived from the original on 19 November 2010 . Retrieved 22 March 2013 .

^ "University Museum of Zoology, Cambridge | Welcome" .

Zoo.cam.ac.uk . Archived from the original on 4 August 2009 . Retrieved 6 February 2016 .

^ "University Museum of Zoology, Cambridge: Historical Significance" .

Museum.zoo.cam.asc.uk . Archived from the original on 19 November 2010 . Retrieved 6 February 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Museum website 52°12′12″N 0°07′13″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.2033°N 0.1204°E ﻿ / 52.2033; 0.1204 v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Authority control databases ISNI Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cambridge_University_Museum_of_Zoology&oldid=1269567557 " Categories : Museums of the University of Cambridge Museums in Cambridge Natural history museums in England Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2015 Use British English from August 2015 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 15 January 2025, at 08:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cambridge University Museum of Zoology 4 languages Add topic

