Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Applications 3 Statistics 4 Computer programs 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Astrometry 70 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски მარგალური Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of astronomy involving positioning and movements of celestial bodies Illustration of the use of interferometry in the optical wavelength range to determine precise positions of stars.

Courtesy NASA/JPL-Caltech Astrometry is a branch of astronomy that involves precise measurements of the positions and movements of stars and other celestial bodies . It provides the kinematics and physical origin of the Solar System and this galaxy , the Milky Way .

History [ edit ] Concept art for the TAU spacecraft , a 1980s era study which would have used an interstellar precursor probe to expand the baseline for calculating stellar parallax in support of Astrometry.

The history of astrometry is linked to the history of star catalogues , which gave astronomers reference points for objects in the sky so they could track their movements. This can be dated back to the ancient Greek astronomer Hipparchus , who around 190 BC used the catalogue of his predecessors Timocharis and Aristillus to discover Earth's precession . In doing so, he also developed the brightness scale still in use today.

[ 1 ] Hipparchus compiled a catalogue with at least 850 stars and their positions.

[ 2 ] Hipparchus's successor, Ptolemy , included a catalogue of 1,022 stars in his work the Almagest , giving their location, coordinates, and brightness.

[ 3 ] In the 10th century, the Iranian astronomer Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi carried out observations on the stars and described their positions, magnitudes and star color ; furthermore, he provided drawings for each constellation, which are depicted in his Book of Fixed Stars . Egyptian mathematician Ibn Yunus observed more than 10,000 entries for the Sun's position for many years using a large astrolabe with a diameter of nearly 1.4 metres. His observations on eclipses were still used centuries later in Canadian–American astronomer Simon Newcomb 's investigations on the motion of the Moon, while his other observations of the motions of the planets Jupiter and Saturn inspired French scholar Laplace 's Obliquity of the Ecliptic and Inequalities of Jupiter and Saturn .

[ 4 ] In the 15th century, the Timurid astronomer Ulugh Beg compiled the Zij-i-Sultani , in which he catalogued 1,019 stars. Like the earlier catalogs of Hipparchus and Ptolemy, Ulugh Beg's catalogue is estimated to have been precise to within approximately 20 minutes of arc .

[ 5 ] In the 16th century, Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe used improved instruments, including large mural instruments , to measure star positions more accurately than previously, with a precision of 15–35 arcsec .

[ 6 ] Ottoman scholar Taqi al-Din measured the right ascension of the stars at the Constantinople Observatory of Taqi ad-Din using the "observational clock" he invented.

[ 7 ] When telescopes became commonplace, setting circles sped measurements English astronomer James Bradley first tried to measure stellar parallaxes in 1729. The stellar movement proved too insignificant for his telescope , but he instead discovered the aberration of light and the nutation of the Earth's axis. His cataloguing of 3222 stars was refined in 1807 by German astronomer Friedrich Bessel , the father of modern astrometry. He made the first measurement of stellar parallax: 0.3 arcsec for the binary star 61 Cygni . In 1872, British astronomer William Huggins used spectroscopy to measure the radial velocity of several prominent stars, including Sirius .

[ 8 ] Being very difficult to measure, only about 60 stellar parallaxes had been obtained by the end of the 19th century, mostly by use of the filar micrometer .

Astrographs using astronomical photographic plates sped the process in the early 20th century.  Automated plate-measuring machines [ 9 ] and more sophisticated computer technology of the 1960s allowed more efficient compilation of star catalogues . Started in the late 19th century, the project Carte du Ciel to improve star mapping could not be finished but made photography a common technique for astrometry.

[ 10 ] In the 1980s, charge-coupled devices (CCDs) replaced photographic plates and reduced optical uncertainties to one milliarcsecond. This technology made astrometry less expensive, opening the field to an amateur audience.

[ citation needed ] In 1989, the European Space Agency 's Hipparcos satellite took astrometry into orbit, where it could be less affected by mechanical forces of the Earth and optical distortions from its atmosphere. Operated from 1989 to 1993, Hipparcos measured large and small angles on the sky with much greater precision than any previous optical telescopes. During its 4-year run, the positions, parallaxes, and proper motions of 118,218 stars were determined with an unprecedented degree of accuracy. A new " Tycho catalog " drew together a database of 1,058,332 stars to within 20-30 mas (milliarcseconds). Additional catalogues were compiled for the 23,882 double and multiple stars and 11,597 variable stars also analyzed during the Hipparcos mission.

[ 11 ] In 2013, the Gaia satellite was launched and improved the accuracy of Hipparcos .

[ 12 ] The precision was improved by a factor of 100 and enabled the mapping of a billion stars.

[ 13 ] Today, the catalogue most often used is USNO-B1.0 , an all-sky catalogue that tracks proper motions, positions, magnitudes and other characteristics for over one billion stellar objects. During the past 50 years, 7,435 Schmidt camera plates were used to complete several sky surveys that make the data in USNO-B1.0 accurate to within 0.2 arcsec.

[ 14 ] Applications [ edit ] Diagram showing how a smaller object (such as an extrasolar planet ) orbiting a larger object (such as a star ) could produce changes in position and velocity of the latter as they orbit their common center of mass (red cross).

Motion of barycenter of solar system relative to the Sun Apart from the fundamental function of providing astronomers with a reference frame to report their observations in, astrometry is also fundamental for fields like celestial mechanics , stellar dynamics and galactic astronomy . In observational astronomy , astrometric techniques help identify stellar objects by their unique motions. It is instrumental for keeping time , in that UTC is essentially the atomic time synchronized to Earth 's rotation by means of exact astronomical observations. Astrometry is an important step in the cosmic distance ladder because it establishes parallax distance estimates for stars in the Milky Way .

Astrometry has also been used to support claims of extrasolar planet detection by measuring the displacement the proposed planets cause in their parent star's apparent position on the sky, due to their mutual orbit around the center of mass of the system. Astrometry is more accurate in space missions that are not affected by the distorting effects of the Earth's atmosphere.

[ 15 ] NASA's planned Space Interferometry Mission ( SIM PlanetQuest ) (now cancelled) was to utilize astrometric techniques to detect terrestrial planets orbiting 200 or so of the nearest solar-type stars . The European Space Agency's Gaia Mission , launched in 2013, applies astrometric techniques in its stellar census. In addition to the detection of exoplanets, [ 16 ] it can also be used to determine their mass.

[ 17 ] Astrometric measurements are used by astrophysicists to constrain certain models in celestial mechanics . By measuring the velocities of pulsars , it is possible to put a limit on the asymmetry of supernova explosions. Also, astrometric results are used to determine the distribution of dark matter in the galaxy.

Astronomers use astrometric techniques for the tracking of near-Earth objects . Astrometry is responsible for the detection of many record-breaking Solar System objects. To find such objects astrometrically, astronomers use telescopes to survey the sky and large-area cameras to take pictures at various determined intervals. By studying these images, they can detect Solar System objects by their movements relative to the background stars, which remain fixed. Once a movement per unit time is observed, astronomers compensate for the parallax caused by Earth's motion during this time and the heliocentric distance to this object is calculated. Using this distance and other photographs, more information about the object, including its orbital elements , can be obtained.

[ 18 ] Asteroid impact avoidance is among the purposes.

Quaoar and Sedna are two trans-Neptunian dwarf planets discovered in this way by Michael E. Brown and others at Caltech using the Palomar Observatory 's Samuel Oschin telescope of 48 inches (1.2 m) and the Palomar-Quest large-area CCD camera. The ability of astronomers to track the positions and movements of such celestial bodies is crucial to the understanding of the Solar System and its interrelated past, present, and future with others in the Universe.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Statistics [ edit ] A fundamental aspect of astrometry is error correction. Various factors introduce errors into the measurement of stellar positions, including atmospheric conditions, imperfections in the instruments and errors by the observer or the measuring instruments. Many of these errors can be reduced by various techniques, such as through instrument improvements and compensations to the data. The results are then analyzed using statistical methods to compute data estimates and error ranges.

[ 21 ] Computer programs [ edit ] XParallax viu (Free application for Windows) Astrometrica (Application for Windows) Astrometry.net (Online blind astrometry) See also [ edit ] Astrometric binary Barycentric celestial reference system Ephemeris Equatorium Geodetic astronomy Gaia spacecraft — launched December 2013 Hipparcos Space Astrometry Mission (ESA—1989-93) International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service List of astrometric solvers Methods of detecting extrasolar planets - Astrometry Spherical astronomy Celestial cartography Star catalogue United States Naval Observatory United States Naval Observatory Flagstaff Station Time standard References [ edit ] ^ Walter, Hans G. (2000).

Astrometry of fundamental catalogues: the evolution from optical to radio reference frames . New York: Springer.

ISBN 3-540-67436-5 .

^ Kanas, Nick (2007).

Star maps: history, artistry, and cartography . Springer. p. 109.

ISBN 978-0-387-71668-8 .

^ p. 110, Kanas 2007.

^ Lovett, E. O. (1895).

"Great Inequalities of Jupiter and Saturn" .

The Astronomical Journal .

15 : 113.

Bibcode : 1895AJ.....15..113L .

doi : 10.1086/102265 .

hdl : 2027/uva.x004243084 .

^ Lankford, John (1997).

"Astrometry" .

History of astronomy: an encyclopedia .

Taylor & Francis . p.

49 .

ISBN 0-8153-0322-X .

^ Kovalevsky, Jean; Seidelmann, P. Kenneth (2004).

Fundamentals of Astrometry .

Cambridge University Press . pp.

2– 3.

ISBN 0-521-64216-7 .

^ Sevim Tekeli (1997).

"Taqi al-Din" .

Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures .

Kluwer Academic Publishers .

ISBN 0-7923-4066-3 .

^ Higgins, William (1871–1872).

"On the Spectrum of the Great Nebula in Orion, and on the Motions of Some Stars towards or from the Earth" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society of London .

20 (142): 379– 394.

Bibcode : 1872Natur...6..231H .

doi : 10.1038/006231a0 .

JSTOR 113159 .

^ CERN paper on plate measuring machine USNO StarScan ^ H.H. Turner, 1912 The Great Star Map, Being a Brief General Account of the International Project Known as the Astrographic Chart (John Murray) ^ Staff (27 February 2019).

"The Hipparcos Space Astrometry Mission" .

European Space Agency . Retrieved 2007-12-06 .

^ Jatan Mehta (2019).

"From Hipparchus to Gaia" . thewire.in . Retrieved 27 January 2020 .

^ Carme Jordi (2019).

"Gaia : the first 3D map of the milky way" . pourlascience.fr . Retrieved 27 January 2020 .

^ Kovalevsky, Jean (1995).

Modern Astrometry . Berlin; New York: Springer.

ISBN 3-540-42380-X .

^ Nature  462, 705 (2009) 8 December 2009 doi : 10.1038/462705a ^ "ESA - Space Science - Gaia overview" .

^ "Infant exoplanet weighed by Hipparcos and Gaia" . 20 August 2018 . Retrieved 21 August 2018 .

^ Trujillo, Chadwick; Rabinowitz, David (1 June 2007).

"Discovery of a candidate inner Oort cloud planetoid" (PDF) . European Space Agency.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 October 2007 . Retrieved 2007-12-06 .

^ Britt, Robert Roy (7 October 2002).

"Discovery: Largest Solar System Object Since Pluto" .

SPACE.com . Retrieved 2007-12-06 .

^ Clavin, Whitney (15 May 2004).

"Planet-Like Body Discovered at Fringes of Our Solar System" .

NASA .

Archived from the original on 30 November 2007 . Retrieved 2007-12-06 .

^ Kovalevsky, Jean (2002-01-22).

Modern Astrometry . Springer Science & Business Media. p.

166 .

ISBN 978-3-540-42380-5 .

error correction astrometry.

Further reading [ edit ] Kovalevsky, Jean; Seidelman, P. Kenneth (2004).

Fundamentals of Astrometry . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-64216-7 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Astrometry .

MPC Guide to Minor Body Astrometry Astrometry Department of the U.S. Naval Observatory USNO Astrometric Catalog and related Products Archived 2015-08-26 at the Wayback Machine "Hall of Precision Astrometry" . University of Virginia Department of Astronomy. Archived from the original on 2006-08-26 . Retrieved 2006-08-10 .

SuperNOVAS high-precision astrometry library for C/C++.

Planet-Like Body Discovered at Fringes of Our Solar System (2004-03-15) Mike Brown's Caltech Home Page Scientific Paper describing Sedna's discovery The Hipparcos Space Astrometry Mission — on ESA v t e Major subfields of astronomy Astrobiology Astrochemistry Astrometry Astrophysics Cosmochemistry Cosmology Extragalactic astronomy Galactic astronomy Orbital mechanics Physical cosmology Planetary geology Planetary science Solar astronomy Stellar astronomy v t e Astronomy Outline History Timeline Astronomer Astronomical symbols Astronomical object Glossary ... in space Astronomy by Manner Amateur Observational Sidewalk Space telescope Celestial subject Galactic / Extragalactic Local system Solar EM methods Radio Submillimetre Infrared ( Far-infrared ) Visible-light (optical) Ultraviolet X-ray History Gamma-ray Other methods Neutrino Cosmic rays Gravitational radiation High-energy Radar Spherical Multi-messenger Culture Australian Aboriginal Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Greek Hebrew Indian Inuit Maya Medieval Islamic Persian Serbian folk Tibetan Optical telescopes List Category Extremely large telescope Extremely Large Telescope Gran Telescopio Canarias Hale Telescope Hubble Space Telescope Keck Observatory Large Binocular Telescope Southern African Large Telescope Very Large Telescope Related Archaeoastronomy Astrobiology Astrochemistry Astroinformatics Astrology and astronomy Astrometry Astronomers Monument Astroparticle physics Astrophysics Astrotourism Binoculars Constellation IAU Cosmogony Photometry Planetarium Planetary geology Physical cosmology Quantum cosmology List of astronomers French Medieval Islamic Russian Women Telescope X-ray telescope history lists Zodiac Category Commons v t e Exoplanets Planet Definition IAU Planetary science Main topics Exoplanet Exoplanet orbital and physical parameters Methods of detecting exoplanets Planetary system Planet-hosting stars Sizes and types Terrestrial Carbon planet Catastrophically evaporating planet Coreless planet Desert planet Dwarf planet Hycean planet Ice planet Iron planet (Super-Mercury) Lava planet Ocean world Mega-Earth Steam world Sub-Earth Super-Earth Gaseous Cold Jupiter Eccentric Jupiter Mini-Neptune (Gas dwarf) Helium planet Hot Jupiter Hot Neptune Gas giant Ice giant Neptunian Jupiter analogue Super-Jupiter Super-Neptune Super-puff Ultra-hot Jupiter Ultra-hot Neptune Warm Jupiter Other types Blanet Brown dwarf Chthonian planet Circumbinary planet Circumtriple planet Disrupted planet Double planet Ecumenopolis Eyeball planet Giant planet Mesoplanet Planemo Planet/Brown dwarf boundary Planetesimal Protoplanet Pulsar planet Sub-brown dwarf Sub-Neptune Toroidal planet Ultra-cool dwarf Ultra-short period planet (USP) Formation and evolution Accretion Accretion disk Asteroid belt Circumplanetary disk Circumstellar disc Circumstellar envelope Cosmic dust Debris disk Detached object Disrupted planet Excretion disk Exozodiacal dust Extraterrestrial materials Extraterrestrial sample curation Giant-impact hypothesis Gravitational collapse Hills cloud Internal structure Interplanetary dust cloud Interplanetary medium Interplanetary space Interstellar cloud Interstellar dust Interstellar medium Interstellar space Kuiper belt List of interstellar and circumstellar molecules Merging stars Molecular cloud Nebular hypothesis Oort cloud Outer space Planetary migration Planetary system Planetesimal Planet formation Protoplanetary disk Radial drift Ring system Rubble pile Sample-return mission Scattered disc Star formation Systems Exocomet Interstellar Exomoon Tidally detached Rogue planet Jupiter-mass binary objects Orbits Retrograde Trojan Mean-motion resonances Titius–Bode law Host stars A B Binary star Brown dwarfs F/Yellow-white dwarfs G/Yellow dwarfs Herbig Ae/Be K/Orange dwarfs M/Red dwarfs Pulsar Red giant Subdwarf B Subgiant T Tauri White dwarfs Yellow giants Detection Astrometry Direct imaging list Microlensing list Polarimetry Timing list Radial velocity list Transit method list Transit-timing variation Habitability Astrobiology Astrooceanography Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Catalogues Nearby Habitable Systems Exoplanet Data Explorer Extrasolar Planets Encyclopaedia NASA Exoplanet Archive NASA Star and Exoplanet Database Open Exoplanet Catalogue Lists Exoplanetary systems Host stars Multiplanetary systems Stars with proto-planetary discs Exoplanets Discoveries Extremes Firsts Nearest Largest Heaviest Terrestrial candidates Kepler 1–500 501–1000 1001–1500 1501–2000 K2 Potentially habitable Proper names Discovered exoplanets by year before 2000 2000–2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Other Carl Sagan Institute Exoplanet naming convention Exoplanet phase curves Exoplanetary Circumstellar Environments and Disk Explorer Extragalactic planet Extrasolar planets in fiction Geodynamics of terrestrial exoplanets Neptunian desert Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Planets in globular clusters Small planet radius gap Sudarsky's gas giant classification Discoveries of exoplanets Search projects Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Astrometry&oldid=1305718985 " Category : Astrometry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2018 Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 18:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Astrometry 70 languages Add topic

