Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Area of responsibility 2 Hurricane naming system 3 Forecasting system 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Central Pacific Hurricane Center 10 languages Deutsch Español Français Nederlands 日本語 Português Simple English ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 21°17′55″N 157°49′00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 21.29861°N 157.81667°W ﻿ / 21.29861; -157.81667 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia United States National Weather Service body This article does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Central Pacific Hurricane Center" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Central Pacific Hurricane Center Front view of the Central Pacific Hurricane Center Agency overview Jurisdiction United States government Headquarters Honolulu , Hawaii , U.S.

21°17′55″N 157°49′00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 21.29861°N 157.81667°W ﻿ / 21.29861; -157.81667 Parent agency NOAA The Central Pacific Hurricane Center ( CPHC ) of the United States National Weather Service is the official body responsible for tracking and issuing tropical cyclone warnings, watches, advisories, discussions, and statements for the Central Pacific region: from the equator northward, 140°W–180°W, most significantly for Hawai‘i. It is the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center (RSMC) for tropical cyclones in this region, and in this capacity is known as RSMC Honolulu .

Based in Honolulu, Hawaii , the CPHC is co-located with the National Weather Service's Honolulu forecast office on the campus of the University of Hawaii at Mānoa . The Honolulu forecast office activates the CPHC when tropical cyclones form in, or move into, the Central Pacific region. The CPHC replaced the previous forecaster, the Joint Hurricane Warning Center, starting in the 1970 season .

Area of responsibility [ edit ] Areas of responsibility, showing RSMC Honolulu's area (Region III).

The CPHC's area of responsibility is the Central Pacific (CP) region, which is an administrative region, not a meteorological one. It is not a tropical cyclone basin (a distinct area where cyclones form), but is still often referred to as the Central Pacific basin or Central North Pacific basin . The western edge of the area of responsibility, 180°W, is formally the antimeridian , though this coincides with the International Date Line for tropical latitudes, and thus these are often conflated. Meteorologically, this region covers the western part of the Eastern Pacific basin and the eastern part of the Western Pacific basin , though administratively the National Hurricane Center is responsible for the Eastern Pacific basin east of 140°W, and thus the Eastern Pacific region (EP) typically refers to region east of 140°W, not the whole meteorological basin. The region east of 140°W was formerly the responsibility of the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center ; like the CPHC, it took responsibility in 1970, but it is now folded into the NHC.

In this area, the hurricane season lasts from June 1 through November 30. Practically, storms may form in the Eastern Pacific region (east or west of 140°W) and move west, possibly affecting Hawaii, or in the Western Pacific basin and move west, possibly affecting Asia. Smaller islands may also be affected, though this region is otherwise very sparsely populated.

Hurricane naming system [ edit ] Further information: List of tropical cyclone names Naming List List 1 List 2 List 3 List 4 Akoni Aka Alika Ana Ema Ekeka Ele Ela Hone Hene Huko Halola Iona Iolana Iopa Iune Keli Keoni Kika Kilo Lala Lino Lana Loke Moke Mele Maka Malia Nolo Nona Neki Niala Olana Oliwa Omeka Oho Pena Pama Pewa Pali Ulana Upana Unala Ulika Wale Wene Wali Walaka The Central Pacific Hurricane Center uses traditional Hawaiian names for hurricanes that form within its regional sphere of jurisdiction.  It has formed four lists of names to choose from.  As soon as all the names are exhausted from the first list, it moves on to the second, then third, then fourth, then back to the first and so on. Unlike the name list in the Atlantic and Eastern Pacific, the names do not start at "A" every year. Four names have been retired, Iwa (1982) , Iniki (1992) , Paka (1997) , and Ioke (2006) . They were replaced with Io (which was later changed to Iona), Iolana, Pama, and Iopa respectively. The most recent names used are Iona and Keli, both during the 2025 season .

Forecasting system [ edit ] Since the 1990s, the CPHC has used the Automated Tropical Cyclone Forecasting System to create forecasts, advisories, and their associated graphics.

See also [ edit ] Tropical cyclones portal Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) References [ edit ] External links [ edit ] Official website (merged with the NHC's since 2019) Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Central_Pacific_Hurricane_Center&oldid=1303108282 " Categories : Meteorological organizations based in the United States National Weather Service Tropical cyclone meteorology Pacific hurricanes 1970 establishments in Hawaii Regional Specialized Meteorological Centres Organizations based in Honolulu Organizations established in 1970 Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking sources from October 2020 All articles lacking sources Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 04:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Central Pacific Hurricane Center 10 languages Add topic

