Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early years Toggle Early years subsection 1.1 Devotion to the angels 2 From priest to preacher 3 Final years Toggle Final years subsection 3.1 Daughters of Wisdom 3.2 Death and burial 4 Spirituality Toggle Spirituality subsection 4.1 Total consecration to Jesus through Mary 5 Works 6 Priest and poet 7 Congregations de Montfort 8 Biographies 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Louis de Montfort 30 languages Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano Kiswahili Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Sardu Simple English Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French saint and priest Saint Louis-Marie Grignion de Montfort SMM Born ( 1673-01-31 ) 31 January 1673 Montfort-sur-Meu , France Died 28 April 1716 (1716-04-28) (aged 43) Saint-Laurent-sur-Sèvre Venerated in Catholic Church Beatified 1888 by Pope Leo XIII Canonized 20 July 1947 by Pope Pius XII Feast 28 April Part of a series on Christian mysticism Theology and philosophy Apophatic Ascetical Cataphatic Catholic spirituality Hellenistic Mystical theology Neoplatonic Henosis Practices Monasticism Monasticism New Silence Asceticism Mendicant Spiritual direction Meditation Meditation Lectio Divina Invoking of Mystic Saints Active asceticism Contemplation Hesychasm Jesus Prayer Quietism Stages of Christian perfection Hesychia Divinization Catharsis Theosis Kenosis Spiritual dryness Religious ecstasy Passive asceticism Abstinence Esoteric Charismatic Esoteric People (by era or century) Antiquity Ancient African Origen Thomasines Gregory of Nyssa Pseudo-Dionysius Desert Fathers Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Moses the Black Syncletica Athanasius John Chrysostom Hilarion John Cassian 11th · 12th Bernard of Clairvaux Guigo II Hildegard of Bingen Symeon the New Theologian Saint Sava of Serbia 13th · 14th Dominican Dominic de Guzmán Franciscan Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Bonaventure Jacopone da Todi Angela of Foligno English Richard Rolle Walter Hilton Julian of Norwich Margery Kempe Flemish Beatrice of Nazareth Lutgardis Hadewijch John van Ruysbroeck German Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Henry Suso Female Beatrice of Nazareth Bridget of Sweden Catherine of Siena Mechthild of Magdeburg Marguerite Porete 15th · 16th Spanish Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Others Catherine of Genoa 17th · 18th French Margaret Mary Alacoque Pierre de Bérulle Jean-Jacques Olier Louis de Montfort Charles de Condren John Eudes John of St. Samson Others Mary of Jesus of Ágreda Anne Catherine Emmerich Veronica Giuliani Francis de Sales 19th Dina Bélanger Catherine Labouré Mélanie Calvat Maximin Giraud Bernadette Soubirous Conchita de Armida Luisa Piccarreta Mary of the Divine Heart Thérèse of Lisieux Gemma Galgani 20th Padre Pio Therese Neumann Marthe Robin Alexandrina of Balazar Faustina Kowalska Sister Lúcia of Fátima Edgar Cayce Simone Weil Alfred Delp Thomas Merton Charles de Foucauld Edvige Carboni Elena Aiello Contemporary papal views Aspects of meditation ( Orationis Formas , 1989) Reflection on the New Age (2003) Literature and media Lingua ignota Ordo Virtutum Scivias Ascent of Mount Carmel Dark Night of the Soul Spiritual Canticle Way of Perfection Book of the First Monks The Interior Castle Abbey of the Holy Ghost A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart The Glories of Mary The Imitation of Christ The Ladder of Divine Ascent Philokalia Revelations of Divine Love The Story of a Soul Theologia Germanica Devotio Moderna Fatima in Lucia's Own Words Calls from the Message of Fatima The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima Sol de Fátima The Cloud of Unknowing On the Consolation of Philosophy The Mirror of Simple Souls Sister Catherine Treatise Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii The Vision of Adamnán Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio Paradiso Fatima v t e Louis-Marie Grignion de Montfort , SMM ( French pronunciation: [lwi maʁi ɡʁiɲɔ̃ də mɔ̃fɔʁ] ; 31 January 1673 – 28 April 1716) was a French Catholic priest known for his influence on Catholic Mariology . He wrote a number of books that went on to become classic Catholic titles, including Secret of the Rosary and True Devotion to Mary , and influenced several popes. He also founded several religious communities, including the Company of Mary .

Pope Pius XII canonised him on 20 July 1947. A "founders statue" created by Giacomo Parisini is located in an upper niche of the south nave of St. Peter's Basilica .

Early years [ edit ] Montfort's birthplace in Montfort-sur-Meu Montfort was born in 1673 in Montfort-sur-Meu , the eldest surviving child of eighteen born to Jean-Baptiste and Jeanne Robert Grignion. His father was a notary. Louis-Marie passed most of his infancy and early childhood in Iffendic , a few kilometers from Montfort, where his father had bought a farm. At the age of 12, he entered the Jesuit College of St Thomas Becket in Rennes , where his uncle was a parish priest.

[ 1 ] At the end of his ordinary schooling, he began his studies of philosophy and theology, still at St Thomas in Rennes.

Listening to the stories of a local priest, the Abbé Julien Bellier, about his life as an itinerant missionary, Montfort was inspired to preach missions among the very poor. Bellier was propagating among his students a consecration and entrustment to Mary .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Under the guidance of Bellier and other priests, de Montfort began to develop his strong devotion to the Blessed Virgin Mary .

19th century depiction of St Sulpice where Montfort had earlier studied for the priesthood Through a benefactor, opportunity arose to go to Paris to study at the renowned Seminary of Saint-Sulpice [ 4 ] towards the end of 1693. When Montfort arrived in Paris, it was to find that his benefactor had not provided enough money for him, so he lodged in a succession of boarding houses, living among the very poor, in the meantime attending the Sorbonne University for lectures in theology. After less than two years, he became very ill and had to be admitted to hospital. He survived this, despite the blood letting that was common practice at that time.

Leaving hospital, he was surprised to find his place had been kept open for him at the Little Saint-Sulpice , which he entered in July 1695. This seminary had been founded by Jean-Jacques Olier , one of the leading experts of what came to be known as the French school of spirituality .

[ 2 ] He was appointed the seminary's librarian, which gave him the opportunity to study most of the available works on spirituality and, in particular, on the Virgin Mary's place in the Christian life. This later led to his focus on the Holy rosary and Montfort's acclaimed book, The Secret of the Rosary .

Devotion to the angels [ edit ] Even as a seminarian in Paris, Montfort was known for his veneration of angels : he "urged his confreres to show marks of respect and tenderness to their guardian angels" and often ended his letters with a salutation to the guardian angel of the person to whom he was writing. When, later, he arrived in Nantes, he saluted all the angels of the city. Apparently, this was something he repeated whenever he entered a village or town.

[ 5 ] One reason behind Montfort's showing such devotion to angels is that veneration of the pure spirits was an integral part of his training, and also of his culture. His college teachers, all Jesuits, were known for their zeal in propagating devotion to the angels. Montfort's seminary training under the Sulpicians brought him into contact with the thought of Cardinal de Bérulle and Olier, both of whom had deep veneration for the angels. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, manuals of piety and treatises on the pure spirits abounded.

[ 5 ] From priest to preacher [ edit ] Louis was ordained a priest in June 1700, [ 4 ] and assigned to Nantes . His great desire had been the foreign missions, preferably in the new French colony of Canada, but his spiritual director advised against it. Letters of this period show he felt frustrated by the lack of opportunity to preach as he felt he was called to.

In November 1710 he joined the Third Order of Saint Dominic and asked permission not only to preach the rosary, but also to form rosary confraternities.

[ 6 ] He began to consider forming a small company of priests to preach missions and retreats under the standard and protection of the Blessed Virgin. This was to eventually lead to the founding of the Company of Mary .

Around this time, Louis de Montfort was appointed chaplain of the hospital in Nantes.

[ 7 ] This was when he was first introduced to Marie Louise Trichet , a meeting that launched her 34 years' service to the poor. During Louis de Montfort's time, France was beginning to face a mounting economic crisis. Outpacing food supply was a rapidly growing population.

Desiring to be a missionary, Montfort made a pilgrimage to Rome to ask the advice of Pope Clement XI .

[ 2 ] The Pope recognized his real vocation and, telling him there was plenty of scope for its exercise in France, sent him back with the title of Apostolic Missionary.

[ 8 ] On his return from his long pilgrimage to Rome, Montfort made a retreat at Mont Saint Michel "to pray to this archangel to obtain from him the grace to win souls for God, to confirm those already in God's grace, and to fight Satan and sin".

[ 5 ] These occasions gave him time to think, contemplate and write.

For several years he preached in missions from Brittany to Nantes. As his reputation as a missioner grew, he became known as "the good Father from Montfort". At Pontchateau he attracted hundreds of people to help him in the construction of a huge calvary . However, on the very eve of its blessing, the Bishop, having heard it was to be destroyed on the orders of the King of France under the influence of members of the Jansenist school, forbade its benediction. It is reported that upon receiving this news, he simply said, "Blessed be God." [ 1 ] Final years [ edit ] Depiction of Montfort with Marie Louise Trichet , at the foundation of the congregation of the Daughters of Wisdom , 19th century Montfort left Nantes and the next several years were extraordinarily busy for him. He was constantly occupied in preaching missions, always walking between one and another. Yet he found time also to write his True Devotion to Mary , [ 9 ] The Secret of Mary [ 10 ] and the Secret of the Rosary , rules for the Company of Mary and the Daughters of Wisdom, and many hymns. His missions made a great impact, especially in the Vendée . The heated style of his preaching was regarded by some people as somewhat strange and he was poisoned once.

[ 1 ] Although it did not prove fatal, it caused his health to deteriorate. Yet he continued, undeterred. He went on preaching and established free schools for the poor boys and girls.

Daughters of Wisdom [ edit ] The bishop of La Rochelle had been impressed with Montfort for some time and invited him to open a school there. Montfort enlisted the help of his follower Marie Louise Trichet, who was then running the General Hospital in Poitiers . In 1715 Marie Louise and Catherine Brunet left Poitiers for La Rochelle to open the school there and in a short time it had 400 students.

On 22 August 1715 Trichet and Brunet, along with Marie Valleau and Marie Régnier from La Rochelle, received the approbation of Bishop de Champflour of La Rochelle to make their religious vows under the direction of Montfort. At the ceremony Montfort told them: "Call yourselves the Daughters of Wisdom, [ 4 ] for the teaching of children and the care of the poor." The Daughters of Wisdom grew into an international organization and the placing of Montfort's founders statue in Saint Peter's Basilica was based on that organization.

[ 11 ] Death and burial [ edit ] Montfort's 16 years of priesthood include many months of solitude, perhaps as many as a total of four years; at the cave of Mervent, amidst the beauty of the forest, at the hermitage of Saint Lazarus near the village of Montfort, and at the hermitage of Saint Eloi in La Rochelle.

Worn out by hard work and sickness, he finally came in April 1716 to Saint-Laurent-sur-Sèvre to begin the mission which was to be his last. During it, he fell ill and died on 28 April of that year. He was 43 years old, and had been a priest for only 16 years. His last sermon was on the tenderness of Jesus and the Incarnate Wisdom of the Father. Thousands gathered for his burial in the parish church, and very quickly there were stories of miracles performed at his tomb.

Exactly 43 years later, on 28 April 1759, Marie Louise Trichet also died in Saint-Laurent-sur-Sèvre and was buried next to Montfort. On 19 September 1996 Pope John Paul II (who beatified Trichet) came to the same site to meditate and pray at their adjacent tombs.

Spirituality [ edit ] Statue of Louis de Montfort at Saint Peter's Basilica "God Alone" was the motto of Montfort and is repeated over 150 times in his writings.

The Incarnation: "The Incarnation of the Word is for him the absolute central reality." [ 12 ] Love of the Blessed Virgin Mary Fidelity to the Cross Missionary Zeal [ 13 ] Total consecration to Jesus through Mary [ edit ] In Montfort's approach to Marian consecration, Jesus and Mary are inseparable. He views "consecration to Jesus in Mary" as a special path to being conformed to, united and consecrated to Christ, given that ... of all creatures the one most conformed to Jesus Christ, it follows that among all devotions that which most consecrates and conforms a soul to our Lord is devotion to Mary, his Holy Mother, and that the more a soul is consecrated to her the more will it be consecrated to Jesus Christ.

[ 14 ] God the Father made an assemblage of all the waters, and He named it the sea (mare). He has made an assemblage of all His graces, and He has called it Mary (Maria).

[ 15 ] According to Montfort, "Mary is the safest, easiest, shortest, and most perfect way of approaching Jesus".

[ 16 ] Montfort's process of "total consecration" has seven elements and effects: knowledge of one's unworthiness, sharing in Mary's faith, the gift of pure love, unlimited confidence in God and Mary, communication of the Spirit of Mary, transformation into the likeness of Jesus, and bringing more glory to Christ.

[ 17 ] His practice of consecration to Mary has both internal and external components. The internal components focus on surrendering oneself as a slave to Mary and to Jesus through her, and performing all actions "with Mary, in Mary, through Mary and for Mary". The suggested exterior practices include enrolment in Marian societies , or joining Marian religious orders, making Marian privileges known and appreciated, and giving alms in honor of Mary.

[ 18 ] Louis de Montfort influenced a number of popes.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] In the 19th century, Pope Pius IX considered it the best and most acceptable form of Marian devotion, while Pope Leo XIII granted indulgences for practicing Montfort's method of Marian consecration. Leo beatified Montfort in 1888, selecting for Montfort's beatification the day of his own Golden jubilee as a priest. In the 20th century Pope Pius X acknowledged the influence of Montfort's writings in the composition of his encyclical Ad diem illum .

[ 21 ] Pope Pius XI stated that he had practiced Montfort's devotional methods since his early youth. Pope Pius XII declared Montfort a saint and stated that Montfort is the guide "who leads you to Mary and from Mary to Jesus". Pope John Paul II once recalled how as a young seminarian he "read and reread many times and with great spiritual profit" a work of de Montfort and that: "Then I understood that I could not exclude the Lord's Mother from my life without neglecting the will of God-Trinity." [ 22 ] According to his Apostolic Letter Rosarium Virginis Mariae , the pontiff's personal motto was " Totus Tuus ." The thoughts, writings, and example of Louis de Montfort were also singled out by Pope John Paul II's encyclical Redemptoris Mater as a distinctive witness of Marian spirituality in the Roman Catholic tradition.

[ 23 ] Works [ edit ] Preparation for Total Consecration according to Saint Louis de Montfort Secret of the Rosary Letters of St. Louis Marie The Love of Eternal Wisdom Letter to the Friends of the Cross The Admirable secret of the Rosary Methods for Saying the Rosary The Secret of Mary True Devotion to Mary Prayer for Missionaries Manuscript Rule of the Company of Mary Letter to the Members of the Company of Mary The "Wisdom Cross" of Poitiers Original Rule of the Daughters of Wisdom Letter to the Inhabitants of Montbernage Rules for Various Groups The Will of St. Louis Marie Morning and Night Prayers Part of a series on the Mariology of the Catholic Church Immaculate Conception by Bartolomé Esteban Murillo ( c.

1675 ) Overview Prayers Antiphons Titles Hymns to Mary Devotional practices Saints Societies Consecrations and entrustments Veneration Titles of Mary Theotokos (Mother of God) Mediatrix Mother of the Church Our Lady of Good Counsel Our Lady of Mount Carmel Our Lady of Peace Our Lady of Sorrows Our Lady of Victory Our Lady, Star of the Sea Queen of Heaven Queen of Poland Refugium Peccatorum (Refuge of Sinners) Untier of Knots Virgin of Mercy Prayers and hymns Angelus Fátima prayers Flos Carmeli Hail Mary Hail Mary of Gold Immaculata prayer Magnificat Mary, Mother of Grace Memorare Sub tuum praesidium Marian hymns Devotional practices Acts of Reparation Consecration to Mary First Saturdays Rosary Seven Joys of the Virgin Seven Sorrows of Mary Three Hail Marys Movements and societies Sodality of Our Lady Congregation of Marian Fathers Company of Mary (Montfort) Marianists (Society of Mary) Marist Fathers Marist Brothers Schoenstatt Movement Legion of Mary World Apostolate of Fátima (Blue Army) Mariological Society Our Lady's Rosary Makers Marian Movement of Priests Fatima Family Apostolate Queen of Angels Foundation Apparitions Approved, with widespread liturgical veneration endorsed by the Holy See : Fátima Three Secrets of Fátima Guadalupe Knock La Salette Lourdes Miraculous Medal Walsingham Dowry of Mary Key Marian feast days Mother of God (1 January) Candlemas (2 February) Annunciation (25 March) Assumption (15 August) Nativity (8 September) Holy Name (12 September) Presentation (21 November) Immaculate Conception (8 December) Catholic Church portal v t e Priest and poet [ edit ] While Montfort is best known for his spiritual writings, he was also a poet and during his missions managed to compose more than 20,000 verses of hymns.

[ 24 ] Montfort's hymns and canticles were, for the most part, meant to be sung in village churches and in the homes of the poor. Some authors argue that a reading of Montfort's hymns is essential for an understanding of him as a man and for appreciating his approach to spirituality.

[ 25 ] Based on the analysis of Bishop Hendrik Frehen of the Company of Mary, Montfortian hymns fall into two major categories "inspired" and "didactic". The inspired canticles flow spontaneously, on the occasion of a pilgrimage to a Marian shrine, or on the occasion of a joyful celebration. The didactic hymns took more effort and time to compose, and focus on instructional and informative qualities: they teach the audience through the use of a moral and a theme. After Montfort's death, the Company of Mary (which continued his work of preaching parish renewals) made great use of his hymns and used them as instruments of evangelization.

He is also said to have carved at least three statues depicting the Madonna and Child.

[ 26 ] Congregations de Montfort [ edit ] Louis de Montfort sculpture on a building of Assumption College Bangkok, Thailand The congregations Montfort left behind, the Company of Mary , the Daughters of Wisdom , and the Brothers of Saint Gabriel (which congregation developed from a group of lay-brothers gathered around him), grew and spread, first in France, then throughout the world.

[ 27 ] The Servants of the Lord and the Virgin of Matará follow the spirituality of Louis de Montfort.

[ 13 ] Montfort's birthplace and tomb are now sites of pilgrimages with about 25,000 visitors each year. The house in which he was born is at No 15, Rue de la Saulnerie in Montfort-sur-Meu . It is now jointly owned by the three Montfortian congregations he formed. The Basilica of Saint Louis de Montfort at Saint-Laurent-sur-Sèvre attracts a number of pilgrims each year.

Montfort is the patron saint of a number of prestigious schools that educate youths from all walks of life, including St. Gabriel's Secondary School and Montfort Secondary School in Singapore , the Assumption College In Thailand , and the Montfort Academy, a private secondary school in Mount Vernon, New York.

Biographies [ edit ] Statue of Montfort at the basilica of Notre-Dame-de-Bonne-Nouvelle in Rennes There are more than a hundred biographies written of Montfort. They differ in how they reflect the ecclesial and cultural milieu within which each was written.

The first four biographies of Montfort, by Grandet, Blain, Besnard, and Picot de Clorivières, were all written in the eighteenth century. They reflect the hagiographical method current then—the devotional biography. Such an approach reflected little of the critical sensibility that had dominated most of the seventeenth century through the works of the Bollandists, the memorialists of Port-Royal, and Jean de Launoy. They sought to edify, praise, eulogize, and idealize. Such early biographies are filled with anachronism, incoherence, and over-generalization. Despite such limitations, Montfort's early biographers provide valuable material. They have preserved eyewitness accounts and original documents, and they offer a solid historical foundation for reconstructing many of the truths of Montfort's life.

[ 28 ] The nineteenth century's "romanticized" conception of history influenced hagiography in two main ways: Although a biography should relive the outer events of a saint's past, it was more important to describe the interior drama of his soul. The nineteenth-century biographies of Montfort reflect this historiographic orientation. Two biographies were prepared for the Montfort's beatification, one by Fonteneau and the other by Persiani. The latter is almost a translation of the former (1887). They limited themselves to recounting the events that took place and did not go into Montfort's psychology. On the other hand, Pauvert (1875) published a collection of Montfort's unpublished letters and established a chronology of the first years of his priesthood. A. Crosnier's biography (1927) was also influenced by nineteenth-century romanticism. Just before Montfort's canonization appeared De Luca (1943). The author took into account the literary and spiritual milieu of seventeenth-century France and attempted to introduce his readers to Montfort's spiritual life, pointing out "phases" in Montfort's growth and development.

[ 28 ] Of the different genres of biography that purport to describe the events of someone's life, the "realistic" biography is popular with some today. Such a method is apparent in the four works dedicated by Louis Perouas to Grignion de Montfort (1966, 1973, 1989, 1990). The author separated himself from his predecessors by describing Montfort, his life, and his pastoral work using a historical-critical and psycho-sociological approach. Perouas held that the Breton saint's path was a "tormented journey" because he had difficulty dealing with a strained relationship with his father, who was known for his violent temper. His long and arduous journey toward a balanced life came to a "certain maturation for Father de Montfort when he was in his forties". Generally more acceptable than Perouas' Freudian psychological interpretation is his understanding of Montfort's ministry in the context of the sociological and pastoral realities of his times.

[ 28 ] See also [ edit ] Saint Louis de Montfort's Prayer to Jesus References [ edit ] ^ a b c Augustin Poulain, St. Louis-Marie Grignion de Montfort in The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 9. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. 21 Feb. 2013 ^ a b c McDermott, Ferdi (August 2015).

"The Life and Legacy of St Louis Marie Grignion de Montfort" .

Conference: The Virgin Mary in Liturgy, Literature and Life at Chavagnes International College : 1 . Retrieved 3 January 2021 .

^ cf. Paulette Leblanc, Louis Marie Grignion de Montfort, Apôtre de la Dévotion Mariale , p. 6 ^ a b c Leonard Foley OFM, Saint of the Day: Lives, Lessons and Feast , (revised by Pat McCloskey OFM), Franciscan Media ^ a b c Jesus Living in Mary: Handbook of the Spirituality of St. Louis de Montfort , Montfort Publications, Litchfield, CT, 1994 ^ Raymond Burke, 2008, Mariology: A Guide for Priests, Deacons,seminarians, and Consecrated Persons , Queenship Publishing ISBN 1-57918-355-7 page 708 ^ A hospital ministry was poorly paid and took courage because of the significant worry about picking up some fatal disease. Since hospitals also housed orphaned or abandoned children, the chaplain would also be expected to undertake their education. In the seventeenth century in provincial France the hospital chaplain was generally a young, newly ordained, priest who would then leave after a few years. The mission might be the more challenging because of the state of the hospital itself: the Hôtel-Dieu in Nantes had been built between 1644 and 1655 on Gloriette Island , in the belief this might provide it with purer air while keeping infectious patients away from the main city. With a donation from the wealthy Duchess of La Meilleraye , plus a royal contribution, the building had been started by the governor of Nantes, her husband, the Duke of La Meilleraye . The buildings had been gradually extended with little regard to planning. Unsanitary conditions gradually took over, not helped by marshy ground and the nearby River Loire . None of this would have put a brake on the hospital having to cope with 600 patients. Alongside the Sanitat de Nantes , with some 400 inmates, the total Nantes hospital population would have approached 1,000 during the time of Louis de Montfort.

^ Theodore E. James and Albert J. Nevins, Heart of Catholicism: Essential Writings of the Church from St. Paul to John Paul II 1997 ISBN 0879738065 ^ Grignon De Montfort, Louis Marie.

A treatise on the true devotion to the blessed virgin , (F.W. Faber, trans.), 1863 ^ Grignon De Montfort, Louis Marie.

Secret of Mary ^ Founder Statue in St Peter's Basilica ^ Pope John Paul II (21 June 1997).

"Letter of Pope John Paul II to Mark the 50th Anniversary Of The Canonization of Saint Louis-Marie Grignion de Montfort" .

vatican.va . Retrieved 2 May 2013 .

^ a b "St. Louis Marie Grignion de Montfort (1673 – 1716)", Servants of the Lord and the Virgin of Matará ^ Thelagathoti 2005 , pp. 246–248.

^ De Montfort, L.-M. G. (1863). A Treatise on the True Devotion to the Blessed Virgin. ( F. W. Faber , Translator) (pp. 11–12). London: Burns and Lambert.

^ Smith, Scott.

"What is a Marian Consecration? St. Louis de Montfort's Total Consecration to Jesus through Mary" .

All Roads Lead to Rome . Retrieved 29 June 2022 .

^ Thelagathoti 2005 , pp. 324–327.

^ Thelagathoti 2005 , pp. 265–271.

^ Antoine Nachef, 2000 Mary's Pope Rowman & Littlefield Press ISBN 978-1-58051-077-6 p. 4 ^ Tim Parry, 2007, The Legacy of John Paul II Intervarsity Press ISBN 978-0-8308-2595-0 p. 109 ^ Heinrich Maria Köster, Die Magd des Herrn , 1947, 54 ^ "Pope Reveals Mary's Role In His Life", Zenit, October 15, 2000 ^ Pope John Paul II, Redemptoris Mater , March 25, 1987, Libreria Editrice Vaticana ^ Thelagathoti 2005 , p. 9.

^ Hymns of Saint Louis de Montfort at EWTN Jesus Living in Mary ^ Statues by Montfort in All About Mary , International Marian Research Institute, University of Dayton.

^ Montfortian Religious Family ^ a b c S. De Fiores, Various Interpretations Of Montfort's Personality in Jesus Living in Mary: Handbook of the Spirituality of St. Louis de Montfort , Montfort Publications, Litchfield, CT, 1994 Sources Louis de Montfort Preparation for Total Consecration according to the Method of St. Louis de Montfort.

Bay Shore NY: Montfort Publications, 2001.

de Montfort, Louis.

God Alone: The Collected Writings of St. Louis Marie De Montfort Montfort Publications, 1995 ISBN 0-910984-55-7 Eddie Doherty, Wisdom's Fool: A biography of St. Louis de Montfort Bay Shore NY: Montfort Publications, 1975.

Stefano Fiores, Dictionnaire de Spiritualité Montfortaine.

(1360 pag.)Novalis, 1994 Thelagathoti, Joseph Raja Rao (2005).

The mystical experience and doctrine of St. Louis-Marie Grignion de Montfort . Roma: Editrice Pontificia Universita Gregoriana.

ISBN 88-7839-030-5 .

OCLC 60561790 .

Scott L. Smith, Jr.

St. Louis de Montfort's Total Consecration to Jesus through Mary - New Easier-to-Read Translation , Holy Water Books , 2019, ISBN 1-95078-205-0 Further reading J. Augustine DiNoia, 1996, The love that never ends OSV Press ISBN 978-0-87973-852-5 External links [ edit ] Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Missionaries of the Company of Mary" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Founded by de Montfort.

Catholic Books including True Devotion to Mary free online International Marian Research Institute at the University of Dayton. The Institute, a leading center for research and scholarship on the Blessed Virgin Mary, has a vast presence in cyberspace.

Marian Library at the University of Dayton. The Marian Library is the world's largest repository of books, periodicals, artwork, and artifacts on Mary, the mother of Jesus Christ.

Montfort Center "Saint Louis Marie de Montfort" article at Catholicism.org Montfort, Secret of Mary Works by or about Louis de Montfort at the Internet Archive Works by Louis de Montfort at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Biography portal Christianity portal Catholicism portal Saints portal France portal v t e Order of Preachers A list of all the congregations, notable members, priories, churches, and convents of the Order of Preachers (Dominicans) Members of the Dominican Order Beatified Dominicans Agnes of Jesus Diana degli Andalò Andrea Franchi Fra Angelico Simone Ballachi Pope Benedict XI Pauline Jaricot Benvenuta Bojani Lucy Brocadelli Jose Gabriel del Rosario Brochero Matthew Carrieri Catherine of Racconigi Chiara Gambacorti Antonio della Chiesa Columba of Rieti Hyacinthe-Marie Cormier Domenico Spadafora John Dominici Margareta Ebner Emilia Bicchieri Augustine Fangi Francisco Martín Fernández de Posadas Pier Giorgio Frassati Peter González Buzád Hahót Humbert of Romans John of Vercelli Jordan of Saxony Ana of the Angels Monteagudo Manés de Guzmán Margaret of Castello Maria Bagnesi Ascensión Nicol y Goñi Osanna of Mantua Nicola Paglia Maddalena Panattieri Luke Spicola of Pontecorvo Marie Poussepin Stephana de Quinzanis Bernardo Scammacca Sebastian Maggi Henry Suso Raymond of Capua Reginald of Orleans Villana de' Botti Congregations of Nuns Congregation of the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament Dominican Nuns of the Holy Cross Convent, Regensburg Dominican Nuns of the Perpetual Rosary Dominicans of the Monastery of the Angels, Karachi Dominicans of the Monastery of the Heart of Jesus, Lockport Congregations of Sisters Adrian Dominican Sisters Dominican Sisters of Ilanz Dominican Sisters of Blauvelt Dominican Sisters of Hawthorne Dominican Sisters of Peace Dominican Sisters of St. Catherine of Siena Dominican Sisters of St. Cecilia Dominican Sisters of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Dominican Sisters of the Immaculate Conception Dominican Sisters of Grand Rapids Dominican Sisters of San Rafael Dominican Sisters of Mary, Mother of the Eucharist Dominican Sisters of Sparkill Racine Dominican Sisters Sinsinawa Dominican Sisters Dominican Bishops Diego de Aguilar (bishop) Johannes Alberti (bishop) Jose Advincula Nicolò Albertini Albertus Magnus Bernardo de Albuquerque Domingo de Alzola Andrea Franchi Rodolfo Fontiveros Beltran Teodoro Bacani Jr.

Rufino Sescon Napoleon Sipalay José S. Palma Socrates Villegas Antoninus of Florence Giacomo Balardi Arrigoni Carlos Azpiroz Costa Daniele Barboli Frank Leo Giovanni Battista Natali Archangelo de' Bianchi Franciscus Buratti James Burke Martín Cabeza de Vaca Francisco de la Cámara y Raya Thomas Cammerota Ambrosius Capello Tomás de Cárdenas Andrew of Carniola Bartolomé de las Casas Alfonso de la Cerda Jerónimo Clavijo Jean-Paul Vesco Antonio Cogorno R. Luke Concanen John Connolly Gregorio Cruz Edward Celestin Daly Vincent Darius Agustín Dávila Padilla Michael James Dempsey Joseph Augustine Di Noia Giulio Doffi John Dominici Jean-Paul Vesco Vincenzo de Doncelli Alberto Drago Vincenzo Ercolano Georg Fabri Edward Fenwick Felipe Fernandez de Pardo Anthony Fisher Eustache Fontana Serafino Fortibraccia Ambrosio Fracassini Felipe Galindo Chávez y Pineda Johannes de Galonifontibus John III of Soltaniyeh Ludovico Giamagna Andrés González Pietro de Gozzo Thomas Grace Alfonso Guerra Antonio de Hervias Jean Heysterbach John Howden Guy of Ibelin Henrik Kalteisen Thomas C. Kelly Edward Thaddeus Lawton Giorgio Lazzari Bartolomé de Ledesma Reginaldo de Lizárraga Jerónimo de Loayza Eustachio Locatelli Umberto Locati Bartolomeo Lopaci Juan Lópe Giovanni Marquet Martin of Opava Bartolomé Martinez Menacho y Mesa Pascase Maupair Stefan Antonin Mdzewski Godfried van Mierlo Paolo Isaresi della Mirandola Hermann Molitoris Antonio de Monroy Alonso de Montúfar Munio of Zamora Francisco Naranjo Girolamo Michele Nichesola Berthold von Oberg Michael Padrolo Dionysius Part Alberto Pascaleo Richard Payl Pedro de la Peña Vicente de Peraza Paolo Pico Sigfried Piscator Ponsa Antonio Ponticorona Agostino Quinzio Juan Ramírez de Arellano Miguel Ramírez de Salamanca Raphael Riva Cristóbal Rodríguez Juárez Giovanni Romano Reginaldo Romero Heinrich von Rübenach Abel de Saint-Brieuc Hugh of Saint-Cher Juan de Salamanca Thomas, bishop of Finland Thomas of Mancasola Tommaso da San Cipriano Peter Sanz Christoph Schönborn Tommaso Scotti Pedro Silva y Tenorio Juan Solano John Sproten Luigi Suppa Johannes Tideln Miguel de Torres Pablo de Torres Burchard Tuberflug Domingo de Ulloa Domingo Valderrama y Centeno Antonio de Valdivieso Vicente de Valverde Vincente de Valverde Vitas John of Wildeshausen Juan de Witte Hoos Pedro Xague Dominican Cardinals Nicolò Albertini Michael Browne Yves Congar John Dominici Andreas Frühwirth Hugh of Saint-Cher Christoph Schönborn Jose Advincula Juan de Torquemada Jean-Paul Vesco Frank Leo Timothy Radcliffe Dominican Martyrs Anna Abrikosova Luis Cancer Francis Ferdinand de Capillas Buzád Hahót John of Cologne Martyrs of Gorkum Paul and Ninety Companions Peter Sanz 17 Thomasian Martyrs Dominican Missionaries Jerónimo de Loayza Luise Radlmeier Peter Sanz Juan Solano Vincente de Valverde José Álvarez Fernández Leo Hofstee Dominican Mystics Agnes of Jesus Albertus Magnus Benvenuta Bojani Lucy Brocadelli Catherine of Racconigi Catherine of Siena Columba of Rieti Christina Ebner Margareta Ebner Mary of Jesus de León y Delgado Louis of Granada Osanna of Mantua Stephana de Quinzanis Catherine of Ricci Rose of Lima Elsbeth Stagel Henry Suso Thomas Aquinas Simone Weil Dominican Nuns Anna Abrikosova Agnes of Denmark Agnes of Jesus Agnes of Montepulciano Diana degli Andalò Concepción Argüello La Beata de Piedrahita Sister Bertranda Infanta Branca, Lady of Guadalajara Violante do Ceo Chiara Gambacorti Teresa Chikaba Anna Vittoria Dolara Augusta Theodosia Drane Christina Ebner Margareta Ebner Stephanie Gorodets Elizabeth of Töss Emilia Bicchieri Patricia Fresen Irmengard of Oettingen Marion Irvine Catherine Jarrige Joanna, Princess of Portugal Theresa Kugel Saint Margaret of Fontana Margaret of Hungary Juliana Morell Osanna of Cattaro Lea Ráskay Bartolomea Riccoboni Nora Rubashova Elsbeth Stagel Yolanda of Vianden Maria Petra Giordano Dominican Popes Pope Benedict XI Pope Benedict XIII Pope Innocent V Pope Pius V Dominican Saints Agnes of Montepulciano Albertus Magnus Antoninus of Florence Louis Bertrand Francis Ferdinand de Capillas Catherine of Siena Saint Dominic Vincent Ferrer Marie-Alphonsine Danil Ghattas Hyacinth of Poland John of Cologne John Macias Margaret of Hungary Martyrs of Gorkum Paul and Ninety Companions Pope Pius V Martin de Porres Raymond of Penyafort Rose of Lima Peter Sanz Thomas Aquinas Zdislava Berka Dominican Scholars Francisco Burgoa Jean Maurice Fiey Bede Jarrett Stjepan Krasić Raymond-Joseph Loenertz Martin of Opava Jean de Menasce Luise Radlmeier Lea Ráskay Antonin Sertillanges Rose Thering Dominican Sisters Anna Abrikosova Mother Mary Alphonsa Lucy Brocadelli Columba of Rieti Carol Gilbert Jackie Hudson Mary of Jesus de León y Delgado Margaret MacCurtain Ascensión Nicol y Goñi Ardeth Platte Stephana de Quinzanis Luise Radlmeier Catherine of Ricci Rose Thering Marjorie Tuite Rose Whitty Dominican Theologians Nicholas Bayard Catherine of Siena Yves Congar Joseph Augustine Di Noia Marcel-Jacques Dubois Luis Galiana y Cervera Henrik Kalteisen John Lutterell Aidan Nichols Paulus Hungarus Juan de Torquemada Benedict T. Viviano Dominican Tertiaries Francis Amherst Simone Ballachi Benvenuta Bojani Jose Gabriel del Rosario Brochero Catherine of Racconigi Catherine of Siena Pier Giorgio Frassati Pauline Jaricot Martin Grabmann Margaret of Castello Maria Bagnesi Osanna of Mantua Rose of Lima Villana de' Botti Lorenzo Ruíz of Manila Dominican Churches, Convents, and Monasteries Dominican Churches Basilica of San Sisto Vecchio Basilica of Santa Maria Novella Basilica of St Dominic, Valletta Blessed Sacrament Church, Seattle Church of St Catherine, Saint Petersburg Church of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, Košice Church of St. Vincent Ferrer, Manhattan Dominican Church, Lviv Dominican Church and Convent of St. James, Sandomierz Dominican Church and Convent of the Assumption of Mary, Tarnobrzeg Dominican Church, Vienna Église Saint-Cannat Monastery Church, Sighișoara Nuestra Señora del Rosario y Santo Domingo, Montevideo Our Lady of Pompei Church, Victoria, Gozo Predigerkirche Zürich San Domenico Maggiore San Domenico, Palermo San Giacomo Apostolo, Forlì Sant'Anastasia, Verona Santa Maria di Castello Santa Maria della Pietà, Palermo Santa Maria sopra Minerva Santa Sabina Santi Giovanni e Paolo, Venice Santissima Trinità a Via Condotti Santo Domingo, Mexico City St. Andrew's Church, Cologne St Cuthbert's Church, Durham St Dominic's Priory Church St. Paul's Church, Antwerp St. Hyacinth's Church, Warsaw Dominican Convents Convent of San Domenico, Fiesole Convento de Santo Tomás Dominican Church and Convent of St. James, Sandomierz Dominican Church and Convent of the Assumption of Mary, Tarnobrzeg Dominican Convent, Ilanz Dominican Convent, Zaragoza Predigerkloster St. Catherine's Priory, Roskilde Schlehdorf Abbey Skänninge Abbey St. John's Priory, Kalmar Wettenhausen Abbey Dominican Monasteries Ballindoon Friary Black Friars' Monastery of Stockholm Burrishoole Friary Corpus Christi Monastery Couvent des Jacobins de la rue Saint-Honoré Couvent des Jacobins de la rue Saint-Jacques Dominican Priory, Viborg Flavigny Abbey Holbæk Priory Kirchberg convent Liebenau monastery Matris Domini Monastery Monastère de Chalais North Abbey, Youghal Notre-Dame-de-Prouille Monastery Oetenbach nunnery Our Lady's Priory, Aarhus Priory of the Immaculate Conception Paulinerkirche, Leipzig Rue Saint-Dominique Sainte Marie de La Tourette Santa Catalina Monastery Sligo Abbey St. Agnes' Priory, Gavnø St Catherine's Monastery, Bremen St. Catherine's Monastery, Tallinn St. Catherine's Priory, Roskilde St. Catherine's Priory, Ribe St. Catherine Monastery, Olomouc Töss Monastery Weesen Abbey Dominican Education Colleges and Universities Albertus Magnus College Angelicum College Aquinas College, Michigan Aquinas College, Tennessee Aquinas Institute of Theology Aquinas University Barry University Caldwell University Colegio de San Juan de Letran Dominican College, New York Dominican School of Philosophy and Theology Dominican University, Illinois Dominican University of California Edgewood College Holy Trinity University Molloy College Mount Saint Mary College Providence College St. Catharine College St. Mary's Dominican College St. Thomas Aquinas College Siena Heights University Pontifical Universities Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas University of Santo Tomas Schools Albertus Magnus High School Angelicum School Iloilo Aquinas High School, New York Aquinas School Blackfriars Priory School Cabra Dominican College Dominican Academy Dominican Convent High School, Harare Dominican Convent High School, Bulawayo Dominican Convent Primary School, Bulawayo Dominican College Sion Hill Dominican College, Fortwilliam Dominican College, Portstewart Dominican High School, Whitefish Bay Dominican International School Dominican School Manila Edgewood High School of the Sacred Heart Fenwick High School (Oak Park, Illinois) Flintridge Sacred Heart Academy Frassati Catholic High School Immaculate Conception Academy (San Francisco, California) Marian Catholic High School (Illinois) Maryknoll School of Lupon Mount de Sales Academy (Catonsville, Maryland) Mount Saint Dominic Academy Newbridge College Queen of Peace High School, Illinois Regina Dominican High School Rosarian Academy Rosary High School, Aurora Rosaryhill School Sacred Heart High School (California) San Gabriel Mission High School Santa Catalina School Saint Agnes Academy, Texas Saint Dominic Academy Saint John Paul the Great Catholic High School (Virginia) Saint Michael Academy, Catarman Santa Sabina College Siena College, Camberwell Siena College of Quezon City Siena College of Taytay St Catherine's Academy St Catherine's School, Germiston St Dominic's Catholic School for Girls, Boksburg St Dominic's Chishawasha St Dominic's College, Henderson St Dominic's Grammar School St Dominic's Grammar School for Girls St Dominic's Priory School, Stone St Dominic's Priory College, Adelaide St Dominic's Sixth Form College St John's High School, Harare St Joseph's School, Oamaru St Mary's Dominican High School St Rose's Senior High School, Akwatia St Vincent Ferrer High School Superior Institute of Religious Sciences of St. Thomas Aquinas Trinity Catholic College, Dunedin, New Zealand Trinity High School (River Forest, Illinois) Catholicism portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Croatia Chile Korea 2 Sweden Poland Vatican Catalonia Belgium People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Louis_de_Montfort&oldid=1300259420 " Categories : 1673 births 1716 deaths People from Ille-et-Vilaine Brothers of Christian Instruction of St Gabriel 18th-century French Catholic theologians 17th-century French Catholic theologians French school of spirituality French Roman Catholic saints French Roman Catholic writers Pope Leo XIII Counter-Reformation Canonizations by Pope Pius XII Catholic Mariology Dominican mystics Lay Dominicans 18th-century Christian saints Early modern Christian devotional writers Breton saints Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with French IPA Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 07:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Louis de Montfort 30 languages Add topic

