Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Background 1.2 Menger and the German Historical School 2 Consequences 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Methodenstreit 16 languages Azərbaycanca Dansk Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Shqip Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economics controversy Methodenstreit (German for "method dispute"), in intellectual history beyond German-language discourse, was an economics controversy commenced in the 1880s and persisting for more than a decade, between that field's Austrian School and the (German) Historical School . The debate concerned the place of general theory in social science and the use of history in explaining the dynamics of human action. It also touched on policy and political issues, including the roles of the individual and state. Nevertheless, methodological concerns were uppermost and some early members of the Austrian School also defended a form of welfare state , as prominently advocated by the Historical School.

When the debate opened, Carl Menger developed the Austrian School's standpoint, and Gustav von Schmoller defended the approach of the Historical School.

(In German-speaking countries , the original of this Germanism is not specific to the one controversy, which is likely to be specified as Methodenstreit der Nationalökonomie , i.e. " Methodenstreit of national economics".) History [ edit ] Background [ edit ] The Historical School contended that economists could develop new and better social laws from the collection and study of statistics and historical materials, and distrusted theories not derived from historical experience. Thus, the German Historical School focused on specific dynamic institutions as the largest variable in changes in political economy.  The Historical School were themselves reacting against materialist determinism , the idea that human action could, and would (once science advanced enough), be explained as physical and chemical reactions.

[ 1 ] The Austrian School, beginning with the work of Carl Menger in the 1860s, argued against this (in Grundsätze der Volkswirtschaftslehre , English title: Principles of Economics ), that economics was the work of philosophical logic and could only ever be about developing rules from first principles—seeing human motives and social interaction as far too complex to be amenable to statistical analysis—and purporting to deduce universally valid precepts from human actions.

[ citation needed ] Menger and the German Historical School [ edit ] Untersuchungen über die Methode der Socialwissenschaften, und der politischen Ökonomie insbesondere , 1933 The first move was when Carl Menger attacked Schmoller and the German Historical School, in his 1883 book Investigations into the Method of the Social Sciences, with Special Reference to Political Economics (Untersuchungen über die Methode der Socialwissenschaften, und der politischen Ökonomie insbesondere).

Menger thought the best method of studying economics was through reason and finding general theories which applied to broad areas. Menger, as did the other Austrians, concentrated upon the subjective, atomistic nature of economics. He argued that the foundations for economics were built upon assumption of self-interest, evaluation on the margin , and incomplete knowledge. He said aggregative, collective ideas could not have adequate foundation unless they rested upon individual components.

[ citation needed ] The direct attack on the German Historical School lead Schmoller to respond quickly with an unfavourable and quite hostile review of Menger's book.

[ 2 ] Menger accepted the challenge and replied in a passionate pamphlet, [ 3 ] written in the form of letters to a friend, in which he (according to Hayek) "ruthlessly demolished Schmoller's position". The encounter between the masters was soon imitated by their disciples. A degree of hostility not often equaled in scientific controversy developed.

[ 4 ] Consequences [ edit ] The term "Austrian school of economics" came into existence as a result of the Methodenstreit, when Schmoller used it in an unfavourable review of one of Menger's later books, intending to convey an impression of backwardness and obscurantism of Austria compared to the more modern Prussians . A serious consequence of the hostile debate was that Schmoller went so far as to declare publicly that members of the "abstract" school were unfit to fill a teaching position in a German university, and his influence was quite sufficient to make this equivalent to a complete exclusion of all adherents to Menger's doctrines from academic positions in Germany. The result was that even thirty years after the close of the controversy Germany was still less affected by the new ideas now spreading elsewhere, than any other academically important country in the world.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Economic methodology Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of science Positive economics Unreasonable ineffectiveness of mathematics Positivismusstreit Werturteilsstreit References [ edit ] ^ Mises, Ludwig von: "The Historical Setting of the Austrian School of Economics" ^ "Zur Methodologie der Staats- und Sozialwissenschaften" in Jahrbuch für Gesetzgebung, Verwaltung und Volkswirtschaft im deutschen Reich 1883.

^ Irrthümer des Historismus in der deutschen Nationalökonomie , 1884 ^ 'Carl Menger'. Introduction by Friedrich A. Hayek , printed in the English translation of Carl Menger's Principles of Economics , New York University Press, 1981. page 24.

^ 'Carl Menger'. Introduction by Friedrich A. Hayek , printed in the English translation of Carl Menger's Principles of Economics , New York University Press, 1981. page 25.

External links [ edit ] Principles of Economics by Carl Menger Investigations into the Method of the Social Sciences with Special Reference to Economics by Carl Menger Epistemological Problems of Economics by Ludwig von Mises The Historical Setting of the Austrian School of Economics by Ludwig von Mises v t e Positivism Perspectives Antihumanism Empiricism Rationalism Scientism Declinations Legal positivism Logical positivism Positivist school Postpositivism Sociological positivism Machian positivism (empirio-criticism) Rankean historical positivism Polish positivism Russian Machism Principal concepts Consilience Demarcation Evidence Induction Justification Pseudoscience Critique of metaphysics Unity of science Verificationism Antitheses Antipositivism Confirmation holism Critical theory Falsifiability Geisteswissenschaft Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human science Humanities Metaphysics Methodological dualism Problem of induction Reflectivism Related paradigm shifts in the history of science Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s) Uncertainty principle (1927) Related topics Behavioralism Post-behavioralism Critical rationalism Criticism of science Epistemology anarchism idealism nihilism pluralism realism Holism Instrumentalism Modernism Naturalism in literature Nomothetic–idiographic distinction Objectivity in science Operationalism Phenomenalism Philosophy of science Deductive-nomological model Ramsey sentence Sense-data theory Qualitative research Relationship between religion and science Sociology Social science Philosophy Structural functionalism Structuralism Structuration theory Positivist-related debate Method Methodenstreit (1890s) Werturteilsstreit (1909–1959) Positivismusstreit (1960s) Fourth Great Debate in international relations (1980s) Science wars (1990s) Contributions The Course in Positive Philosophy (1830) A General View of Positivism (1848) Critical History of Philosophy (1869) Idealism and Positivism (1879–1884) The Analysis of Sensations (1886) The Logic of Modern Physics (1927) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) The Two Cultures (1959) The Universe in a Nutshell (2001) Proponents Richard Avenarius A. J. Ayer Alexander Bogdanov Percy Williams Bridgman Auguste Comte Eugen Dühring Émile Durkheim Stephen Hawking Ernst Laas Ernst Mach C. P. Snow Berlin Circle Vienna Circle Criticism Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) History and Class Consciousness (1923) The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1934) The Poverty of Historicism (1936) World Hypotheses (1942) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Truth and Method (1960) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) Conjectures and Refutations (1963) One-Dimensional Man (1964) Knowledge and Human Interests (1968) The Poverty of Theory (1978) The Scientific Image (1980) The Rhetoric of Economics (1986) Critics Theodor W. Adorno Gaston Bachelard Mario Bunge Wilhelm Dilthey Paul Feyerabend Hans-Georg Gadamer Jürgen Habermas Thomas Kuhn Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Herbert Marcuse Deirdre McCloskey Stephen Pepper Karl Popper Willard Van Orman Quine E. P. Thompson Bas van Fraassen Max Weber Concepts in contention Knowledge Objectivity Phronesis Truth Verstehen Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Methodenstreit&oldid=1301220433 " Categories : Economic controversies Austrian School Historical school of economics German words and phrases Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 18:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Methodenstreit 16 languages Add topic

