Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Antiquity 2 Aboriginal mythology: whole of Australia Toggle Aboriginal mythology: whole of Australia subsection 2.1 Diversity across a continent 2.2 Public education about Aboriginal perspectives 2.3 An anthropological generalisation 2.4 An Aboriginal generalisation 2.5 Sacred sites 3 Pan-Australian mythology Toggle Pan-Australian mythology subsection 3.1 Rainbow Serpent 3.2 Captain Cook 3.3 Views on death 3.4 Link to astronomy 4 Group-specific mythology Toggle Group-specific mythology subsection 4.1 Yolngu 4.2 Murrinh-Patha people 4.3 Pintupi people 5 Newer belief systems 6 See also 7 Notes Toggle Notes subsection 7.1 Citations 8 Bibliography 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Australian Aboriginal religion and mythology 22 languages العربية Asturianu Català Čeština Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego हिन्दी Italiano Latina مصرى Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Tagalog Türkçe Українська 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia See also: Australian Aboriginal culture The Djabugay language group's mythical being, Damarri , transformed into a mountain range, is seen lying on his back above the Barron River Gorge , looking upwards to the skies, within north-east Australia's wet tropical forested landscape.

Australian Aboriginal religion and mythology is the sacred spirituality represented in the stories performed by Aboriginal Australians within each of the language groups across Australia in their ceremonies . Aboriginal spirituality includes the Dreamtime ( the Dreaming ), songlines , and Aboriginal oral literature .

Aboriginal spirituality often conveys descriptions of each group's local cultural landscape , adding meaning to the whole country's topography from oral history told by ancestors from some of the earliest recorded history . Most of these spiritualities belong to specific groups, but some span the whole continent in one form or another.

Antiquity [ edit ] An Australian linguist , R. M. W. Dixon , recording Aboriginal myths in their original languages, encountered coincidences between some of the landscape details being told about within various myths, and scientific discoveries being made about the same landscapes.

[ 1 ] In the case of the Atherton Tableland , myths tell of the origins of Lake Eacham , Lake Barrine , and Lake Euramoo . Geological research dated the formative volcanic explosions described by Aboriginal myth tellers as having occurred more than 10,000 years ago.

Pollen fossil sampling from the silt which had settled to the bottom of the craters confirmed the Aboriginal myth-tellers' story. When the craters were formed, eucalyptus forests dominated rather than the current wet tropical rainforests .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ a ] Dixon observed from the evidence available that Aboriginal myths regarding the origin of the Crater Lakes might be dated as accurate back to 10,000 years ago.

[ 2 ] Further investigation of the material by the Australian Heritage Commission led to the Crater Lakes myth being listed nationally on the Register of the National Estate , [ 4 ] and included within Australia's World Heritage nomination of the wet tropical forests , as an "unparalleled human record of events dating back to the Pleistocene era." [ 5 ] Since then, Dixon has assembled a number of similar examples of Australian Aboriginal myths that accurately describe landscapes of an ancient past. He particularly noted the numerous myths telling of previous sea levels, including: [ 2 ] the Port Phillip myth (recorded as told to Robert Russell in 1850), describing Port Phillip Bay as once dry land, and the course of the Yarra River being once different, following what was then Carrum Carrum swamp.

the Great Barrier Reef coastline myth (told to Dixon) in Yarrabah , just south of Cairns , telling of a past coastline (since flooded) which stood at the edge of the current Great Barrier Reef, and naming places now completely submerged after the forest types and trees that once grew there.

the Lake Eyre myths (recorded by J. W. Gregory in 1906), telling of the deserts of Central Australia as once having been fertile, well-watered plains, and the deserts around present Lake Eyre having been one continuous garden. This oral story matches geologists' understanding that there was a wet phase to the early Holocene when the lake would have had permanent water.

Other volcanic eruptions in Australia may also be recorded in Aboriginal myths, including Mount Gambier in South Australia, [ 6 ] and Kinrara in northern Queensland.

[ 7 ] Aboriginal mythology: whole of Australia [ edit ] Indigenous peoples ' regions in Australia Geological map of Australia The stories enshrined in Aboriginal mythology variously "tell significant truths within each Aboriginal group's local landscape . They effectively layer the whole of the Australian continent's topography with cultural nuance and deeper meaning, and empower selected audiences with the accumulated wisdom and knowledge of Australian Aboriginal ancestors back to time immemorial ".

[ 8 ] David Horton 's Encyclopaedia of Aboriginal Australia contains an article on Aboriginal mythology observing: [ 9 ] A mythic map of Australia would show thousands of characters, varying in their importance, but all in some way connected with the land. Some emerged at their specific sites and stayed spiritually in that vicinity. Others came from somewhere else and went somewhere else.
Many were shape changing, transformed from or into human beings or natural species, or into natural features such as rocks but all left something of their spiritual essence at the places noted in their stories.

Australian Aboriginal mythologies have been characterised as "at one and the same time fragments of a catechism , a liturgical manual, a history of civilization , a geography textbook, and to a much smaller extent a manual of cosmography ." [ 10 ] Diversity across a continent [ edit ] There are 900 distinct Aboriginal groups across Australia, [ 11 ] each distinguished by unique names usually identifying particular languages , dialects , or distinctive speech mannerisms .

[ 12 ] Each language was used for original myths, from which the distinctive words and names of individual myths derive.

With so many distinct Aboriginal groups, languages, beliefs and practices, scholars cannot attempt to characterise, under a single heading, the full range and diversity of all myths being variously and continuously told, developed, elaborated, performed, and experienced by group members across the entire continent. Attempts to represent the different groupings in maps have varied widely.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The Encyclopaedia of Aboriginal Australia nevertheless observes: "One intriguing feature [of Aboriginal Australian mythology] is the mixture of diversity and similarity in myths across the entire continent." [ 9 ] Public education about Aboriginal perspectives [ edit ] The Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation 's booklet, Understanding Country , formally seeks to introduce non-Indigenous Australians to Aboriginal perspectives on the environment. It makes the following generalisation about Aboriginal myths and mythology: [ 15 ] ...they generally describe the journeys of ancestral beings, often giant animals or people, over what began as a featureless domain. Mountains, rivers, waterholes, animal and plant species, and other natural and cultural resources came into being as a result of events which took place during these Dreamtime journeys. Their existence in present-day landscapes is seen by many Indigenous peoples as confirmation of their creation beliefs...

The routes taken by the Creator Beings in their Dreamtime journeys across land and sea... link many sacred sites together in a web of Dreamtime tracks criss-crossing the country. Dreaming tracks can run for hundreds, even thousands of kilometres, from desert to the coast [and] may be shared by peoples in countries through which the tracks pass...

An anthropological generalisation [ edit ] Australian anthropologists willing to generalise suggest Aboriginal myths still being performed across Australia by Aboriginal peoples serve an important social function amongst their intended audiences: justifying the received ordering of their daily lives; [ 16 ] helping shape peoples' ideas; and assisting to influence others' behaviour.

[ 17 ] In addition, such performance often continuously incorporates and "mythologises" historical events in the service of these social purposes in an otherwise rapidly changing modern world .

It is always integral and common... that the Law ( Aboriginal law ) is something derived from ancestral peoples or Dreamings and is passed down the generations in a continuous line. While... entitlements of particular human beings may come and go, the underlying relationships between foundational Dreamings and certain landscapes are theoretically eternal ... the entitlements of people to places are usually regarded strongest when those people enjoy a relationship of identity with one or more Dreamings of that place. This is an identity of spirit, a consubstantiality , rather than a matter of mere belief...: the Dreaming pre-exists and persists, while its human incarnations are temporary.

[ 18 ] An Aboriginal generalisation [ edit ] Mythology Mythologies Indeterminate Proto-Indo-European Africa Berber Bantu Efik Guanche Kongo Lugbara Maasai Malagasy Mbuti Somali West African Yoruba Mediterranean Egyptian French Greek Iberian Basque Catalan Cantabrian Lusitanian Italian Etruscan Roman Romanian Turkic Europe Albanian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Prussian Celtic Breton Cornish Irish Scottish Welsh English Estonian Georgian Germanic Nazi mythology Frankish Continental Germanic Norse Anglo-Saxon Gothic Slavic Uralic Finnish Hungarian Proto-Uralic Sámi Middle East Arabian Armenian Christian Hittite Jewish Mesopotamian Ossetian Persian Talysh Asia Buddhist Chinese Hindu Japanese Korean Meitei Mongol Philippine Tai Thai Tibetan Vietnamese Oceania Aboriginal Australian Indonesian Māori Melanesian Micronesian Papuan Polynesian North America Algonquian Abenaki Blackfoot Lenape Aztec Californian Miwok Ohlone Choctaw Muscogee/Creek Haida Inuit Iroquois Maya Kwakwakaʼwakw Plains Indians Ho-Chunk Lakota Pawnee Puebloan Hopi Zuni Talamancan South America Brazilian Chaná Chilote Guarani Inca Muisca Selk'nam Types Creation Flood National Origin Lists Creations Creatures Deities Feral children Floods Heroes Culture Folk Objects Pairs Places Sources Related concepts Deity Legendary creature Type Legendary progenitor Twins Culture hero Folk hero See also Comparative mythology Comparative religion Euhemerism Folklore Epics Lower mythology Pseudo-mythology Religion and mythology Symbolism Theology v t e Aboriginal specialists willing to generalise believe all Aboriginal myths across Australia, in combination, represent a kind of unwritten ( oral ) library within which Aboriginal peoples learn about the world and perceive a peculiarly Aboriginal 'reality' dictated by concepts and values vastly different from those of western societies : [ 19 ] Aboriginal people learned from their stories that a society must not be human-centred but rather land centred, otherwise they forget their source and purpose ... humans are prone to exploitative behaviour if not constantly reminded they are interconnected with the rest of creation, that they as individuals are only temporal in time, and past and future generations must be included in their perception of their purpose in life.

People come and go but the Land, and stories about the Land, stay. This is a wisdom that takes lifetimes of listening, observing and experiencing ... There is a deep understanding of human nature and the environment... sites hold 'feelings' which cannot be described in physical terms... subtle feelings that resonate through the bodies of these people... It is only when talking and being with these people that these 'feelings' can truly be appreciated. This is... the intangible reality of these people...

Sacred sites [ edit ] Main article: Australian Aboriginal sacred sites Aboriginal people observe some places as sacred, owing to their central place in the mythology of the local people.

[ 20 ] Pan-Australian mythology [ edit ] Rainbow Serpent [ edit ] Main article: Rainbow Serpent Australian carpet python , one of the forms the 'Rainbow Serpent' character may take in 'Rainbow Serpent' myths In 1926 a British anthropologist specialising in Australian Aboriginal ethnology and ethnography , Professor Alfred Radcliffe-Brown , noted many Aboriginal groups widely distributed across the Australian continent all appeared to share variations of a single (common) myth telling of an unusually powerful, often creative, often dangerous snake or serpent of sometimes enormous size closely associated with the rainbows, rain, rivers, and deep waterholes.

[ 21 ] Radcliffe-Brown coined the term 'Rainbow Serpent' to describe what he identified to be a common, recurring myth. Working in the field in various places on the Australian continent, he noted the key character of this myth (the 'Rainbow Serpent') is variously named: [ 21 ] Kanmare ( Boulia, Queensland ); Tulloun : ( Mount Isa ); Andrenjinyi ( Pennefather River , Queensland), Takkan ( Maryborough, Queensland ); Targan ( Brisbane , Queensland); Kurreah ( Broken Hill, New South Wales ); Wawi ( Riverina , New South Wales), Neitee & Yeutta ( Wilcannia, New South Wales ), Myndie ( Melbourne , Victoria); Bunyip (Western Victoria ); Arkaroo (Flinders Ranges, South Australia); Wogal ( Perth , Western Australia); Wanamangura ( Laverton, Western Australia ); Kajura ( Carnarvon, Western Australia ); Numereji ( Kakadu, Northern Territory ).

This 'Rainbow Serpent' is generally and variously identified by those who tell 'Rainbow Serpent' myths, as a snake of some enormous size often living within the deepest waterholes of many of Australia's waterways; descended from that larger being visible as a dark streak in the Milky Way , it reveals itself to people in this world as a rainbow as it moves through water and rain, shaping landscapes, naming and singing of places, swallowing and sometimes drowning people; strengthening the knowledgeable with rainmaking and healing powers; blighting others with sores, weakness, illness, and death.

[ 21 ] Even Australia's ' Bunyip ' was identified as a 'Rainbow Serpent' myth of the above kind.

[ 22 ] The term coined by Radcliffe-Brown is now commonly used and familiar to broader Australian and international audiences, as it is increasingly used by government agencies, museums, art galleries, Aboriginal organisations and the media to refer to the pan-Australian Aboriginal myth specifically, and as a shorthand allusion to Australian Aboriginal mythology generally.

[ b ] Captain Cook [ edit ] See also: James Cook Statue of Captain James Cook at Admiralty Arch , London A number of linguists, anthropologists and others have formally documented another common Aboriginal myth occurring across Australia. Predecessors of the myth tellers encounter a mythical, exotic (most often English) character who arrives from the sea, bringing western colonialism , either offering gifts to the performer's predecessors or bringing great harm upon the performer's predecessors.

[ 23 ] This key mythical character is most often named "Captain Cook", this being a mythical character shared with the broader Australian community, who also attribute James Cook with playing a key role in colonising Australia.

[ 24 ] The Aboriginal Captain Cook is attributed with bringing British rule to Australia, [ 25 ] but his arrival is not celebrated. More often within the Aboriginal telling, he proves to be a villain .

[ 24 ] The many Aboriginal versions of this Captain Cook are rarely oral recollections of encounters with the Lieutenant James Cook who first navigated and mapped Australia's east coast on HM Bark Endeavour in 1770.

Guugu Yimidhirr predecessors, along the Endeavour River , did encounter James Cook during a 7-week period beached at the site of the present town of Cooktown while the Endeavour was being repaired.

[ 26 ] From this time the Guugu Yimidhirr did receive present-day names for places occurring in their local landscape; and the Guugu Yimmidhir recollect this encounter.

The pan-Australian Captain Cook myth, however, tells of a generic, largely symbolic British character who arrives from across the oceans sometime after the Aboriginal world was formed and the original social order founded. This Captain Cook is a harbinger of dramatic transformations in the social order, bringing change and a different social order, into which present-day audiences have been born.

[ 24 ] (see above regarding this social function played by Aboriginal myths) In 1988 Australian anthropologist Kenneth Maddock assembled several versions of this Captain Cook myth as recorded from a number of Aboriginal groups around Australia.

[ 27 ] Included in his assemblage are: Batemans Bay, New South Wales : Percy Mumbulla told of Captain Cook's arriving on a large ship which anchored at Snapper Island , from which he disembarked to give the myth-teller's predecessors clothes (to wear) and hard biscuits (to eat). Then he returned to his ship and sailed away. Mumbulla told how his predecessors rejected Captain Cook's gifts, throwing them into the sea.

[ 28 ] Cardwell, Queensland : Chloe Grant and Rosie Runaway told of how Captain Cook and his group seemed to stand up out of the sea with the white skin of ancestral spirits, returning to their descendants. Captain Cook arrived first offering a pipe and tobacco to smoke (which was dismissed as a 'burning thing... stuck in his mouth'), then boiling a billy of tea (which was dismissed as scalding 'dirty water'), next baking flour on the coals (which was rejected as smelling 'stale' and thrown away untasted), finally boiling beef (which smelled well, and tasted okay, once the salty skin was wiped off). Captain Cook and group then left, sailing away to the north, leaving Chloe Grant and Rosie Runaway's predecessors beating the ground with their fists, fearfully sorry to see the spirits of their ancestors depart in this way.

[ 2 ] South-eastern side of the Gulf of Carpentaria , Queensland : Rolly Gilbert told of how Captain Cook and others sailed the oceans in a boat, and decided to come to see Australia. There he encountered a couple of Rolly's predecessors whom he first intended to shoot, but instead tricked them into revealing the local population's main camping area, after which they: [ 29 ] set up the people [cattle industry] to go down the countryside and shoot people down, just like animal, they left them lying there for the hawks and crows... So a lot of old people and young people were struck by the head with the end of a gun and left there. They wanted to get the people wiped out because Europeans in Queensland had to run their stock: horses and cattle.

Victoria River : it is told in a Captain Cook saga that Captain Cook sailed from London to Sydney to acquire land. Admiring the country, he landed bullocks and men with firearms , following which local Aboriginal peoples in the Sydney area were massacred. Captain Cook made his way to Darwin , where he sent armed horsemen to hunt down the Aboriginal people in the Victoria River country, founding the city of Darwin and giving police plus cattle station managers orders on how to treat Aboriginal people.

[ 30 ] Kimberley : Numerous Aboriginal myth-tellers say that Captain Cook is a European culture hero who landed in Australia. Using gunpowder, he set a precedent for the treatment of Aboriginal peoples throughout Australia, including the Kimberley. On returning to his home, he claimed he had not seen any Aboriginal peoples, and advised that the country was a vast and empty land which settlers could come and claim for themselves. In this myth, Captain Cook introduced 'Cook's Law', upon which the settlers rely. The Aboriginal people note, however, that this is a recent, unjust and false law compared to Aboriginal law.

[ 31 ] Views on death [ edit ] The response to death in Aboriginal religion may seem similar in some respects to that to be found in European traditions—notably in regard to the holding of a ceremony to mark the death of an individual and the observance of a period of mourning for that individual. Any such similarity, however, is, at best, only superficial (with ceremony and mourning of some kind being common to most, if not all, human cultures). In death—as in life—Aboriginal spirituality gives pre-eminence to the land and sees the deceased as linked indissolubly, by a web of subtle connections, to that greater whole: "For Aboriginal people when a person dies some form of the persons spirit and also their bones go back to the country they were born in".

[ 32 ] "Aborigine people [sic] believe that they share their being with their country and all that is within it". "So when a person dies their country suffers, trees die and become scarred because it is believed that they came into being because of the deceased person".

[ 32 ] When an Aboriginal person dies the families have death ceremonies called the "Sorry Business." During this time the person is mourned for days by the family and whole community, crying together and sharing their grief. Often the deceased person's family stay in one room and mourn together.

[ 33 ] Naming a person after their death is often taboo, as it is thought that it could disturb their spirit. Photos of the deceased are often not allowed, for the same reason. A smoking ceremony may be conducted, using smoke on the belongings and in the home of the deceased, which is believed to aid in releasing the spirit. The cause of death, often of a spiritual nature, may be determined by Aboriginal elders .

[ 33 ] Ceremonies and mourning periods can last days, weeks and even sometimes months depending upon the social status of the deceased person.  It is culturally inappropriate for a non-Aboriginal person to contact and inform the next of kin of a person's passing. When someone passes away, the family of the deceased move out of their house and another family then moves in. Some families will move to "sorry camps", which are usually further away. Mourning includes the recital of symbolic chants, the singing of songs, dance, body paint, and cuts on the bodies of the mourners. In some Aboriginal cultures, the body is placed on a raised platform for several months, covered in native plants, or in a cave or tree. When only the bones remain, family and friends scatter them in various ways, or place them in a special place.

[ 33 ] Many Aboriginal people believe in a place called the "Land of the Dead". This place was also commonly known as the "sky-world", which is really just the sky. As long as certain rituals were carried out during their life and at the time of their death, the deceased is allowed to enter The Land of the Dead in the "Sky World".  The spirit of the dead is also a part of different lands and sites and then those areas become sacred sites . This explains why the Aboriginal people are very protective of sites they call sacred.

The rituals that are performed enable an Aboriginal person to return to the womb of all time, which is "Dreamtime". It allows the spirit to be connected once more to all nature, to all their ancestors, and to their own personal meaning and place within the scheme of things. "The Dreamtime is a return to the real existence for the aborigine". "Life in time is simply a passing phase – a gap in eternity". It has a beginning and it has an end. "The experience of Dreamtime, whether through ritual or from dreams, flowed through into the life in time in practical ways". "The individual who enters the Dreamtime feels no separation between themselves and their ancestors". "The strengths and resources of the timeless enter into what is needed in the life of the present". "The future is less uncertain because the individual feels their life as a continuum linking past and future in unbroken connection". Through Dreamtime the limitations of time and space are overcome.

[ 34 ] For the Aboriginal people, dead relatives are very much a part of continuing life. It is believed that in dreams dead relatives communicate their presence." At times they may bring healing if the dreamer is in pain". "Death is seen as part of a cycle of life in which one emerges from Dreamtime through birth, and eventually returns to the timeless, only to emerge again. It is also a common belief that a person leaves their body during sleep, and temporarily enters the Dreamtime".

[ 34 ] Link to astronomy [ edit ] Further information: Australian Aboriginal astronomy There are many songlines which include reference to the stars, planets and the Moon, although the complex systems which go to make up Australian Aboriginal astronomy also serve practical purposes, such as navigation.

Group-specific mythology [ edit ] Yolngu [ edit ] Further information: Yolngu § Yolŋu culture, law and mythology Murrinh-Patha people [ edit ] Murrinh-Patha people's country [ 35 ] The Murrinh-Patha people (whose country is the saltwater country immediately inland from the town of Wadeye [ 35 ] ) describe a Dreamtime in their myths which anthropologists believe is a religious belief equivalent to, though wholly different from, most of the world's other significant religious beliefs.

[ 36 ] In particular, scholars suggest the Murrinh-Patha have a oneness of thought, belief, and expression unequalled within Christianity , as they see all aspects of their lives, thoughts and culture as under the continuing influence of their Dreaming.

[ 36 ] Within this Aboriginal religion, no distinction is drawn between things spiritual/ideal/mental and things material; nor is any distinction drawn between things sacred and things profane: rather all life is 'sacred', all conduct has 'moral' implication, and all life's meaning arises out of this eternal, everpresent Dreaming .

[ 36 ] In fact, the isomorphic fit between the natural and supernatural means that all nature is coded and charged by the sacred , while the sacred is everywhere within the physical landscape. Myths and mythic tracks cross over.. thousands of miles, and every particular form and feature of the terrain has a well-developed 'story' behind it.

[ 37 ] Animating and sustaining this Murrinh-patha mythology is an underlying philosophy of life that has been characterised by Stanner as a belief that life is "... a joyous thing with maggots at its centre." [ 36 ] Life is good and benevolent, but throughout life's journey, there are numerous painful sufferings that each individual must come to understand and endure as he grows. This is the underlying message repeatedly being told within the Murrinh-patha myths. It is this philosophy that gives Murrinh-patha people motive and meaning in life.

[ 36 ] The following Murrinh-patha myth, for instance, is performed in Murrinh-patha ceremonies to initiate young men into adulthood.

"A woman, Mutjinga (the 'Old Woman'), was in charge of young children, but instead of watching out for them during their parents' absence, she swallowed them and tried to escape as a giant snake. The people followed her, spearing her and removing the undigested children from the body." [ 38 ] Within the myth and in its performance, young, unadorned children must first be swallowed by an ancestral being (who transforms into a giant snake ), then regurgitated before being accepted as young adults with all the rights and privileges of young adults.

[ 39 ] Pintupi people [ edit ] Pintupi people's country Scholars of the Pintupi peoples (from within Australia's Gibson Desert region) believe they have a predominantly 'mythic' form of consciousness , [ 40 ] within which events occur and are explained by the preordained social structures and orders told of, sung about, and performed within their superhuman mythology, rather than by reference to the possible accumulated political actions, decisions and influences of local individuals (i.e. this understanding effectively 'erases' history).

[ 41 ] The Dreaming.. provides a moral authority lying outside the individual will and outside human creation.. although the Dreaming as an ordering of the cosmos is presumably a product of historical events, such an origin is denied.

These human creations are objectified – thrust out – into principles or precedents for the immediate world.. Consequently, current action is not understood as the result of human alliances, creations, and choices, but is seen as imposed by an embracing, cosmic order.

Within this Pintupi world view , three long geographical tracks of named places dominate, being interrelated strings of significant places named and created by mythic characters on their routes through the Pintupi desert region during the Dreaming. It is a complex mythology of narratives, songs and ceremonies known to the Pintupi as Tingarri . It is most completely told and performed by Pintupi peoples at larger gatherings within Pintupi country.

[ 42 ] Newer belief systems [ edit ] In principle, census information could identify the extent of traditional Aboriginal beliefs compared to other belief systems such as Christianity ; however the official census in Australia does not include traditional Aboriginal beliefs as a religion, and includes Torres Strait Islanders , a separate group of Indigenous Australians , in most of the counts.

[ 43 ] In the 1991 census, almost 74 percent of Aboriginal respondents identified with Christianity, up from 67 percent in the 1986 census. The wording of the question changed for the 1991 census; as the religion question is optional, the number of respondents reduced.

[ 44 ] The 1996 census reported that almost 72 percent of Aboriginal people practised some form of Christianity, and that 16 percent listed no religion. The 2001 census contained no comparable updated data.

[ 45 ] The Aboriginal population also includes a small number of followers of other mainstream religions.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] See also [ edit ] Australian Aboriginal culture Bush medicine Cultural landscape Indigenous Australians § Belief systems Indigenous Australian literature Indigenous Australian traditional custodianship Quinkan rock art Notes [ edit ] ^ See Lake Euramoo for an excerpt of the original myth, translated.

^ See Rainbow Serpent#External links .

Citations [ edit ] ^ Dixon 1972 , p. 29.

^ a b c d Dixon 1996 .

^ NASO .

^ AHD105689 .

^ Pannell 2006 , p. 11.

^ Nunn 2017 .

^ Cohen et al. 2017 , pp. 79–91.

^ Morris 1995 .

^ a b Berndt 1994 .

^ Van Gennep 1906 .

^ Horton, David (1994) Encyclopaedia of Aboriginal Australia ^ Donaldson 1994 .

^ Indymedia map .

^ Tindale map .

^ Smyth 1994 , pp. 3, 6.

^ Beckett 1994 , pp. 97–115.

^ Watson 1994 .

^ Sutton 2003 , pp. 113, 117.

^ Morris 1995 , p. 71.

^ Aboriginal Areas Protection Authority .

^ a b c Radcliffe-Brown 1926 , pp. 19–25.

^ Radcliffe-Brown 1926 , p. 22.

^ Maddock 1988 , p. 20.

^ a b c Maddock 1988 , p. 27.

^ Dixon 1996 , pp. 1–3.

^ Hough 1994 , pp. 150–155.

^ Maddock 1988 , pp. 13–19.

^ Robinson 1970 , pp. 29–30.

^ Maddock 1988 , p. 17.

^ Rose 1984 , pp. 24–39.

^ Kolig 1980 , pp. 23–27.

^ a b Bird Rose 2003 , pp. 163–168.

^ a b c Korff 2019 .

^ a b Dream Beliefs .

^ a b de Brabander 1994 .

^ a b c d e Yengoyan 1979 .

^ Yengoyan 1979 , p. 406.

^ Stanner 1966 , pp. 40–43, as summarised and cited by Koepping 1981 , p. 378 ^ Koepping 1981 , pp. 377–378.

^ Rumsey 1994 , pp. 116–128.

^ Myers 1986 .

^ De Brabander 1984 .

^ Household Census form 2001 .

^ ABoS 4102.0 1994 .

^ ABoS 2901.0 1996 .

^ Mercer 2003 .

^ Marks 2003 .

Bibliography [ edit ] "2001 Census of Population and Housing - 2001 Census Household Form" (PDF) .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . 2001. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 January 2020 . Retrieved 16 January 2020 .

"2901.0 - Census Dictionary" .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . 1996.

"Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people" .

4102.0 - Australian Social Trends, 1994 .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . 27 May 1994 . Retrieved 2 November 2006 .

Beckett, J. (1994). "Aboriginal Histories, Aboriginal Myths: an Introduction".

Oceania .

65 (2): 97– 115.

doi : 10.1002/j.1834-4461.1994.tb02493.x .

JSTOR 40331425 .

Berndt, C. (1994). "Mythology". In Horton, David (ed.).

Encyclopaedia of Aboriginal Australia . Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press.

ISBN 0-85575-234-3 .

Berndt, R. M.; Berndt, C. H (1989).

The Speaking Land: Myth and Story in Aboriginal Australia . Melbourne: Penguin.

ISBN 978-0892815180 .

Bird Rose, Deborah (2003).

Experiences of Place (Religions of the World) . Harvard University Press. pp.

163– 168.

ISBN 978-0945454380 .

de Brabander, Dallas (1994). "Murrinh-patha". In Horton, David (ed.).

Encyclopaedia of Aboriginal Australia . Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press.

ISBN 0-85575-234-3 .

Cohen, Benjamin E.; Mark, Darren F.; Fallon, Stewart J.; Stephenson, P. Jon (1 April 2017).

"Holocene-Neogene volcanism in northeastern Australia: Chronology and eruption history" (PDF) .

Quaternary Geochronology .

39 : 79– 91.

Bibcode : 2017QuGeo..39...79C .

doi : 10.1016/j.quageo.2017.01.003 .

ISSN 1871-1014 .

Cowan, James (1994).

Myths of the dreaming: interpreting Aboriginal legends . Roseville, N. S. W.: Unity Press.

ISBN 978-1853270857 .

Crisp, Tony.

"Australian Aborigine Dream Beliefs" .

dreamhawk.com . Retrieved 4 May 2017 .

De Brabander, Dallas (1984). "Pintupi". In Horton, David (ed.).

Encyclopaedia of Aboriginal Australia . Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press.

ISBN 0-85575-234-3 .

Dixon, R. M. W (1972).

The Dyirbal Language of North Queensland . Cambridge University Press. p. 29.

Dixon, R. M. W.

(1996). "Origin legends and linguistic relationships".

Oceania .

67 (2): 127– 140.

doi : 10.1002/j.1834-4461.1996.tb02587.x .

JSTOR 40331537 .

Donaldson, T. J. (1994). "Tribal Names". In Horton, David (ed.).

Encyclopaedia of Aboriginal Australia . Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press.

ISBN 0-85575-234-3 .

Elkin, A. P (1938). "Studies in Australian Totemism. Monograph No. 2".

Oceania .

Haviland, John B.; Hart, Roger (1998).

Old Man Fog and the Last Aborigines of Barrow Point . Bathurst: Crawford House Publishing.

ISBN 1-86333-169-7 .

Hiatt, L.

(1975).

Australian Aboriginal Mythology: Essays in Honour of W. E. H. Stanner . Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies.

Horton, David, ed. (1994). "Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander History, Society, and Culture".

Encyclopaedia of Aboriginal Australia . Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press.

ISBN 0-85575-234-3 .

Hough, Richard (1994).

Captain James Cook: a biography . London: Hodder and Stoughton. pp.

150– 155.

ISBN 0-340-58598-6 .

"Indymedia map" .

indymedia.org . Archived from the original on 24 October 2009.

Isaacs, J. (1980).

Australian Dreaming: 40,000 Years of Aboriginal History . Sydney: Lansdowne Press.

ISBN 0-7018-1330-X .

Koepping, Klaus-Peter (1981). "Religion in Aboriginal Australia".

Religion . Vol. 11. pp.

367– 391.

Kolig, Erich (1980). "Captain Cook in the Kimberley's". In Berndt, R. M.; Berndt, C. H. (eds.).

Aborigines of the West: Their Past and Their Present . St Lucia: University of Western Australia Press. pp.

23– 27.

Korff, Jens (2 October 2019).

"Mourning an Aboriginal death" .

Creative Spirits . Retrieved 4 May 2017 .

Maddock, K.

(1988). "Myth, History and a Sense of Oneself". In Beckett, J. R. (ed.).

Past and Present: The Construction of Aboriginality . Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press. pp.

11– 30.

ISBN 0-85575-190-8 .

Marks, Kathy (28 February 2003).

"Militant Aborigines embrace Islam to seek empowerment" .

The Independent . London.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2008 . Retrieved 12 December 2007 .

Mercer, Phil (31 March 2003).

"Aborigines turn to Islam" .

BBC News . Retrieved 12 December 2007 .

Morphy, H (1992).

Ancestral Connections . Chicago: University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 978-0226538662 .

Morris, C. (1994). "Oral Literature". In Horton, David (ed.).

Encyclopaedia of Aboriginal Australia . Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press.

ISBN 0-85575-234-3 .

Morris, C. (1995). "An Approach to Ensure Continuity and Transmission of the Rainforest Peoples' Oral Tradition". In Fourmile, Henrietta; Schnierer, Stephan; Smith, Arthur (eds.).

An Identification of Problems and Potential for Future Rainforest Aboriginal Cultural Survival and Self-Determination in the Wet Tropics . Cairns: Centre for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Participation Research and Development, James Cook University – via Trove .

Mountford, C. P (1985).

The Dreamtime Book: Australian Aboriginal Myths . Louis Braille Productions.

Myers, Fred R. (1986).

Pintupi Country, Pintubi Self: Sentiment, Place and Politics among Western Desert Aborigines . Canberra & Washington: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies & Smithsonian Institution.

ISBN 978-0520074118 .

"Ngadjonjii Antiquity and Social Organisation" . Archived from the original on 2 February 2008 . Retrieved 25 December 2007 .

Nunn, Patrick D. (22 August 2017).

"When the Bullin shrieked: Aboriginal memories of volcanic eruptions thousands of years ago" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 15 June 2018 .

Pannell, Sandra (2006).

Reconciling Nature and Culture in a Global Context? Lessons form the World Heritage List . Research Report No. 48. Cairns: Cooperative Research Centre for Tropical Rainforest Ecology and Management. p. 11.

ISBN 0-86443-766-8 . Archived from the original on 3 March 2016.

Parker, K. Langloh (1896).

Australian Legendary Tales (1st ed.). Melbourne: Melville, Mullen and Slade.

Pohlner, Peter (1986).

gangarru . Milton, Queensland: Hopevale Mission Board.

ISBN 1-86252-311-8 .

"Queensland's wet tropical forests (Place ID 105689)" .

Australian Heritage Database .

Australian Government .

Radcliffe-Brown, A. R.

(1926). "The Rainbow-Serpent Myth of Australia".

The Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland .

56 : 19– 25.

doi : 10.2307/2843596 .

JSTOR 2843596 .

Robinson, Roland (1970).

Alteringa and Other Aboriginal Poems . Sydney: A. H. and A. W. Reed. pp.

29– 30.

Rose, Deborah (1984). "The Saga of Captain Cook: Morality in Aboriginal and European Law".

Australian Aboriginal Studies .

2 : 24– 39.

Roth, W. E.

(1984) [First published 1897].

The Queensland Aborigines (Facsimile ed.). Victoria Park, W. A.: Hesperian Press.

ISBN 0-85905-054-8 .

Rumsey, Allen (1994). "The Dreaming, human agency and inscriptive practice".

Oceania .

65 (2): 116– 128.

doi : 10.1002/j.1834-4461.1994.tb02494.x .

"Sacred sites" .

Aboriginal Areas Protection Authority . Northern Territory Government. 2 July 2014 . Retrieved 12 February 2020 .

Smith, W. Ramsay (2003).

Myths and legends of the Australian aborigines . Mineola, NY: Dover Publications.

ISBN 0-486-42709-9 .

OCLC 51800252 .

Smyth, Dermot (1994).

Understanding Country: The Importance of Land and Sea in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Societies . Key Issue Paper 1. Canberra: Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation. pp. 3, 6.

Stanner, W. E. H.

(1966).

On aboriginal religion . Oceania Monograph No. 11. Sydney: Oceania Publications.

Sutton, Peter (1988). "Myth as History, History as Myth". In Keen, I (ed.).

Being Black: Aboriginal Cultures in 'Settled' Australia . Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press. pp.

251– 268.

ISBN 978-0855751852 .

Sutton, Peter (2003).

Native Title in Australia: An Ethnographic Perspective . Cambridge University Press. pp. 113, 117.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511481635 .

ISBN 0-521-81258-5 .

Tindale, Norman .

"Earlier map" .

Government of South Australia . Archived from the original on 16 March 2008.

Van Gennep, A (1906).

Mythes et Legendes d'Australie (in French). Paris.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Watson, M. (1994). "Storytelling". In Horton, David (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Aboriginal Australia: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander History, Society, and Culture . Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press.

Yengoyan, Aram A. (1979). "Economy, Society, and Myth in Aboriginal Australia".

Annual Review of Anthropology .

8 : 393– 415.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.an.08.100179.002141 .

JSTOR 2155626 .

Further reading [ edit ] Waterman, Patricia Panyity (1987).

A Tale-type Index of Australian Aboriginal Oral Narratives . Folklore Fellows’ Communications. Vol. 238. Academia scientiarum Fennica.

ISBN 9789514105319 .

"Dreamtime Stories and The Dreaming in Aboriginal Art" .

ARTARK . Retrieved 28 August 2023 .

| External links [ edit ] Library resources about Australian Aboriginal religion and mythology Resources in your library Resources in other libraries "Dust Echoes" .

ABC Education . Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 16 May 2017.

a series of twelve beautifully animated Dreamtime stories from Central Arnhem Land ...

− 12 Episodes, each with accompanying Study Guide: Whirlpool, Mermaid, Brolga, Morning Star, Namorrodor, Curse, Moon Man, Be, Spear, Wawalag (or Wagalak) sisters, Bat and the Butterfly, and Mimis.

Yolngu mythology.

Australian Government 'portal' on Aboriginal 'Dreamings' and associated mythology Ngadjonji Antiquity and Social Organisation Ngadjonji History of the Rainforest People v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights v t e Religion in Australia Aboriginal Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Protestantism Anglicanism Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Neopaganism Sikhism Irreligion v t e Oceanian religion and mythology Mythology  by region Australian Aboriginal religion and mythology Melanesian mythology Micronesian mythology Polynesian mythology Chatham Islands Cook Islands Easter Island Fiji Hawaii Mangareva Islands Marquesas Islands Nauru New Zealand Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tahiti and Society Islands Tikopia Tonga Tuamotu Vanuatu Oceanian gods Australian Aboriginal gods Hawaiian gods Māori gods Polynesian gods Tahiti and Society Islands gods Oceanian goddesses Australian Aboriginal goddesses Māori goddesses Polynesian goddesses Tahiti and Society Islands goddesses Creatures & spirits Australian legendary creatures Māori legendary creatures Oceanian legendary creatures Ghosts in Polynesian culture v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐bmwff
Cached time: 20250817222408
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.001 seconds
Real time usage: 1.225 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8092/1000000
Revision size: 50113/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 392606/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10079/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 201270/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.567/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8343279/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  851.711      1 -total
 18.13%  154.446     62 Template:Sfn
 15.41%  131.280     27 Template:Cite_book
 12.63%  107.536     11 Template:Cite_web
  8.42%   71.677      1 Template:Mythology
  8.20%   69.866      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.54%   64.247      1 Template:Short_description
  5.69%   48.452      1 Template:Religion_topics
  5.37%   45.756      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  4.88%   41.528      8 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:94155:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222408 and revision id 1295969978. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Australian_Aboriginal_religion_and_mythology&oldid=1295969978 " Category : Australian Aboriginal mythology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2021 Use Australian English from May 2013 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 00:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Australian Aboriginal religion and mythology 22 languages Add topic

