Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Subtypes 2 Gallery 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Altocumulus cloud 50 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano Kaszëbsczi Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Altocumulus ) Genus of mid-level cloud Altocumulus clouds Altocumulus cloud formation Abbreviation Ac Symbol Genus alto-, meaning high, and cumulo-, meaning heap Species Castellanus Floccus Lenticularis Stratiformis Volutus Variety Duplicatus Lacunosus Opacus Perlucidus Radiatus Translucidus Undulatus Altitude 2,000–7,000 m (7,000–23,000 ft) Classification Family B (Medium-level) Appearance Middle-altitude Stratocumulus clouds arranged in groups or rolls. Has smaller clouds separate from each other Precipitation Virga only Altocumulus (from Latin altus ' high ' and cumulus ' heaped ' ) [ 1 ] is a middle-altitude cloud genus that belongs mainly to the stratocumuliform physical category, characterized by globular masses or rolls in layers or patches – the individual elements being larger and darker than those of cirrocumulus and smaller than those of stratocumulus .

[ 2 ] However, if the layers become tufted in appearance due to increased airmass instability, then the altocumulus clouds become more purely cumuliform in structure.  Like other cumuliform and stratocumuliform clouds, altocumulus signifies convection . A sheet of partially conjoined altocumulus perlucidus is sometimes found preceding a weakening warm front , where the altostratus is starting to fragment, resulting in patches of altocumulus perlucidus between the areas of altostratus. Altocumulus is also commonly found between the warm and cold fronts in a depression, although this is often hidden by lower clouds.

Some Altocumulus floccus clouds in a gold tinge due to Rayleigh scattering in Norah Head .

Towering altocumulus, known as altocumulus castellanus , frequently signals the development of thunderstorms later in the day, as it shows instability and convection in the middle levels of the troposphere , the area where towering cumulus clouds can turn into cumulonimbus .

[ 3 ] It is therefore one of three warning clouds often recorded by the aviation industry, the other two being towering cumulus and cumulonimbus.

[ 3 ] Altocumulus generally forms at about 2,000 to 6,100 m (6,600 to 20,000 ft) above ground level, a similar level to altostratus formations, and satellite photography reveals that the two types of cloud can create formations that can stretch for thousands of square miles.

[ 4 ] Extensive altocumulus formations, particularly if they take the form of undulatus, are often referred to as altocumulus mackerel sky .

Subtypes [ edit ] Middle cloud weather map symbols: Includes middle-étage and downward growing vertical.

Species:  Altocumulus has four species.  The stratiformis species (Ac str) is composed of sheets or relatively flat patches of stratocumuliform cloud.  The synoptic coding is determined by the predominant variety or occasionally by the genitus mother cloud. Altocumulus lenticularis (Ac len lenticular cloud ) is a lens-shaped middle cloud which can resemble flying saucers and may occasionally be mistaken for " unidentified flying objects ". This is formed by uplift usually associated with mountains. but usually with at least some grey shading. It is coded C M 4 on the SYNOP weather observation. Grey shading is also seen with altocumulus castellanus (Ac cas), a turreted middle cloud that can achieve significant vertical development and signals increasing air mass instability. It is nevertheless usually classified as middle rather than vertical and is coded C M 8. The floccus species (Ac flo) is a tufted middle cloud which is also associated with greater instability. It shares the same code C M 8. Chaotic altocumulus, which is typically poorly defined with multiple species or transitional forms arranged in several layers, [ 5 ] is coded C M 9.

Opacity-based varieties:  Altocumulus stratiformis has three opacity-based varieties; Translucidus (C M 3), perlucidus (C M 3 or 7 depending on predominant opacity), and opacus (C M 7). Varieties based on opacity are not commonly associated with the species lenticularis, castellanus, or floccus.

Pattern-based varieties: Radiatus (arranged in parallel bands) is sometimes seen with the stratformis and castellanus species.  Altocumulus stratiformis radiatus of any opacity is coded C M 5 if it is increasing in amount.  The duplicatus or undulatus varieties are occasionally seen with the stratiformis and lenticularis species.

[ 6 ] Altocumulus stratiformis duplicatus is coded C M 7 if it is not overridden by another coding of higher importance.

Lacunosus is very occasionally associated with altocumulus of the species stratiformis, castellanus, or floccus.

Precipitation-based supplementary feature: Altocumulus often produces virga but usually not precipitation that reaches the ground.

Cloud-based supplementary feature: Mamma caused by localized downdrafts in the cloud layer are occasionally seen with altocumulus.

[ 7 ] A newly recognized type is the asperitas feature that is characterized by chaotic undulations caused by severe wind shear.

Genitus Mother clouds: Altocumulus stratiformis cumulogenitus or cumulonimbogenitus can form when the middle or upper part of a towering free convective cloud begins to spread horizontally due to a loss of convective lift.  It is coded C M 6.

Mutatus mother clouds: Altocumulus can form due to the complete transformation of cirrocumulus, altostratus, nimbostratus, or stratocumulus.

Gallery [ edit ] Altocumulus perlucidus Altocumulus lenticularis Altocumulus at sunset Altocumulus floccus with line of castellanus Altocumulus undulatus during a cold front Altocumulus mammatus Altocumulus stratiformis radiatus See also [ edit ] Atmospheric convection Mackerel sky References [ edit ] ^ "Weather Facts: Altocumulus" . WeatherOnline . Retrieved 2015-02-03 .

^ "Altocumulus, International Cloud Atlas".

Manual on the Observation of Clouds and Other Meteors . Vol. I.

World Meteorological Organization . 1975. pp.

31– 35.

ISBN 92-63-10407-7 . Retrieved 2014-08-26 .

^ a b "Altocumulus Castellanus" .

Clouds . TheAirlinePilots.com.

^ "Altocumulus" .

Clouds . TheAirlinePilots.com.

^ World Meteorological Organization , ed. (1975).

Species, International Cloud Atlas . Vol. I. pp.

17–20 .

ISBN 92-63-10407-7 . Retrieved 26 August 2014 .

^ World Meteorological Organization, ed. (1975).

Varieties, International Cloud Atlas (PDF) . pp.

20– 22. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 July 2016 . Retrieved 26 August 2014 .

^ World Meteorological Organization , ed. (1975).

Features, International Cloud Atlas . Vol. I. pp.

22–24 .

ISBN 92-63-10407-7 . Retrieved 26 August 2014 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Altocumulus clouds .

International Cloud Atlas – Altocumulus Archived 2011-10-08 at the Wayback Machine Clouds-Online.com Cloud Atlas with many photos and description of the different cloud genus National Science Digital Library – Altocumulus Altocumulus Archived 2006-10-17 at the Wayback Machine WW2010: University of Illinois v t e Cloud genera and selected species, supplementary features, and other airborne hydrometeors - WMO Latin terminology except where indicated Mesospheric Extreme-level 80–85 km Noctilucent (NLC) Polar mesospheric clouds Noctilucent type I veils Noctilucent type II bands Noctilucent type III billows Noctilucent type IV whirls Stratospheric Very high-level 15–30 km Nacreous polar stratospheric clouds (PSC) Cirriform nacreous Lenticular nacreous Nitric acid and water polar stratospheric clouds (PSC) No differentiated sub-types; tends to resemble cirrostratus Tropospheric High-level 3–18 km Cirrus (Ci) Species Cirrus castellanus (Ci cas) Cirrus fibratus (Ci fib) Cirrus floccus (Ci flo) Cirrus spissatus (Ci spa) Cirrus uncinus (Ci unc) Ci-only varieties Cirrus intortus (Ci in) Cirrus vertebratus (Ci ve) Cirrocumulus (Cc) Species Cirrocumulus castellanus (Cc cas) Cirrocumulus floccus (Cc flo) Cirrocumulus lenticularis (Cc len) Cirrocumulus stratiformis (Cc str) Cirrostratus (Cs) Species Cirrostratus fibratus (Cs fib) Cirrostratus nebulosus (Cs neb) High-level-only mutatus cloud Mutatus non-height specific (see below) Medium-level 2–8 km Altocumulus (Ac) Species Altocumulus castellanus (Ac cas) Altocumulus floccus (Ac flo) Altocumulus lacunosus (Ac la) Altocumulus lenticularis (Ac len) Altocumulus stratiformis (Ac str) Altocumulus volutus (Ac vol) Altostratus (As) Altostratus undulatus Nimbostratus (Ns) Multi-level Varieties Nimbostratus virga (Ns vir) Low-level 0–2 km Cumulonimbus (Cb) Towering vertical Species Cumulonimbus calvus (Cb cal) Cumulonimbus capillatus (Cb cap) Cb-only supplementary features Cumulonimbus cauda ((cau) Tail cloud) Cumulonimbus incus (inc) Cumulonimbus murus ((mur) Wall cloud) Cb-only accessories and other Cumulonimbus flumen ((Cb flu) Beaver tail) Overshooting top Hot tower Cumulus (Cu) Variable vertical extent Species Fractus Cumulus humilis (Cu hum) Cumulus mediocris (Cu med) ( Cumulus congestus (Cu con) ( Cumulus castellanus (unofficial alternative name for Cu con)) ( ICAO term for Cu con and "Cu cas" is  Towering cumulus [Tcu])) Other Horseshoe Trade wind cumulus Stratus (St) Species Stratus fractus (St fra) Stratus nebulosus (St neb) St-only genitus cloud and other Stratus silvagenitus (St sil) Fog (Fg) Surface level Stratocumulus (Sc) Species Stratocumulus castellanus (Sc cas) Stratocumulus floccus (Sc flo) Stratocumulus lenticularis (Sc len) Stratocumulus stratiformis (Sc str) Stratocumulus Undulatus Stratocumulus volutus (Sc vol) Low-level-only supplementary features Arcus ((arc) Shelf) Tuba ((tub) Funnel cloud) Low-level-only accessory cloud and other Pileus (pil) Velum (vel) Pannus (pan) Other- Actinoform cloud (Stratocumulus) Non-height specific Varieties Duplicatus (du) Lacunosus (la) Opacus (op) Perlucidus (pe) Radiatus (ra) Translucidus (tr) Undulatus (un) Supplementary features Asperitas (asp) Cavum (cav) Fluctus (flu) Mamma (mam) Praecipitatio (pra) Virga (vir) Mother clouds and human-made clouds (Mother cloud)+genitus (e.g. cumulogenitus (cugen) (Mother cloud)+mutatus (e.g. cumulomutatus (cumut) Homogenitus (hogen) Homomutatus (homut) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Altocumulus_cloud&oldid=1305252377 " Category : Cumulus Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 00:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Altocumulus cloud 50 languages Add topic

