Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Lists 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Fauna of Iceland 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Native animals of  Iceland The fauna of Iceland is the animal life which resides on the island of Iceland and its coasts, located in the north Atlantic Ocean just south of the Arctic Circle . This fauna includes a number of birds , mammals , fish , and invertebrates . The Arctic fox is the only land mammal native to Iceland, although a number of other mammals have been introduced following the human settlement of Iceland .

Overview [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Wildlife of Iceland § Fauna .

[ edit ] Arctic fox in summer coat The only native land mammal on Iceland is the Arctic fox .

[ 1 ] Walruses were native to Iceland, but disappeared after human settlement, likely as a result of hunting, climate change and/or volcanism.

[ 2 ] Polar bears have been known to occasionally visit the island, mostly drifting there from Greenland . However, sightings of polar bears are rare, and those that are seen are usually killed for reasons of public safety.

[ 3 ] Animals that have been introduced include the American mink , which escaped from fur farms and prospered, and the reindeer . A herd of reindeer in the southeast has died out but a larger herd in the northeast has a population of several thousand animals. The wood mouse has also been introduced and inhabits the countryside, with the house mouse , the brown rat and the black rat being restricted to urban areas.

[ 4 ] Bats have been increasingly recorded where they are thought to be either vagrants or artificially introduced.

[ 5 ] Great skua About 72 species of bird breed on Iceland. These include the gyrfalcon , the white-tailed eagle , the merlin , the snowy owl and the short-eared owl . There are also ducks , geese , waders , gulls and other sea birds, the Arctic skua and the great skua , with the Icelandic population of the latter representing almost half of the total world population. There are few passerines (perching birds), perhaps because of a lack of nesting opportunities or a dearth of insect food at some times of year.

[ 4 ] The rivers and lakes are home to Atlantic salmon , brown trout and Arctic char , as well as European eel and three-spined stickleback , and there are rainbow trout which have escaped from fish hatcheries . No species of reptiles or amphibians are known to live on Iceland.

[ 4 ] Around 270 species of marine fish occur in the waters around Iceland, with the most important commercial species being cod , haddock , sea perch , plaice , herring , capelin and blue whiting . The harbour seal and the grey seal breed on beaches and several species of whale occur in the waters, as well as dolphins and harbour porpoises .

[ 4 ] Lists [ edit ] List of birds of Iceland List of Lepidoptera of Iceland List of mammals of Iceland List of freshwater fishes of Iceland See also [ edit ] Outline of Iceland Wildlife of Iceland References [ edit ] ^ Evans, Andrew (2008).

Iceland . Bradt Travel Guides. pp.

47– 60.

ISBN 978-1-84162-215-6 .

^ Keighley, Xénia; Pálsson, Snæbjörn; Einarsson, Bjarni F; Petersen, Aevar; Fernández-Coll, Meritxell; Jordan, Peter; Tange Olsen, Morten; Malmquist, Hilmar J (2019-09-12). Nowick, Katja (ed.).

"Disappearance of Icelandic walruses coincided with Norse settlement" .

Molecular Biology and Evolution .

36 (12): 2656– 2667.

doi : 10.1093/molbev/msz196 .

ISSN 0737-4038 .

PMC 6878957 .

PMID 31513267 .

^ "Killing polar bears in Iceland "only logical thing to do" " .

icelandmonitor.mbl.is . Retrieved 15 December 2020 .

^ a b c d "Biological Diversity in Iceland" (PDF) . Convention on Biological Diversity. 2001 . Retrieved 5 November 2018 .

^ Petersen, Aevar; Jensen, Jens-Kjeld; Jenkins, Paulina; Bloch, Dorete; Ingimarsson, Finnur (2014).

"A Review of the Occurrence of Bats (Chiroptera) on Islands in the North East Atlantic and on North Sea Installations" .

Acta Chiropterologica .

16 : 169– 195.

doi : 10.3161/150811014X683381 .

hdl : 10141/622681 .

S2CID 86008251 .

v t e Fauna of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard This Iceland -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fauna_of_Iceland&oldid=1282156904 " Categories : Fauna of Iceland Iceland stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts All stub articles This page was last edited on 24 March 2025, at 18:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fauna of Iceland 1 language Add topic

