Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation 2 Classification 3 Interpretation 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Mylonite 29 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Italiano Қазақша Кыргызча Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Metamorphic rock An amphibolitic mylonite showing a number of (rotated) porphyroclasts : a clear red garnet left in the picture while smaller white feldspar porphyroclasts can be found  all over. Location: the tectonic contact between the ( autochthonous ) Western Gneiss Region and rocks of the ( allochthonous ) Blåhø nappe on Otrøy , Caledonides , Central Norway .

A mylonite (through a petrographic microscope ) showing rotated so-called δ-clasts. The clasts show that the shear was dextral in this particular cut.

Strona -Cenery zone, Southern Alps , Italy .

Mylonite, Owl Mountains , Poland Mylonite is a fine-grained, compact metamorphic rock produced by dynamic recrystallization of the constituent minerals resulting in a reduction of the grain size of the rock. Mylonites can have many different mineralogical compositions; it is a classification based on the textural appearance of the rock.

Formation [ edit ] Mylonites are ductilely deformed rocks formed by the accumulation of large shear strain , in ductile fault zones. There are many different views on the formation of mylonites, but it is generally agreed that crystal-plastic deformation must have occurred, and that fracturing and cataclastic flow are secondary processes in the formation of mylonites. Mechanical abrasion of grains by milling does not occur, although this was originally thought to be the process that formed mylonites, which were named from the Greek μύλος mylos , meaning mill.

[ 1 ] Mylonites form at depths of no less than 4 km.

[ 2 ] There are many different mechanisms that accommodate crystal-plastic deformation. In crustal rocks the most important processes are dislocation creep and diffusion creep . Dislocation generation acts to increase the internal energy of crystals. This effect is compensated through grain-boundary-migration recrystallization which reduces the internal energy by increasing the grain boundary area and reducing the grain volume, storing energy at the mineral grain surface. This process tends to organize dislocations into subgrain boundaries . As more dislocations are added to subgrain boundaries, the misorientation across that subgrain boundary will increase until the boundary becomes a high-angle boundary and the subgrain effectively becomes a new grain. This process, sometimes referred to as subgrain rotation recrystallization , [ 3 ] acts to reduce the mean grain size. Volume and grain-boundary diffusion, the critical mechanisms in diffusion creep, become important at high temperatures and small grain sizes. Thus some researchers have argued that as mylonites are formed by dislocation creep and dynamic recrystallization, a transition to diffusion creep can occur once the grain size is reduced sufficiently.

Peridotitic mylonite in a petrographic microscope Mylonites generally develop in ductile shear zones where high rates of strain are focused. They are the deep crustal counterparts to cataclastic brittle faults that create fault breccias .

[ 4 ] Classification [ edit ] Blastomylonites are coarse grained, often sugary in appearance without distinct tectonic banding .

Ultramylonites usually have undergone extreme grainsize reduction. In structural geology , ultramylonite is a kind of mylonite defined by modal percentage of matrix grains [ clarify ] more than 90%.

[ 4 ] Ultramylonite is often hard, dark, cherty to flinty in appearance and sometimes resemble pseudotachylite and obsidian . In reverse, ultramylonite-like rocks are sometimes "deformed pseudotachylyte".

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Mesomylonites have undergone an appreciable amount of grainsize reduction, and are defined by their modal percentage of matrix grains being between 50 and 90%.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Protomylonites are mylonites which have experienced limited grainsize reduction, and are defined by their modal percentage of matrix grains being less than 50%. Because mylonitisation is incomplete in these rocks, relict grains and textures are apparent, and some protomylonites can resemble foliated cataclasite or even some schists .

Phyllonites are phyllosilicate (e.g., chlorite or mica )-rich mylonites. They typically have a well-developed secondary shear (C') fabric .

Interpretation [ edit ] Determining the displacements that occur in mylonite zones depends on correctly determining the orientations of the finite strain axis and inferring how those orientations change with respect to the incremental strain axis. This is referred to as determining the shear sense. It is common practice to assume that the deformation is plane strain simple shear deformation. This type of strain field assumes that deformation occurs in a tabular zone where displacement is parallel to the shear zone boundary. Furthermore, during deformation the incremental strain axis maintains a 45-degree angle to the shear zone boundary. The finite strain axes are initially parallel to the incremental axis, but rotate away during progressive deformation.

Kinematic indicators are structures in mylonites that allow the sense of shear to be determined. Most kinematic indicators are based on deformation in simple shear and infer sense of rotation of the finite strain axes with respect to the incremental strain axes. Because of the constraints imposed by simple shear, displacement is assumed to occur in the foliation plane in a direction parallel to the mineral stretching lineation. Therefore, a plane parallel to the lineation and perpendicular to the foliation is viewed to determine the shear sense.

The most common shear sense indicators are C/S fabrics, asymmetric porphyroclasts, vein and dike arrays, mantled porphyroclasts and mineral fibers. All of these indicators have a monoclinic symmetry which is directly related to the orientations of the finite strain axes. Although structures like asymmetric folds and boudinages are also related to the orientations of the finite strain axes, these structures can form from distinct strain paths and are not reliable kinematic indicators.

References [ edit ] ^ Lapworth, C. (1885). "The highland controversy in British geology; its causes, course and consequence".

Nature .

32 : 558– 559.

^ Mylonitic marble , alexstreckeisen.it ^ Urai J.L.; Means W.D.; Lister G.S.

"Dynamic recrystallization of minerals" . Archived from the original on 5 September 2019 . Retrieved 9 July 2016 .

^ a b Sibson R.H. (1977).

"Fault rocks and fault mechanisms" (PDF) .

Journal of the Geological Society of London .

133 (3): 191– 213.

Bibcode : 1977JGSoc.133..191S .

doi : 10.1144/gsjgs.133.3.0191 .

S2CID 131446805 .

^ Passchier C.W. (1982).

"Pseudotachylyte and the development of ultramylonite bands in the Saint-Barthelemy Massif, French Pyrenees" .

Journal of Structural Geology .

4 (1): 69– 79.

Bibcode : 1982JSG.....4...69P .

doi : 10.1016/0191-8141(82)90008-6 .

^ White J.C. (1996). "Transient discontinuities revisited: pseudotachylyte, plastic instability and the influence of low pore fluid pressure on deformation processes in the mid-crust".

Journal of Structural Geology .

18 (12): 1471– 1486.

Bibcode : 1996JSG....18.1471W .

doi : 10.1016/S0191-8141(96)00059-4 .

^ Takagi H.; Goto K.; Shigematsu N. (2000).

"Ultramylonite bands derived from cataclasite and pseudotachylyte in granites, northeast Japan" .

Journal of Structural Geology .

22 (9): 1325– 1339.

Bibcode : 2000JSG....22.1325T .

doi : 10.1016/S0191-8141(00)00034-1 .

^ Ueda T.; Obata M.; Di Toro G.; Kanagawa K.; Ozawa K. (2008).

"Mantle earthquakes frozen in mylonitized ultramafic pseudotachylytes of spinel-lherzolite facies" (PDF) .

Geology .

36 (8): 607– 610.

Bibcode : 2008Geo....36..607U .

doi : 10.1130/G24739A.1 .

^ Passchier C.W.; Trouw R.A.J. (2013).

Microtectonics . Springer. p. 106.

ISBN 978-3-662-08734-3 .

^ Trouw R.A.J.; Passchier C.W.; Wiersma D.J. (2009).

Atlas of Mylonites- and related microstructures . Springer.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-03608-8 .

ISBN 978-3-642-03607-1 .

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Mylonite ".

Mylonite photo gallery Archived 2020-11-08 at the Wayback Machine v t e Structural geology Underlying theory Deformation mechanism Lamé's stress ellipsoid Mohr–Coulomb theory Mohr's circle Overburden pressure Rock mechanics Strain Strain partitioning Stress Stress field Tension Measurement conventions Brunton compass Inclinometer Orthographic projection Rake Stereographic projection Strike and dip Large-scale tectonics Accretionary wedge Allochthon Autochthon Back-arc basin Continental collision Convergent boundary Décollement Divergent boundary Extensional tectonics Fault block Fenster Fold and thrust belt Fold mountains Foreland basin Graben Half-graben Horse Horst Horst and graben Intra-arc basin Inversion Klippe List of tectonic plate interactions Mélange Mountain formation Nappe Obduction Orogeny Passive margin Plate tectonics Pull-apart basin Rift valley Rift Saddle Strike-slip tectonics Structural basin Suture Syneclise Terrane Thick-skinned deformation Thin-skinned deformation Thrust tectonics Fracturing Columnar jointing Dike Exfoliation joint Fissure Joint Vein Faulting Asperity Cataclasite Cataclastic rock Detachment fault Disturbance Fault friction Fault mechanics Fault scarp Fault trace Thrust fault Transfer zone Transform fault Foliation and lineation Cleavage Compaction Crenulation Fissility Oblique foliation Pressure solution Rock microstructure Slickenside Stylolite Tectonic phase Tectonite Folding Anticline Chevron Detachment fold Dome Homocline Monocline Syncline Vergence Boudinage Competence Kinematic analysis 3D fold evolution Paleostress inversion Paleostress Section restoration Shear zone Mylonite Pure shear Shear Category v t e Types of rocks Igneous rock Adakite Alkali feldspar granite Andesite Anorthosite Aplite Basalt Alkali basalt Picrite basalt Basaltic trachyandesite Mugearite Shoshonite Basanite Blairmorite Boninite Carbonatite Charnockite Enderbite Dacite Diabase Diorite Napoleonite Dunite Essexite Foidolite Gabbro Granite Granodiorite Granophyre Harzburgite Hornblendite Hyaloclastite Icelandite Ignimbrite Ijolite Kimberlite Komatiite Lamproite Lamprophyre Latite Lherzolite Monzogranite Monzonite Nepheline syenite Nephelinite Norite Obsidian Pegmatite Peridotite Phonolite Phonotephrite Porphyry Pumice Pyroxenite Quartz diorite Quartz monzonite Quartzolite Rhyodacite Rhyolite Comendite Pantellerite Scoria Shonkinite Sovite Syenite Tachylyte Tephriphonolite Tephrite Tonalite Trachyandesite Benmoreite Trachybasalt Hawaiite Trachyte Troctolite Trondhjemite Tuff Websterite Wehrlite Sedimentary rock Argillite Arkose Banded iron formation Breccia Calcarenite Chalk Chert Claystone Coal Conglomerate Coquina Diamictite Diatomite Dolomite Evaporite Flint Geyserite Greywacke Gritstone Itacolumite Jaspillite Laterite Lignite Limestone Lumachelle Marl Mudstone Oil shale Oolite Phosphorite Sandstone Shale Siltstone Sylvinite Tillite Travertine Tufa Turbidite Varve Wackestone Metamorphic rock Anthracite Amphibolite Blueschist Cataclasite Eclogite Gneiss Granulite Greenschist Hornfels Calcflinta Itabirite Litchfieldite Marble Migmatite Mylonite Metapelite Metapsammite Phyllite Pseudotachylite Quartzite Schist Serpentinite Skarn Slate Suevite Talc carbonate Soapstone Tectonite Whiteschist Specific varieties Adamellite Appinite Aphanite Borolanite Blue Granite Epidosite Felsite Flint Ganister Gossan Hyaloclastite Ijolite Jadeitite Jasperoid Kenyte Lapis lazuli Larvikite Litchfieldite Llanite Luxullianite Mangerite Novaculite Pietersite Pyrolite Rapakivi granite Rhomb porphyry Rodingite Shonkinite Taconite Tachylite Teschenite Theralite Unakite Variolite Wad Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mylonite&oldid=1228782252 " Categories : Metamorphic rocks Structural geology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2023 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 13 June 2024, at 04:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mylonite 29 languages Add topic

