Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Views 2 Sources 3 Early Islam Toggle Early Islam subsection 3.1 Umayyad and Abbasid caliphates 4 Ottoman Empire Toggle Ottoman Empire subsection 4.1 The Harem 4.2 Bathhouses 5 In Islamic countries Toggle In Islamic countries subsection 5.1 Afghanistan 5.2 Egypt 5.3 Iran 5.4 Iraq 5.5 Saudi Arabia 5.6 Syria 5.7 Mandate Palestine 5.8 Malaysia 5.9 United States 6 In mosques 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Islam and gender segregation 6 languages العربية বাংলা فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Português Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Gender segregation in Islamic law This is a sub-article of Islamic jurisprudence and Sex segregation .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Islam and gender segregation" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable .

Please help improve this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged and removed.

( January 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Part of a series on Islamic jurisprudence ( fiqh ) Ritual Shahada Salah Raka'ah Qibla Turbah Sunnah prayer ( Tarawih Tahajjud ) Witr Nafl prayer Sawm Zakat Hajj Ihram ( clothing Mut'ah ) Tawaf Umrah ( and Hajj ) Political Islamic leadership Caliphate Majlis-ash-Shura Imamate Wilayat al-faqih Bay'ah Dhimmi Aman Family Marriage Contract Mahr Misyar Halala Urfi Mut‘ah Polygyny Divorce Khula Zihar Iddah Kafa'ah Adoption Breastfeeding Sexual Awrah Abortion Baligh Haya Hygiene Rape Zina Masturbation Criminal Hudud Blasphemy Maisir (gambling) Zina (illicit sex) Hirabah (unlawful warfare and banditry) Fasad ("mischief") Mofsed-e-filarz ("spreading corruption") Fitna ("sedition") Rajm (stoning) Tazir (discretionary) Qisas (retaliation) Diya (compensation) Etiquette Adab Gender segregation ( Purdah ) Mahram Honorifics Toilet Economic History Zakat Jizya Nisab Khums Sadaqah ( Waqf ) Bayt al-mal Banking Riba Murabaha Takaful Sukuk Inheritance Hygiene Sexual Toilet Taharah Ihram Wudu Masah Ghusl Tayammum Miswak Najis Istinja Dietary Dhabihah Alcohol Pork Comparison with kashrut Military Jihad Ghanimah Hudna Istijarah (asylum) Prisoners of war Social Haqq al-Nas ( The right(s) of the people ) Islamic studies v t e Part of a series on Women in society Society Women's history ( legal rights ) Woman Animal advocacy Business Female entrepreneurs Gender representation on corporate boards of directors Combat Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Economic development Explorers and travelers Education Feminism Womyn Government Conservatives in the US Heads of state or government Legislators Queen regnant List Health Journalism Law Law enforcement Military Mother Nobel Prize laureates Piracy Positions of power Reproductive rights Sex segregation Feminist In Islam Venture capital Violence and abuse Voting rights Workforce Exchange of women Science Technology Computing Engineering Geology Medicine dentistry in the United States Organizations Science Science, technology, engineering and mathematics Space Telegraphy Arts Humanities Architecture Arts Art history field Women's cinema Dance Film "Chick flicks" Fine arts Literature Science fiction Philosophy Feminist philosophy Photographers Music Jazz Punk rock In Shakespeare's works Religion Theological figures Baháʼí Faith Bible Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Mormonism Opus Dei Hinduism Islam Imams Mahr Segregation Women's testimony Judaism Sikhism Taoism Zoroastrianism Popular culture Comics Portrayal in American comics Film industry Music Fictional pirates Speculative fiction Video games Gender representation in video games Women in the video game industry Sports Auto racing Baseball Basketball Boxing Cricket Curling Cycling Fastpitch softball Football / soccer Golf Gymnastics Ice hockey Lacrosse Mixed martial arts Netball Paralympic Games Rodeo Roller derby Rowing Surfing Swimming Tennis Track and field Volleyball Winter sports See also: List of sports By country Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Argentina Armenia Australia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Belgium Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Croatia Cuba Cyprus ( North ) Denmark DR Congo Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Ethiopia FS Micronesia Fiji Finland France Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Iceland Italy India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Ivory Coast Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Libya Madagascar Malaysia Maldives Mali Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal New Zealand Niger Nigeria North Korea Oman Pakistan Palau Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Spain Somalia South Africa South Korea South Sudan Sudan Suriname Sri Lanka Sweden Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Tonga Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Trinidad and Tobago Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Yemen v t e Gender segregation in Islamic law , custom, law, and traditions refers to the practices and requirements in Islamic countries and communities for the separation of men and boys from women and girls in social and other settings. In terms of actual practice, the degree of adherence to these rules depends on local laws and cultural norms. In some Muslim-majority countries, men and women who are unrelated may be forbidden to interact closely or participate in the same social spaces. In other Muslim countries, these practices may be partly or completely unobserved. These rules are generally more relaxed in the media and business settings and more strictly observed in religious or formal settings.

Views [ edit ] There have been fatwas that forbid free mixing between men and women (known as Ikhtilat ) when alone. The objective of the restrictions is to keep such interaction at a modest level. According to some, men are not permitted to touch any part of the body of the women, whether she is Muslim or non-Muslim.

[ 1 ] Others have ruled that Muslim men and women who are not immediate relatives may not, for instance, socialize in order to know each other with a handshake or any form of contact that involves physical contact.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] A number of Muslim intellectuals and Muslim scholars have challenged this view and claim that certain physical contact is permissible as long as there is no obscenity, inappropriate touching (other than a simple handshake), secret meetings or flirting, according to the general rules of interaction between the genders.

[ 5 ] In some parts of the Muslim world, preventing women from being seen by men is closely linked to the concept of Namus .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Namus is an ethical category, a virtue , in Middle Eastern Muslim patriarchal character. It is a strongly gender -specific category of relations within a family described in terms of honor , attention , respect /respectability, and modesty . The term is often translated as "honor".

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Sources [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( April 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Qur'anic verses which address the interaction of men and women in the social context include: Tell the believing men to lower their gaze and to be mindful of their chastity: this will be most conducive to their purity – (and,) verily, Allah is aware of all that they do. And tell the believing women to lower their gaze and to be mindful of their chastity, and not to display their charms beyond what may be apparent thereof; hence let them draw their veils over their bosoms and do not show their adornments except to their husbands or their fathers or their husbands' fathers or their sons or their husbands' sons or their brothers or their brothers' sons or their sisters' sons or their women or what their right hands possess or male servants free of sexual desires or those children who never knows the private things of women; and do not stamp their feet so that it may show their hidden adornments; and repent towards God collectively O believers so that you may succeed.

— Qur'an, Sura 24 (An-Nur), ayat 30–31 [ 8 ] However, he forbade men from stopping their wives from going to the Mosque : The Messenger of God said, "Do not prevent the maid-servants of God from going to the mosque." — Muslim, No.888 (See also Nos. 884–891 and Bukhari Vol.1, Nos. 824, 832) Early Islam [ edit ] Umayyad and Abbasid caliphates [ edit ] See also: Abbasid harem The roots of gender segregation in Islam have been investigated by many historians.

Leila Ahmed said that the harem arose in the Umayyad and Abbasid dynasties and was not an institution from the time of Muhammad.

[ 9 ] Leor Halevi wrote in an article about women and mourning laments that a "novel and unprecedented concern with the segregation of the sexes" took place in Kufa , Iraq, in the eighth century. In time, this became normative.

[ 10 ] Everett K. Rowson discovered that gender nonconforming men in eighth century Medina could move freely between the sexes. Known as Mukhannath , these men were freely able to move between men and women due to beliefs that they were not sexually attracted to women. This changed during the times of the Early Caliphs in order to further keep women in private.

[ 11 ] Gender segregation did not exist for female slaves. Female slaves were visible in public; while free Muslim women were expected to veil in public to signal their modesty and status as free women, slave women were expected to appear unveiled in public to differentiate them from free and modest women, [ 12 ] and the awrah of slave women defined as being only between her navel and her knee, which meant they were not veiled.

[ 13 ] The famous qiyan -slave artists were not secluded from men in harem , but in contrast performed for male guests.

[ 14 ] Ottoman Empire [ edit ] The Harem [ edit ] See also: Ottoman Imperial Harem The Ottoman Empire kept genders segregated in the harems and concubines were not allowed to leave the harem. Men, aside from the male head of the household, were forbidden to enter the harem. However, eunuchs were allowed to move freely inside and outside the harem and acted as protectors of the women. This position gave eunuchs the ability to have access to the ruler's living quarters. A common consequence of this segregation of the ruler from the rest of the house while in the harem, gave eunuchs the role of message bearers.

[ 15 ] During the course of the Harem, racial segregation became common between eunuchs.

[ 16 ] Slave traders of white Circassian slaves enjoyed more business clout due to the inflated value of whiteness that existed during the Ottoman Empire.

[ 17 ] Bathhouses [ edit ] Segregation between men and women was strictly enforced in 18th-century Ottoman bathhouses. The rules on bathhouse segregation also restricted Muslim women from sharing a bathhouse with non-Muslim women, while Muslim men could share bathhouses with non-Muslim men. Shari'a courts held this up to preserve Muslim women's sanctity and prevent their violation.

[ 18 ] In Islamic countries [ edit ] Afghanistan [ edit ] See also: Sex segregation in Afghanistan Afghanistan , under Taliban religious leadership, was characterized by feminist groups and others as a " gender apartheid " system where women are segregated from men in public and do not enjoy legal equality or equal access to employment or education. In Islam, women have the right to equal access to employment and education, although their first priority should be that of the family. Also, Men are said to be actively involved in child rearing and household chores. Muhammad helped his wives in the house.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] During Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (2004–2021), a huge number of Afghan men did not have any contact with females other than their own family until going to university. This caused men to not see women as their colleagues. Thus, they usually tended to show impolite behaviour to women, so thousands of women suffered from insults in the streets all over Afghanistan.

[ 21 ] During this period, gender segregation in Afghanistan's schools forced the strained Ministry of Education, which was already short on supplies, funding, and teachers, to recreate the system for each gender.

[ 22 ] Baghe-Sharara ( Persian : باغ شهرآرا ) was a women-only park in Kabul during the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. It is the ancient garden constructed by Babur. No men were allowed to enter because it was a women-only space .

[ 23 ] This garden was reconstructed by financial support from US, Italy and Switzerland and yearly, on March 8, programs specific to women were held there.

[ 24 ] Women-specific markets were held inside the garden as well.

[ 25 ] English and sewing classes, shops selling products, a counselling center, other classes, were all run by women.

[ 26 ] Immediately after 2021 Taliban offensive all universities became sex-segregated nationwide.

[ 27 ] Since March 2022, Taliban started to segregate all amusement parks and resorts by sex.

Ministry for the Propagation of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice (Afghanistan) stated that in Kabul, males can go to amusement parks on Wednesdays, Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays, while females can go to amusement parks on Sundays, Mondays and Tuesdays. This ministry added that no one is allowed to complain, emphasizing that men are not allowed to enter parks on women's days.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Egypt [ edit ] During the mid-20th century, movements in Egypt implemented laws regarding public sex segregation. This included the segregation of women on trains, organized by the Muslim Brotherhood.

Before this new era, gender segregation was only applied to areas of religious ceremony.

[ 30 ] The idea of a "Pink taxi" in Egypt emerged after numerous women demanded women-only cabs. Advocates of the idea claimed that the taxis would help shield women against possible harassment and sexual assault.

Iran [ edit ] See also: Sex segregation in Iran When Ruhollah Khomeini called for women to attend public demonstrations and ignore the night curfew, millions of women who would otherwise not have left their homes without their husbands' and fathers' permission or presence, took to the streets. After the Islamic revolution, however, Khomeini publicly announced his disapproval of mixing between the sexes.

[ 31 ] During Khomeini's rule, limits would be placed on what jobs a woman could possess, these laws would also uphold gender segregation in the workplace.

[ 32 ] Many women would not be given access to positions of political power without ties to male political elites or ties with religious leaders, movements, or activism.

[ 33 ] Prevention of women candidates is upheld by male-dominated political parties who have rejected women from being represented as their recommended candidates. All women who have run as candidates for president have been rejected with no reason given.

[ 33 ] Critics have argued that the restriction of women's rights under Islamic law has led to the segregation of public and private spaces, which they must then attempt to resolve through politics and by creating their own spaces.

[ 34 ] Gender segregation also impacts the company that people keep; researcher Ziba Mir-Hosseini noted that during her field work, she spent most of her time around women and that in some instances she never met the male relatives of some of these women due to the strict regulation of gender segregation.

[ 35 ] These restrictions may also impact travel, as some rules state that married women are forbidden from traveling without their husband's permission. In some cases, women must be segregated from male passengers.

[ 36 ] Since 2005, access to higher education has been prohibited by the Iranian government.

[ 33 ] In pre-college level education, gender segregation has conflicted with religious laws. Article 13 of the Islamic Republic of Iran allows Christians, Jews, and Zoroastrians to educate their followers in whatever way their religion instructs them. Regardless of this law, boys and girls have been segregated from being in the same classroom. Boys and girls would also get different textbooks. These regulations on gender have moved the ceremonies and events of religious minorities, such as funerals and weddings, out of view from the public due to laws against the public mixture of sexes.

[ 37 ] Iraq [ edit ] Gender-isolated education is conducted through higher education due to religious ideas of sex segregation. Hotels and motels all have strict rules for sex segregation.

Historically, sex segregation was one of the reasons given by conservatives who opposed women's suffrage and political participation. 
When women's suffrage in Syria was introduced in 1949, MP Farhan al-Irs of al-Amara commented: "Women are shameful. How could they possibly sit with men?" [ 38 ] In 1951, a motion to include women in the Electoral Law was rejected in the Chamber of Deputies.

[ 39 ] During the discussion to change the electoral law to include women's suffrage in March–April 1951, the MP Abd al-Abbas of Diwaniyya opposed suffrage as this would contradict Islamic sex segregation, as elected women MP would then sit among male MPs in the Chamber of Deputies: "Is this not forbidden? Are we not all of Islam?" [ 40 ] A week of Women's Rights was launched in October 1953 by Iraqi Women's Union , who arranged a symposium and voiced their demand in radio programs and articles in the press to campaign for women's suffrage.

[ 41 ] As a response, the Islamic clergy launched a Week of Virtue and called for a general strike against women's suffrage and called for women to "stay at home" since women's suffrage was against Islam.

[ 42 ] During the Week of Virtue, the Sunni Nihal al-Zahawi, daughter of Amjad al-Zahawi, head of the Muslim Sisters Society (Jamiyyat al-Aukht al-Muslima), spoke on the radio against women's suffrage: she described the suffragists as women who revolted against the very Islam that gave them rights, and that women's suffrage was lamentable since it broke sex segregation and resulted in gender mixing, which was an unrestricted liberty that broke the rules of against Islam.

[ 43 ] Women's suffrage was finally introduced in 1980.

[ citation needed ] Saudi Arabia [ edit ] See also: Sex segregation in Saudi Arabia In Saudi Arabia, male doctors were previously not allowed to treat female patients unless there were no female specialists available; it was also not permissible for women to treat men.

[ 44 ] This has changed, however, and now it is not uncommon for men and women to visit doctors of the opposite sex.

[ citation needed ] Critics have argued that the restriction of women's rights under Saudi Arabia law, which is based on sharia law, has led to the separation of gender, since women and men are separated in almost all areas, from women-only fast food lines to women-only offices. These laws and policies are enforced by the Islamic religious police, which has prompted some to find ways to evade policing.

[ 45 ] Gender segregation also impacts the Saudi education system, as there are more opportunities for men to graduate with a career and find employment. Women do not share in these opportunities and have a more difficult time finding employment as there are only a small number of locations that permit men and women to mix.

[ 46 ] Gender segregation also impacts the participation of women in religion by encouraging women to pray at home and not in the mosque. Scholars have stated that despite these restrictions, changes brought about with the new generations have allowed women more freedom to choose whether they pray at the mosque or in their homes.

[ 47 ] Syria [ edit ] Historically, sex segregation played an important role in the conservative opposition toward women's choice to not wear the hijab. During the interwar period, there was an intense campaign in Syria about women's rights to choose to not wear a hijab if they did not wish to do so. Since the hijab was a form of sex segregation, to stop wearing it met with great opposition by conservatives who viewed it as a form of ending of sex segregation. The right for women to unveil was also a part of the progressive ending of sex segregation and women's right to participate in society, as well as the question of women's suffrage.

During the visit of the King–Crane Commission in Damascus in 1919, women's rights activists (of the Nur al-Fayha organization) attended unveiled to demonstrate the progressive modernist ambitions of the Faisal Government.

[ 48 ] During a nationalist demonstration in Damascus during a visit of Lord Balfour, the women demanded the abolition of the veil, which created tension with their male counterparts.

[ 49 ] When a petition on women's suffrage was discussed in the Syrian Congress in 1920, Shaykh Abd al-Qadir al-Kaylani stated that to give women the right to vote would be the same thing as abolishing sex segregation and allowing women to appear unveiled.

[ 50 ] Women's rights activists in the modernist interwar period viewed the veil as a hindrance to women's participation in society as productive citizens, preventing them from benefiting a successful independent nation, and combined their criticism against hijab with their criticism against colonialism.

[ 51 ] In 1922, during a women's march in protest of the imprisonment of Shahbandar by the French, the participating women removed their veils.

[ 52 ] In the 1920s, the feminist women's press in Lebanon and Syria published images of unveiled Turkish women and gave room to women's voices when the indigenous press normally avoided mentioning or showing images of women.

[ 53 ] The modernization reform program of Atatürk in Turkey abolished sex segregation and encouraged women to unveil as a part of a social revolution in order to make Turkey a modern state.

[ 54 ] The social revolution in Turkey created a debate in Syria, where Turkish postcards displayed modern unveiled Turkish women, and according to the US Consul in Damascus in 1922: "I am informed that they attract considerable attention in local feminine circles", and the women's magazine Dimashqiya (The New Woman) celebrated Ataturk for his reforms and published photographs of unveiled Turkish woman.

[ 55 ] During the 1920s, upper-class women in Syria started to appear unveiled in public, which caused great opposition from religious conservatives, who sometimes attacked unveiled women with acid.

[ 56 ] When the conservative Shaykh Taj became Prime minister in Damascus in 1928, a campaign started by preachers in the mosques who called upon believers to attack unveiled women, which was followed by men attacking unveiled women on the street with acid; and a women's march against the hijab, which was held in Hamidiya was attacked by a mob.

[ 57 ] The fact that women started to appear unveiled in public during the interwar era created great opposition; Islamic conservatives debated on whether women should be allowed to appear in public, and unveiled women were harassed in order to frighten women from accessing the public space.

[ 58 ] The Islamist group al-gharra demanded that all women be forced to veil completely from head to toe, while the French colonial press condemned the men who made unveiled women afraid to leave their home in fear of violence.

[ 59 ] As a reaction to the progressive unveiling trend among women, the League of Modesty was founded by conservative women in 1934, whose members patrolled the streets in white shrouds and attacked unveiled women armed with scissors and bottles of acid.

[ 60 ] In the 1940s, Thuraya Al-Hafez campaigned for women's right to choose if she wished to veil or not.

[ 61 ] In the summer of 1943, Thuraya Al-Hafez headed a women's march of 100 women to the Marja Square in Damascus demonstrating against hijab, with the claim that the Quran did not demand for women to veil.

[ 62 ] In 1944, Islamic groups in Syria demanded sex segregation in schools and public transport, to prohibit women from visiting the cinema, and that women be forced to wear hijab by a morality police.

[ 63 ] To appease the Islamic groups, the government introduced sex segregation on public transportation in Damascus during religious holidays in 1944.

[ 64 ] In May 1944, a rumour was spread that a ball attended by unveiled Muslim women was to take place at Nuqtar al-halib. As a response, the Islamic al-ghurra group launched a campaign in the mosques with the demanded that the government stop the ball, and riots occurred in Damascus, Aleppo, Homs and Hamah. In response, Adila Bayyhum , a member of the Nuqtat al-halib, stopped her philanthropic distribution of milk to the poor until the government threatened to stop their own grain distribution if the Islamic riot campaign did not stop.

[ 65 ] During the Baathist regime (1963–2024), women were legally free to veil or unveil, and sex segregation was not imposed.

[ citation needed ] Mandate Palestine [ edit ] On the late 19th and early 20th century European Jewish immigration to Palestine , Norman Rose writes that secular "Zionist mores" were "often at odds with Arab convention, threatening the customs and moral assumptions that lent cohesion to a socially conservative, traditional Palestinian society." [ 66 ] The active political role of the women of the Yishuv and their lack of segregation was judged as particularly offensive.

[ 67 ] Malaysia [ edit ] The policy on gender segregation in Kelantan , Malaysia, is drawn based on Islamic teachings as interpreted by the state government leaders. It does not allow only men spectators at sports tournaments involving female players. Another example of sex segregation in Kelantan , Malaysia, is gender-specific counters in supermarkets.

[ 68 ] United States [ edit ] In the United States, Muslim couples may opt for gender-segregated wedding celebrations so that men and women sit separately during the ceremony and celebrate in different rooms. Men and women, who are guests, do not sit together at the wedding ceremony, because it is seen as a 'time out' from the usual mixing of the sexes.

[ 69 ] In mosques [ edit ] Main article: Woman prayer The ladies' prayer hall in the Khadija Mosque in Berlin ; upper part reads: Only in the remembrance of Allah will your hearts find peace (in Arabic) Makhphil ( makfil ), upper gallery plateau part of Bosnian mosques reserved only for women (except when Jumu'ah ) who climb to it by stairs at side(s) of entrance; White/Nasser's mosque in Zenica See also: Mosque , Women's mosques , and Islamic Bill of Rights for Women in the Mosque Some schools of thought say that women should be encouraged to pray at home rather than in a mosque. However, other schools prefer to look at the context of the sayings, which, they suggest, were given at a time when women were in danger when leaving their homes, and consider mosques to be as welcome for women as their homes. Muhammad did not forbid women from entering his mosque in Medina. In fact, he told Muslims "not to prevent their women from going to mosque when they ask for permission".

[ 70 ] Muhammad specifically admonished the men not to keep their wives from going to the mosques: The Messenger of God said, "Do not prevent the maid-servants of God from going to the mosque." — Muslim, No.888 (See also Nos. 884–891 and Bukhari Vol.1, Nos. 824, 832) The segregation of sexes in mosques and prayer spaces is reported in a hadith in Sahih Muslim , one of the two most authentic Hadith books in Islam. It says that the best rows for men are the first rows, and the worst ones the last ones, and the best rows for women are the last ones and the worst ones for them are the first ones.

[ 71 ] It is also recorded that Muhammad ordered that mosques have separate doors for women and men so that men and women would not be obliged to go and come through the same door.

[ 72 ] He also commanded that after the Isha' evening prayer, women be allowed to leave the mosque first so that they would not have to mix with men.

[ 73 ] After Muhammad's death, many of his followers began to forbid women under their control from going to the mosque.

Aisha bint Abi Bakr , a wife of Muhammad, once said, "If the Prophet had lived now and if he saw what we see of women today, he would have forbidden women to go to the mosque even as the Children of Israel forbade their women." [ 74 ] The second caliph Umar also prohibited women from attending mosques, especially at night, because he feared there might be occasions of harassment by men, so he asked them to pray at home.

[ 75 ] As Islam spread, it became unusual for women to worship in mosques because of male fear of immorality between sexes.

[ 76 ] Sometimes, a special part of the mosque was railed off for women. For example, the governor of Mecca in 870 had ropes tied between the columns to make a separate place for women.

[ 77 ] The male section of a mosque in Srinagar , Jammu and Kashmir , India Many mosques today put the women behind a barrier or partition or in another room. Mosques in South and Southeast Asia put men and women in separate rooms, as the divisions were built into them centuries ago. In nearly two-thirds of American mosques, women pray behind partitions or in separate areas, not in the main prayer hall. Some mosques do not admit women at all due to the "lack of space" and the fact that some prayers, such as the Friday Jumuʻah, are mandatory for men but optional for women, although there are sections exclusively for women and children. The Grand Mosque in Mecca is desegregated.

[ 78 ] There is a growing women's movement led by figures such as Asra Nomani who protest against what they regard as their second-class status and facilities.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] Justifications for segregation include the need to avoid distraction during prayer, although the primary reason cited is that this was the tradition (sunnah) of worshipers in the time of Muhammad.

[ 81 ] See also [ edit ] Islam portal Society portal Wikiquote has quotations related to Islam and gender segregation .

Gender separation in Judaism Harem Women-only park Islamic Bill of Rights for Women in the Mosque Marriage in Islam Namus , virtue, used in a gender-specific way Purdah , a physically separate area for women Women's mosques Negiah Case studies: Golden Needle Sewing School Mechitza , barrier that separates men and women in Jewish synagogues References [ edit ] ^ "What Is The Commandment Of Shaking Hands By Muslims With Non-Muslim Members Of The Opposite Sex?" . 5 July 2016 . Retrieved 7 April 2020 .

^ "هل سلام المرأة باليد على الرِجال حرام؟ – خالد عبد المنعم الرفاعي" .

Archived from the original on 2017-05-19 . Retrieved 2020-01-12 .

^ "حكم مصافحة الرجل للمرأة الأجنبية - islamqa.info" .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2016 . Retrieved 2 January 2016 .

^ "تحريم مصافحة المرأة الأجنبية – إسلام ويب – مركز الفتوى" .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2016 . Retrieved 2 January 2016 .

^ "Sexuality in Islam" . Archived from the original on 2011-07-09 . Retrieved 2011-07-10 .

^ a b Werner Schiffauer, "Die Gewalt der Ehre. Erklärungen zu einem deutsch-türkischen Sexualkonflikt." ("The Force of the Honour"), Suhrkamp: Frankfurt am Main, 1983. ISBN 3-518-37394-3.

^ a b Dilek Cindoglu, " Virginity tests and artificial virginity in modern Turkish medicine," pp. 215–228, in Women and sexuality in Muslim societies , P. Ýlkkaracan (Ed.), Women for Women's Human Rights, Istanbul, 2000.

^ Quran 24:30–31 ^ Ahmed, Leila. Women and Gender in Islam: Historical Roots of a Modern Debate. Yale University Press, 1992; pp. 112–115 ^ Halevi, Leor (2004).

"Wailing for the Dead: The Role of Women in Early Islamic Funerals" .

Past & Present (183): 3– 39.

ISSN 0031-2746 .

^ Rowson, Everett K. (1991).

"The Effeminates of Early Medina" .

Journal of the American Oriental Society .

111 (4): 671– 693.

doi : 10.2307/603399 .

JSTOR 603399 .

^ Cite error: The named reference Medieval Iberia 2022 p. 180-181 was invoked but never defined (see the help page ).

^ Anchassi, Omar (2021-04-20).

"Status Distinctions and Sartorial Difference: Slavery, Sexual Ethics, and the Social Logic of Veiling in Islamic Law" .

Islamic Law and Society .

28 (3): 125– 155.

doi : 10.1163/15685195-bja10008 .

ISSN 0928-9380 .

^ Concubines and Courtesans: Women and Slavery in Islamic History. (2017). Storbritannien: Oxford University Press.

^ El-Cheikh, Nadia Marie (2005).

"Servants at the Gate: Eunuchs at the Court of Al-Muqtadir" .

Journal of Economic and Social History of the Orient .

48 (2): 234– 252.

doi : 10.1163/1568520054127095 .

JSTOR 25165091 .

^ Peirce, Leslie (1993).

The Imperial Harem . Oxford University Press. pp.

113– 150.

^ Toledano, Ehud.

Struggle and Survival in the Modern Middle East . California Press. pp.

48– 62.

^ Semerdjian, Elyse (2013).

"Naked Anxiety: Bathhouses, Nudity, and the "Dhimmī" Woman in 18th-Century Aleppo" .

International Journal of Middle East Studies .

45 (4): 651– 676.

doi : 10.1017/S0020743813000846 .

JSTOR 43304006 .

S2CID 146725920 .

^ Hunter, D. Lyn.

Gender Apartheid Under Afghanistan's Taliban Archived 2007-06-10 at the Wayback Machine The Berkleyan , March 17, 1999.

^ The Taliban & Afghan Women: Background Archived 2007-06-05 at the Wayback Machine , Feminist Majority Foundation website, Accessed June 25, 2006.

^ "خیابان آزاری در افغانستان؛ مشکلی که روز به روز جدی تر می شود" (in Persian). BBC Persian. BBC Persian. 18 April 2011 . Retrieved 3 October 2021 .

^ "Afghanistan's 'Separate but Equal' Education System" .

The Diplomat . 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 3 October 2021 .

^ "باغ شهر آرا: ورود آقایان ممنوع" .

Kabul Municipality (in Persian).

^ "بازگشایی نخستین باغ زنانه در کابل" (in Persian). Payam Aftab News Network. October 2010. Archived from the original on October 5, 2021 . Retrieved 5 October 2021 .

^ "باغ زنانه؛ محل تفریحی و آموزشی زنان" (in Persian). The Kelid Group . Retrieved 5 October 2021 .

^ "At the Garden, Unveiled by Maya Jayapal" .

www.boloji.com .

^ "Taliban impose gender segregation at universities in Afghanistan" .

12 September 2021 . Daily Sabah. 12 September 2021 . Retrieved 23 September 2021 .

^ "به دستور طالبان فعالیت پارک های تفریحی کابل براساس تفکیک جنسیتی شد" (in Persian). Raha Press. 27 March 2022 . Retrieved 2 April 2022 .

^ "دستور جدید طلبان: تفکیک جنسیتی پارک‌ها در افغانستان؛ چهار روز مردانه، سه روز زنانه" (in Persian). Azjomle. 27 March 2022 . Retrieved 2 April 2022 .

^ Aaron, Rock-Singer (2016).

"The Salafi Mystique: The Rise of Gender Segregation in 1970s Egypt" .

Islamic Law and Society .

23 (3): 279– 305.

doi : 10.1163/15685195-00233p03 .

JSTOR 43997269 .

^ Roksana Bahramitash.

"Revolution, Islamization, and Women's Employment in Iran" (PDF) . Watsoninstitute. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-05-26 . Retrieved 2013-09-09 .

^ Kian, Azadeh (2012).

Iran: A Revolutionary Republic in Transition . European Union Institute for Security Studies. pp.

63– 64.

^ a b c Hoodfar, Homa; Shadi, Sadr (2010).

"Islamic Politics and Women's Quest for Gender Equality in Iran" (PDF) .

Third World Quarterly .

31 (6): 885– 903.

doi : 10.1080/01436597.2010.502717 .

JSTOR 27896587 .

PMID 20857567 .

S2CID 14191735 .

^ Osanloo, Arzoo (2009-03-29). The Politics of Women's Rights in Iran. Princeton University Press. p. 49.

ISBN 9780691135472 .

^ Mir-Hosseini, Ziba (2000). Islam and Gender: The Religious Debate in Contemporary Iran. I.B.Tauris. p. xvii.

ISBN 9781850432685 .

^ Hall, C. Michael; Prayag, Girish (2019-05-20). The Routledge Handbook of Halal Hospitality and Islamic Tourism. Routledge.

ISBN 9781351367035 .

^ Choksy, Jamsheed K. (2012).

"Non-Muslim Religious Minorities in Contemporary Iran" .

Iran and the Caucasus .

16 (3): 271– 299.

doi : 10.1163/1573384X-20120017 .

JSTOR 41723267 .

^ Efrati, N. (2012). Women in Iraq: Past Meets Present. Tyskland: Columbia University Press.

^ Efrati, N. (2012). Women in Iraq: Past Meets Present. Tyskland: Columbia University Press.

^ Efrati, N. (2012). Women in Iraq: Past Meets Present. Tyskland: Columbia University Press.

^ Efrati, N. (2012). Women in Iraq: Past Meets Present. Tyskland: Columbia University Press.

^ Efrati, N. (2012). Women in Iraq: Past Meets Present. Tyskland: Columbia University Press.

^ Efrati, N. (2012). Women in Iraq: Past Meets Present. Tyskland: Columbia University Press.

^ Haghian (1988).

^ Zoeff, Katherine (June 1, 2010). "Talk of Women's Rights Divides Saudi Arabia". The New York Times. Retrieved 30 October 2019.

^ Abdella Doumato, Eleanor (Autumn 1999). "Women and Work in Saudi Arabia: How Flexible Are Islamic Margins?". Middle East Journal. 53 (4): 568–583. Retrieved 30 October 2019.

^ Dreher, Tanja (2009). Beyond the Hijab Debates: New Conversations on Gender, Race, and Religion. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. pp. 52–66.

ISBN 1443801690 . Retrieved 30 October 2019.

^ Thompson, E. (2000). Colonial Citizens: Republican Rights, Paternal Privilege, and Gender in French Syria and Lebanon. USA: Columbia University Press. p.128 ^ Thompson, E. (2000). Colonial Citizens: Republican Rights, Paternal Privilege, and Gender in French Syria and Lebanon. USA: Columbia University Press. p.129 ^ Thompson, E. (2000). Colonial Citizens: Republican Rights, Paternal Privilege, and Gender in French Syria and Lebanon. USA: Columbia University Press. p.128 ^ Mapping Arab Women's Movements: A Century of Transformations from Within. (2012). Egypten: American University in Cairo Press.

^ Thompson, E. (2000). Colonial Citizens: Republican Rights, Paternal Privilege, and Gender in French Syria and Lebanon. USA: Columbia University Press. p.128 ^ Thompson, E. (2000). Colonial Citizens: Republican Rights, Paternal Privilege, and Gender in French Syria and Lebanon. USA: Columbia University Press. p.137 ^ Thompson, E. (2000). Colonial Citizens: Republican Rights, Paternal Privilege, and Gender in French Syria and Lebanon. USA: Columbia University Press. p.129 ^ Thompson, E. (2000). Colonial Citizens: Republican Rights, Paternal Privilege, and Gender in French Syria and Lebanon. USA: Columbia University Press. p.129 ^ "Covering the Nakedness for a Man: Answers" . 27 May 2014.

Archived from the original on 14 February 2019 . Retrieved 18 February 2019 .

^ Thompson, E. (2000). Colonial Citizens: Republican Rights, Paternal Privilege, and Gender in French Syria and Lebanon. USA: Columbia University Press. p.136 ^ Keddie, N. R. (2012). Women in the Middle East: Past and Present. Ukraina: Princeton University Press. p.97 ^ Thompson, E. (2000). Colonial Citizens: Republican Rights, Paternal Privilege, and Gender in French Syria and Lebanon. USA: Columbia University Press. p.139 ^ Thompson, E. (2000). Colonial Citizens: Republican Rights, Paternal Privilege, and Gender in French Syria and Lebanon. USA: Columbia University Press. p.138 ^ Mapping Arab Women's Movements: A Century of Transformations from Within. (2012). Egypten: American University in Cairo Press. p. 85-86 ^ Meininghaus, E. (2016). Creating Consent in Ba‘thist Syria: Women and Welfare in a Totalitarian State. Storbritannien: Bloomsbury Publishing. p.59 ^ Meininghaus, E. (2016). Creating Consent in Ba‘thist Syria: Women and Welfare in a Totalitarian State. Storbritannien: Bloomsbury Publishing. p.58 ^ Keddie, N. R. (2012). Women in the Middle East: Past and Present. Ukraina: Princeton University Press. p.98 ^ Meininghaus, E. (2016). Creating Consent in Ba‘thist Syria: Women and Welfare in a Totalitarian State. Storbritannien: Bloomsbury Publishing. p.58 ^ Norman Rose, A Senseless, Squalid War: Voices from Palestine 1945–1948 , The Bodley Head, London, 2009. (p. 10) ^ Porath, Zipporah, Letters from Jerusalem, 1947–1948, Jerusalem: Association of Americans and Canadians in Israel, 1987 (pp. 26–30) ^ "The politics of gender segregation in public space" . Strait Times. Strait Times. 15 December 2014 . Retrieved 12 April 2024 .

^ Khan, Tasmiha (23 September 2020).

"For Some Muslim Couples, Gender-Separate Weddings Are the Norm" .

The New York Times .

^ Doi, Rahi.

"Can women go to mosque?" . Questions on Islam . Retrieved 2010-03-15 .

^ "Sahih Muslim, Book 4, Hadith 881" . Islam.us. Archived from the original on 2011-10-15 . Retrieved 2012-09-09 .

^ al-Sunan al-Kubrá, vol. 1, p. 109.

^ al-Sunan al-Kubrá, vol. 2, p. 558 ^ Tafsīr al-Qurṭubī, 14:244 ^ Doi, Abdur Rahman I.

"Women in Society" .

Compendium of Muslim Texts . University of Southern California. Archived from the original on April 9, 2006 . Retrieved 2006-04-15 .

^ Mattson, Ingrid. "Women, Islam, and Mosques". In Encyclopedia of Women And Religion in North America (Rosemary Skinner Keller, Rosemary Radford Ruether, and Marie Cantlon, ed.). Indiana University Press (2006), p. 616 Archived 2016-01-15 at the Wayback Machine .

ISBN 0-253-34688-6 .

^ Hillenbrand, R. "Masdjid. I. In the central Islamic lands". In P.J. Bearman; Th. Bianquis; C.E. Bosworth ; E. van Donzel; W.P. Heinrichs (eds.).

Encyclopaedia of Islam Online . Brill Academic Publishers.

ISSN 1573-3912 .

^ Rezk, Rawya (2006-01-26).

"Muslim Women Seek More Equitable Role in Mosques" .

The Columbia Journalist . Archived from the original on 2006-05-27 . Retrieved 2006-04-09 .

^ [1] Archived August 9, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ Keller, Rosemary Skinner; Ruether, Rosemary Radford; Cantlon, Marie (2006).

Encyclopedia of Women and Religion in North America: Women and religion ... – Google Books . Indiana University Press.

ISBN 9780253346865 . Retrieved 2013-09-09 .

^ Smith, Jane L.

Islam in America . Columbia University Press (2000): p111 Archived 2015-10-25 at the Wayback Machine .

ISBN 0-231-10967-9 .

External links [ edit ] Rasoulallah.net – entries about Women in Islam Sultan.org – Islamic portal dealing with many points related to women in Islam Women in the Qur'an, hadith, and fiqh/jurisprudence Behind Closed Doors with a Girl – Shia Perspective on being alone with a member of the opposite gender Archived 2016-06-17 at the Wayback Machine Shia perspective on shaking hands with opposite gender and exceptions Archived 2016-08-02 at the Wayback Machine v t e Islam topics Outline of Islam Beliefs God in Islam Allah Tawhid Muhammad In Islam Prophets of Islam Angels Revelation Qadar Judgement Day Holiest sites Five Pillars Shahada Salah Sawm Zakat Hajj History Leaders Timeline of the history of Islam Succession to Muhammad Early conquests Golden Age Historiography Sahaba Ahl al-Bayt Shi'a Imams Caliphates Rashidun Umayyad Abbasid Córdoba Fatimid Almohad Sokoto Ottoman Religious texts Quran Hadith Tafsir Seerah Story of Prophets Denominations Sunni Ash'arism Atharism Maturidism Mu'tazili Salafi Wahhabism Sufi Shia Twelver Shi'ism Isma'ilism Alawites Alevism Bektashi Alevism Zaydism Muhakkima / Khawarij Azariqa Moderate Kharijites Ibadi Azzabas Nukkari Wahbi Sufri Najdat Nation of Islam Ahmadiyya Lahori Quranism Non-denominational Life Culture Animals Art Association football Calendar Children Clothing Flags Holidays Mosques Madrasas Moral teachings Music Peace Pacifism Philosophy Political aspects Democracy Petro-Islam Liberalism and progressivism Qurbani Science Social welfare Women LGBT Islam by country Law Jurisprudence Economics Banking Economic history Sukuk Takaful Murabaha Riba Hygiene Ghusl Miswak Najis Tayammum Toilet Wudu Family Marriage Sex Haya Marriage contract Mahr Mahram Nikah Nikah mut'ah Zina Other aspects Baligh Cleanliness Criminal Violence Domestic violence Islamic extremism Islamic terrorism Apostasy Blasphemy Death penalty Dhabiĥa Dhimmi Divorce Diet Ethics Etiquette Gambling Gender segregation Honorifics Hudud Inheritance Jizya Leadership Ma malakat aymanukum Military POWs Slavery Sources of law Theological Kalam Schools of islamic jurisprudence Islamic studies Arts Arabesque Architecture Calligraphy Carpets Gardens Geometric patterns Music Pottery Medieval science Alchemy and chemistry Astronomy Cosmology Geography and cartography Mathematics Medicine Ophthalmology Physics Philosophy Early Contemporary Eschatology Theological Other areas Astrology Creationism (evolution) Feminism Inventions Literature poetry Psychology Shu'ubiyya Conversion to mosques Other Other religions Christianity Catholicism Mormonism Protestantism Druzism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Sikhism Apostasy Apostasy in Islam by country Ex-Muslims List of former Muslims List of ex-Muslim organisations Related topics Criticism of Islam Muhammad Quran Cultural Muslim Islamism Criticism Post-Islamism Qutbism Islamophobia Islamic view of miracles Nursing Persecution of Muslims Minority Muslim Sectarian Quran and miracles Symbolism Islam portal Category v t e Segregation in countries by type (in some countries, categories overlap) Religious Partition of India Northern Ireland Israel Serbia Greece and Turkey Partition of Bengal Portugal Saudi Arabia Spain Bahrain Myanmar Ethnic and racial Canada Bahrain Brazil Bulgaria and Romania Bulgaria Czechoslovakia and Hungary Dominican Republic Fiji France Germany Israel Malaysia Portugal Rhodesia Apartheid in South Africa Spain United Kingdom United States Civil War Separate but equal School segregation Brown v. Board of Education Massive resistance Anti-miscegenation laws Gender Islam Afghanistan Iran Saudi Arabia Judaism Sex segregation in public restrooms Separatist feminism Dynamics Auto-segregation Balkanization Ethnic cleansing Ethnic federalism Bantustan Ethnopluralism Ethnocracy Exclusionary zoning Forced migration Internment labor camps Residential segregation in the United States Segregation academy (United States) Social exclusion Related topics Apartheid laws Anti-miscegenation laws Black Codes Corporative federalism Discrimination Ghetto benches Hafrada Jim Crow laws Majority minority Nativism Nuremberg Laws Racism Rankism Religious intolerance Reservation in India Second-class citizen Separate school (Canada) Shunning Social apartheid White Australia policy Xenophobia See also: Pillarisation Category caste gender racial Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Islam_and_gender_segregation&oldid=1305875636 " Categories : Gender and Islam Islamism Modesty in Islam Sex segregation Sex segregation and Islam Sexuality and society Sharia Hidden categories: Pages with reference errors Pages with broken reference names Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Persian-language sources (fa) CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2019 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking reliable references from January 2019 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with excerpts Articles that may contain original research from April 2014 All articles that may contain original research Articles containing Persian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Articles containing Bosnian-language text Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 15:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Islam and gender segregation 6 languages Add topic

