Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 World War II 1.3 Cold War politics and anticolonialism 1.4 Later life and death 2 Thought 3 Career as public intellectual 4 Literature 5 Allegations of sexual abuse 6 Works Toggle Works subsection 6.1 Novels and short story collections 6.1.1 The Roads to Freedom 6.2 Plays 6.3 Screenplays 6.4 Autobiographical 6.5 Philosophic essays 7 See also 8 References 9 Sources 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle External links subsection 11.1 By Sartre 11.2 On Sartre Toggle the table of contents Jean-Paul Sartre 147 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego گیلکی 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Madhurâ Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Picard Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Yerwa Kanuri Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French existentialist philosopher (1905–1980) "Sartre" redirects here. For other uses, see Sartre (disambiguation) .

Jean-Paul Sartre Sartre in 1965 Born Jean-Paul Charles Aymard Sartre ( 1905-06-21 ) 21 June 1905 Paris , France Died 15 April 1980 (1980-04-15) (aged 74) Paris, France Partner Simone de Beauvoir (1929–1980) Awards Nobel Prize for Literature (1964, declined) Education Education École normale supérieure ( BA , MA ) Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy , existentialism , phenomenology , existential phenomenology , [ 1 ] hermeneutics , [ 1 ] Western Marxism , anarchism Main interests Metaphysics , epistemology , ethics , consciousness , self-consciousness , literature , political philosophy , ontology Notable ideas Bad faith , " existence precedes essence ", nothingness , "Hell is other people", situation , transcendence of the ego ("every positional consciousness of an object is a non-positional consciousness of itself"), [ 2 ] [ 3 ] the imaginary , being for itself , neocolonialism Signature Simone de Beauvoir and Jean-Paul Sartre in Beijing , 1955 Jean-Paul Charles Aymard Sartre ( / ˈ s ɑːr t r ə / , US also / ˈ s ɑːr t / ; [ 4 ] French: [saʁtʁ] ; 21 June 1905 – 15 April 1980) was a French philosopher, playwright, novelist, screenwriter, political activist, biographer, and literary critic , considered a leading figure in 20th-century French philosophy and Marxism . Sartre was one of the key figures in the philosophy of existentialism (and phenomenology ). His work has influenced sociology, critical theory , post-colonial theory , and literary studies . He was awarded the 1964 Nobel Prize in Literature despite attempting to refuse it, saying that he always declined official honors and that "a writer should not allow himself to be turned into an institution." [ 5 ] Sartre held an open relationship with prominent feminist and fellow existentialist philosopher Simone de Beauvoir . Together, Sartre and de Beauvoir challenged the cultural and social assumptions and expectations of their upbringings, which they considered bourgeois , in both lifestyles and thought. The conflict between oppressive, spiritually destructive conformity ( mauvaise foi , literally, ' bad faith ') and an " authentic " way of " being " became the dominant theme of Sartre's early work, a theme embodied in his principal philosophical work Being and Nothingness ( L'Être et le Néant , 1943).

[ 6 ] Sartre's introduction to his philosophy is his work Existentialism Is a Humanism ( L'existentialisme est un humanisme , 1946), originally presented as a lecture.

Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Jean-Paul Sartre was born on 21 June 1905 in Paris as the only child of Jean-Baptiste Sartre, an officer of the French Navy , and Anne-Marie (Schweitzer).

[ 7 ] When Sartre was two years old, his father died of an illness, which he most likely contracted in Indochina . Anne-Marie moved back to her parents' house in Meudon , where she raised Sartre with help from her father Charles Schweitzer, a teacher of German who taught Sartre mathematics and introduced him to classical literature at a very early age.

[ 8 ] When he was twelve, Sartre's mother remarried, and the family moved to La Rochelle , where he was frequently bullied, in part due to the wandering of his blind right eye (sensory exotropia ).

[ 9 ] As a teenager in the 1920s, Sartre became attracted to philosophy upon reading Henri Bergson 's essay Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness .

[ 10 ] He attended the Cours Hattemer , a private school in Paris.

[ 11 ] He studied and earned certificates in psychology, history of philosophy, logic, general philosophy, ethics and sociology, and physics, as well as his diplôme d'études supérieures [ fr ] (roughly equivalent to an MA ) in Paris at the École Normale Supérieure (ENS), an institution of higher education that was the alma mater for several prominent French thinkers and intellectuals.

[ 12 ] (His 1928 MA thesis under the title "L'Image dans la vie psychologique: rôle et nature" ["Image in Psychological Life: Role and Nature"] was supervised by Henri Delacroix .) [ 12 ] It was at ENS that Sartre began his lifelong, sometimes fractious, friendship with Raymond Aron .

[ 13 ] Perhaps the most decisive influence on Sartre's philosophical development was his weekly attendance at Alexandre Kojève 's seminars, which continued for a number of years.

[ 14 ] From his first years in the École normale , Sartre was one of its fiercest pranksters .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] In 1927, his antimilitarist satirical cartoon in the revue of the school, which he co-wrote with Georges Canguilhem , particularly upset the director Gustave Lanson .

[ 17 ] In the same year, with his comrades Nizan, Larroutis, Baillou and Herland, [ 18 ] he organized a media prank following Charles Lindbergh 's successful New York City–Paris flight; Sartre & Co. called newspapers and informed them that Lindbergh was going to be awarded an honorary École degree. Many newspapers, including Le Petit Parisien , announced the event on 25 May. Thousands, including journalists and curious spectators, showed up, unaware that what they were witnessing was a stunt involving a Lindbergh look-alike .

[ 17 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] The scandal led Lanson to resign.

[ 17 ] In 1929 at the École normale, he met Simone de Beauvoir , who studied at the Sorbonne and later went on to become a noted philosopher, writer, and feminist. The two became inseparable and lifelong companions, initiating a romantic relationship, [ 21 ] though they were not monogamous .

[ 22 ] The first time Sartre took the agrégation , he failed. He took it a second time and virtually tied for first place with Beauvoir, although Sartre was eventually awarded first place, with Beauvoir second.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] From 1931 until 1945, Sartre taught at various lycées of Le Havre (at the Lycée de Le Havre, the present-day Lycée François-Ier (Le Havre) [ fr ] , 1931–1936), Laon (at the Lycée de Laon, 1936–37), and, finally, Paris (at the Lycée Pasteur , 1937–1939, and at the Lycée Condorcet , 1941–1944; [ 25 ] see below ).

In 1932, Sartre read Voyage au bout de la nuit by Louis-Ferdinand Céline , a book that had a remarkable influence on him.

[ 26 ] In 1933–34, he succeeded Raymond Aron at the Institut français d'Allemagne in Berlin where he studied Edmund Husserl 's phenomenological philosophy. Aron had already advised him in 1930 to read Emmanuel Levinas 's Théorie de l'intuition dans la phénoménologie de Husserl ( The Theory of Intuition in Husserl's Phenomenology ).

[ 27 ] The neo-Hegelian revival led by Alexandre Kojève and Jean Hyppolite in the 1930s inspired a whole generation of French thinkers, including Sartre, to discover Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit .

[ 28 ] World War II [ edit ] In 1939, Sartre was drafted into the French Army , where he served as a meteorologist .

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] He was captured by German troops in 1940 in Padoux , [ 31 ] and he spent nine months as a prisoner of war —in Nancy and finally in Stalag XII-D [ fr ] , Trier , where he wrote his first theatrical piece, Barionà, fils du tonnerre , a drama concerning Christmas. It was during this period of confinement that Sartre read Martin Heidegger 's Sein und Zeit , later to become a major influence on his own essay on phenomenological ontology . Because of poor health (he claimed that his poor eyesight and exotropia affected his balance), Sartre was released in April 1941. According to other sources, he escaped after a medical visit to the ophthalmologist.

[ 32 ] Given civilian status, he recovered his teaching position at Lycée Pasteur near Paris and settled at the Hotel Mistral. In October 1941, he was given a position, previously held by a Jewish teacher who had been forbidden to teach by Vichy law , at Lycée Condorcet in Paris.

Sartre (third from left) and other French journalists visit General George C. Marshall in the Pentagon, 1945.

After coming back to Paris in May 1941, he participated in the founding of the underground group Socialisme et Liberté ("Socialism and Liberty") with other writers Simone de Beauvoir , Maurice Merleau-Ponty , Jean-Toussaint Desanti , Dominique Desanti , Jean Kanapa, and École Normale students. In spring of 1941, Sartre suggested with "cheerful ferocity" at a meeting that the Socialisme et Liberté assassinate prominent war collaborators like Marcel Déat , but de Beauvoir noted his idea was rejected as "none of us felt qualified to make bombs or hurl grenades".

[ 33 ] The British historian Ian Ousby observed that the French always had far more hatred for collaborators than they did for the Germans, noting it was French people like Déat that Sartre wanted to assassinate rather than the military governor of France, General Otto von Stülpnagel , and the popular slogan always was "Death to Laval !" rather than "Death to Hitler !".

[ 34 ] In August Sartre and de Beauvoir went to the French Riviera seeking the support of André Gide and André Malraux . However, both Gide and Malraux were undecided, and this may have been the cause of Sartre's disappointment and discouragement.

Socialisme et liberté soon dissolved and Sartre decided to write instead of being involved in active resistance. He then wrote Being and Nothingness , The Flies , and No Exit , none of which were censored by the Germans, and also contributed to both legal and illegal literary magazines.

In his essay "Paris under the Occupation ", Sartre wrote that the "correct" behaviour of the Germans had entrapped too many Parisians into complicity with the occupation, accepting what was unnatural as natural: The Germans did not stride, revolver in hand, through the streets. They did not force civilians to make way for them on the pavement. They would offer seats to old ladies on the Metro. They showed great fondness for children and would pat them on the cheek. They had been told to behave correctly and being well-disciplined, they tried shyly and conscientiously to do so. Some of them even displayed a naive kindness which could find no practical expression.

[ 35 ] Sartre noted when Wehrmacht soldiers asked Parisians politely in their German-accented French for directions, people usually felt embarrassed and ashamed as they tried their best to help out the Wehrmacht which led Sartre to remark "We could not be natural ".

[ 36 ] French was a language widely taught in German schools and most Germans could speak at least some French. Sartre himself always found it difficult when a Wehrmacht soldier asked him for directions, usually saying he did not know where it was that the soldier wanted to go, but still felt uncomfortable as the very act of speaking to the Wehrmacht meant he had been complicit in the Occupation.

[ 37 ] Ousby wrote: "But, in however humble a fashion, everyone still had to decide how they were going to cope with life in a fragmenting society ... So Sartre's worries ... about how to react when a German soldier stopped him in the street and asked politely for directions were not as fussily inconsequential as they might sound at first. They were emblematic of how the dilemmas of the Occupation presented themselves in daily life".

[ 37 ] Sartre wrote the very "correctness" of the Germans caused moral corruption in many people who used the "correct" behavior of the Germans as an excuse for passivity, and the very act of simply trying to live one's day-to-day existence without challenging the occupation aided the " New Order in Europe", which depended upon the passivity of ordinary people to accomplish its goals.

[ 35 ] Throughout the occupation, it was German policy to plunder France, and food shortages were always a major problem as the majority of food from the French countryside went to Germany.

[ 38 ] Sartre wrote about the "languid existence" of the Parisians as people waited obsessively for the one weekly arrival of trucks bringing food from the countryside that the Germans allowed, writing: "Paris would grow peaked and yawn with hunger under the empty sky. Cut off from the rest of the world, fed only through the pity or some ulterior motive, the town led a purely abstract and symbolic life".

[ 38 ] Sartre himself lived on a diet of rabbits sent to him by a friend of de Beauvoir living in Anjou .

[ 39 ] The rabbits were usually in an advanced state of decay, full of maggots, and despite being hungry, Sartre once threw out one rabbit as uneatable, saying it had more maggots in it than meat.

[ 39 ] Sartre also remarked that conversations at the Café de Flore between intellectuals had changed, as the fear that one of them might be a mouche (informer) or a writer of the corbeau (anonymous denunciatory letters) meant that no one really said what they meant anymore, imposing self-censorship.

[ 40 ] Sartre and his friends at the Café de Flore had reasons for their fear; by September 1940, the Abwehr alone had already recruited 32,000 French people to work as mouches while by 1942 the Paris Kommandantur was receiving an average of 1,500 letters per day sent by the corbeaux .

[ 41 ] Sartre wrote under the occupation Paris had become a "sham", resembling the empty wine bottles displayed in shop windows as all of the wine had been exported to Germany, looking like the old Paris, but hollowed out, as what had made Paris special was gone.

[ 42 ] Paris had almost no cars on the streets during the occupation as the oil went to Germany while the Germans imposed a nightly curfew, which led Sartre to remark that Paris "was peopled by the absent".

[ 43 ] Sartre also noted that people began to disappear under the occupation, writing: One day you might phone a friend and the phone would ring for a long time in an empty flat. You would go round and ring the doorbell, but no-one would answer it. If the concierge forced the door, you would find two chairs standing close together in the hall with the fag-ends of German cigarettes on the floor between their legs. If the wife or mother of the man who had vanished had been present at his arrest, she would tell you that he had been taken away by very polite Germans, like those who asked the way in the street. And when she went to ask what had happened to them at the offices in the Avenue Foch or the Rue des Saussaies she would be politely received and sent away with comforting words" [No. 11 Rue des Saussaies was the headquarters of the Gestapo in Paris].

[ 44 ] Sartre wrote the feldgrau ("field grey") uniforms of the Wehrmacht and the green uniforms of the Order Police which had seemed so alien in 1940 had become accepted, as people were numbed into accepting what Sartre called "a pale, dull green, unobtrusive strain, which the eye almost expected to find among the dark clothes of the civilians".

[ 45 ] Under the occupation, the French often called the Germans les autres ("the others"), which inspired Sartre's aphorism in his play Huis clos (" No Exit ") of " l'enfer, c'est les Autres " ("Hell is other people").

[ 46 ] Sartre intended the line " l'enfer, c'est les Autres " at least in part to be a dig at the German occupiers.

[ 46 ] Sartre was a very active contributor to Combat , a newspaper created during the clandestine period by Albert Camus , a philosopher and author who held similar beliefs. Sartre and de Beauvoir remained friends with Camus until 1951, with the publication of Camus's The Rebel . Sartre wrote extensively post-war about neglected minority groups, namely French Jews and black people . In 1946, he published Anti-Semite and Jew , after having published the first part of the essay, "Portrait de l'antisémite", the year before in Les Temps modernes, No. 3.

In the essay, in the course of explaining the etiology of "hate" as the hater's projective fantasies when reflecting on the Jewish question , he attacks antisemitism in France [ 47 ] during a time when the Jews who came back from concentration camps were quickly abandoned.

[ 48 ] In 1947, Sartre published several articles concerning the condition of African Americans in the United States—specifically the racism and discrimination against them in the country—in his second Situations collection. Then, in 1948, for the introduction of Léopold Sédar Senghor 's l'Anthologie de la nouvelle poésie nègre et malgache (Anthology of New Negro and Malagasy Poetry) , he wrote "Black Orpheus" (re-published in Situations III), a critique of colonialism and racism in light of the philosophy Sartre developed in Being and Nothingness.

Later, while Sartre was labeled by some authors as a resistant, the French philosopher and resistant Vladimir Jankelevitch criticized Sartre's lack of political commitment during the German occupation, and interpreted his further struggles for liberty as an attempt to redeem himself. According to Camus, Sartre was a writer who resisted; not a resister who wrote.

In 1945, after the war ended, Sartre moved to an apartment on the rue Bonaparte , where he was to produce most of his subsequent work and where he lived until 1962. It was from there that he helped establish a quarterly literary and political review , Les Temps modernes ( Modern Times ), in part to popularize his thought.

[ 49 ] He ceased teaching and devoted his time to writing and political activism. He would draw on his war experiences for his great trilogy of novels, Les Chemins de la Liberté ( The Roads to Freedom ) (1945–1949).

Cold War politics and anticolonialism [ edit ] Jean-Paul Sartre (middle) and Simone de Beauvoir (left) meeting with Che Guevara (right) in Cuba, 1960 The first period of Sartre's career, defined in large part by Being and Nothingness (1943), gave way to a second period—when the world was perceived as split into communist and capitalist blocs—of highly publicized political involvement. Sartre tended to glorify the Resistance after the war as the uncompromising expression of morality in action, and recalled that the résistants were a "band of brothers" who had enjoyed "real freedom" in a way that did not exist before nor after the war.

[ 50 ] Sartre was "merciless" in attacking anyone who had collaborated or remained passive during the German occupation; for instance, criticizing Camus for signing an appeal to spare the collaborationist writer Robert Brasillach from being executed.

[ 50 ] His 1948 play Les mains sales ( Dirty Hands ) in particular explored the problem of being a politically "engaged" intellectual. He embraced Marxism but did not join the Communist Party . For a time in the late 1940s, Sartre described French nationalism as "provincial" and in a 1949 essay called for a "United States of Europe".

[ 51 ] In an essay published in the June 1949 edition of the journal Politique étrangère , Sartre wrote: If we want French civilization to survive, it must be fitted into the framework of a great European civilization. Why? I have said that civilization is the reflection on a shared situation. In Italy, in France, in Benelux, in Sweden, in Norway, in Germany, in Greece, in Austria, everywhere we find the same problems and the same dangers ... But this cultural polity has prospects only as elements of a policy which defends Europe's cultural autonomy vis-à-vis America and the Soviet Union, but also its political and economic autonomy, with the aim of making Europe a single force between the blocs, not a third bloc, but an autonomous force which will refuse to allow itself to be torn into shreds between American optimism and Russian scientificism.

[ 52 ] About the Korean War, Sartre wrote: "I have no doubt that the South Korean feudalists and the American imperialists have promoted this war. But I do not doubt either that it was begun by the North Koreans".

[ 53 ] In July 1950, Sartre wrote in Les Temps Modernes about his and de Beauvoir's attitude to the Soviet Union: As we were neither members of the [Communist] party nor its avowed sympathizers, it was not our duty to write about Soviet labor camps; we were free to remain aloof from the quarrel over the nature of this system, provided that no events of sociological significance had occurred.

[ 54 ] Sartre held that the Soviet Union was a "revolutionary" state working for the betterment of humanity and could be criticized only for failing to live up to its own ideals, but that critics had to take in mind that the Soviet state needed to defend itself against a hostile world; by contrast Sartre held that the failures of "bourgeois" states were due to their innate shortcomings.

[ 50 ] The Swiss journalist François Bondy wrote that, based on a reading of Sartre's numerous essays, speeches and interviews "a simple basic pattern never fails to emerge: social change must be comprehensive and revolutionary" and the parties that promote the revolutionary charges "may be criticized, but only by those who completely identify themselves with its purpose, its struggle and its road to power", deeming Sartre's position to be "existentialist".

[ 50 ] Sartre believed at this time in the moral superiority of the Eastern Bloc , arguing that this belief was necessary "to keep hope alive" [ 55 ] and opposed any criticism of Soviet Union [ 56 ] to the extent that Maurice Merleau-Ponty called him an "ultra-Bolshevik".

[ 57 ] Sartre's expression "workers of Billancourt must not be deprived of their hopes" [ 57 ] ( Fr . "il ne faut pas désespérer Billancourt"), became a catchphrase meaning communist activists should not tell the whole truth to the workers in order to avoid decline in their revolutionary enthusiasm.

[ 58 ] In 1954, just after Stalin's death, Sartre visited the Soviet Union, which he stated he found a "complete freedom of criticism" while condemning the United States for sinking into "prefascism".

[ 59 ] Sartre wrote about those Soviet writers expelled from the Soviet Writers' Union "still had the opportunity of rehabilitating themselves by writing better books".

[ 60 ] Sartre's comments on Hungarian revolution of 1956 are quite representative to his frequently contradictory and changing views. On one hand, Sartre saw in Hungary a true reunification between intellectuals and workers [ 61 ] only to criticize it for "losing socialist base".

[ 62 ] In 1964 Sartre attacked Khrushchev's "Secret Speech" which condemned the Stalinist repressions and purges . Sartre argued that "the masses were not ready to receive the truth".

[ 63 ] In 1969 Sartre, along with other fifteen prominent French writers, including Louis Aragon and Michel Butor , signed the letter of protest against the expulsion of "the writer most representative of the great Russian tradition, Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn – already a victim of Stalinist repression", from the Union of Soviet Writers .

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] In 1973 he argued that "revolutionary authority always needs to get rid of some people that threaten it, and their death is the only way".

[ 66 ] A number of people, starting from Frank Gibney in 1961, classified Sartre as a " useful idiot " due to his uncritical position.

[ 67 ] Sartre came to admire the Polish leader Władysław Gomułka , a man who favored a "Polish road to socialism" and wanted more independence for Poland, but was loyal to the Soviet Union because of the Oder-Neisse line issue.

[ 68 ] Sartre's newspaper Les Temps Modernes devoted a number of special issues in 1957 and 1958 to Poland under Gomułka, praising him for his reforms.

[ 68 ] Bondy wrote of the notable contradiction between Sartre's "ultra Bolshevism" as he expressed admiration for the Chinese leader Mao Zedong as the man who led the oppressed masses of the Third World into revolution while also praising more moderate Communist leaders like Gomułka.

[ 68 ] As an anti-colonialist, Sartre took a prominent role in the struggle against French rule in Algeria, and the use of torture and concentration camps by the French in Algeria. He became an eminent supporter of the FLN in the Algerian War and was one of the signatories of the Manifeste des 121 . Consequently, Sartre became a domestic target of the paramilitary Organisation armée secrète (OAS), escaping two bomb attacks in the early '60s.

[ 69 ] He later argued in 1959 that each French person was responsible for the collective crimes during the Algerian War of Independence .

[ 70 ] (He had an Algerian mistress, Arlette Elkaïm , who became his adopted daughter in 1965.) He opposed U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War and, along with Bertrand Russell and others, organized a tribunal intended to expose U.S.

war crimes , which became known as the Russell Tribunal in 1967.

Sketch of Sartre for The New York Times by Reginald Gray , 1965 His work after Stalin's death, the Critique de la raison dialectique ( Critique of Dialectical Reason ), appeared in 1960 (a second volume appearing posthumously). In the Critique Sartre set out to give Marxism a more vigorous intellectual defense than it had received until then; he ended by concluding that Marx's notion of "class" as an objective entity was fallacious. Sartre's emphasis on the humanist values in the early works of Marx led to a dispute with a leading leftist intellectual in France in the 1960s, Louis Althusser , who claimed that the ideas of the young Marx were decisively superseded by the "scientific" system of the later Marx. In the late 1950s, Sartre began to argue that the European working classes were too apolitical to carry out the revolution predicated by Marx, and influenced by Frantz Fanon started to argue it was the impoverished masses of the Third World, the "real damned of the earth", who would carry out the revolution.

[ 71 ] A major theme of Sartre's political essays in the 1960s was of his disgust with the "Americanization" of the French working class who would much rather watch American TV shows dubbed into French than agitate for a revolution.

[ 50 ] Sartre was a sponsor of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee .

[ 72 ] He went to Cuba in the 1960s to meet Fidel Castro and spoke with Ernesto "Che" Guevara . After Guevara's death, Sartre would declare him to be "not only an intellectual but also the most complete human being of our age" [ 73 ] and the "era's most perfect man".

[ 74 ] Sartre would also compliment Guevara by professing that "he lived his words, spoke his own actions and his story and the story of the world ran parallel".

[ 75 ] However he stood against the persecution of gays by Castro's government, which he compared to Nazi persecution of the Jews, and said: "In Cuba there are no Jews, but there are homosexuals".

[ 76 ] During a collective hunger strike in 1974, Sartre visited Red Army Faction member Andreas Baader in Stammheim Prison and criticized the harsh conditions of imprisonment.

[ 77 ] Towards the end of his life, Sartre began to describe himself as a "special kind" of anarchist .

[ 78 ] Later life and death [ edit ] Hélène de Beauvoir 's house in Goxwiller , where Sartre tried to hide from the media after being awarded the Nobel Prize In 1964, Sartre renounced literature in a witty and sardonic account of the first ten years of his life, Les Mots ( The Words ). The book is an ironic counterblast to Marcel Proust , whose reputation had unexpectedly eclipsed that of André Gide (who had provided the model of littérature engagée for Sartre's generation). Literature, Sartre concluded, functioned ultimately as a bourgeois substitute for real commitment in the world. In October 1964, Sartre was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature , but he declined it. He was the first Nobel laureate to voluntarily decline the prize, [ 79 ] and remains one of only two laureates to do so.

[ 80 ] According to Lars Gyllensten , in the book Minnen, bara minnen ("Memories, Only Memories") published in 2000, Sartre himself or someone close to him got in touch with the Swedish Academy in 1975 with a request for the prize money, but was refused.

[ 81 ] In 1945, he had refused the Légion d'honneur .

[ 82 ] The Nobel prize was announced on 22 October 1964; on 14 October, Sartre had written a letter to the Nobel Institute, asking to be removed from the list of nominees, and warning that he would not accept the prize if awarded, but the letter went unread; [ 83 ] on 23 October, Le Figaro published a statement by Sartre explaining his refusal. He said he did not wish to be "transformed" by such an award, and did not want to take sides in an East vs. West cultural struggle by accepting an award from a prominent Western cultural institution.

[ 83 ] Nevertheless, he was that year's prizewinner.

[ 84 ] Sartre in Venice in 1967 Though his name was then a household word (as was "existentialism" during the tumultuous 1960s), Sartre remained a simple man with few possessions, actively committed to causes until the end of his life, such as the May 1968 strikes in Paris during the summer of 1968 during which he was arrested for civil disobedience . President Charles de Gaulle intervened and pardoned him, commenting that "you don't arrest Voltaire ".

[ 85 ] Sartre's and de Beauvoir's grave in the cimetière du Montparnasse Sartre's and de Beauvoir's grave in 2016, with a new gravestone. Note the Metro tickets left by visitors.

In 1975, when asked how he would like to be remembered, Sartre replied: I would like [people] to remember Nausea , [my plays] No Exit and The Devil and the Good Lord , and then my two philosophical works, more particularly the second one, Critique of Dialectical Reason . Then my essay on Genet , Saint Genet . ... If these are remembered, that would be quite an achievement, and I don't ask for more. As a man, if a certain Jean-Paul Sartre is remembered, I would like people to remember the milieu or historical situation in which I lived, ... how I lived in it, in terms of all the aspirations which I tried to gather up within myself.

[ 86 ] Sartre's physical condition deteriorated, partially because of the merciless pace of work (and the use of amphetamine ) [ 87 ] he put himself through during the writing of the Critique and a massive analytical biography of Gustave Flaubert ( The Family Idiot ), both of which remained unfinished. He had hypertension, [ 88 ] and became almost completely blind in 1973. Sartre was a notorious chain smoker , which could also have contributed to the deterioration of his health.

[ 89 ] Sartre died on 15 April 1980 in Paris from pulmonary edema . He had not wanted to be buried at Père-Lachaise Cemetery between his mother and stepfather, so it was arranged that he be buried at Montparnasse Cemetery . At his funeral on Saturday, 19 April, 50,000 Parisians descended onto boulevard du Montparnasse to accompany Sartre's cortege.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] The funeral started at "the hospital at 2:00 p.m., then filed through the fourteenth arrondissement, past all Sartre's haunts, and entered the cemetery through the gate on the Boulevard Edgar Quinet". Sartre was initially buried in a temporary grave to the left of the cemetery gate.

[ 92 ] Four days later the body was disinterred for cremation at Père-Lachaise Cemetery, and his ashes were reburied at the permanent site in Montparnasse Cemetery, to the right of the cemetery gate.

[ 93 ] Thought [ edit ] See also: Being and Nothingness Sartre's primary idea is that people, as humans, are "condemned to be free".

[ 94 ] He explained, "This may seem paradoxical because condemnation is normally an external judgment which constitutes the conclusion of a judgment. Here, it is not the human who has chosen to be like this. There is a contingency of human existence. It is a condemnation of their being. Their being is not determined, so it is up to everyone to create their own existence, for which they are then responsible. They cannot not be free, there is a form of necessity for freedom, which can never be given up." [ 95 ] This theory relies upon his position that there is no creator, and is illustrated using the example of the paper cutter . Sartre says that if one considered a paper cutter, one would assume that the creator would have had a plan for it: an essence. Sartre said that human beings have no essence before their existence because there is no Creator. Thus: "existence precedes essence".

[ 94 ] This forms the basis for his assertion that because one cannot explain one's own actions and behavior by referring to any specific human nature, they are necessarily fully responsible for those actions. "We are left alone, without excuse." "We can act without being determined by our past which is always separated from us." [ 96 ] Sartre maintained that the concepts of authenticity and individuality have to be earned but not learned. We need to experience "death consciousness" so as to wake up ourselves as to what is really important; the authentic in our lives which is life experience, not knowledge.

[ 97 ] Death draws the final point when we as beings cease to live for ourselves and permanently become objects that exist only for the outside world.

[ 98 ] In this way death emphasizes the burden of our free, individual existence. "We can oppose authenticity to an inauthentic way of being. Authenticity consists in experiencing the indeterminate character of existence in anguish. It is also to know how to face it by giving meaning to our actions and by recognizing ourselves as the author of this meaning. On the other hand, an inauthentic way of being consists in running away, in lying to oneself in order to escape this anguish and the responsibility for one's own existence." [ 95 ] While Sartre had been influenced by Heidegger, the publication of Being and Nothingness did mark a split in their perspectives, with Heidegger remarking in Letter on Humanism : Existentialism says existence precedes essence. In this statement he is taking existentia and essentia according to their metaphysical meaning, which, from Plato's time on, has said that essentia precedes existentia . Sartre reverses this statement. But the reversal of a metaphysical statement remains a metaphysical statement. With it, he stays with metaphysics, in oblivion of the truth of Being.

[ 99 ] Herbert Marcuse also had issues with Sartre's metaphysical interpretation of human existence in Being and Nothingness and suggested the work projected anxiety and meaninglessness onto the nature of existence itself: Insofar as Existentialism is a philosophical doctrine, it remains an idealistic doctrine: it hypostatizes specific historical conditions of human existence into ontological and metaphysical characteristics. Existentialism thus becomes part of the very ideology which it attacks, and its radicalism is illusory.

[ 100 ] Sartre also took inspiration from phenomenological epistemology, explained by Franz Adler in this way: "Man chooses and makes himself by acting. Any action implies the judgment that he is right under the circumstances not only for the actor, but also for everybody else in similar circumstances." [ 101 ] Also important is Sartre's analysis of psychological concepts, including his suggestion that consciousness exists as something other than itself, and that the conscious awareness of things is not limited to their knowledge: for Sartre intentionality applies to the emotions as well as to cognitions, to desires as well as to perceptions.

[ 102 ] "When an external object is perceived, consciousness is also conscious of itself, even if consciousness is not its own object: it is a non-positional consciousness of itself." [ 103 ] However his critique of psychoanalysis, particularly of Freud has faced some counter-critique.

Richard Wollheim and Thomas Baldwin argued that Sartre's attempt to show that Sigmund Freud 's theory of the unconscious is mistaken was based on a misinterpretation of Freud.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] Career as public intellectual [ edit ] Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir at the Balzac Memorial While the broad focus of Sartre's life revolved around the notion of human freedom, he began a sustained intellectual participation in more public matters towards the end of the Second World War, around 1944–1945.

[ 106 ] Before World War II, he was content with the role of an apolitical liberal intellectual: "Now teaching at a lycée in Laon ... Sartre made his headquarters the Dome café at the crossing of Montparnasse and Raspail boulevards. He attended plays, read novels, and dined [with] women. He wrote. And he was published." [ 107 ] Sartre and his lifelong companion, de Beauvoir, existed, in her words, where "the world about us was a mere backdrop against which our private lives were played out".

[ 108 ] The war opened Sartre's eyes to a political reality he had not yet understood until forced into continual engagement with it: "the world itself destroyed Sartre's illusions about isolated self-determining individuals and made clear his own personal stake in the events of the time." [ 109 ] Returning to Paris in 1941, he formed the "Socialisme et Liberté" resistance group. In 1943, after the group disbanded, Sartre joined a writers' Resistance group, [ 110 ] in which he remained an active participant until the end of the war. He continued to write ferociously, and it was due to this "crucial experience of war and captivity that Sartre began to try to build up a positive moral system and to express it through literature".

[ 111 ] The symbolic initiation of this new phase in Sartre's work is packaged in the introduction he wrote for a new journal, Les Temps modernes , in October 1945. Here he aligned the journal, and thus himself, with the Left and called for writers to express their political commitment.

[ 112 ] Yet, this alignment was indefinite, directed more to the concept of the Left than a specific party of the Left.

During the trial of Robert Brasillach Sartre was among a small number of prominent intellectuals advocating for his execution for 'intellectual crimes'.

[ 113 ] Sartre's philosophy lent itself to his being a public intellectual . He envisaged culture as a very fluid concept; neither pre-determined, nor definitely finished; instead, in true existential fashion, "culture was always conceived as a process of continual invention and re-invention." This marks Sartre, the intellectual, as a pragmatist , willing to move and shift stance along with events. He did not dogmatically follow a cause other than the belief in human freedom , preferring to retain a pacifist's objectivity. It is this overarching theme of freedom that means his work "subverts the bases for distinctions among the disciplines".

[ 114 ] Therefore, he was able to hold knowledge across a vast array of subjects: "the international world order, the political and economic organisation of contemporary society, especially France, the institutional and legal frameworks that regulate the lives of ordinary citizens, the educational system, the media networks that control and disseminate information. Sartre systematically refused to keep quiet about what he saw as inequalities and injustices in the world." [ 115 ] Sartre always sympathized with the Left, and supported the French Communist Party (PCF) until the 1956 Soviet invasion of Hungary . Following the Liberation the PCF were infuriated by Sartre's philosophy, which appeared to lure young French men and women away from the ideology of communism and into Sartre's own existentialism.

[ 116 ] From 1956 onwards Sartre rejected the claims of the PCF to represent the French working classes, objecting to its "authoritarian tendencies". In the late 1960s Sartre supported the Maoists , a movement that rejected the authority of established communist parties.

[ 1 ] However, despite aligning with the Maoists, Sartre said after the May events: "If one rereads all my books, one will realize that I have not changed profoundly, and that I have always remained an anarchist." [ 117 ] He would later explicitly allow himself to be called an anarchist.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] In the aftermath of a war that had for the first time properly engaged Sartre in political matters, he set forth a body of work which "reflected on virtually every important theme of his early thought and began to explore alternative solutions to the problems posed there".

[ 120 ] The greatest difficulties that he and all public intellectuals of the time faced were the increasing technological aspects of the world that were outdating the printed word as a form of expression. In Sartre's opinion, the "traditional bourgeois literary forms remain innately superior", but there is "a recognition that the new technological 'mass media' forms must be embraced" if Sartre's ethical and political goals as an authentic, committed intellectual are to be achieved: the demystification of bourgeois political practices and the raising of the consciousness, both political and cultural, of the working class.

[ 121 ] Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir and Claude Lanzmann meeting President Gamal Abdel Nasser at his home in Cairo, February 1967 The struggle for Sartre was against the monopolising moguls who were beginning to take over the media and destroy the role of the intellectual. His attempts to reach a public were mediated by these powers, and it was often these powers he had to campaign against. He was skilled enough, however, to circumvent some of these issues by his interactive approach to the various forms of media, advertising his radio interviews in a newspaper column for example, and vice versa.

[ 122 ] Sartre's role as a public intellectual occasionally put him in physical danger, such as in June 1961, when a plastic bomb exploded in the entrance of his apartment building. His public support of Algerian self-determination at the time had led Sartre to become a target of the campaign of terror that mounted as the colonists' position deteriorated. A similar occurrence took place the next year and he had begun to receive threatening letters from Oran , Algeria.

[ 123 ] Sartre's role in this conflict included his comments in his preface to Frantz Fanon 's The Wretched of the Earth that, "To shoot down a European is to kill two birds with one stone, to destroy an oppressor and the man he oppresses at the same time: there remains a dead man and a free man". This comment led to some criticisms from the right, such as by Brian C. Anderson and Michael Walzer . Writing for Dissent , Walzer suggested that Sartre, a European, was a hypocrite for not volunteering to be killed.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] However, Sartre's stances regarding post-colonial conflict have not been entirely without controversy on the left; Sartre's preface is omitted from some editions of The Wretched of the Earth printed after 1967. The reason for this is his public support for Israel in the Six-Day War . Fanon's widow, Josie considered Sartre's pro-Israel stance as inconsistent with the anti-colonialist position of the book, from which his preface was eventually omitted.

[ 126 ] When interviewed at Howard University in 1978, she explained, "when Israel declared war on the Arab countries [during the Six-Day War ], there was a great pro- Zionist movement in favor of Israel among western (French) intellectuals. Sartre took part in this movement. He signed petitions favoring Israel. I felt that his pro-Zionist attitudes were incompatible with Fanon's work".

[ 126 ] Recent reprints of Fanon's book have generally included Sartre's preface.

Literature [ edit ] Sartre wrote successfully in a number of literary modes and made major contributions to literary criticism and literary biography. His plays are richly symbolic and serve as a means of conveying his philosophy. The best-known, Huis-clos ( No Exit ), contains the famous line "L'enfer, c'est les autres", usually translated as "Hell is other people." [ 127 ] Aside from the impact of Nausea , Sartre's major work of fiction was The Roads to Freedom trilogy which charts the progression of how World War II affected Sartre's ideas. In this way, Roads to Freedom presents a less theoretical and more practical approach to existentialism .

John Huston got Sartre to script his film Freud: The Secret Passion .

[ 128 ] However it was too long and Sartre withdrew his name from the film's credits.

[ 129 ] Nevertheless, many key elements from Sartre's script survive in the finished film.

[ 128 ] Despite their similarities as polemicists, novelists, adapters, and playwrights, Sartre's literary work has been counterposed, often pejoratively, to that of Camus in the popular imagination. In 1948 the Roman Catholic Church placed Sartre's œuvre on the Index Librorum Prohibitorum (List of Prohibited Books) .

Allegations of sexual abuse [ edit ] See also: Simone de Beauvoir § Allegations of sexual abuse In 1993, French author Bianca Lamblin (originally Bianca Bienenfeld) wrote in her book Mémoires d'une jeune fille dérangée (Memoirs of a deranged young girl, published in English under the title A Disgraceful Affair ) of her sexual exploitation by Sartre and Beauvoir.

[ 130 ] Lamblin claims that while a student at Lycée Molière, she was sexually exploited by her teacher Beauvoir, who introduced her to Sartre a year later. Bianca wrote her Mémoires in response to the posthumous 1990 publication of Jean-Paul Sartre's Lettres au Castor et à quelques autres: 1926–1963 (Letters to Castor and other friends), in which she noted that she was referred to by the pseudonym Louise Védrine.

[ 131 ] Sartre and Beauvoir frequently followed this pattern, in which Beauvoir would seduce female students and then pass them on to Sartre.

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] [ 134 ] [ 135 ] Works [ edit ] Novels and short story collections [ edit ] Nausea / La nausée (1938) The Wall / Le mur (1939) – collection of 5 short stories The Roads to Freedom [ edit ] The Age of Reason / L'âge de raison (1945) The Reprieve / Le sursis (1945) Troubled Sleep (London ed. (Hamilton) has title: Iron in the Soul ) / La mort dans l'âme (1949) The Last Chance (1949 and 1981) – unfinished Plays [ edit ] Bariona / Bariona, ou le fils du tonnerre (1940) The Flies / Les mouches (1943) No Exit / Huis clos (1944) The Respectful Prostitute / La putain respectueuse (1946) The Victors (Men Without Shadows) / Morts sans sépulture (1946) In the Mesh / L'engrénage (1948) Dirty Hands ( Crime Passionnel, The Assassin, Red Gloves ) / Les mains sales (1948) Intimacy (1949) The Devil and the Good Lord (Lucifer and the Lord ) / Le diable et le bon dieu (1951) Kean (1953) Nekrassov (1955) The Condemned of Altona / Les séquestrés d'Altona (1959) Hurricane over Sugar , written and printed in Brazil, along with Rubem Braga and Fernando Sabino (1960) The Trojan Women / Les Troyennes (1965) Screenplays [ edit ] Typhus , wr. 1944, pub. 2007; adapted as The Proud and the Beautiful The Chips Are Down / Les jeux sont faits (screenplay, dir.

Jean Delannoy ; 1947) The Crucible (screenplay, 1957; dir.

Raymond Rouleau ) Freud: The Secret Passion (screenplay, 1962; dir.

John Huston ; Sartre had his name removed from the film) The Freud Scenario / Le scénario Freud (1984) Autobiographical [ edit ] Sartre By Himself / Sartre par lui-mème (1959) The Words / Les Mots (1964) [ 136 ] Witness to My Life & Quiet Moments in a War / Lettres au Castor et à quelques autres (1983) War Diaries: Notebooks from a Phony War / Les carnets de la drole de guerre (1984) Philosophic essays [ edit ] The Transcendence of the Ego / La transcendance de l'égo (1936) Imagination: A Psychological Critique / L'imagination (1936) Sketch for a Theory of the Emotions / Esquisse d'une théorie des émotions (1939) The Imaginary / L'imaginaire (1940) Being and Nothingness / L'être et le néant (1943) Existentialism Is a Humanism / L'existentialisme est un humanisme (1946) Existentialism and Human Emotions / Existentialisme et émotions humaines (1957) Search for a Method / Question de méthode (1957) Critique of Dialectical Reason / Critique de la raison dialectique (1960, 1985) Notebooks for an Ethics / Cahiers pour une morale (1983) Truth and Existence / Vérité et existence (1989) Anti-Semite and Jew / Réflexions sur la question juive (wr. 1944, pub. 1946) Baudelaire (1946) Situations I: Literary Critiques / Critiques littéraires (1947) [ 137 ] Situations II: What Is Literature?

/ Qu'est-ce que la littérature ?

(1947) "Black Orpheus" / "Orphée noir" (1948) Situations III (1949) Saint Genet , Actor and Martyr / S.G., comédien et martyr (1952) [ 136 ] The Henri Martin Affair / L'affaire Henri Martin (1953) Situations IV: Portraits (1964) Situations V: Colonialism and Neocolonialism (1964) Situations VI: Problems of Marxism, Part 1 (1966) Situations VII: Problems of Marxism, Part 2 (1967) The Family Idiot / L'idiot de la famille (1971–72) Situations VIII: Autour de 1968 (1972) Situations IX: Mélanges (1972) Situations X: Life/Situations: Essays Written and Spoken / Politique et Autobiographie (1976) See also [ edit ] France portal Biography portal Anarchism portal Communism portal Socialism portal Place Jean-Paul-Sartre-et-Simone-de-Beauvoir Sartrean terminology References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Jean-Paul Sartre" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 6 October 2011 . Retrieved 27 October 2011 .

^ Sartre, J.-P. 2004 [1937].

The Transcendence of the Ego . Trans. Andrew Brown. Routledge, p. 7.

^ Siewert, Charles, "Consciousness and Intentionality" Archived 2 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine , The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2011 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

^ "Dictionary.com | Meanings & Definitions of English Words" .

Dictionary.com . Retrieved 18 February 2024 .

^ "Minnen, bara minnen" ( ISBN 978-91-0-057140-5 ) from year 2000 by Lars Gyllensten. Address by Anders Österling, Member of the Swedish Academy. Retrieved 4 February 2012.

^ McCloskey, Deirdre N. (2006).

The Bourgeois Virtues: Ethics for an Age of Commerce . University of Chicago Press. p.

297 .

ISBN 978-0-226-55663-5 .

^ Forrest E. Baird (22 July 1999).

Twentieth Century Philosophy . Prentice Hall. p. 226.

ISBN 978-0-13-021534-5 .

Archived from the original on 19 March 2022 . Retrieved 4 December 2011 .

^ Brabazon, James (1975).

Albert Schweitzer: A Biography . Putnam. p. 28.

^ Leak, Andrew N. (2006), Jean-Paul Sartre , London: Reaktion Books, pp. 16–18.

^ Jean-Paul, Sartre; Arlette Elkaïm-Sartre , Jonathan Webber (2004) [1940].

The Imaginary: A Phenomenological Psychology of the Imagination . Routledge. pp. viii.

ISBN 978-0-415-28755-5 .

^ "Quelques Anciens Celebres" . Hattemer. Archived from the original on 18 June 2015 . Retrieved 30 June 2015 .

^ a b Schrift, Alan D. (2006).

Twentieth-century French Philosophy: Key Themes and Thinkers . Blackwell Publishing. pp.

174–175 .

ISBN 978-1-4051-3217-6 .

^ Memoirs: Fifty Years of Political Reflection , Raymond Aron (1990).

^ Auffret, D. (2002), Alexandre Kojeve. La philosophie, l'Etat, la fin de l'histoire, Paris: B. Grasset.

^ Boulé, Jean-Pierre (2005).

Sartre, Self-formation, and Masculinities . Berghahn Books.

ISBN 978-1-57181-742-6 .

^ Cohen-Solal 1987 , pp. 61–62 "During his first years at the Ecole, Sartre was the fearsome instigator of all the revues, all the jokes, all the scandals." ^ a b c Gerassi 1989 , pp.

76–77 .

^ Godo, Emmanuel (2005).

Sartre en diable (in French). Cerf.

ISBN 978-2-204-07041-6 .

^ Hayman, Ronald (1987).

Sartre: A Life . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-671-45442-5 .

^ "Jean-Paul Sartre Philosopher, Social Advocate" . Tameri.com.

Archived from the original on 28 October 2011 . Retrieved 27 October 2011 .

^ Humphrey, Clark (28 November 2005).

"The People Magazine approach to a literary supercouple" .

The Seattle Times . Archived from the original on 31 December 2007 . Retrieved 20 November 2007 .

^ Siegel, Liliane (1990).

In the Shadow of Sartre . Collins (London). p. 182.

ISBN 978-0-00-215336-2 .

^ Desan, Wilfred, The Tragic Finale: An Essay on the Philosophy of Jean-Paul Sartre (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1960) xiv.

^ Bair, Deirdre, Simone de Beauvoir: A Biography (New York: Touchstone Book, 1990), pp. 145–146.

^ Harold Bloom (ed.), Jean-Paul Sartre , Infobase Publishing, 2009, p. 200.

^ Simone de Beauvoir , La Force de l'âge , Gallimard, 1960, p. 158.

^ Sartre, Jean-Paul (1964), "Merleau-Ponty vivant", in Situations, IV: Portraits , Paris: Gallimard, p. 192.

^ Tidd, Ursula (2004), Simone de Beauvoir , Psychology Press, p. 19.

^ Fulton 1999 , p. 7.

^ Van den Hoven, Adrian; Andrew N. Leak (2005).

Sartre Today: A Centenary Celebration . Andrew N. Leak. Berghahn Books. pp. viii.

ISBN 978-1-84545-166-0 .

^ Boulé, Jean-Pierre (2005).

Sartre, Self-formation, and Masculinities . Berghahn Books. p.

114 .

ISBN 978-1-57181-742-6 .

^ Bakewell, Sarah (2016).

At the Existentialist Café . Chatto&Windus. p. 142.

ISBN 978-1-4735-4532-8 .

^ Ousby 2000 , p. 218.

^ Ousby 2000 , p. 225.

^ a b Ousby 2000 , p. 54.

^ Ousby 2000 , p. 57-58.

^ a b Ousby 2000 , p. 151.

^ a b Ousby 2000 , p. 70.

^ a b Ousby 2000 , p. 127.

^ Ousby 2000 , p. 148.

^ Ousby 2000 , p. 146.

^ Ousby 2000 , p. 161.

^ Ousby 2000 , p. 172.

^ Ousby 2000 , p. 173.

^ Ousby 2000 , p. 170.

^ a b Ousby 2000 , p. 168.

^ Cohen-Solal, Annie; Cabanel, Patrick; Simon-Nahum, Perrine; Jaduken, Jonathen; Melinge, Yoann (7 June 2013).

"Table ronde autour de "Sartre, le judaïsme et le protestantisme" : Sartre et ses contemporains" (à l'occasion de la Nuite Sartre 2013 à l'ENS)" .

savoirs.ens.fr .

Archived from the original on 31 October 2020 . Retrieved 8 December 2020 .

^ Wieviorka, Annette (1995).

Déportation et génocide: entre la mémoire et l'oubli (in French). Hachette. pp.

168– 173.

ISBN 978-2-01-278737-7 .

Archived from the original on 19 August 2020 . Retrieved 8 December 2020 .

^ Fulton 1999 , p. 12.

^ a b c d e Bondy 1967 , p. 26.

^ Bondy 1967 , p. 29.

^ Bondy 1967 , pp. 29–30.

^ Bondy 1967 , p. 34.

^ Bondy 1967 , p. 25.

^ Bondy 1967 , p. 28: "To keep hope alive one must, in spite of all mistakes, horrors, and crimes, recognize the obvious superiority of the socialist camp." ^ Bondy 1967 , p. 38: "In Stalin's day this seemed a private refinement and what was of particular importance then was Sartre's strong resistance to any form of opposition to the communist bloc." ^ a b Bondy 1967 , p. 33.

^ "désespérer Billancourt" .

Langue sauce piquante (in French). 21 December 2007.

Archived from the original on 30 June 2019 . Retrieved 10 March 2020 .

^ Bondy 1967 , p. 28.

^ Bondy 1967 , p. 41.

^ Bondy 1967 , p. 37: "In 1956 Sartre saw in Hungary the kind of revolution of which he had dreamed: a contact between intellectual circles and broadly based mass movements, an activism shared by intellectuals and workers, revolution as an explosion of spontaneity. Reading Sartre's reply to Camus after fourteen years, we are struck by the mixture of dishonesty and bubbling verve with which Sartre indulges in misquotation in order to ridicule his opponents with the quick wit of the experience playwright." ^ "Du côté des intellectuels : Sartre et la Hongrie" .

Lutte Ouvrière : Le Journal (in French).

Archived from the original on 11 August 2020 . Retrieved 10 March 2020 .

^ Sartre, Jean-Paul (19 November 1964). "Nouvel Observateur".

La faute la plus énorme a probablement été le rapport de Khrouchtchev, car la dénonciation publique et solennelle, l'exposition détaillée de tous les crimes d'un personnage sacré qui a représenté si longtemps le régime est une folie quand une telle franchise n'est pas rendue possible par une élévation préalable et considérable du niveau de vie de la population... Le résultat a été de découvrir la vérité à des masses qui n'étaient pas prêtes à la recevoir.

^ Solzhenitsyn: A Soul in Exile . Ignatius Press. January 2011.

ISBN 978-1-58617-496-5 .

^ Solzhenitsyn: A Documentary Record . Harper & Row. 17 April 1971.

ISBN 978-0-06-012487-8 .

^ Judt, Tony (2011).

Past Imperfect: French Intellectuals, 1944–1956 . New York University Press.

^ Gibney, Frank (1961).

The Khrushchev Pattern . Duell, Sloan and Pearce.

Archived from the original on 26 January 2021 . Retrieved 2 October 2020 .

^ a b c Bondy 1967 , p. 38.

^ Mészáros, István (2012).

The Work of Sartre: Search for Freedom and the Challenge of History (Rev. ed.). New York: Monthly Review. p. 16.

ISBN 978-1-58367-293-8 .

^ Le Sueur, James D.; Pierre Bourdieu (2005) [2005].

Uncivil War: Intellectuals and Identity Politics During the Decolonization of Algeria . University of Nebraska Press. p. 178.

ISBN 978-0-8032-8028-1 .

^ Bondy 1967 , p. 27-28.

^ Green, James N. (2010).

We Cannot Remain Silent Opposition to the Brazilian Military Dictatorship in the United States . Duke University Press. p. 60.

^ Khwaja Masud (9 October 2006).

"Remembering Che Guevara" .

The News International . Archived from the original on 12 January 2012 . Retrieved 27 October 2011 .

^ Amazon Review of: 'The Bolivian Diary: Authorized Edition' . Ocean Press. 2006.

ISBN 978-1-920888-24-4 .

^ "People about Che Guevara" .

HeyChe.org . Archived from the original on 3 January 2008.

^ Directed by Néstor Almendros and Orlando Jiménez Leal (1984).

Conducta Impropria .

[ Guido Vitiello (5 January 2010).

Conducta Impropria – Improper Conduct (Part 8) .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2021 . Retrieved 25 May 2018 – via YouTube.

] ^ Jean-Paul Sartre (7 December 1974).

"The Slow Death of Andreas Baader" . Marxists.org.

Archived from the original on 4 December 2008 . Retrieved 2 March 2010 .

^ "R.A. Forum > Sartre par lui-même (Sartre by Himself)" . 30 September 2011. Archived from the original on 30 September 2011 . Retrieved 19 September 2019 .

^ "Nobel Prize in Literature 1964" .

Nobelprize.org (Press release). The Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on 11 July 2006 . Retrieved 11 February 2009 .

^ "Nobel Prize facts" .

NobelPrize.org . Nobel Media AB.

Archived from the original on 15 August 2018 . Retrieved 26 May 2019 .

^ Schueler, Kaj (2 January 2015).

"Sartres brev kom försent till Akademien" [Sartre's letter arrived too late to the Academy].

Svenska Dagbladet (in Swedish).

Archived from the original on 1 December 2016 . Retrieved 1 December 2016 .

^ "Ces personnalités qui ont refusé la Légion d'honneur" .

FIGARO . 2 January 2013.

Archived from the original on 5 October 2014 . Retrieved 17 August 2014 .

^ a b Histoire de lettres Jean-Paul Sartre refuse le Prix Nobel en 1964 Archived 3 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine , Elodie Bessé.

^ "All Nobel Prizes" .

NobelPrize.org . Nobel Media AB.

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 26 May 2019 .

^ Bishop, Tom (7 June 1987), "Superstar of the Mind" , The New York Times .

Archived 4 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Charlesworth, Max (1976).

The Existentialists and Jean-Paul Sartre . University of Queensland Press. p. 154.

ISBN 978-0-7022-1150-8 .

^ "The last days of Jean-Paul Sartre" .

www.newcriterion.com . September 1982.

Archived from the original on 23 August 2019 . Retrieved 23 August 2019 .

^ Hayman 1992 , p. 464.

^ Samuel, Henry (10 March 2005).

"Hell is other people removing your cigarette" .

The Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022.

^ "Histoire du monde.net" .

histoiredumonde.net .

Archived from the original on 6 February 2022 . Retrieved 17 August 2014 .

^ Singer, Daniel (5 June 2000).

"Sartre's Roads to Freedom" .

The Nation . Archived from the original on 2 June 2008 . Retrieved 9 May 2009 .

^ Cohen-Solal 1987 , p. 523.

^ Cohen-Solal 1987 , p. 523; Hayman 1992 , p. 473; de Beauvoir 1984 , "The Farewell Ceremony".

^ a b Existentialism and Humanism , p. 29.

^ a b Malinge 2021 .

^ Malinge 2013 .

^ Sartre (1943) Being and Nothingness , p. 246.

^ Death. (1999). Gordon Hayim (Ed.) Dictionary of Existentialism (p. 105). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.

^ Heidegger, Martin (1978).

Basic Writings from 'Being and Time' (1927) to 'The Task of Thinking' (1964) . Routledge & Kegan Paul.

ISBN 978-0-7100-8646-4 .

^ Marcuse, Herbert. "Sartre's Existentialism". Printed in Studies in Critical Philosophy . Translated by Joris De Bres. London: NLB, 1972. p. 161.

^ Adler, Franz (1949). "The Social Thought of Jean-Paul Sartre".

American Journal of Sociology .

55 (3): 284– 294.

doi : 10.1086/220538 .

S2CID 144247304 .

^ Farina, Gabriella (2014).

Some reflections on the phenomenological method .

Archived 14 February 2019 at the Wayback Machine Dialogues in Philosophy, Mental and Neuro Sciences , 7 (2):50–62.

^ Malinge 2016 .

^ Baldwin, Thomas (1995). Ted Honderich (ed.).

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p.

792 .

ISBN 978-0-19-866132-0 .

^ Wollheim, Richard.

Freud . London, Fontana Press, pp. 157–176.

^ Baert 2015 .

^ Gerassi 1989 , p. 134.

^ Aronson 1980 , p. 21.

^ Aronson 1980 , p. 108.

^ Aronson 2004 , p. 30.

^ Thody 1964 , p. 21.

^ Aronson 1980 , p. 10.

^ David Newcastle, The Rise and Fall of Pierre Drieu la Rochlle , Gilles, Tikhanov Library, 2024, preface ^ Kirsner 2003 , p. 13.

^ Scriven 1999 , p. xii.

^ Scriven 1999 , p. 13.

^ Davis, Lydia; Auster, Paul; Contat, Michel; Sartre, Jean-Paul (7 August 1975).

"Sartre at Seventy: An Interview by Jean-Paul Sartre and Michel Contat" .

The New York Review of Books .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2011 . Retrieved 27 October 2011 .

^ "Sartre par lui-même (Sartre by Himself)" . Raforum.info. 28 September 1966. Archived from the original on 30 September 2011 . Retrieved 27 October 2011 .

^ "Interview with Jean-Paul Sartre" in The Philosophy of Jean-Paul Sartre , ed. P. A. Schilpp, p. 21.

^ Aronson 1980 , p. 121.

^ Scriven 1993 , p. 8.

^ Scriven 1993 , p. 22.

^ Aronson 1980 , p. 157.

^ Brian C. Anderson (1 February 2004).

"The Absolute Intellectual" .

Hoover Institution . Stanford University. Archived from the original on 13 November 2011.

^ Michael Walzer (Spring 2002).

"Can There Be a Decent Left?" .

Dissent . Archived from the original on 18 November 2011.

^ a b Christian Filostrat.

"Frantz Fanon's Widow Speaks: Interview with Frantz Fanon's Widow Josie Fanon" Archived 5 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine .

Negritude Agonistes . Accessed 05 June 2021.

^ Woodward, Kirk (9 July 2010).

"The Most Famous Thing Jean-Paul Sartre Never Said" .

Rick on Theater . Blogger (Google: blogspot.com).

Archived from the original on 8 July 2011 . Retrieved 8 January 2010 .

^ a b Holland, Norman N.

"John Huston, Freud , 1962" .

A Sharper Focus .

Archived from the original on 23 July 2018 . Retrieved 26 May 2019 .

^ Roudinesco, Elisabeth.

Jacques Lacan & Co: A History of Psychoanalysis in France, 1925–1985 . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990, p. 166 ^ Mémoires d'une jeune fille dérangée (1994, LGF – Livre de Poche; ISBN 978-2-253-13593-7 /2006, Balland; ISBN 978-2-7158-0994-9 ).

^ "Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir: Bianca, leur jouet sexuel" [Sartre, Beauvoir: Bianca, their sexual toy].

Gala (in French). 14 July 2023 . Retrieved 1 August 2023 .

^ Rodgers ; Thompson (2004).

Philosophers Behaving Badly . London: Peter Owen Publishers . pp.

186– 187.

ISBN 072061368X .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Martin, Andy (19 May 2013).

"The Persistence of the 'Lolita Syndrome' " .

New York Times . Retrieved 28 February 2024 .

It is well established that she and Jean-Paul Sartre developed a pattern, which they called the "trio," in which Beauvoir would seduce her students and then pass them on to Sartre.

^ LaBreck, Abby (16 May 2020).

"Moi Aussi: French Literature and Culture in the Age of #MeToo" .

Harvard International Review . Retrieved 28 February 2024 .

During his time as a teacher, Sartre developed an obsessive passion for one 17-year-old pupil, before engaging romantically with her younger sister. De Beauvoir even aided Sartre in his relations with minors—grooming and teaching young girls before introducing them to him.

^ Menand, Louis (18 September 2005).

"Stand By Your Man" .

New Yorker . Retrieved 28 February 2024 .

Sartre and Beauvoir liked to refer to their entourage as "the Family," and the recurring feature of their affairs is a kind of play incest. Their customary method was to adopt a very young woman as a protégée—to take her to movies and cafés, travel with her, help her with her education and career, support her financially.... The ideal form for a Sartre and Beauvoir ménage was the triangle.

^ a b "Jean-Paul Sartre – Biographical" .

NobelPrize.org . Nobel Media AB. 2019.

Archived from the original on 9 January 2010 . Retrieved 26 May 2019 .

^ "Jean-Paul Sartre Biography" . People.brandeis.edu.

Archived from the original on 1 November 2011 . Retrieved 27 October 2011 .

Sources [ edit ] Aronson, Ronald (1980).

Jean-Paul Sartre – Philosophy in the World . London: NLB.

Aronson, Ronald (2004).

Camus & Sartre: The Story of a Friendship and the Quarrel That Ended It . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-02796-8 .

Baert, Patrick (2015).

The Existentialist Moment: The Rise of Sartre as a Public Intellectual . Cambridge: Polity Press.

Bondy, Francois (April 1967). "Jean-Paul Sartre and Politics".

The Journal of Contemporary History .

2 (2): 25– 48.

doi : 10.1177/002200946700200204 .

S2CID 150438929 .

Cohen-Solal, Annie (1987). Narman MacAfee (ed.).

Sartre: A Life . Translated by Anna Cancogni. New York: Pantheon Books.

ISBN 978-0-394-52525-9 .

de Beauvoir, Simone (1984).

Adieux: A Farewell to Sartre . Translated by Patrick O'Brian. New York: Pantheon Books.

ISBN 9780394530352 .

Fulton, Ann (1999).

Apostles of Sartre: Existentialism in America, 1945–1963 . Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.

Gerassi, John (1989).

Jean-Paul Sartre: Hated Conscience of His Century. Volume 1: Protestant or Protester?

. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-28797-3 .

Hayman, Ronald (1992).

Sartre: A Biography . New York: Carroll & Graf Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-881-84875-5 .

(Detailed chronology of Sartre's life on pages 485–510.) Kirsner, Douglas (2003).

The Schizoid World of Jean-Paul Sartre and R.D. Laing . New York: Karnac.

Malinge, Yoann (2013).

"Does our past have a motivational effect? Our reasons for acting: Sartre's philosophy of action" . Vol. 4, no. 2. Ethics in Progress. pp.

46– 53.

Malinge, Yoann (2016).

"Sartre, " The Transcendance of the Ego " " .

The Literary Encyclopedia . Retrieved 25 May 2019 – via Academia.

Malinge, Yoann (2021).

"Sartre, "Existentialism is a humanism" " .

The Literary Encyclopedia . Retrieved 12 May 2021 – via Academia.

Ousby, Ian (2000).

Occupation: The Ordeal of France, 1940–1944 . New York: Cooper Square Press.

Scriven, Michael (1993).

Sartre and the Media . London: MacMillan Press Ltd.

Scriven, Michael (1999).

Jean-Paul Sartre: Politics and Culture in Postwar France . London: MacMillan Press Ltd.

Thody, Philip (1964).

Jean-Paul Sartre . London: Hamish Hamilton.

Further reading [ edit ] Allen, James Sloan, "Condemned to Be Free", Worldly Wisdom: Great Books and the Meanings of Life , Savannah: Frederic C. Beil, 2008.

ISBN 978-1-929490-35-6 .

Catalano, Joseph S., A Commentary on Jean-Paul Sartre's Critique of Dialectical Reason , University of Chicago Press, 1987.

ISBN 978-0-226-09701-5 .

Churchill, Steven and Reynolds, Jack (eds.), Jean-Paul Sartre: Key Concepts , London/New York: Routledge, 2014.

Desan, Wilfrid , The Tragic Finale: An Essay on the philosophy of Jean-Paul Sartre (1954).

Doran, Robert, "Sartre's Critique of Dialectical Reason and the Debate with Lévi-Strauss", Yale French Studies 123 (2013): 41–62.

Flynn, Thomas, Sartre and Marxist Existentialism: The Test Case of Collective Responsibility , Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984.

Hayim, Gila J. (1980).

The Existential Sociology of Jean-Paul Sartre . Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press.

ISBN 9780870232985 .

Judaken, Jonathan, (2006) Jean-Paul Sartre and the Jewish Question: Anti-antisemitism and the Politics of the French Intellectual . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

Laing, R. D.

and Cooper, D. G., Reason and Violence: A Decade of Sartre's Philosophy, 1950–1960 , New York: Pantheon, 1971.

Lilar, Suzanne , A propos de Sartre et de l'amour , Paris: Grasset, 1967.

Madsen, Axel, Hearts and Minds: The Common Journey of Simone de Beauvoir and Jean-Paul Sartre , William Morrow & Co, 1977.

Roudinesco, Élisabeth , Philosophy in Turbulent Times: Canguilhem , Sartre , Foucault , Althusser , Deleuze , Derrida , New York: Columbia University Press, 2008.

Said, Edward , 2000: My Encounter with Sartre , London Review of Books Sartre, Jean-Paul and Levy, Benny, Hope Now: The 1980 Interviews , translated by Adrian van den Hoven, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996.

Siegler, Marcel, Needful Structures. The Dialectics of Action, Technology, and Society in Sartre's Later Philosophy , Bielefeld: transcript, 2023.

ISBN 978-3-8376-6282-5 .

Spade, P. V.

Class Lecture Notes on Jean-Paul Sartre's Being and Nothingness . 1996.

Vagnarelli, Gianluca, La democrazia tumultuaria. Sulla filosofia politica di Jean-Paul Sartre , Macerata, EUM, 2010.

Webber, Jonathan, The Existentialism of Jean-Paul Sartre , London: Routledge, 2009.

Wittmann, H., Sartre und die Kunst. Die Porträtstudien von Tintoretto bis Flaubert , Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag, 1996.

Wittmann, H., L'esthétique de Sartre. Artistes et intellectuels , translated from German by N. Weitemeier and J. Yacar, Éditions L'Harmattan (Collection L'ouverture philosophique), Paris, 2001.

Wittmann, H., Sartre and Camus in Aesthetics. The Challenge of Freedom , edited by Dirk Hoeges. Dialoghi/Dialogues. Literatur und Kultur Italiens und Frankreichs, vol. 13, Frankfurt/M: Peter Lang, 2009.

ISBN 978-3-631-58693-8 .

External links [ edit ] Jean-Paul Sartre at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Jean-Paul Sartre on Nobelprize.org By Sartre [ edit ] Works by or about Jean-Paul Sartre at the Internet Archive "Americans and Their Myths" —Sartre's essay in The Nation (18 October 1947 issue) Sartre Texts on Philosophy Archive Sartre Internet Archive on Marxists.org Works by Jean-Paul Sartre at Open Library George H. Bauer Jean Paul Sartre Manuscript Collection.

General Collection, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University.

On Sartre [ edit ] UK Sartre Society [ usurped ] Groupe d'études sartriennes , Paris Newspaper clippings about Jean-Paul Sartre in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW v t e Jean-Paul Sartre Novels and short stories Nausea (1938) The Wall (1939) including The Childhood of a Leader The Roads to Freedom The Age of Reason (1945) The Reprieve (1945) Troubled Sleep (1949) In the Mesh (1948) Intimacy (1949) Hurricane over Cuba (1961) Plays and screenplays Bariona (1940) The Flies (1943) No Exit (1944) Morts sans sépulture (1945) The Respectful Prostitute (1946) The Chips Are Down (1947) Dirty Hands (1948) The Devil and the Good Lord (1951) Kean (1953) Nekrassov (1955) The Condemned of Altona (1959) The Trojan Woman (1965) The Freud Scenario (1984) Philosophical essays and books " Imagination: A Psychological Critique " (1936) " The Transcendence of the Ego " (1936) " Sketch for a Theory of the Emotions " (1939) The Imaginary (1940) Being and Nothingness (1943) Existentialism Is a Humanism (1946) " Search for a Method " (1957) " Critique of Dialectical Reason " (1960, 1985) " Notebooks for an Ethics " (1983) " Truth and Existence " (1989) Critical essays " Anti-Semite and Jew " (1946) " Situations I–X (1947–1976) " Black Orpheus " (1948) " Saint Genet, Actor and Martyr " (1952) " The Henri Martin Affair " (1953) " The Family Idiot " (1971–72) Autobiographical Sartre by Himself (1959) The Words (1964) Witness to My Life & Quiet Moments in a War (1983) War Diaries: Notebooks from a Phony War (1984) Related Authenticity Bad faith ( mauvaise foi ) By any means necessary Existence precedes essence Les Temps modernes Madah-Sartre Simone de Beauvoir Arlette Elkaïm-Sartre (adopted daughter) Situation Place Jean-Paul-Sartre-et-Simone-de-Beauvoir v t e Simone de Beauvoir Fiction When Things of the Spirit Come First (1937) She Came to Stay (1943) The Blood of Others (1945) All Men Are Mortal (1946) The Mandarins (1954) Non-fiction Pyrrhus and Cineas (1944) The Ethics of Ambiguity (1946) America Day by Day (1948) The Second Sex (1949) The Coming of Age (1970) Related Hélène de Beauvoir (sister) Sylvie Le Bon-de Beauvoir (adopted daughter) Jean-Paul Sartre Place Jean-Paul-Sartre-et-Simone-de-Beauvoir Articles related to Jean-Paul Sartre v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category v t e Existentialism Variants Atheistic Christian Jewish Islamic Nihilist Phenomenological Concepts Abandonment Absurdism Angst Authenticity Bad faith Being in itself Dasein Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Leap of faith Meaning Nihilism Other Ressentiment Thrownness People Artists Beckett Buzzati Camus Cioran Dostoevsky Ellison Fondane Giacometti Ionesco Kafka Mahfouz Marcel Sartre Unamuno Wilson Wright Philosophers Abbagnano Arendt Barth Berdyaev Buber Bultmann Camus Carlyle Cioran Beauvoir Fanon Flusser Fondane Heidegger Husserl James Jaspers Kaufmann Kierkegaard Levinas Marcel May Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rosenzweig Sartre Shestov Soloveitchik Tillich Unamuno Wilson Wright Zapffe Related Continental philosophy German idealism Marxist humanism Phenomenology Transcendentalism Western Marxism v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Laureates of the Nobel Prize in Literature 1901–1920 1901 : Sully Prudhomme 1902 : Theodor Mommsen 1903 : Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson 1904 : Frédéric Mistral / José Echegaray 1905 : Henryk Sienkiewicz 1906 : Giosuè Carducci 1907 : Rudyard Kipling 1908 : Rudolf Eucken 1909 : Selma Lagerlöf 1910 : Paul Heyse 1911 : Maurice Maeterlinck 1912 : Gerhart Hauptmann 1913 : Rabindranath Tagore 1914 1915 : Romain Rolland 1916 : Verner von Heidenstam 1917 : Karl Gjellerup / Henrik Pontoppidan 1918 1919 : Carl Spitteler 1920 : Knut Hamsun 1921–1940 1921 : Anatole France 1922 : Jacinto Benavente 1923 : W. B. Yeats 1924 : Władysław Reymont 1925 : George Bernard Shaw 1926 : Grazia Deledda 1927 : Henri Bergson 1928 : Sigrid Undset 1929 : Thomas Mann 1930 : Sinclair Lewis 1931 : Erik Axel Karlfeldt ( posthumously ) 1932 : John Galsworthy 1933 : Ivan Bunin 1934 : Luigi Pirandello 1935 1936 : Eugene O'Neill 1937 : Roger Martin du Gard 1938 : Pearl S. Buck 1939 : Frans Eemil Sillanpää 1940 1941–1960 1941 1942 1943 1944 : Johannes V. Jensen 1945 : Gabriela Mistral 1946 : Hermann Hesse 1947 : André Gide 1948 : T. S. Eliot 1949 : William Faulkner 1950 : Bertrand Russell 1951 : Pär Lagerkvist 1952 : François Mauriac 1953 : Winston Churchill 1954 : Ernest Hemingway 1955 : Halldór Laxness 1956 : Juan Ramón Jiménez 1957 : Albert Camus 1958 : Boris Pasternak 1959 : Salvatore Quasimodo 1960 : Saint-John Perse 1961–1980 1961 : Ivo Andrić 1962 : John Steinbeck 1963 : Giorgos Seferis 1964 : Jean-Paul Sartre (declined award) 1965 : Mikhail Sholokhov 1966 : Shmuel Yosef Agnon / Nelly Sachs 1967 : Miguel Ángel Asturias 1968 : Yasunari Kawabata 1969 : Samuel Beckett 1970 : Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn 1971 : Pablo Neruda 1972 : Heinrich Böll 1973 : Patrick White 1974 : Eyvind Johnson / Harry Martinson 1975 : Eugenio Montale 1976 : Saul Bellow 1977 : Vicente Aleixandre 1978 : Isaac Bashevis Singer 1979 : Odysseas Elytis 1980 : Czesław Miłosz 1981–2000 1981 : Elias Canetti 1982 : Gabriel García Márquez 1983 : William Golding 1984 : Jaroslav Seifert 1985 : Claude Simon 1986 : Wole Soyinka 1987 : Joseph Brodsky 1988 : Naguib Mahfouz 1989 : Camilo José Cela 1990 : Octavio Paz 1991 : Nadine Gordimer 1992 : Derek Walcott 1993 : Toni Morrison 1994 : Kenzaburō Ōe 1995 : Seamus Heaney 1996 : Wisława Szymborska 1997 : Dario Fo 1998 : José Saramago 1999 : Günter Grass 2000 : Gao Xingjian 2001–2020 2001 : V. S. Naipaul 2002 : Imre Kertész 2003 : J. M. Coetzee 2004 : Elfriede Jelinek 2005 : Harold Pinter 2006 : Orhan Pamuk 2007 : Doris Lessing 2008 : J. M. G. Le Clézio 2009 : Herta Müller 2010 : Mario Vargas Llosa 2011 : Tomas Tranströmer 2012 : Mo Yan 2013 : Alice Munro 2014 : Patrick Modiano 2015 : Svetlana Alexievich 2016 : Bob Dylan 2017 : Kazuo Ishiguro 2018 : Olga Tokarczuk 2019 : Peter Handke 2020 : Louise Glück 2021–present 2021 : Abdulrazak Gurnah 2022 : Annie Ernaux 2023 : Jon Fosse 2024 : Han Kang 2025 : to be determined v t e 1964 Nobel Prize laureates Chemistry Dorothy Hodgkin (Great Britain) Literature ( 1964 ) Jean-Paul Sartre (France) Peace ( 1964 ) Martin Luther King Jr.

(United States) Physics Charles Hard Townes (United States) Nikolay Basov (Soviet Union) Alexander Prokhorov (Soviet Union) Physiology or Medicine Konrad Emil Bloch (United States) Feodor Felix Konrad Lynen (Germany) Nobel Prize recipients 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican 2 Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz KulturNav FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9zpv5
Cached time: 20250817043637
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.894 seconds
Real time usage: 2.154 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 15065/1000000
Revision size: 91339/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 524236/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 133252/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 32/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 409676/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.130/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22508235/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1680.990      1 -total
 30.17%  507.072      1 Template:Reflist
 16.52%  277.701      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 11.94%  200.788     39 Template:Cite_book
 10.90%  183.188     59 Template:Sfn
  7.94%  133.431     26 Template:Cite_web
  7.80%  131.167      1 Template:Navboxes
  7.67%  129.007      8 Template:Navbox
  6.82%  114.697      3 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  5.41%   90.866      6 Template:Lang Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:16340:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043637 and revision id 1305803586. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jean-Paul_Sartre&oldid=1305803586 " Categories : Jean-Paul Sartre 1905 births 1980 deaths Atheist philosophers Burials at Montparnasse Cemetery Deaths from edema Existentialists Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Free love advocates French anarchists French anti-war activists French atheists French biographers 20th-century French dramatists and playwrights French humanists French literary critics French Marxists French male screenwriters French screenwriters French military personnel of World War II French Nobel laureates French prisoners of war in World War II Marxist humanists Marxist writers Nobel laureates in Literature Ontologists Phenomenologists Philosophers of sexuality Psychedelic drug advocates Scholars of antisemitism World War II prisoners of war held by Germany Writers from Paris 20th-century French philosophers 20th-century French novelists 20th-century atheists Lycée Henri-IV alumni Lycée Louis-le-Grand alumni École Normale Supérieure alumni 20th-century biographers French male dramatists and playwrights Critics of religions Atheism activists Lycée Condorcet teachers French people of German descent Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from May 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from December 2014 Articles containing French-language text Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Nobelprize template using Wikidata property P8024 Articles with Internet Archive links Open Library ID same as Wikidata Articles with Open Library links Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 05:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jean-Paul Sartre 147 languages Add topic

