Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Background and predecessors 2.2 Early history and rise, 1970s–1980s 2.3 Later history, 1990s to present 2.4 Organizational ability 2.4.1 Grassroots activism 2.4.2 Political leaders and institutions 3 Institutions in the United States Toggle Institutions in the United States subsection 3.1 National organizations 3.2 Partisan activity of churches 3.3 Electoral activity 3.4 Education 3.5 Media 4 Views Toggle Views subsection 4.1 Capital punishment 4.2 Education 4.3 Evolution 4.4 Sex education 4.5 Schooling 4.6 Sunday Sabbatarianism 4.7 Role of government 4.8 Church and state relations 4.9 Economics 4.10 Middle East 4.11 Abortion and contraception 4.12 Biotechnology 4.13 Opposition to drugs 4.14 Sex and sexuality 5 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 5.1 Interpretation of Christianity 5.2 Race and diversity 5.3 LGBT rights 5.4 Use of dominionism labeling 6 Movements outside the United States Toggle Movements outside the United States subsection 6.1 Australia 6.2 Brazil 6.3 Canada 6.4 The Caribbean, Latin America, and Sub-Saharan Africa 6.5 Mexico 6.6 Netherlands 6.7 Northern Ireland 6.8 Other countries 7 Associated minor political parties Toggle Associated minor political parties subsection 7.1 Groups 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Christian right 24 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Socially conservative political ideology rooted in Christianity This article is about right-wing movements influenced by Christianity. For religious right-wing movements unrelated to Christianity, see Religious right .

Not to be confused with Conservative Christianity , a grouping of overlapping and denominationally diverse theological movements within Christianity that seeks to retain the orthodox and long-standing traditions and beliefs of Christianity.

The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( March 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Conservatism Variants Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Libertarian Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Balance of power Class collaboration Collective identity Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family as a state model Family values Fundamentalism Gender roles Complementarianism Essentialism Historism Honour Imperialism Law and order Loyalty Maternalism Monarchism Royalism Moral absolutism Natalism Nationalism Nativism Natural law Norms Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organised religion State Orthodoxy Patriarchy Patriarchalism Patriotism Peace through strength Property rights Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Sovereignty Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Johnson Hume Burke More Maistre Bonald Chateaubriand Czartoryski Coleridge Karamzin Savigny Carlyle Ranke Newman Tocqueville Dostoevsky Taine Le Bon Nordau Belloc Iorga Chesterton Spengler Jabotinsky Ilyin Savarkar Schmitt Eliot Mannheim Jünger Evola Strauss Röpke Gadamer Freyre Voegelin Oakeshott Burnham Lefebvre Qutb Kuehnelt-Leddihn Gómez Dávila Kirk Solzhenitsyn Koselleck Mishima Buckley Sowell Mansfield Scruton Hoppe Dugin Peterson Politicians Adams Pitt Canning Metternich Disraeli Bismarck Salisbury Dmowski Mannerheim Baldwin Maurras Horthy Metaxas Churchill Adenauer De Gasperi Chiang Salazar De Gaulle Dollfuss Franco Khomeini Reagan Powell Pinochet Marcos Park Smith Reza Shah Suharto Lee Zia Vajpayee Thatcher Kohl Fujimori Trump Bush Kaczyński Netanyahu Modi Putin Erdoğan Abe Sarkozy Bolsonaro Yoon Orbán Milei Meloni Bukele Religion Christian democracy Christian right Confucianism Clericalism Hindutva Islamism Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Theravada Buddhism Traditionalist Catholicism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Personal variants Berlusconism Bukelism Cameronism Chiangism Erdoğanism Francoism Fujimorism Gaullism Janismo Kaczyzm Maurrassisme Mellismo Metaxism Powellism Pinochetism Putinism Qutbism Khomeinism Reaganism Sarkozysm Thatcherism Trumpism Ziaism National variants Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Belize Brazil Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Cuba Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Guatemala Hungary Iceland India Iran Israel Italy Japan Luxembourg Malaysia Mexico Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Panama Peru Poland Russia Serbia Singapore Sweden Switzerland South Korea Taiwan Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Toryism United States Related ideologies Agrarianism Black conservatism In US Conservative feminism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Conservative socialism Corporatism Hispanic conservatism In US LGBTQ conservatism Ordoliberalism Para-fascism Related topics Anti-communism White Terror Anti-gender movement Anti-immigration Catholic social teaching Conservative wave NatCon Radical right Europe US Right realism Right-wing politics Alt Authoritarianism Centre Dictatorship Far New Small-c conservative Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e The Christian right are Christian political factions characterized by their strong support of socially conservative and traditionalist policies.

[ 4 ] Christian conservatives seek to influence politics and public policy with their interpretation of the teachings of Christianity .

[ 8 ] In the United States , the Christian right (otherwise known as the New Christian Right or the Religious Right ) [ 9 ] is an informal coalition which was formed around a core of conservative Evangelical Protestants and conservative Roman Catholics .

[ 12 ] The Christian right draws additional support from politically conservative mainline Protestants , Orthodox Jews , and Mormons .

[ 14 ] The movement in American politics became a dominant feature of U.S. conservatism from the late 1970s onwards.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The Christian right gained powerful influence within the Republican Party during the Presidency of Ronald Reagan in the 1980s.

[ 19 ] Its influence draws from grassroots activism as well as from focus on social issues and the ability to motivate the electorate around those issues.

[ 20 ] The Christian right has advanced socially conservative positions on issues such as creationism in public education , [ 22 ] school prayer , [ 1 ] [ 23 ] temperance , [ 1 ] [ 24 ] Christian nationalism , [ 1 ] [ 25 ] Christian Zionism , [ 3 ] and Sunday Sabbatarianism , [ 26 ] as well as opposition to the teaching of biological evolution , [ 21 ] embryonic stem cell research , [ 27 ] LGBTQ rights , [ 31 ] abortion , [ 1 ] [ 23 ] euthanasia , [ 33 ] pornography , [ 37 ] and the use of drugs .

[ 39 ] Although the term Christian right is most commonly associated with U.S. politics, [ 3 ] similar Christian conservative groups can be found in the political cultures of other Christian-majority countries .

[ 40 ] Terminology [ edit ] In the United States , the Christian right is otherwise known as the New Christian Right (NCR) or the Religious Right , [ 41 ] although some consider the religious right to be "a slightly broader category than Christian Right".

[ 16 ] [ 42 ] John C. Green of the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life states that Jerry Falwell used the label religious right to describe himself. Gary Schneeberger, vice president of media and public relations for Focus on the Family , states that "[t]erms like 'religious right' have been traditionally used in a pejorative way to suggest extremism. The phrase 'socially conservative evangelicals' is not very exciting, but that's certainly the way to do it." [ 43 ] Evangelical Protestant leaders like Tony Perkins of the Family Research Council have called attention to the problem of equating the term Christian right with Evangelical Christianity . Although Evangelicals constitute the core constituency of the Christian right, not all Evangelicals fit the description, and a number of Roman Catholics are also members of the Christian right's core base.

[ 10 ] The problem of description is further complicated by the fact that the label religious conservative or conservative Christian may apply to other religious groups as well. For instance, Anabaptist Christians (most notably Amish , Mennonites , Hutterites , the Bruderhof Communities , Schwarzenau Brethren , River Brethren , and Apostolic Christians ) are theologically, socially, and culturally conservative; however, there are no overtly political organizations associated with these Christian denominations , which are usually uninvolved, uninterested, apathetic, or indifferent towards politics.

[ 44 ] Evangelical theologian and pastor Tim Keller stated that conservative Christianity (theology) predates the Christian right (politics). Keller asserted that being a theological conservative does not require a person to be a political conservative, and that some political progressive views around economics, helping the poor, the redistribution of wealth , and racial diversity are compatible with theologically conservative Christianity.

[ 45 ] Conservative writer Rod Dreher has stated that a Christian can be theologically conservative while still holding left-wing economic views or even socialist views .

[ 46 ] History [ edit ] Jerry Falwell , whose founding of the " Moral Majority " was a key step in the formation of the "New Christian Right" Background and predecessors [ edit ] In 1863, representatives from eleven Christian denominations in the United States organized the National Reform Association . The organization's goal was to amend the U.S. Constitution to make the country a Christian state . The National Reform Association is one of the first organizations through which adherents from several Christian denominations worked together in an attempt to enshrine Christianity in American governance.

[ 47 ] The Christian Civic League of Maine (founded in 1897), and other early organizations of the Christian right, supported the aims of the temperance movement . During the 19th and early 20th centuries, there were also a number of Evangelical Protestants who supported progressive causes . The Scopes trial in 1925 reportedly resulted in most Evangelicals abandoning the political arena in an organized fashion. An Evangelical political subculture emerged, largely isolated from the outside world, consisting of various organizations that laid the groundwork for the Christian right in the late 1970s.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] While the beginning of the influence of the Christian right is typically traced to the late 1970s, Daniel K. Williams argues in God's Own Party that it had actually been involved in politics for most of the twentieth century.

[ 50 ] He also notes that the Christian right had previously been in alliance with the Republican Party in the 1940s through 1960s on matters such as opposition to communism and defending "a Protestant-based moral order".

[ 51 ] Similarly, scholar Celestini Carmen traces the John Birch Society (JBS)'s focus on culture war issues and rhetoric of apocalypticism , conspiracism , and fear to the rise of the Christian right through JBS members and Christian rightist activists Tim LaHaye , Phyllis Schlafly , and others.

[ 52 ] In light of the state atheism espoused by communist countries aligned with the Eastern Bloc during the height of the Cold War (1950s–1960s), secularization came to be seen by many Americans sympathetic to proto-Christian right narratives as the biggest threat to American and Christian values.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] These fears resulted in a number of actions by the U.S. federal government throughout the 1950s, including the establishment of the National Day of Prayer , the addition of the motto " In God We Trust " to U.S. currency , and the addition of the phrase "Under God" to the Pledge of Allegiance .

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] The alienation of Southern Democrats from the Democratic Party contributed to the rise of the right, as the counterculture of the 1960s provoked fear of social disintegration amongst many conservatives. In addition, as the Democratic Party became identified with progressive and liberal policies, social conservatives joined the Republican Party in increasing numbers.

[ 57 ] Despite these trends, many White Evangelicals remained politically inactive and were not a unified voting bloc , with many on the Evangelical left believing political activism and engagement to be inconsistent with their beliefs.

[ 48 ] [ 58 ] Early history and rise, 1970s–1980s [ edit ] The movement that would become the Christian right had much of its origin in the work and activism of conservative operative Paul Weyrich , who had foreseen the potential to organize conservative Evangelicals and Roman Catholics into a political force in the early 1960s and had reportedly started trying to do so during the 1964 U.S. Presidential election . Weyrich tried a number of wedge issues throughout the 1960s and early 1970s, including abortion , pornography , the proposed Equal Rights Amendment , and school prayer , without success.

[ 48 ] [ 58 ] Weyrich was not successful until the legality of segregation academies began to be challenged in the early 1970s. In 1970, the Internal Revenue Service adopted a policy of rescinding the tax-exempt status of private schools that did not admit African–American students , and the following year, the Supreme Court ruled in Coit v. Green that organizations that voluntarily practice racial discrimination are not eligible for tax exemption.

[ 59 ] The origin of this case was a legal challenge to the tax-exempt status of a group of segregation academies in Holmes County, Mississippi .

[ 48 ] [ 58 ] Many of the schools targeted by these rulings were church-sponsored, and these actions reportedly caught the attention of a number of evangelical leaders, including Jerry Falwell . The largest educational institution targeted by the IRS was Bob Jones University , which lost its tax exemption in 1976 due to its policy prohibiting interracial dating. This action reportedly further caught the ire of evangelical leaders, many of whom believed that the IRS was overstepping its legal authority.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] Weyrich also sought to frame the IRS crackdown on segregation academics as an issue of government intrusion and attacks on religious freedom, effectively diverting attention from the racial aspect of the issue.

[ 48 ] [ 62 ] During the 1976 U.S. Presidential election , Jimmy Carter , who described himself as an Evangelical , born-again Christian , received the support of a majority of American evangelicals and the emerging Christian right largely because of his much-acclaimed religious conversion. However, the issue of segregation academies carried over into Carter's presidency, and in 1978, the IRS proposed a new rule that would have revoked the tax exemption of private schools based on their racial demographic composition relative to that of their respective communities. While this rule never went into effect, it provoked fierce backlash and protests from evangelical leaders and church congregants alike, with many believing it to be an attack on non-discriminatory institutions and religious freedom. The IRS reportedly received over 150,000 letters in opposition to this proposal, mostly from Christians.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] This action reportedly encouraged many white evangelicals to become politically active for the first time, and turned them against Jimmy Carter.

[ 65 ] Weyrich later stated that what got evangelicals involved in politics was "Jimmy Carter's intervention against the Christian schools, trying to deny them tax-exempt status on the basis of so-called de facto segregation", [ 66 ] and Richard Viguerie said that the 1978 IRS action "kicked a sleeping dog." [ 58 ] Others, including religious right leader Ed Dobson and conservative activist Grover Norquist have affirmed this as the beginnings of the religious right.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] Around the same time, Weyrich realized that support for segregation academies was not viable and began to look for other issues. The unexpected success of predominantly Catholic anti-abortion activists in the 1978 midterms convinced Weyrich that opposition to abortion might work as a wedge issue to keep evangelicals politically mobilized.

[ 48 ] [ 58 ] He favored the issue because it could be framed in the context of family values and be used to claim moral superiority, as well as attack second-wave feminism .

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] Prior to this time, the Catholic Church was the only Christian denomination that was staunchly anti-abortion, with many Protestant and evangelical denominations, including the Southern Baptist Convention , either supporting the legalization of the procedure in some circumstances, or not taking a stance on the issue. The following year, filmmaker Frank Schaeffer produced a series of anti-abortion films titled Whatever Happened to the Human Race?

, starring his father, evangelist Francis Schaeffer and pediatric surgeon Dr. C. Everett Koop .

[ 48 ] [ 62 ] That same year, abortion was reportedly suggested as a wedge issue during a conference call between a number of religious right leaders, although many were still skeptical of its ability to mobilize evangelicals.

[ 71 ] Schaeffer's films were also reportedly met with tepid reception during a tour in which they were shown at numerous churches around the United States, and leaders like Jerry Falwell were initially hesitant to utilize abortion, believing that its stereotype amongst evangelicals as a "Catholic issue" would hinder its ability to politically mobilize them.

[ 72 ] It was not until the early 1980s that abortion would become in effect the signature wedge issue of the religious right, and conservative evangelicals began joining the anti-abortion movement in large numbers.

[ 10 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] In 1979, the Moral Majority , widely considered the first religious right organization, was founded by Falwell, Weyrich, and other associates and began emphasizing such issues as abortion, pornography, gay rights, and opposition to the Equal Rights Amendment , and a perceived moral decline of the United States, and played a major role in mobilizing evangelicals to support Ronald Reagan in the 1980 United States presidential election .

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] In response to the rise of the Christian right, the 1980 Republican Party platform assumed a number of its positions, including the resumption of public school prayer. While the platform also opposed abortion, leaned towards restricting taxpayer funding for abortions, and sought a constitutional amendment bestowing personhood to fetuses , it also acknowledged the fact that many Americans, including Republicans, were divided on the issue.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 77 ] At this time, both major political parties were divided internally on abortion rights, and it was not until the late 1980s that abortion came to be viewed as a partisan issue.

[ 69 ] Over the next two decades, Christian rightist citizens became more politically active in a time period labeled the New Christian Right .

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] In addition to the "Moral Majority" (which dissolved in the late 1980s), the Christian right was associated with new organizations throughout the 1980s and 1990s, including the Christian Coalition of America , Focus on the Family , the Alliance Defending Freedom , the Family Research Council , and the American Center for Law & Justice .

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] [ 82 ] Later history, 1990s to present [ edit ] Demonstrators at the 2004 March for Life in Washington, D.C.

Since its inception, the Christian right has engaged in battles over abortion, euthanasia , contraception , pornography , gambling, obscenity , Christian nationalism , Sabbatarianism (concerning Sunday blue laws ), state-sanctioned public school prayer , public school textbook inclusion of creationism (if not prohibition on teaching mainstream evolutionary science ), LGBTQ rights , and sexual education .

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Ralph Reed , the chairman of the Christian Coalition, stated that the 1988 presidential campaign of Pat Robertson was the "political crucible" that led to the proliferation of Christian right groups in the United States.

[ 83 ] The Christian right is perhaps best known for its alliance with the U.S. anti-abortion movement and its efforts to overturn the 1973 Roe v Wade ruling, which established abortion as a constitutionally protected right in the U.S.

[ 83 ] Changing political contexts led to the Christian right's advocacy for other issues, such as opposition to euthanasia and campaigning for abstinence-only sex education .

[ 83 ] In the 2016 presidential election , the Christian right staunchly supported Donald Trump , who promised to appoint Supreme Court justices who would overturn Roe v Wade . Many evangelicals were initially hesitant to support Trump due to his character flaws and lack of religiosity.

[ 84 ] Trump ultimately appointed three justices to the Supreme Court, all of whom voted to overturn the 1973 decision in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization in 2022.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] Trump's support amongst evangelicals has also been attributed by some, including journalist Tim Alberta , to a fear that white evangelicals and evangelicalism, if not Christianity more broadly, are losing their political power.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] Since the 1990s, the share of Americans who identify as Christian has declined, part of a larger decline of Christianity in the Western world .

[ 89 ] Alberta, and others, have argued that many white evangelicals see Trump as a savior figure, and that his rhetoric about returning the United States to a perceived state of former greatness, embodied by his campaign slogan " Make America Great Again ", resonates strongly with them. In addition to their declining numbers, many have also reported a fear of an increasingly secularizing world, which some scholars and commentators have argued led them to embrace Trumpism .

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] On many occasions, Trump has stated that he believes Christianity is under attack in the United States.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] Trump continued to receive strong support from the Christian right in the 2020 and 2024 presidential elections.

[ 84 ] Since the 2010s, the Christian right has increasingly supported other measures targeting the separation of church and state , including school vouchers and efforts to integrate the Christian Bible and the Ten Commandments into public school curricula.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Organizational ability [ edit ] Grassroots activism [ edit ] The Christian right wields significant influence in American politics due to their high voter turnout and strong motivation to support right-wing candidates. They actively participate in political events, canvassing and distributing literature without needing financial compensation, driven by their devotion to the cause.

[ 20 ] [ 94 ] [ needs update?

] Political leaders and institutions [ edit ] Led by Robert Grant 's advocacy group Christian Voice , Jerry Falwell's Moral Majority, Ed McAteer 's Religious Roundtable Council, James Dobson 's Focus on the Family , Paul Weyrich 's Free Congress Research and Education Foundation , and the Heritage Foundation , [ 95 ] and Pat Robertson 's Christian Broadcasting Network , the new Christian right combined conservative politics with evangelical and fundamentalist religion.

[ 80 ] The birth of the new Christian right, however, is usually traced to a 1979 meeting wherein televangelist Jerry Falwell was urged to create a "Moral Majority" organization.

[ 81 ] [ 96 ] In 1979, Weyrich was in a discussion with Falwell when he remarked that there was a "moral majority" of Americans ready to be called to political action.

[ 95 ] Weyrich later recalled in a 2007 interview with the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel that after he mentioned the term "moral majority", Falwell "turned to his people and said, 'That's the name of our organization.

' " [ 95 ] Weyrich would then engineer a strong union between the Republican Party and many culturally conservative Christians.

[ 95 ] Soon, "moral majority" became a general term for the conservative political activism of evangelicals and fundamentalists such as Pat Robertson, James Robison , and Jerry Falwell.

[ 75 ] Howard Schweber, professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, writes that "in the past two decades", "Catholic politicians have emerged as leading figures in the religious conservative movement." [ 11 ] Institutions in the United States [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e National organizations [ edit ] An early attempt to bring the Christian right into American politics began in 1974 when Robert Grant , a movement leader, who founded the American Christian Cause to advocate Christian ideological teachings in Southern California. Concerned that Christians overwhelmingly voted for President Jimmy Carter in 1976, Grant founded Christian Voice to rally Christian voters behind socially conservative candidates. Prior to his alliance with Falwell, Weyrich sought an alliance with Grant.

[ 97 ] Grant and other Christian Voice staff soon set up their main office at the headquarters of Weyrich's Heritage Foundation.

[ 97 ] The alliance between Weyrich and Grant fell apart in 1978.

[ 97 ] In the late 1980s, Pat Robertson founded the Christian Coalition of America , building from his 1988 presidential run , with Republican activist Ralph Reed , who became the spokesman for the Coalition. In 1992, the national Christian Coalition, Inc., headquartered in Virginia Beach, Virginia, began producing voter guides, which it distributed to conservative Christian churches, both Protestant and Catholic, with the blessing of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York .

[ 98 ] Under the leadership of Reed and Robertson, the Coalition quickly became the most prominent voice in the conservative Christian movement, its influence culminating with an effort to support the election of a conservative Christian to the presidency in 1996 . In addition, they have encouraged the convergence of conservative Christian ideology with political issues, such as healthcare, the economy, education and crime.

[ 99 ] Political activists lobbied within the Republican party locally and nationally to influence party platforms and nominations.

[ 24 ] More recently James Dobson's group Focus on the Family, based in Colorado Springs, and the Family Research Council in Washington D.C. have gained enormous respect from Republican lawmakers. While strongly advocating for these ideological matters, Dobson himself is warier of the political spectrum and much of the resources of his group are devoted to other aims such as media.

[ 100 ] However, as a private citizen, Dobson has stated his opinion on presidential elections; on February 5, 2008, Dobson issued a statement regarding the 2008 presidential election and his strong disappointment with the Republican party's candidates.

[ 101 ] In an essay written in 1996, Ralph Reed argued against the moral absolutist tone of Christian right leaders, arguing for the Republican Party Platform to stress the moral dimension of abortion rather than placing emphasis on overturning Roe v. Wade. Reed believes that pragmatism is the best way to advocate for the Christian right.

[ 102 ] Partisan activity of churches [ edit ] Overtly partisan actions by churches could threaten their 501(c)(3) tax-exempt status due to the Johnson Amendment of the Internal Revenue Code.

[ 103 ] In one notable example, the former pastor of the East Waynesville Baptist Church in Waynesville, North Carolina "told the congregation that anyone who planned to vote for Democratic Sen.

John Kerry should either leave the church or repent ".

[ 104 ] The church later expelled nine members who had voted for Kerry and refused to repent, which led to criticism on the national level. The pastor resigned and the ousted church members were allowed to return.

[ 105 ] The Alliance Defense Fund , a Christian right group now known as the Alliance Defending Freedom, started the Pulpit Freedom Initiative [ 106 ] in 2008. ADF states that "[t]he goal of Pulpit Freedom Sunday is simple: have the Johnson Amendment declared unconstitutional – and once and for all remove the ability of the IRS to censor what a pastor says from the pulpit." [ 107 ] Electoral activity [ edit ] Both Christian right and secular polling organizations sometimes conduct polls to determine which presidential candidates will receive the support of Christian right constituents. One such poll is taken at the Family Research Council 's Values Voter Summit.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] George W. Bush's electoral success owed much to his overwhelming support from white evangelical voters, who comprise 23% of the vote. In 2000 he received 68% of the white evangelical vote; in 2004 that percentage rose to 78%.

[ 110 ] In 2016, Donald Trump received 81% of the white evangelical vote.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] Education [ edit ] See also: Christian school The Home School Legal Defense Association was co-founded in 1983 by Michael Farris , who would later establish Generation Joshua and Patrick Henry College , and Michael Smith. This organization attempts to challenge laws that serve as obstacles to allowing parents to home-school their children and to organize the disparate group of homeschooling families into a cohesive bloc. The number of homeschooling families has increased in the last twenty years, and around 80 percent of these families identify themselves as evangelicals.

[ 113 ] The main universities associated with the Christian right in the United States are: Bob Jones University – Protestant Fundamentalist institution, founded in 1927.

[ 114 ] Christendom College – Roman Catholic institution, founded in 1977 [ 115 ] Liberty University – Baptist institution, founded in 1971 [ 116 ] Regent University – Evangelical Christian institution, founded in 1977 [ 116 ] Media [ edit ] See also: Christian media The media has played a major role in the rise of the Christian right since the 1920s and has continued to be a powerful force for political Christianity today. The role of the media for the Religious right has been influential in its ability to connect Christian audiences to the larger American culture while at the same time bringing and keeping religion into play as both a political and a cultural force.

[ 117 ] The political agenda of the Christian right has been disseminated to the public through a variety of media outlets including radio broadcasting, television, and literature.

Religious broadcasting began in the 1920s through the radio.

[ 117 ] Between the 1950s and 1980s, TV became a powerful way for the Christian right to influence the public through shows such as Pat Robertson's The 700 Club and The Family Channel (now Freeform ). The Internet has also helped the Christian right reach a much larger audience. These organizations' websites play a strong role in popularising the Christian right's stances on cultural and political issues, and inform interested viewers on how to get involved. For example, the Christian Coalition of America has used the Internet to inform the public, as well as to sell merchandise and gather members.

[ citation needed ] Views [ edit ] Capital punishment [ edit ] Support for the death penalty has divided Catholics and Evangelical Protestants within the Christian Right: The Roman Catholic Church is against capital punishment , while the Southern Baptist Convention and the Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod support it.

[ 118 ] The Moral Majority made strong support for capital punishment part of its socially conservative agenda.

[ 119 ] Surveys have found that Evangelical Protestants are more likely than any other American religious group to favor the death penalty.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] Education [ edit ] The Christian right strongly advocates for a system of educational choice, using a system of school vouchers , instead of public education. Vouchers would be government funded and could be redeemed for "a specified maximum sum per child per years if spent on approved educational services".

[ 122 ] This method would allow parents to determine which school their child attends while relieving the economic burden associated with private schools. The concept is popular among constituents of church-related schools, including those affiliated with Roman Catholicism.

Evolution [ edit ] See also: Creation and evolution in public education The Protestant members of the Christian right in the United States generally promote the teaching of creationism and intelligent design as opposed to, or alongside, biological evolution.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] [ 125 ] [ 126 ] Some supporters of the Christian right have opposed the teaching of evolution in the past, but they did not have the ability to stop it being taught in public schools as was done during the Scopes Trial in Dayton, Tennessee , in which a science teacher went on trial for teaching about the subject of evolution in a public school.

[ 127 ] Other "Christian right organizations supported the teaching of creationism, along with evolution, in public schools", specifically promoting theistic evolution (also known as evolutionary creationism) in which God is regarded as the originator of the process.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] Members of and organizations associated with the Christian right, such as the Discovery Institute , created and popularized the modern concept of intelligent design, which became widely known only with the publication of the book Of Pandas and People in 1989.

[ 128 ] The Discovery Institute, through their intelligent design initiative called the Center for Science and Culture , has endorsed the teach the controversy approach . According to its proponents, such an approach would ensure that both the strengths and weaknesses of evolutionary theory were discussed in the curriculum.

[ 129 ] This tactic was criticized by Judge John E. Jones III in Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , describing it as "at best disingenuous, and at worst a canard." [ 130 ] The overwhelming majority of scientific research, both in the United States and elsewhere, has concluded that the theory of evolution, using the technical definition of the word theory, is the only viable explanation of the development of life, and an overwhelming majority of biologists strongly support its presentation in public school science classes.

[ 131 ] Outside the United States, as well as among American Catholics and Mainline Protestants, Christian conservatives have generally come to accept the theory of evolution.

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] [ 134 ] [ 135 ] [ 136 ] Sex education [ edit ] Some Christian groups advocate for the removal of sex education literature from public schools, [ 137 ] for parental opt-out of comprehensive sex education, or for abstinence-only sex education .

Sam Harris has written that thirty percent of America's sex-education programs are abstinence based and ineffective.

[ 138 ] Schooling [ edit ] The Christian right promotes homeschooling and private schooling as a valid alternative to public education for parents who object to the content being taught at school.

[ citation needed ] The percentage of children being homeschooled rose from 1.7% of the student population in 1999 to 2.2% in 2003, [ 139 ] and much of this increase has been attributed to the desire to incorporate Christian teachings into the curriculum.

[ 140 ] In 2003, 72% of parents who homeschooled their children cited the ability to provide religious or moral instruction as the reason for removing their children from public schools.

[ 141 ] The Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District case established that creationism cannot be taught in public schools, and in response officials have increasingly appropriated public funds for charter schools that teach curricula like Accelerated Christian Education .

[ 142 ] Sunday Sabbatarianism [ edit ] The Christian right is in favor of legislation that maintains and promotes Sunday Sabbatarianism , such as Sunday blue laws that forbid shopping and restrict the sale of alcohol on Sundays, which is the Lord's Day in mainstream Christianity.

[ 26 ] Role of government [ edit ] Supporters of the Christian right have no one unified stance on the role of government since the movement is primarily one that advocates social conservatism ; in fact, "struggles [have] broken out in state party organizations" between supporters of the Christian right and other conservatives.

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] It promotes conservative interpretations of the Bible as the basis for moral values and enforcing such values by legislation.

Evangelical Christians have generally supported laissez-faire economic policies since the New Deal era , [ 145 ] while Catholics alternatively accept the Catholic Church's strong support for labor unions .

[ 146 ] Church and state relations [ edit ] See also: Accommodationism The Christian right believes that separation of church and state is not explicit in the American Constitution, believing instead that such separation is a creation of what it claims are activist judges in the judicial system.

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] [ 149 ] In the United States, the Christian right often supports their claims by stating that the country was " founded by Christians as a Christian Nation ." [ 150 ] [ 151 ] Members of the Christian right take the position that the Establishment Clause bars the federal government from establishing or sponsoring a state church (e.g., the Church of England), but does not prevent the government from acknowledging religion. The Christian right points out that the term "separation of church and state" is derived from a letter written by Thomas Jefferson, not from the Constitution itself.

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] [ 154 ] Furthermore, the Alliance Defending Freedom (ADF) takes the view that the concept of "separation of church and state" has been used by the American Civil Liberties Union and its allies to inhibit public acknowledgment of Christianity and restrict the religious freedoms of Christians.

[ 155 ] Thus, Christian right leaders have argued that the Establishment Clause does not prohibit the display of religion in the public sphere. Leaders, therefore, believe that public institutions should be allowed, or even required, to display the Ten Commandments . This interpretation has been repeatedly rejected by the courts, which have found that such displays violate the Establishment Clause . Public officials though are prohibited from using their authority in which the primary effect is "advancing or prohibiting religion", according to the Lemon Supreme Court test, and there cannot be an "excessive entanglement with religion" and the government. Some, such as Bryan Fischer of the American Family Association , argue that the First Amendment, which specifically restricts Congress, applies only to the Congress and not the states. This position rejects the incorporation of the Bill of Rights .

[ 156 ] Generally, the Christian right supports the presence of religious institutions within government and the public sphere, and advocates for fewer restrictions on government funding for religious charities and schools. Both Catholics and Protestants, according to a 2005 Gallup study, have been supportive of school prayer in public schools.

[ 124 ] [ 157 ] Economics [ edit ] Early American fundamentalists, such as John R. Rice [ 158 ] [ 159 ] often favored laissez-faire economics and were outspoken critics of the New Deal and later the Great Society .

[ 158 ] The contemporary Christian right supports economic conservative policies such as tax cuts and social conservative policies such as child tax credits.

[ 160 ] Middle East [ edit ] See also: Christian Zionism Many evangelical Protestant supporters of the religious right have strongly supported the state of Israel in recent decades, encouraging support for Israel within the United States government.

[ 161 ] Some of them have linked Israel to Biblical prophesies ; for example, Ed McAteer, founder of the Moral Majority, said "I believe that we are seeing prophecy unfold so rapidly and dramatically and wonderfully and, without exaggerating, makes me breathless." [ 162 ] This belief, an example of dispensationalism , arises from the idea that the establishment of Israel is a prerequisite for the Second Coming of Jesus, because it represents the Biblically prophesied Gathering of Israel . A 2017 poll indicates that this belief is held by 80% of evangelicals, and that half of evangelicals consider it an important cause of their support for the state of Israel.

[ 163 ] During the Lebanese Civil War that started in 1975 and ended in 1990, many Christian parties endorsed the right's political viewpoints such as the Christian Lebanese phalanges which is known as the Kataeb Party , and later, the right's political viewpoints were also endorsed by the Lebanese Armed Forces because their power and influence were threatened by the growing power and influence of the more radical Islamist and left-wing movements, such as the Shiite Amal Movement , and the Progressive Socialist Party in the 1980s.

Abortion and contraception [ edit ] See also: Bioethics and Consistent life ethic Historically, large percentages of American Catholics and Evangelical Protestants oppose and have opposed abortion, [ 164 ] believing that life begins at conception and that abortion is murder. Therefore, those in the movement have worked toward the overturning of Roe v. Wade (1973) , and Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1992). The Christian right has also supported incremental steps to make abortion less available. Such efforts include bans on late-term abortion (including intact dilation and extraction ), [ 165 ] prohibitions against Medicaid funding and other public funding for elective abortions, removal of taxpayer funding for Planned Parenthood and other organizations that provide abortion services, legislation requiring parental consent or notification for abortions performed on minors , [ 166 ] legal protections for unborn victims of violence, legal protections for infants born alive following failed abortions, and bans on abortifacient medications.

The Christian right element in the Reagan coalition strongly supported him in 1980, in the belief that he would appoint Supreme Court justices to overturn Roe v. Wade . They were astonished and dismayed when his first appointment was Sandra Day O'Connor , whom they feared would tolerate abortion. They worked hard to defeat her confirmation but failed.

[ 167 ] The Christian right contends that morning-after pills such as Plan B and Ella are possible abortifacients, able to interfere with a fertilized egg 's implantation in the uterine wall .

[ 168 ] The labeling mandated by the U.S.

Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for Plan B and Ella state that they may interfere with implantation, but according to a June 2012, The New York Times article, many scientists believe that they work only by interfering with ovulation and are arguing to have the implantation language removed from product labels. The Christian right maintains that the chemical properties of morning-after pills make them abortifacients and that the politics of abortion is influencing scientific judgments. Jonathan Imbody of the Christian Medical Association says he questions "whether ideological considerations are driving these decisions." [ 168 ] Specifically, many Catholic members, as well as some conservative Protestant members, of the Christian right have campaigned against contraception altogether.

[ 169 ] [ 170 ] See also: Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization The Roberts Court in 2020. This court oversaw the landmark United States Supreme Court case Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization in 2022.

[ 171 ] In May 2022, Politico published a leaked draft majority opinion, written by Justice Samuel Alito .

[ 172 ] It would overturn Roe and Casey by nullifying the specific privacy rights in question, eliminating federal involvement, and leaving the issue to be determined by the states. Through a statement made by the Chief Justice of the United States , John Roberts , the Court confirmed the document's authenticity but said that it was not a final decision or the Justice's final decision, which was expected by June or July.

The decision was issued on June 24, 2022, ruling 6–3 to reverse the lower court rulings; a more narrow 5–4 ruling overturned Roe and Casey . The majority opinion stated that abortion was not a constitutional right , and that states should have discretion in regulating abortion. The majority opinion, written by Alito, was substantially similar to the leaked draft. Chief Justice Roberts agreed with the judgment upholding the Mississippi law but did not join the majority in the opinion to overturn Roe and Casey .

Biotechnology [ edit ] Due to the Christian right's views regarding ethics and to an extent due to negative views of eugenics common to most ideologies in North America, it has worked for the regulation and restriction of certain applications of biotechnology . In particular, the Christian right opposes therapeutic and reproductive human cloning , championing a 2005 United Nations ban on the practice, and human embryonic stem cell research , which involves the extraction of one or more cells from a human embryo.

[ 27 ] The Christian right supports research with adult stem cells , amniotic stem cells , and induced pluripotent stem cells which do not use cells from human embryos, as they view the harvesting of biological material from an embryo lacking the ability to give permission as an assault on a living being.

The Christian right also opposes euthanasia , and, in one highly publicized case, took an active role in seeking governmental intervention to prevent Terri Schiavo from being deprived of nutrition and hydration .

[ citation needed ] Opposition to drugs [ edit ] Further information: Woman's Christian Temperance Union and List of anti-cannabis organizations The Christian right has historically supported the temperance movement , thus supporting causes such as maintaining Sunday blue laws , adding alcohol packaging warning messages to bottles and limiting alcohol advertising.

[ 24 ] It has advocated for the prohibition of drugs and has opposed efforts to legalize marijuana.

[ 173 ] However, the Roman Catholic Church in Canada is in support of medical marijuana for therapeutic reasons.

[ 174 ] Sex and sexuality [ edit ] Main articles: Christianity and homosexuality , Christianity and transgender people , and Same-sex marriage in the United States Further information: Discrimination in the United States , LGBT rights opposition , and Public opinion of same-sex marriage in the United States The modern roots of the Christian right's views on sexual matters were evident in the years 1950s–1960s, a period in which many conservative Christians in the United States viewed sexual promiscuity as not only excessive, but in fact as a threat to their ideal vision of the country.

[ 28 ] : 30 Beginning in the 1970s, conservative Christian protests against promiscuity began to surface, largely as a reaction to the " permissive Sixties " and changes in sexual behavior confirmed by Roe v. Wade and the LGBT rights movement . The Christian right proceeded to make sexuality issues a priority political cause.

[ 28 ] : 28 Anita Bryant organized Save Our Children , a widespread campaign to oppose legislation prohibiting discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in Miami-Dade County, Florida .

[ 175 ] The group argued that gay people were " recruiting " or " molesting children " in order to make them gay.

[ 175 ] Bryant said, "As a mother, I know that homosexuals cannot biologically reproduce children; therefore, they must recruit our children," and also said that "If gays are granted rights, next we'll have to give rights to prostitutes and to people who sleep with St. Bernards and to nail biters." [ 176 ] The Bryant campaign achieved success in repealing some city anti-discrimination laws, and proposed other citizen initiatives such as a failed California ballot question designed to ban gay people or those who supported LGBT rights from holding public teaching jobs. Bryant's campaign attracted widespread opposition and boycotts which put her out of business.

[ citation needed ] From the late 1970s onwards, some conservative Christian organizations such as the Christian Broadcasting Network , Focus on the Family , Concerned Women for America , the American Family Association , and the Christian Coalition of America , along with right-wing Christian hate groups such as the Westboro Baptist Church , have been outspoken against LGBT rights.

[ 2 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 23 ] Late in 1979, a new religious revival among conservative Evangelical Protestants and Roman Catholics ushered in the Republican coalition politically aligned with the Christian right that would reign in the United States between the years 1970s and 1980s, becoming another obstacle for the progress of the LGBTQ rights movement .

[ 2 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 23 ] During the HIV/AIDS epidemic of the 1980s , LGBTQ communities were further stigmatized as they became the focus of mass hysteria and suffered isolation , marginalization and violence .

[ 177 ] The Christian right champions itself as the "self-appointed conscience of American society". During the 1980s, the movement was largely dismissed by political pundits and mainstream religious leaders as "a collection of buffoonish has-beens". Later, it re-emerged, better organized and more focused, taking firm positions against abortion, pornography, sexual deviancy, and extreme feminism.

[ 38 ] [ 178 ] : 4 Beginning around the first presidency of Donald Trump , Christian conservatives have largely refrained from engaging in debates about sexual morality.

[ 179 ] Influential Christian right organizations at the forefront of the anti-gay rights movement in the United States include Focus on the Family, Family Research Council, and the Family Research Institute .

[ 28 ] : 15–16 An important stratagem in Christian right anti-gay politics is in its rejection of "the edicts of a Big Brother" state, allowing it to profit from "a general feeling of discontent and demoralization with government". As a result, the Christian right has endorsed smaller government, restricting its ability to arbitrate in disputes regarding values and traditions. In this context, gay rights laws have come to symbolize the government's allegedly unconstitutional "[interference] with individual freedom".

[ 28 ] : 170–171 The central tenets of Focus on the Family and similar organizations, such as the Family Research Council, emphasise issues such as abortion and the necessity of gender roles. A number of organizations, including the New Christian Right, "have in various ways rejected liberal America in favor of the regulation of pornography, anti-abortion legislation, the criminalization of homosexuality, and the virtues of faithfulness and loyalty in sexual partnerships", according to sociologist Bryan S. Turner .

[ 32 ] Some members of the Christian right view same-sex marriage as a central issue in the culture wars, more so than other gay rights issues and even more significantly than abortion.

[ 178 ] : 57 [ dubious – discuss ] The legalization of same-sex marriage in Massachusetts in 2004 changed the Christian right, causing it to put its opposition to these marriages above most other issues. It also created previously unknown interracial and ecumenical coalitions, and stimulated new electoral activity in pastors and congregations.

[ 178 ] : 58 Criticism [ edit ] Criticisms of the Christian right often come from Christians who believe Jesus' message was centered on social responsibility and social justice . Theologian Michael Lerner has summarized: "The unholy alliance of the Political Right and the Religious Right threatens to destroy the America we love. It also threatens to generate a revulsion against God and religion by identifying them with militarism, ecological irresponsibility, fundamentalist antagonism to science and rational thought, and insensitivity to the needs of the poor and the powerless." [ 180 ] Commentators such as Rob Schenck , Randall Balmer , and Charles M. Blow criticized the Christian right for its tolerance and embrace of Donald Trump during the 2016 presidential election despite Trump's failure to adhere to any of the principles advocated by the Christian right groups for decades.

[ 181 ] [ 182 ] In a 2023 interview with NPR , Russell D. Moore stated that he had come to believe that Christianity was "in a crisis" after hearing multiple pastors speak of congregation members rejecting quotes from the Sermon on the Mount as "liberal talking points" and not backing down upon being informed of their source.

[ 183 ] Interpretation of Christianity [ edit ] See also: Christian left , Christian socialism , and Christian communism One argument which questions the legitimacy of the Christian right posits that Jesus Christ may be considered a leftist on the modern political spectrum . Jesus' and Catholics’ concern with the poor and feeding the hungry, among other things , are argued, by proponents of Christian leftism, to be core attributes of modern-day socialism and social justice .

[ 184 ] [ 185 ] [ 186 ] However, others [ who?

] contend that while Jesus' concern for the poor and hungry is virtuous and that individuals have a moral obligation to help others, the relationship between charity and the state should not be construed in the same manner.

[ 187 ] [ 188 ] According to Frank Newport of Gallup , "there are fewer Americans today who are both highly religious and liberal than there are Americans who are both highly religious and conservative." Newport also noted that 52% of white conservatives identify as "highly religious" while only 16% of white liberals identify as the same. However, African-Americans , "the most religious of any major racial or ethnic group in the country", are "strongly oriented to voting Democratic". While observing that African-American Democrats are more religious than their white Democrat counterparts, Newport further noted, however, that African-American Democrats are "much more likely to be ideologically moderate or conservative." [ 189 ] Some criticize what they see as a politicization of Christianity because they say Jesus transcends political concepts.

[ 190 ] [ 191 ] Mikhail Gorbachev referred to Jesus as "the first Socialist".

[ 192 ] [ 193 ] Race and diversity [ edit ] The Christian right has tried to recruit social conservatives in the black church .

[ 194 ] Prior to the 2016 United States presidential election , African-American Republican Ben Carson emerged as a leader of the Christian right.

[ 195 ] Other Christian African-Americans who identify with conservatism are Supreme Court justice Clarence Thomas , [ 196 ] rapper Kanye West , [ 197 ] Alveda King , and pastor Tony Evans .

[ 198 ] [ 199 ] LGBT rights [ edit ] Whilst the Christian right in the United States generally identifies with aspects of LGBT rights opposition , other Christian movements argue that the biblical texts only oppose specific types of divergent sexual behaviour, such as paederasty (i.e. sexual intercourse between boys and men).

[ 200 ] [ 201 ] [ 202 ] [ 203 ] During the Trump administration, there was a growing push [ who?

] for religious liberty bills , aimed to exempt individuals and businesses from anti-discrimination laws intended to protect LGBT people, if they claimed that their actions were motivated by religious beliefs.

[ citation needed ] Among the most powerful organizations that promoted anti-LGBT and anti-transgender legislation under the Trump administration is the Alliance Defending Freedom .

[ 204 ] Use of dominionism labeling [ edit ] Some social scientists have used the word "dominionism" to refer to adherence of dominion theology , [ 205 ] [ 206 ] [ 207 ] as well as to the influence in the broader Christian Right of ideas inspired by Dominion Theology.

[ 205 ] Although such influence (particularly of Reconstructionism) has been described by many authors, [ 81 ] [ 208 ] full adherents to Reconstructionism are few and marginalized among conservative Christians.

[ 81 ] [ 209 ] [ 210 ] In the early 1990s, sociologist Sara Diamond [ 211 ] [ 212 ] defined dominionism in her PhD dissertation as a movement that, while it includes Dominion Theology and Reconstructionism as subsets, is much broader in scope, extending to much of the Christian Right.

[ 213 ] She was followed by journalists who included Frederick Clarkson [ 214 ] [ 215 ] and Chris Hedges [ 216 ] [ 217 ] [ 218 ] and others who have stressed the influence of Dominionist ideas on the Christian right.

[ 219 ] [ 220 ] [ 221 ] [ 222 ] [ 223 ] [ 224 ] [ 225 ] [ 226 ] [ 227 ] [ 228 ] [ excessive citations ] The terms "dominionist" and "dominionism" are rarely used for self-description, and their usage has been attacked from right-leaning quarters.

Stanley Kurtz labeled it "conspiratorial nonsense", "political paranoia", and " guilt by association ", [ 229 ] and decried Hedges' "vague characterizations" that allow him to "paint a highly questionable picture of a virtually faceless and nameless 'Dominionist' Christian mass." [ 230 ] Kurtz also complained about a perceived link between average Christian evangelicals and extremism such as Christian Reconstructionism : The notion that conservative Christians want to reinstitute slavery and rule by genocide is not just crazy, it's downright dangerous. The most disturbing part of the Harper's cover story (the one by Chris Hedges) was the attempt to link Christian conservatives with Hitler and fascism. Once we acknowledge the similarity between conservative Christians and fascists, Hedges appears to suggest, we can confront Christian evil by setting aside "the old polite rules of democracy." So wild conspiracy theories and visions of genocide are really excuses for the Left to disregard the rules of democracy and defeat conservative Christians – by any means necessary.

[ 229 ] Lisa Miller of Newsweek said that many warnings about "dominionism" are "paranoid" and she also said that "the word creates a siege mentality in which 'we' need to guard against 'them.

' " [ 231 ] Ross Douthat of The New York Times noted that "many of the people that writers like Diamond and others describe as 'dominionists' would disavow the label, many definitions of dominionism conflate several very different Christian political theologies, and there's a lively debate about whether the term is even useful at all." [ 232 ] According to Joe Carter of First Things , "the term was coined in the 1980s by Diamond and is never used outside liberal blogs and websites. No reputable scholars use the term for it is a meaningless neologism that Diamond concocted for her dissertation", [ 233 ] while Jeremy Pierce of First Things coined the word "dominionismist" to describe those who promote the idea that there is a dominionist conspiracy.

[ 234 ] Another criticism has focused on the proper use of the term. Berlet wrote that "some critics of the Christian Right have stretched the term dominionism past its breaking point", [ 235 ] and argued that, rather than labeling conservatives as extremists, it would be better to "talk to these people" and "engage them".

[ 236 ] Sara Diamond wrote that "[l]iberals' writing about the Christian Right's take-over plans has generally taken the form of conspiracy theory ", and argued that instead one should "analyze the subtle ways" that ideas like Dominionism "take hold within movements and why." [ 237 ] Dan Olinger, a professor at the fundamentalist Bob Jones University in Greenville, South Carolina , said, "We want to be good citizens and participants, but we're not really interested in using the iron fist of the law to compel people to do everything Christians should do." [ 238 ] Bob Marcaurelle, interim pastor at Mountain Springs Baptist Church in Piedmont, said the Middle Ages were proof enough that Christian ruling groups are almost always corrupted by power. "When Christianity becomes the government, the question is whose Christianity?" Marcaurelle asked.

[ 239 ] Movements outside the United States [ edit ] While the Christian right is a strong movement in the United States, it also has a presence in Canada. Alan Curtis suggests that the American Christian right "is a phenomenon that is very hard for Europeans to understand." [ 240 ] [ 241 ] Robin Pettitt, a professor at Kingston University London , states, however, that like the Christian right in the US, Christian Democratic movements in Europe and Latin America are "equally driven by the debate over the role of the state and the church in political, social and moral life." [ 242 ] Australia [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Australia Ideologies Agrarianism Australian nationalism Christian right Liberal conservatism Right-wing populism Hansonism Principles Familialism Federalism Free market Free trade (factions) Limited government Loyalism Monarchism Property rights Protectionism (factions) Rule of law Intellectuals Blainey Coleman Donnelly Finnis Flint Harries Henderson Melluish Minogue Oldmeadow Santamaria Stove Windschuttle Jurists Allan Barton Callinan Craven Dawson Gleeson Gibbs Hayne Heydon Myers Steward Commentators Akerman Albrechtsen Bolt Credlin Dean Devine (Frank) Devine (Miranda) Hadley Jones Kenny Kerr Lehmann McGuinness Mundine Murray van Onselen Panahi de Percy Price Shelton Politicians Abbott Anderson Anning Barton [ citation needed ] Bernardi Bonner [ citation needed ] Canavan Christensen Petersen Dutton Hanson Howard Joyce Katter Kelly Lyons [ citation needed ] Menzies McMahon Morrison Mundine Newman Nile Palmer Price Reid Vanstone [ citation needed ] Parties Active Australian Christians Democratic Labour Party Family First (2021) Katter's Australian Liberal–National Coalition Liberal LNP National Country Liberal Party Libertarian Party Pauline Hanson's One Nation Shooters, Fishers and Farmers Trumpet of Patriots United Australia Party Defunct Christian Democratic Party Commonwealth Liberal Party Conservatives Conservative Party Conservative National Party Family First (2002) Liberal (Queensland) National (Queensland) National Defence League Nationalist Party United Australia Party Organisations Active Advance Australia Australians for Constitutional Monarchy Australian Christian Lobby Australian Jewish Association Coalition for Marriage CPAC Australia Cormack Foundation National Civic Council Ramsay Centre for Western Civilisation Defunct Australian Academy of Art Australian National Flag Association King and Empire Alliance Old Guard Think tanks Centre for Independent Studies Institute of Public Affairs Menzies Research Centre Page Research Centre Samuel Griffith Society H. R. Nicholls Society Media ADH TV The Australian Counterpoint The Daily Telegraph Herald Sun News Weekly Quadrant Quillette Sky News Australia The Argus (Defunct) Related topics Conservatism in New Zealand The Fabrication of Aboriginal History (2002) Far-right politics in Australia (factions) Liberal Party factions Moderates Centre Right National Right One Australia Politics of Australia Liberalism Conservatism portal Australia portal v t e In Australia, the Christian right draws from both Catholics and Protestants. Historically, the first Christian right party was the Democratic Labor Party .

[ 243 ] The Democratic Labor Party was formed in 1955 as a split from the Australian Labor Party (ALP). In Victoria , and New South Wales , state executive members, parliamentarians and branch members associated with the Industrial Groups or B. A. Santamaria and "The Movement" (and therefore strongly identified with Roman Catholicism ) were expelled from the party, and formed the Democratic Labor Party (DLP). Later in 1957, a similar split occurred in Queensland , with the resulting group subsequently joining the DLP. The party also had sitting members from Tasmania and New South Wales at various times, though it was much stronger in the former mentioned states. The goals of the party were anti communism , the decentralization of industry, population, administration and ownership.

[ 244 ] The party decided, in its view that the ALP was filled with communists, that it would preference the ruling conservative Liberal and Country parties over the ALP.

[ 245 ] However, it was more morally conservative, militantly anti-communist and socially compassionate than the Liberals.

[ citation needed ] The DLP heavily lost ground in the federal election of 1974 that saw its primary vote cut by nearly two-thirds, and the election of an ALP government. The DLP never regained its previous support in subsequent elections and formally disbanded in 1978, but a small group within the party refused to accept this decision and created a small, reformed successor party (now the Democratic Labour Party ). Though his party was effectively gone, Santamaria and his National Civic Council (NCC) took a strong diametrically opposed stance to dominant Third Way / neoliberal / New Right tendencies within both the ALP and Liberal parties throughout the 1980s and early 1990s.

[ citation needed ] The B. A Santamaria and the Democratic Labor party produced many alumni who became the base of the Christian right in Australia. In Liberal party , these were Tony Abbott and Kevin Andrews .

[ 243 ] Outside the Liberal party, conservative commentator's such as Greg Sheridan and Gerrard Henderson also had links to Santamaria. Within the Australian Labor Party (ALP) , this alumni can be found in the Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees Association (SDA) , which de-affiliated from the ALP with the industrial Groups in the 1950s, and then re-affiliated in the 1980s.

[ 246 ] The SDA opposed gay marriage and abortion, which were some reasons for workers to form another competing union .

[ 247 ] Tony Burke, who opposed euthanasia, came from the SDA.

[ 248 ] [ 249 ] Currently, the NCC functions as a minority organization within the Christian Right.

The more Protestant strands of the Christian Right have been far more diverse. Fundamentalist Christianity directly inspired Fred Nile and his parties. Nile in 1967–68 was assistant director of the Billy Graham Crusade in Sydney. The Christian Democratic Party (initially known as the "Call to Australia" party) is on the strongly religious conservative end of the Australian political spectrum, promoting social conservatism, opposing gay rights and abortion.

[ 250 ] It gained 9.1% of the vote in the New South Wales (NSW) state election of 1981, Its support base has generally been restricted to NSW and Western Australia , where it usually gains between 2–4% of votes, with its support being minuscule in other states. The party started to fall apart in 2019 when the moderate faction member, Paul Green, lost his seat, and when a faction of younger people attempted to dismiss the governing board.

[ 251 ] [ 252 ] Whilst this failed, it opened up a rift between the traditional party factions that led to prolonged legal disputes and the party winding up in 2022.

[ 253 ] Fred Nile would quickly join a new party.

[ 254 ] The Family First Party is a former political party which was linked with Pentecostal Church and other smaller Christian denominations, and was also identified with the strongly religious conservative end of the Australian political spectrum. It has had one or two members in the SA parliament since 2002, and in 2004 also managed to elect a Victorian senator. Its electoral support is small, with the largest constituencies being South Australia (4–6%), and Victoria (around 4%). Family First generally receives lower support in national elections than in state elections.

Family First was merged with the Australian Conservatives Party in 2017.

[ 255 ] Outside of the Catholic links to B.A. Santamaria and the minor Protestant parties, some party members of the Liberal and National Party Coalition and the Australian Labor Party also support some of the values of the Christian right on abortion and gay rights. The Australian Christian Lobby argues for opposition to same-sex marriage in state and federal politics.

[ 256 ] Brazil [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Brazil Ideologies Bolsonarism Christian right Coronelism Integralism Janismo Liberal conservatism Free Brazil Movement Monarchism Patrianovism Nationalism Populism Principles Agrarianism Anti-communism Authority Family values Federalism Gun rights Law and order Lusotropicalism Militarism Multiracialism Patriotism Traditionalism History Jair Bolsonaro campaign Brazilian Miracle Colonial Brazil Empire of Brazil Kingdom of Brazil Military dictatorship in Brazil Intellectuals Campos Carpeaux Carvalho Corção Corrêa de Oliveira Francis Freyre Lacombe Léo Lobato Mourão Oliveira Lima Oliveira Torres Paulo Ricardo Pinto Reale Roquette-Pinto Rodríguez Santos Silva Simonsen Tolentino Viana Politicians Andrada e Silva Araújo Lima Bolsonaro Carneiro Castelo Branco Ferreira Fidelix Freitas Lacerda Maluf Médici Nabuco Santos Getúlio Vargas (early) Zema Parties Active Brazil Union Brazilian Labour Renewal Party Brazilian Woman's Party Christian Democracy Democratic Renewal Party Liberal Party New Resistance Progressistas Republicans Defunct Alliance for Brazil Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Labour Party Conservative Party Conservative Republican Party Democratic Social Party Democrats Fluminense Republican Party National Democratic Union Party of the Reconstruction of the National Order Patriota Popular Representation Party Social Christian Party Social Liberal Party Organisations Black Guard Diretório Monárquico do Brasil Evangelical Caucus Imperial Patrianovist Guard União Democrática Ruralista Media Gazeta do Povo O Tempo Related topics BBB Bench Bolsominion Brazilian nobility Fidalgo O Presidente Negro (1926) Politics of Brazil Liberalism Socialism Conservatism portal Brazil portal v t e In Brazil , the evangelical caucus have a great influence at the parliament and in the society in general. The bloc promotes strong socially conservative positions, like opposition to abortion , LGBT rights, marijuana legalization, sexual and gender education at schools and support to decrease of age of defense of infancy . Except for left-wing and far-left parties with strong social progressive beliefs like Workers' Party or Socialism and Liberty Party , Christian conservatives can be found in all political parties of Brazil, but nevertheless they are more common associated with parties like Social Democratic Party , Democratas , PSL , Social Christian Party , Brazilian Republican Party , Patriota and in the Party of the Republic . In 2016, Marcelo Crivella , a licensed pentecostal pastor from the Universal Church of the Kingdom of God , won in a runoff the election to mayor of Rio de Janeiro , the second biggest city in Brazil, with the Brazilian Republican Party, making for the first time an evangelical bloc member mayor of a big city in Brazil. In 2018, Jair Bolsonaro was elected president with massive support of conservative Catholics, Charismatics, Evangelicals and Pentecostals; Another candidate, Cabo Daciolo , from Patriota , attracted much attention from media and public in general, despite a lower votation. Both had a right-wing populist , Christian nationalist program, but Bolsonaro was near to a national conservative and economic liberal one, contrasting with an Ultranationalist , theocratic and protectionist style of Daciolo.

[ citation needed ] Canada [ edit ] Further information: Social conservatism in Canada See also: Abortion in Canada This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Canada Schools Calgary School Christian right Clerico-nationalism Right-wing populism Trumpism Social conservatism Social credit Toryism Blue Red Pink Principles Canadian values Federalism Economic liberalism Limited government Loyalism Monarchism Nationalism Property rights Protectionism Rule of law Tradition History Château Clique Family Compact Lower Canada Tories National Policy Port Hope Conference Unite the Right United Empire Loyalist Upper Canada Tories Canada convoy protest Intellectuals Alexander Black Blackwood Bouchard Byfield Brodie Cooper Duchesne Dart Farthing Flanagan Furedi Gilley Granatstein Grant Groulx Gwyn Kaufmann Kirkconnell Leacock McLuhan Pageau Packer Peterson Stackhouse Jr.

Strachan Tiger Politicians Aberhart Bennett (Bill) Bennett (R. B.) Bennett (W. A. C.) Bernier Borden Campbell De Cosmos Diefenbaker Duplessis D. Ford R. Ford Haliburton Harper Harris Kenney Klein Legault Lougheed Macdonald Manning (Ernest) Manning (Preston) McGee Mulroney O'Toole Poilievre Rustad Scheer Smith Stanfield Vander Zalm Wall Commentators Camp Chen Crowder Frum Jivani Lester Levant Lilley McIntyre Murphy Segal Speer Steyn Literature Canada and the Canadian Question (1891) Lament for a Nation (1965) Who Killed Canadian History?

(1998) Maps of Meaning (1999) The Black Book of English Canada (Series; 2001–2003) The Uniqueness of Western Civilization (2011) Harperism (2014) " The Case for Colonialism " (2017) 12 Rules for Life (2018) Whiteshift (2018) Active parties Federal Christian Heritage Party of Canada Conservative Party of Canada Libertarian Party of Canada People's Party of Canada Provincial BC United Coalition Avenir Québec Conservative Party of British Columbia Conservative Party of Quebec Progressive Conservative Party of Manitoba Progressive Conservative Party of NB Progressive Conservative Party of NL Progressive Conservative Party of Nova Scotia Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario Progressive Conservative Party of PEI Progressive Conservative Party of Sask.

Saskatchewan Party Social Credit Party of Canada United Conservative Party Yukon Party Defunct parties Federal Canadian Alliance Conservative Party of Canada (1867–1942) Liberal-Conservative Party Progressive Conservative Party of Canada Reform Party of Canada Social Credit Party of Canada Unionist Party Provincial Action démocratique du Québec British Columbia Social Credit Party Conservative Party of Quebec (historical) Parti bleu Progressive Conservative Assoc. of Alberta Union Nationale Upper Canada Tories Wildrose Party Media CFRA Climate Audit Free Dominion LifeSiteNews National Post The Post Millennial Rebel News Sun News Network The Dorchester Review Toronto Sun Western Standard Winnipeg Sun Other organizations Campaign Life Coalition Canadian Centre for Bio-Ethical Reform Canadian Coalition for Democracies Canadian Taxpayers Federation Catholic Civil Rights League Focus on the Family Canada Fraser Institute Institute for Research on Public Policy LGBTory Macdonald–Laurier Institute Mackenzie Institute Montreal Economic Institute National Citizens Coalition Orange Order Progressive Group for Independent Business REAL Women of Canada Rumble Three Percenters True North Centre for Public Policy Voice of Canadians Related Common Sense Revolution Conservatism in the United Kingdom Conservatism in the United States Censorship under the Canadian Human Rights Act Illegal immigration to Canada Old Stock Canadians Pure laine Western alienation Alberta Agenda Alberta separatism Canada portal Conservatism portal v t e Religion has been a key factor in Canadian politics since well before the Canadian Confederation was established in 1867, when the Conservatives were the party of traditionalist Catholics and Anglicans and the Liberals were the party of Protestant dissenters and anti-clerical Catholics. This pattern largely remained until the mid-twentieth century when a new division emerged between the Christian left (represented by the Social Gospel philosophy and ecumenicism ) and the Christian right (represented by fundamentalism and biblical literalism ). The Christian left (along with the secular and anti-religious left) became supporters of the New Democratic Party while the right moved to the Social Credit Party , especially in Western Canada, and to a lesser extent the Progressive Conservatives .

The Social Credit Party, founded in 1935, represented a major change in Canadian religious politics. Until that time, fundamentalists had shunned politics as " worldly ", and a distraction from the proper practice of religion. However, the new party was founded by fundamentalist radio preacher and Bible school teacher William Aberhart or "Bible Bill". Aberhart mixed his own interpretation of scripture and prophecy with the monetary reform theories of social credit to create a movement that swept across Alberta, winning the provincial election of 1935 in a landslide. Aberhart and his disciple Ernest Manning then governed the province for the next forty years, several times trying to expand into the rest of Canada [ 257 ] In 1987, Manning's son, Preston Manning , founded the new Reform Party of Canada , which soon became the main party of the religious right. It won majorities of the seats in Western Canada in repeated elections, but was unable to break through in Eastern Canada, though it became the official opposition from 1997 to 2003 (Reform was renamed the Canadian Alliance in 2000). In 2003 the Canadian Alliance and the Progressive Conservatives merged to create the Conservative Party of Canada , led by Stephen Harper , a member of the Christian and Missionary Alliance , who went on to become prime minister in 2006.

[ citation needed ] The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , introduced by the patriation of the Canadian Constitution in 1982, has been controversial within the Christian right in Canada. Although this Charter entrenches rights and freedoms (such as the freedom of religion) that are central in the belief systems of the Christian right, it has also been interpreted by the Supreme Court of Canada to strike down many laws supported by the Christian right. In 1982, the Supreme Court struck down Canada's Lords' Day Act , which required many stored to be closed on Sundays, as an infringement the freedom of conscience and religion. Abortion, partly decriminalized in 1969 by an act of Parliament , was completely decriminalized after the two R. v. Morgentaler cases ( in 1988 and in 1993 ). Parliament attempted to pass a new law governing abortion in 1993, but this legislation failed after a tie vote in the Senate . A series of provincial superior court decisions which legalized same-sex marriage led the federal government to introduce legislation that legalized same-sex marriage in all of Canada . Before he took office, former Conservative prime minister Stephen Harper stated that he would hold a free vote on the issue, [ 258 ] and declared the issue closed after it was voted down in the House of Commons in 2006.

[ 259 ] In 2013, the Supreme Court struck down Canada's prostitution law in Canada v Bedford , prompting the Stephen Harper government to introduce a new prostitution law fashioned after the Nordic Model . In 2015, the Supreme Court struck down Canada's prohibition on euthanasia in Carter v Canada , again leading Parliament to pass a new law governing euthanasia . The Christian right has been critical of all these judicial decisions and have generally been the greatest advocates for the stringent laws against abortion, same-sex marriage, prostitution, and euthanasia, though in differing degrees. For instance, the Christian right in Canada is strongly and vocally organized on the topic of abortion, but criticism of same-sex marriage is far more seldom.

[ 260 ] In 2021 the Canadian government passed Bill C-4, banning conversion therapy nationwide, which received opposition from the Christian Right and Conservative members of parliament. Christian Pastors altered their preaching schedules to criticize and discuss this new law.

[ 261 ] The Caribbean, Latin America, and Sub-Saharan Africa [ edit ] Main article: Political influence of Evangelicalism in Latin America Further information: Conservative wave and World Christianity Christian right politics in the Caribbean , Latin America , and Sub-Saharan Africa is strongly connected with the growing propagation of the Evangelical - Pentecostal movement in the Global South and Third World countries.

[ 262 ] [ 263 ] [ 264 ] [ 265 ] Roman Catholics in the Caribbean, Latin America, and Sub-Saharan Africa, despite being normally socially conservative, tend to be more left-wing in economics [ 266 ] [ 267 ] due to the traditional teachings of the Catholic social doctrine .

[ 265 ] Evangelical-Pentecostal Christians, on the other hand, are mostly from the neo-Pentecostal movement , and thus believers in the Prosperity theology that justifies most of their neoliberal economic ideas .

[ 262 ] [ 265 ] [ 268 ] [ 269 ] They are also strongly socially conservative, even for Latin American standards.

[ 265 ] Mexico [ edit ] In Mexico , the interests of the Christian right are represented by different political organisations and civil associations. The most notable case is the National Action Party , a conservative party aligned with Christian Democratic ideas, notably influenced by the Social teaching of the Catholic Church , and which has held the presidency of Mexico twice. The party's platform states strong opposition to abortion , same-sex marriage and the legalisation of drugs , among many other conservative policies. In addition, prominent figures in the party have been linked to Catholic Church organisations. The evangelical caucus, albeit for a relatively short time, was represented by the Social Encounter Party and the Solidarity Encounter Party , the latter being the successor to the former. Both parties were founded by Hugo Eric Flores , who according to some sources was an evangelical minister before entering politics. Initially statewide for Baja California , Social Encounter came to govern that state in coalition with the National Action Party. The party would later be officialised as a political party at the federal level. Other organisations and associations adhering to the ideals of the Christian right include the Frente Nacional por la Familia, the Organización del Bien Común , colloquially known as El Yunque and with close ties to the PAN, and the Legionaries of Christ , a Roman Catholic clerical religious order of priests and candidates for the priesthood established in Mexico.

[ citation needed ] Netherlands [ edit ] In the Netherlands , Calvinist Protestants have long had their own political parties, now called the Reformed Political Party (SGP) on the right, and the ChristianUnion (CU) in the center. For generations they operated their own newspapers and broadcasting association. The SGP has about 28,000 members, and three out of 150 members of the Dutch parliament's lower house. It has always been in opposition to the government.

[ 270 ] Northern Ireland [ edit ] In Northern Ireland , Ian Paisley led a Protestant fundamentalist party, the Democratic Unionist Party , which had a considerable influence on the province's culture.

[ 271 ] [ 272 ] For a time after the 2017 United Kingdom general election , the DUP provided confidence and supply to the governing Conservative Party, although this agreement provoked concern from socially liberal elements of the party about possible DUP influence on social policy.

[ 273 ] Although there is no evidence this occurred.

Karen Armstrong has mentioned British evangelical leader Colin Urquhart as advocating positions similar to the Christian Right.

[ 274 ] Other countries [ edit ] In Fiji , Sodelpa is a conservative, nationalist party which seeks to make Christianity the state religion , while the constitution makes Fiji a secular republic. Following the 2014 general election, Sodelpa is the main opposition party in Parliament.

In Hungary , the ruling national-conservative party Fidesz can also be considered to be a party of the Christian right.

Viktor Orbán is known for his use of conservative Christian values against immigration and the rise of Islam in Europe.

[ 275 ] [ 276 ] In the Philippines , due to Spanish colonization , and the introduction of the Catholic Church, religious conservatism has a strong influence on national policies. Some have argued that the U.S. Christian right may have roots in the Philippines.

[ 277 ] In Poland , the Roman Catholic national-conservative party Law and Justice can be considered to be a party of the Christian right.

[ 278 ] In Russia , the United Russia has collaborated closely with the Russian Orthodox Church , boosting the Kremlin 's appeal to social conservatives .

[ 279 ] In Scandinavia , the Faroe Island's Centre Party is a bible-oriented fundamentalist party with about 4% of the vote. However, the Norwegian Christian People's Party , the Swedish Christian Democrats and Danish Christian Democrats are less religiously orthodox and are similar to mainstream European Christian Democracy .

In Switzerland , Federal Democratic Union is a small conservative Protestant party with about 1% of the vote.

[ 280 ] Associated minor political parties [ edit ] Some minor political parties have formed as vehicles for Christian right activists: Australian Christians (Australia) Christian Democratic Party (Australia) Christian Party of Austria (Austria) Botswana Movement for Democracy (Botswana) We Believe (Bolivia) Alliance for Brazil (Brazil) Patriota (Brazil) Christian Heritage Party (Canada) National Restoration Party (Costa Rica) Christian Democratic People's Party (Hungary) Kataeb Party (Lebanon) Christian Liberal Party (South Korea) Christian Values Party (Sweden) Katipunan ng Demokratikong Pilipino (Philippines) Federal Democratic Union (Switzerland) Reformed Political Party (Netherlands) Nicaraguan Party of the Christian Path (Nicaragua) The Christians (Norway) Law and Justice (Poland) Alliance for the Union of Romanians (Romania) Christian Party (United Kingdom) Christian People's Alliance (United Kingdom) Indian National Christian Party (India) Christian Liberty Party (United States) American Solidarity Party (United States) [ 281 ] Constitution Party (United States) [ 282 ] Prohibition Party (United States) Democratic Unionist Party (United Kingdom) Traditional Unionist Voice (United Kingdom) Christian Conservative Party , a political party in Norway Conservative Christian Party – BPF, a political party in Belarus Groups [ edit ] Roman Catholic Church (social, moral, and cultural issues) Traditionalist Catholicism Southern Baptist Convention Assemblies of God Presbyterian Church in America Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod Continuing Anglicans Conservative evangelicalism The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Conservatism portal Alliance Defending Freedom Anti-Semitism in Christianity American Center for Law & Justice Bible Belt (United States) Bible Belt (Netherlands) Catholic Church and Nazi Germany Catholic Church and Nazi Germany during World War II Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Chalcedon Foundation Christian fascism Christian fundamentalism Christian Identity Christian libertarianism Christian nationalism Christian reconstructionism Christian revival Christian terrorism Christianity and other religions Christianity and politics Christianity and violence Christian values Christian Zionism Clerical fascism Ustaše Wahhabism Concerned Women for America Dominion theology Family values Focus on the Family Integralism Independent Baptist Liberty Institute Manhattan Declaration: A Call of Christian Conscience National Catholicism Neopatriarchy New Independent Fundamental Baptist Movement Orthodox Anglican Communion PragerU Radical right (United States) Radical right (Europe) Religion and authoritarianism Theonomy Traditional Anglican Church Traditionalist Catholicism Traditionalist conservatism True Orthodox church References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j Douglas, Christopher (December 2021). Wilsey, John D. (ed.).

"Revenge Is a Genre Best Served Old: Apocalypse in Christian Right Literature and Politics" .

Religions .

13 (1: The Historical Interaction between Nationalism and Christian Theology ).

Basel : MDPI: 21.

doi : 10.3390/rel13010021 .

eISSN 2077-1444 .

hdl : 1828/14485 .

S2CID 245562021 .

^ a b c d e f g Gannon, Thomas M. (July–September 1981).

"The New Christian Right in America as a Social and Political Force" .

Archives de sciences sociales des religions .

26 ( 52– 1).

Paris : Éditions de l'EHESS : 69– 83.

doi : 10.3406/assr.1981.2226 .

ISSN 0335-5985 .

JSTOR 30125411 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Ben Barka, Mokhtar (December 2012).

"The New Christian Right's relations with Israel and with the American Jews: the mid-1970s onward" .

E-Rea .

10 (1).

Aix-en-Provence and Marseille : Centre pour l'Édition Électronique Ouverte on behalf of Aix-Marseille University .

doi : 10.4000/erea.2753 .

ISSN 1638-1718 .

S2CID 191364375 .

The Jews have cause to worry because Evangelicals are active on both fronts, promoting support for the State of Israel , and evangelizing the Jews at the same time. While the Israeli government eagerly accepts public support of Evangelicals and courts the leaders of the New Christian Right, many Jews bitterly condemn Christian proselytism and try their best to restrict the activities of missionaries in Israel. " Jews for Jesus " and other Christian Jewish groups in Israel have become especially effective in evangelizing, often with the support of foreign Evangelicals. It is not surprising that Jewish leaders, both in the United States and Israel , react strongly to "Jews for Jesus" and the whole "Messianic Jewish" movement , whose concern is to promote awareness among the Jews as to God's real plans for humanity and the need to accept Jesus as a Savior . In this respect, Gershom Gorenberg lamented the fact that "people who see Israel through the lens of Endtimes prophecy are questionable allies, whose support should be elicited only in the last resort. In the long run, their apocalyptic agenda has no room for Israel as a normal country." ^ [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] ^ a b c d e f Miller, Steven P. (2014).

"Left, Right, Born Again" .

The Age of Evangelicalism: America's Born-Again Years .

New York : Oxford University Press . pp.

32– 59.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199777952.003.0003 .

ISBN 9780199777952 .

LCCN 2013037929 .

OCLC 881502753 .

^ a b c d e f Durham, Martin (2000).

"The rise of the right" .

The Christian Right, the Far Right, and the Boundaries of American Conservatism .

Manchester and New York : Manchester University Press . pp.

1– 23.

ISBN 9780719054860 .

^ Sociology: understanding a diverse society , Margaret L. Andersen, Howard Francis Taylor, Cengage Learning, 2005, ISBN 978-0-534-61716-5 ^ [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] ^ [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] ^ a b c d Deckman, Melissa Marie (2004).

School Board Battles: The Christian Right in Local Politics .

Washington, D.C.

: Georgetown University Press . p.

48 .

ISBN 9781589010017 . Retrieved April 10, 2014 .

More than half of all Christian right candidates attend evangelical Protestant churches, which are more theologically liberal. A relatively large number of Christian Right candidates (24 percent) are Catholics; however, when asked to describe themselves as either "progressive/liberal" or "traditional/conservative" Catholics, 88 percent of these Christian right candidates place themselves in the traditional category.

^ a b Schweber, Howard (February 24, 2012).

"The Catholicization of the American Right" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved February 24, 2012 .

In the past two decades, the American religious Right has become increasingly Catholic. I mean that both literally and metaphorically. Literally, Catholic writers have emerged as intellectual leaders of the religious right in universities, the punditocracy, the press, and the courts, promoting an agenda that at its most theoretical involves a reclamation of the natural law tradition of Thomas Aquinas and at its most practical involves appeals to the kind of common-sense, 'everybody knows,' or 'it just is' arguments that have characterized opposition to same-sex marriage ... Meanwhile, in the realm of actual politics, Catholic politicians have emerged as leading figures in the religious conservative movement.

^ [ 3 ] [ 5 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] ^ Smith, David Whitten; Burr, Elizabeth Geraldine (2007).

Understanding World Religions: A Road Map for Justice and Peace . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 106.

ISBN 9780742550551 .

^ [ 3 ] [ 10 ] [ 13 ] ^ a b Palmer, Randall; Winner, Lauren F. (2005) [2002].

"Protestants and Homosexuality" .

Protestantism in America . Columbia Contemporary American Religion Series.

New York : Columbia University Press . pp.

149– 178.

ISBN 9780231111317 .

LCCN 2002023859 .

^ a b c "Content Pages of the Encyclopedia of Religion and Social Science" . Archived from the original on March 3, 2016.

^ a b Williams 2010 , pp. 1, 2.

^ Trollinger, William (October 8, 2019).

"Fundamentalism turns 100, a landmark for the Christian Right" .

The Conversation .

ISSN 2201-5639 .

Archived from the original on May 7, 2022 . Retrieved July 3, 2022 .

^ [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] ^ a b Green, John C.

; Silk, Mark (Spring 2005).

"Why Moral Values Did Count" .

Religion in the News . Archived from the original on January 23, 2018.

^ a b Edis, Taner (August 2020).

"Is There A Political Argument For Teaching Evolution?" .

Marburg Journal of Religion .

22 (2).

University of Marburg : 1– 26.

doi : 10.17192/mjr.2020.22.8304 .

ISSN 1612-2941 . Retrieved July 20, 2022 .

^ [ 1 ] [ 21 ] ^ a b c d e f McKeegan, Michele (Fall 1993). "The politics of abortion: A historical perspective".

Women's Health Issues .

3 (3).

Elsevier on behalf of the Jacobs Institute of Women's Health : 127– 131.

doi : 10.1016/S1049-3867(05)80245-2 .

ISSN 1878-4321 .

PMID 8274866 .

S2CID 36048222 .

^ a b c Rozell, Mark J.; Green, John Clifford; Jelen, Ted G.; Rozell, Mark J.; Wilcox, Clyde (2003).

The Christian Right in American Politics: Marching to the Millennium .

Georgetown University Press . p. 258.

ISBN 978-0-87840-393-6 .

The temperance movement is the clearly identifiable origin of the contemporary Christian Right in Maine. The Maine Christian Civic League (MCCL)—the principal Christian Right group in the state began as a temperance organization in ^ a b Zubovich, Gene (July 17, 2018).

"The Christian Nationalism of Donald Trump" .

Religion and Politics .

Washington University in St. Louis .

^ a b c Bowers, Paige (February 22, 2009).

"Will the Recession Doom the Last Sunday Blue Laws?" .

Time . Retrieved October 6, 2020 .

Those states — Georgia, Connecticut, Texas, Alabama and Minnesota — enjoy overwhelming voter support for an extra day of sales, but face opposition from members of the Christian right, who say that selling on Sunday undermines safety and tears apart families.

^ a b "U-M: 6 new stem cell lines available for research" .

Newsday . Associated Press. June 14, 2012.

^ a b c d e Herman, Didi (1997).

The Antigay Agenda: Orthodox Vision and the Christian Right . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-32764-8 . Retrieved September 20, 2012 .

^ di Mauro, Diane; Joffe, Carole (March 1, 2007).

"The religious right and the reshaping of sexual policy: An examination of reproductive rights and sexuality education" .

Sexuality Research & Social Policy .

4 (1): 67– 92.

doi : 10.1525/srsp.2007.4.1.67 .

ISSN 1553-6610 .

S2CID 19893992 .

^ Bouma, Gary D. (September 5, 2018).

"Young people want sex education and religion shouldn't get in the way" .

The Conversation . Retrieved January 6, 2022 .

^ [ 1 ] [ 6 ] [ 15 ] [ 23 ] [ 28 ] comprehensive sex education , [ 29 ] [ 30 ] ^ a b Petersen, David L. (Spring 2005). "Genesis and Family Values".

Journal of Biblical Literature .

124 (1).

Society of Biblical Literature : 5– 23.

doi : 10.2307/30040988 .

ISSN 0021-9231 .

JSTOR 30040988 .

S2CID 141110842 .

^ [ 3 ] [ 23 ] [ 32 ] ^ Perry, Samuel L. (September 2019). "What Arouses Evangelicals? Cultural Schemas, Interpretive Prisms, and Evangelicals' Divergent Collective Responses to Pornography and Masturbation".

Journal of the American Academy of Religion .

87 (3).

Oxford and New York : Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Academy of Religion : 693– 724.

doi : 10.1093/jaarel/lfz024 .

ISSN 1477-4585 .

S2CID 197904626 .

^ Sumerau, J. Edward; Cragun, Ryan T. (April 2015). " "Don't push your immorals on me": Encouraging anti-porn advocacy in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints".

Sexualities .

18 ( 1– 2).

Thousand Oaks, California : SAGE Publications : 57– 79.

doi : 10.1177/1363460714531433 .

ISSN 1461-7382 .

S2CID 96454666 .

^ Thomas, Jeremy N. (September 2013). "Outsourcing Moral Authority: The Internal Secularization of Evangelicals' Anti-Pornography Narratives".

Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion .

52 (3).

Chichester, West Sussex : Wiley-Blackwell on behalf of the Society for the Scientific Study of Religion : 457– 475.

doi : 10.1111/jssr.12052 .

ISSN 1468-5906 .

JSTOR 24644031 .

^ [ 1 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] ^ a b Kaplan, George R. (May 1994). "Shotgun Wedding: Notes on Public Education's Encounter with the New Christian Right".

Phi Delta Kappan .

75 (9).

^ [ 1 ] [ 3 ] [ 38 ] ^ Sotelo, María Victoria; Arocena, Felipe (July 2021).

"Evangelicals in the Latin American political arena: The cases of Brazil, Argentina, and Uruguay" .

SN Social Sciences .

1 (180).

Springer Nature .

doi : 10.1007/s43545-021-00179-6 .

ISSN 2662-9283 .

S2CID 237748900 .

^ [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] ^ Grant Wacker.

"The Christian Right, The Twentieth Century, Divining America: Religion in American History" . National Humanities Center.

^ Sarah Pulliam: Phrase 'Religious Right' Misused, Conservatives Say Christianity Today (Web-only), February 12, 2009.

^ Joireman, Sandra F. (2009).

"Anabaptism and the State: An Uneasy Coexistence" . In Joireman, Sandra F. (ed.).

Church, State, and Citizen: Christian Approaches to Political Engagement .

Oxford and New York : Oxford University Press . pp.

73– 91.

ISBN 978-0-19-537845-0 .

LCCN 2008038533 .

S2CID 153268965 .

Archived from the original on November 25, 2020 . Retrieved February 26, 2022 .

^ "Dr. Timothy Keller at the March 2013 Faith Angle Forum" .

Ethics & Public Policy Center . Retrieved January 19, 2023 .

^ Dreher, Rod (July 24, 2014).

"What Is 'Traditional Christianity,' Anyway?" .

The American Conservative . Retrieved January 19, 2023 .

^ Boston, Robert (2010).

Why the Religious Right Is Wrong About Separation of Church and State . Prometheus Books. p. 103.

ISBN 9781615924103 .

^ a b c d e f g Balmer, Randall (August 10, 2021).

Bad Faith: Race and the Rise of the Religious Right . Grand Rapids, Michigan: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company .

ISBN 9781467462907 – via Google Books.

^ Balmer, Randall (December 29, 2024).

"Jimmy Carter: The Last Progressive Evangelical" .

Politico . Retrieved January 8, 2025 .

^ Williams 2010 , p. 3 ^ Williams 2010 , p. 3 ^ Celestini, Carmen (2018).

God, Country, and Christian Conservatives: The National Association of Manufacturers, the John Birch Society, and the Rise of the Christian Right (PDF) (PhD).

University of Waterloo . pp. iv, 37, 283, 322– 325, 328– 334.

^ Merriman, Scott A.

Religion and the Law in America: An Encyclopedia of Personal Belief and Public Policy . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2007. Print. "In 1956, the United States, changed its motto to 'In God We Trust,' in large part to differentiate itself from the Soviet Union, its Cold War enemy that was widely seen as promoting atheism." ^ Williams 2010 , p. 5 ^ Kruse, Kevin M. (March 30, 2015).

"How 'One Nation' Didn't Become 'Under God' Until The '50s Religious Revival" . NPR.

Archived from the original on March 8, 2018 . Retrieved April 4, 2018 .

^ Gourley, Bruce (August 16, 2016).

"POLITICIZED PRAYER: National Day of Prayer has Roots in False History, Anti-Communist Fears" .

Christian Ethics Today . Retrieved January 8, 2025 .

^ Perlstein, Rick (2008).

Nixonland: The Rise of a President and the Fracturing of America . Simon and Schuster. p. 164.

ISBN 978-0743243025 .

^ a b c d e Balmer, Randall (September 24, 2021).

"The Historian's Pickaxe: Uncovering the Racist Origins of the Religious Right" (PDF) .

The Andrea Mitchell Center for the Study of Democracy . University of Pennsylvania . Retrieved January 8, 2025 .

^ Green v. Connally , 330 F. Supp. 1150 (U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia June 30, 1971).

^ Linda Wertheimer (June 23, 2006).

"Evangelical: Religious Right Has Distorted the Faith" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on February 2, 2007 . Retrieved January 31, 2019 .

^ Perry, Samuel L.; Braunstein, Ruth; Gorski, Philip S.; Grubbs, Joshua B. (March 2022).

"Historical Fundamentalism? Christian Nationalism and Ignorance About Religion in American Political History" .

Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion .

61 (1): 24.

doi : 10.1111/jssr.12760 .

ISSN 0021-8294 .

^ a b Balmer, Randall (May 10, 2022).

"The Religious Right and the Abortion Myth" .

Politico . Retrieved August 10, 2022 .

^ Pine, Art (February 9, 1979).

"IRS Softens Proposal Aimed At 'Segregation Academies' " .

The Washington Post . Retrieved January 8, 2025 .

^ Kurlander, David (February 17, 2022).

" 'We Want Them Burned': The 1978 IRS Controversy Over Discriminatory Schools" .

Cafe.com .

Vox Media . Retrieved January 8, 2025 .

^ Lehmann, Chris (December 30, 2024).

"How Jimmy Carter Lost Evangelical Christians to the Right" .

The Nation . Retrieved January 8, 2025 .

^ Martin, William Curtis (1996).

With God on Our Side: The Rise of the Religious Right in America . New York City: Broadway Books. p. 173.

ISBN 9780553067491 . Retrieved January 8, 2025 – via Google Books.

^ Cromartie, Michael, ed. (1992).

No Longer Exiles: The Religious New Right in American Politics . Washington, D.C.: Ethics and Public Policy Center . p. 52.

ISBN 9780896331723 . Retrieved January 8, 2025 – via Google Books.

Edward G. Dobson: "The Religious New Right did not start because of a concern about abortion. I want to go back and re-emphasize that. I sat in the non-smoke-filled back room with the Moral Majority, and I frankly do not remember abortion being mentioned as a reason why we ought to do something." ^ Gilgoff, Dan (June 11, 2009).

"Exclusive: Grover Norquist Gives Religious Conservatives Tough Love" .

U.S. News & World Report . Retrieved January 8, 2025 .

The religious right did not get started in 1962 with prayer in school. And it didn't get started in '73 with Roe v. Wade. It started in '77 or '78 with the Carter administration's attack on Christian schools and Christian radio stations [pressing for allegedly segregated Christian organizations to lose their tax-exempt status]. That's where all of the organization flowed out of. It was complete self-defense.

^ a b Clark, Emily (July 15, 2022).

"Why is America so divided on abortion? Because a key conservative player planned it that way" .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved January 8, 2025 .

^ "How abortion became a mobilizing issue among the religious right" .

NPR . Washington, D. C. May 8, 2022 . Retrieved January 8, 2025 .

^ Balmer, Randall (September 8, 2021).

"There's a straight line from US racial segregation to the anti-abortion movement" .

The Guardian . Retrieved January 8, 2025 .

^ Gross, Terry (December 9, 2008).

"Pro-Life — And In Favor Of Keeping Abortion Legal" .

NPR . Washington, D. C . Retrieved January 8, 2025 .

^ Joel D. Aberbach; Gillian Peele.

Crisis of Conservatism?: The Republican Party, the Conservative Movement, and American Politics After Bush .

Oxford University Press .

^ Kristin E. Heyer; Mark J. Rozell; Michael A. Genovese.

Catholics and Politics: the Dynamic Tension between Faith and Power .

Georgetown University Press .

To summarize, in the Republican Party, many Catholic activists held conservative positions on key issues emphasized by Christian Right leaders, and they said that they supported the political activities of some Christian Right candidates.

^ a b Reinhard, David (1983).

The Republican Right since 1945 . Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky. p.

245 .

ISBN 978-0813114842 .

^ Ellis, Blake A. "An Alternative Politics: Texas Baptists and the Rise of the Christian Right, 1975–1985." The Southwestern Historical Quarterly , vol. 112, no. 4, 2009, pp. 361–86.

JSTOR 30242432 Retrieved May 5, 2023.

^ "Republican Party Platforms: Republican Party Platform of 1980" . Archived from the original on December 19, 2013 . Retrieved December 19, 2013 .

^ Cook, Kimberly J.; Powell, Chris (2003). "Christianity and Punitive Mentalities: A Qualitative Study".

Crime, Law and Social Change .

39 (1): 69– 89.

doi : 10.1023/A:1022487430900 .

S2CID 142654351 .

^ Miller, Patricia (December 12, 2016).

"Meet the New Christian Right, Same as the Old Christian Right" .

Religion Dispatches .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2017 . Retrieved February 2, 2017 .

^ a b Jerome Himmelstein, p. 97; Spiritual Warfare: The Politics of the Religious Right, p.49–50, Sara Diamond, South End Press , Boston, MA ^ a b c d Martin, William (1996).

With God on Our Side: The Rise of the Religious Right in America . New York: Broadway Books.

ISBN 978-0-553-06745-3 .

^ Lehmann, Chris (October 5, 2023).

"The Vanguard Party of the Christian Right" .

The Nation . Retrieved July 29, 2024 .

^ a b c Rozell, Mark J.; Wilcox, Clyde (1997).

God at the Grass Roots, 1996: The Christian Right in the American Elections . Rowman & Littlefield. p.

117 .

ISBN 9780847686117 .

Initially, the abortion issue dominated the agenda of conservative Christians. But as political context changed, more issues were included. Euthanasia, the rights of homosexuals, pornography, sex education in schools, charter and home schools, and gambling have become issues of concern to the "pro-family" movement.

^ a b "What Donald Trump owes the Christian Right" .

The Week . December 8, 2024.

^ Dias, Elizabeth; Lerer, Lisa (May 28, 2024).

"The Untold Story of the Network That Took Down Roe v. Wade" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 8, 2025 .

^ Watkins, Morgan (June 24, 2022).

"How Mitch McConnell helped engineer the fall of Roe v. Wade and cement his abortion legacy" .

The Courier-Journal . Louisville, KY . Retrieved March 7, 2023 .

^ a b Szalai, Jennifer (December 2, 2023).

"How American Evangelicalism Became 'Mister Rogers With a Blowtorch' " .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 8, 2025 .

^ a b Bennett, Geoff; Kotuby, Stephanie; Gold, Alexa (December 6, 2023).

"Tim Alberta discusses his new book exploring American evangelicals and political extremism" .

PBS Newshour . Retrieved January 8, 2025 .

^ "The American Religious Landscape in 2020s" .

Public Religion Research Institute . July 8, 2021 . Retrieved July 10, 2021 .

^ Darbhamulla, Sruthi (September 10, 2024).

"An unsteady alliance: Donald Trump and the religious right" .

The Hindu . Retrieved January 8, 2025 .

^ Maqbool, Aleem (November 16, 2024).

" 'Anointed by God': The Christians who see Trump as their saviour" .

BBC News . Retrieved January 8, 2025 .

^ Smith, David (June 22, 2024).

"In Trump we trust: religious right on crusade to make their man president" .

The Guardian . Retrieved January 8, 2025 .

^ Prokop, Andrew (September 11, 2023).

"The conservative push for "school choice" has had its most successful year ever" .

Vox . Retrieved January 8, 2025 .

^ Layman, Geoffrey C.

; Green, John C. (2006). "Wars and Rumors of Wars: The Contexts of Cultural Conflict in American Political Behavior".

British Journal of Political Science .

36 (1): 61– 89.

doi : 10.1017/S0007123406000044 .

S2CID 144870729 .

^ a b c d Elaine Woo (December 19, 2008).

"Paul Weyrich, religious conservative and ex-president of Heritage Foundation, dies at 66" .

Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on April 9, 2015 . Retrieved January 29, 2015 .

^ Sara, Diamond (1995).

Roads to Dominion . New York: Guilford Press.

ISBN 978-0-89862-864-7 .

^ a b c Rossi, Melissa (May 29, 2007).

What Every American Should Know About Who's Really Running America . Penguin.

ISBN 9781440621031 – via Google Books.

^ Smidt, Corwin E.; Penning, James M. (1997).

Sojourners in the Wilderness: The Christian Right in Comparative Perspective . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 51.

ISBN 9780847686452 .

Perhaps the most prominent example of this was when the Archdiocese of New York joined forces with the Christian Coalition during the New York City school board elections in 1993 and allowed the distribution of Christian Coalition voter guides in Catholic parishes.

^ Micklethwait and Wooldridge, The Right Nation, 2005, 111 ^ Micklethwait and Wooldridge, The Right Nation, 2005, 187 ^ "Dr. Dobson: ' I Cannot, and Will Not, Vote for McCain' " . CitizenLink. Archived from the original on March 12, 2008 . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ Moen, Matthew C. (1996). "The Evolving Politics of the Christian Right".

PS: Political Science and Politics .

29 (3): 461– 464.

doi : 10.1017/S104909650004508X .

JSTOR 420824 .

^ "Charities, Churches and Politics" . Internal Revenue Service. Archived from the original on July 4, 2011 . Retrieved July 5, 2011 .

^ "Democrats voted out of church because of their politics, members say" .

USA Today .

^ Political Split Leaves a Church Sadder and Grayer , The New York Times , May 15, 2005 ^ Berlinerblau, Jacques (October 5, 2011).

"Where does church end and state begin? – Georgetown/On Faith" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ "Speak Up: Pulpit Freedom Sunday – History of the Pulpit Initiative" . Speakupmovement.org. Archived from the original on April 26, 2012 . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ "FRC Action" .

www.frcaction.org . Archived from the original on May 12, 2015.

^ Vu, Michelle (October 20, 2007).

"Presidential Hopefuls Highlight 'Values' to Christian Conservatives" .

The Christian Post . Archived from the original on January 2, 2013 . Retrieved May 28, 2018 .

^ Religion and the Presidential Vote Archived April 13, 2008, at the Wayback Machine , Pew Research Center for the People and the Press, December 6, 2004 ^ Martínez, Jessica; Smith, Gregory A. (November 9, 2016).

"How the faithful voted: A preliminary 2016 analysis" .

Pew Research Center . Retrieved June 12, 2019 .

^ Lovett, Ian (November 9, 2016).

"Evangelicals Back Donald Trump in Record Numbers, Despite Earlier Doubts" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved June 12, 2019 .

^ Rosin, God's Harvard, 2007, 61–62 ^ Haberman, Aaron (2005). "Into the Wilderness: Ronald Reagan, Bob Jones University, and the Political Education of the Christian Right".

The Historian .

67 (2): 234– 253.

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-6563.2005.00111.x .

S2CID 143885519 .

^ Askin, Steve (February 1, 1994).

A new Rite: conservative Catholic organizations and their allies . Catholics for a Free Choice.

^ a b Anderson, John (September 19, 2014).

Conservative Christian Politics in Russia and the United States . Routledge. p. 164.

ISBN 9781317606635 .

Some Christian Right leaders established their own institutions, such as Pat Robertson's Regents University and Jerry Falwell's Liberty University.

^ a b Diamond, S. (2000) Not by Politics Alone: The Enduring Influence of the Christian right. New York: Guildford Press.

^ Lipka, Michael.

"Some major U.S. religious groups differ from their members on the death penalty" .

Pew Research Center . Retrieved June 24, 2025 .

^ Spring, Beth (February 5, 1982).

"Moral Majority Aims at the Criminal Code" . Christianity Today . Retrieved June 24, 2025 .

^ Kramer, Stephanie.

"Unlike other U.S. religious groups, most atheists and agnostics oppose the death penalty" .

Pew Research Center . Retrieved June 24, 2025 .

^ "Support for Death Penalty by Religious Affiliation" .

Public Religion Research Institute . Retrieved June 24, 2025 .

^ Spring, Joel.

Political Agendas for Education: From the Religious Right to the Green Party . Second Edition. (Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2002) ^ a b Ciment, James (March 26, 2015).

Postwar America: An Encyclopedia of Social, Political, Cultural, and Economic History . Routledge. p. 513.

ISBN 9781317462354 .

Throughout the twentieth century, many evangelicals accepted theistic evolution ... Some Christian right organizations supported the teaching of creationism, along with evolution, in public schools.

^ a b c Wilson, J. Matthew (October 22, 2007).

From Pews to Polling Places: Faith and Politics in the American Religious Mosaic . Georgetown University Press. p. 178.

ISBN 9781589013261 .

Among Catholics and Latinos who practice other religious traditions, more than seven in ten support having organized prayer in public schools. ... Catholics are much more likely to state that both evolution and creationism should be taught in the schools.

^ Pat Robertson Warns Pa. Town of Disaster Archived August 9, 2006, at the Wayback Machine , CBSNews.com ^ Pa. Voters Rejected God Archived May 11, 2013, at the Wayback Machine , CBSNews.com ^ "Court decisions regarding Evolution/Creationism" . Archived from the original on July 20, 2001 . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ Matzke, Nick (August 14, 2007).

"The true origin of 'intelligent design' " .

The Panda's Thumb (Blog). Houston, TX: The TalkOrigins Foundation, Inc. Archived from the original on March 27, 2012 . Retrieved July 3, 2012 .

^ Slack, Gordy.

The Battle Over the Meaning of Everything . (San Francisco: John Wiley and Sons, 2007), 67.

^ Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District: Memorandum Opinion by Judge John E. Jones III, page 89 ^ "Project Steve" . Ncse.com . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ "Pope backs evolution, Vatican calls creation 'blasphemous' " . Archived from the original on February 14, 2015 . Retrieved February 24, 2015 .

^ Chris Irvine (February 11, 2009).

"The Vatican claims Darwin's theory of evolution is compatible with Christianity" .

The Telegraph .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2022.

^ "Our views" .

The Church of England .

^ Wynne-Jones, Jonathan (September 13, 2008).

"Charles Darwin to receive apology from the Church of England for rejecting evolution" .

The Telegraph .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2022.

^ "Christianity in Evolution" . Archived from the original on February 24, 2015 . Retrieved February 24, 2015 .

^ See Is the School House the Proper Place to Teach Raw Sex?

(1968). Also: Janice M. Irvine (2004).

Talk about Sex: The Battles Over Sex Education in the United States . University of California Press. p. 74.

ISBN 978-0-520-24329-3 .

Gilbert Herdt (June 1, 2009).

Moral Panics, Sex Panics: Fear and the Fight Over Sexual Rights . NYU Press.

ISBN 978-0-8147-3723-1 .

Irvine, Janice M. (2006). "Emotional scripts of sex panics".

Sexuality Research and Social Policy .

3 (3): 82– 94.

doi : 10.1525/srsp.2006.3.3.82 .

ISSN 1868-9884 .

S2CID 144221306 .

Daniel Wallis (October 30, 2014).

"Arizona school board votes to remove pages from biology textbook" .

Reuters .

"Gilbert schools to edit 'abortion' section of textbook" .

azcentral . October 30, 2014.

^ Harris, Sam.

Letter to a Christian Nation 2006 ^ "Homeschooling in the United States: 2003 – Executive Summary" . National Center for Education Statistics . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ "Popularity of homeschooling rises nationwide, curriculum concerns, safety cited" .

Christian Examiner . Archived from the original on January 12, 2012 . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ "Homeschooling in the United States: 2003 – Parents' Reasons for Homeschooling" . National Center for Education Statistics . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ Zack Kopplin (January 16, 2014).

"Creationism in Texas public schools: Undermining the charter movement" .

Slate .

^ Farney, James Harold (2012).

Social Conservatives and Party Politics in Canada and the United States . University of Toronto Press. p. 61.

ISBN 9781442612600 .

Struggles broke out in state party organizations between social conservatives - in general organized by the Christian Coalition - and party activists more interested in fiscal policy, foreign policy, or simply winning office.

^ "The Christian Right, The Twentieth Century, Divining America: Religion in American History, TeacherServe, National Humanities Center" . Nationalhumanitiescenter.org . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ Phillips-Fein, Kim.

"Laissez Prayer" The secret history of the 1950s Christian right and its zeal for capitalism" . No. Fall 2015. Democracy Journal . Retrieved July 3, 2025 .

^ Gray, J.A.

"Standing up for the worker: A matter of faith" .

San Francisco Archdiocese . Retrieved July 3, 2025 .

^ Pat Robertson.

"The First Amendment" . PatRobertson.com.

^ "Jefferson's Letter to the Danbury Baptists" .

Library of Congress . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ ThinkExist.com Quotations.

"James Madison quotes" . Thinkexist.com . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ "House Resolution 888 United States House of Representatives (Bill Text – 110th Congress (2007–2008) – THOMAS)" . Library of Congress. December 18, 2007. Archived from the original on October 14, 2008 . Retrieved January 25, 2008 .

^ A Nonbeliever.

"America is not founded upon Christianity but the Enlightenment" . Freethought.mbdojo.com. Archived from the original on August 7, 2013 . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ Watkins, Shanea.

"The Mythical "Wall of Separation": How a Misused Metaphor Changed Church–State Law, Policy, and Discourse" . The Heritage Foundation. Archived from the original on March 22, 2010 . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ "Wall of Separation Between Church and State: Myth, Reality, Results" . Family Research Council . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ Charles E. Steele (January 18, 2009).

"Separation of Church and State, Thomas Jefferson, and the First Amendment" . Schoolprayerinamerica.info. Archived from the original on January 6, 2012 . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ "Religious Freedom" . Alliance Defense Fund. Archived from the original on December 26, 2011 . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ "The First Amendment means what it says - RIGHTLYCONCERNED.COM" . Action.afa.net. February 19, 2010. Archived from the original on July 21, 2011 . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ Gallup, Alec; Newport, Frank (2006).

The Gallup Poll: Public Opinion 2005 . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 318.

ISBN 9780742552586 .

Related to their support of school prayer, most Americans also believe that religion should have a greater 'presence' in public schools. ... Protestants are most likely to favor school prayer (82%), followed closely by Catholics (75%).

^ a b "[Rice] melded politics and religion in a way that made it very clear what side of any political
issue he believed God was on. God had been very clearly opposed to the New Deal "socialism" of Franklin Roosevelt,
and God was equally opposed to the Great Society "socialism" of Lyndon Baines Johnson". Andrew Himes, The Sword of the Lord: The Roots of Fundamentalism in an American Family Chiara Press, 2011 ISBN 1453843752 , (p.271).

^ Nathan Andrew Finn, The Development of Baptist Fundamentalism in the South, 1940–1980 ProQuest, 2007 ISBN 0549371435 (p.204).

^ "Christian Coalition of America's Agenda for the 108th Congress (2003-2004)" .

Christian Coalition of America . Archived from the original on October 9, 2004 . Retrieved March 17, 2008 .

^ Stephen Spector, Evangelicals and Israel: the story of American Christian Zionism (2008) pp 23–49 ^ Jan G. Linn, What's Wrong With The Christian Right (2004) p 27 ^ Bump, Philip. May 14, 2017.

"Half of evangelicals support Israel because they believe it is important for fulfilling end-times prophecy" .

The Washington Post .

^ "Religious Landscape Study" .

Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project . Retrieved June 27, 2022 .

^ Partial Birth Abortion Act of 2003 108th United States Congress (1st session) ^ Allen Wants Parents Notified – Daily Press . Articles.dailypress.com (April 9, 1994). Retrieved on August 24, 2013.

^ Prudence Flowers, "'A Prolife Disaster': The Reagan Administration and the Nomination of Sandra Day O'Connor".

Journal of Contemporary History 53.2 (2018): 391–414 ^ a b Belluck, Pam (June 6, 2012).

"Abortion Qualms on Morning-After Pill May Be Unfounded" .

The New York Times .

^ Marcotte, Amanda (January 6, 2014).

"Catholic Groups Trying to Eliminate Coverage of Contraception No Matter Who Pays: The latest court challenges to the birth control benefit show how much the fight against the contraception mandate is really about the Christian right trying to establish an employer's "right" to control your private sex life" .

Rewire . Retrieved February 2, 2017 .

^ Shorto, Russell (May 7, 2006). "Contra-Contraception".

The New York Times .

^ "Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved June 27, 2022 .

^ "Exclusive: Supreme Court has voted to overturn abortion rights, draft opinion shows" .

POLITICO . May 2, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2022 .

^ Rainey, Clint (January 4, 2013).

"Is the Religious Right's Powerful Opposition to Drugs Finally Fading?" .

Slate . Retrieved October 6, 2020 .

^ https://www.pgdiocese.bc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/BC-and-Yukon-Bishops-Statement-on-the-Legalization-of-Marijuana-in-Canada-3.pdf [ bare URL PDF ] ^ a b Fetner, Tina (August 2001). "Working Anita Bryant: The Impact of Christian Anti-Gay Activism on Lesbian and Gay Movement Claims".

Social Problems .

48 (3).

Oxford and New York : Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for the Study of Social Problems : 411– 428.

doi : 10.1525/sp.2001.48.3.411 .

hdl : 11375/21175 .

ISSN 1533-8533 .

S2CID 144876642 .

^ Bryant, Anita; Green, Bob (1978).

At Any Cost . Grand Rapids, Michigan, US: Fleming H. Revell.

ISBN 9780800709402 .

^ Westengard, Laura (2019).

"Monstrosity: Melancholia, Cannibalism, and HIV/AIDS" .

Gothic Queer Culture: Marginalized Communities and the Ghosts of Insidious Trauma .

Lincoln, Nebraska : University of Nebraska Press . pp.

99– 103.

ISBN 978-1-4962-0204-8 .

LCCN 2018057900 .

^ a b c Green, Hohn (2006). Green, John C.; Rozell, Mark J.; Wilcox, Clyde (eds.).

THE VALUES CAMPAIGN? The Christian Right and the 2004 Elections . Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.

ISBN 978-1589011083 .

^ Douthat, Ross, et al.

"The 'Let's Just Ban Everything' Edition" Political Gabfest .  Slate, February 15, 2018.

Slate .  Start listening at 37:00.

^ Lerner, Michael (2006).

The Left Hand of God . Harper Collins. p.

1 .

ISBN 978-0-06084247-5 .

^ Posner, Sarah.

"Amazing Disgrace" New Republic .  March 20, 2017.  November 16, 2017.

^ Blow, Charles M.

"Moore, Trump and the Right's New Religion" .

The New York Times .  November 16, 2017.  November 16, 2016.

^ Detrow, S.

"Russell Moore on 'altar call for Evangelical America'" , NPR , All Things Considered , August 5, 2023. January 18, 2024.

^ Johnson, Paul (2005).

"Right-wing, rightist" .

A Political Glossary . Auburn University. Archived from the original on August 19, 2014 . Retrieved October 23, 2014 .

^ Bobbio, Norberto and Allan Cameron, Left and Right: The Significance of a Political Distinction .

University of Chicago Press , 1997, p. 51, 62.

ISBN 978-0-226-06246-4 ^ J. E. Goldthorpe.

An Introduction to Sociology . Cambridge, England, UK; Oakleigh, Melbourne, Australia; New York City, USA p. 156.

ISBN 0-521-24545-1 .

^ Petersen, David L. (2005). "Genesis and Family Values".

Journal of Biblical Literature .

124 (1) ^ Paul Edward Gottfried, Conservatism in America: Making Sense of the American Right , p. 13.

^ The Religious Left Has a Numbers Problem by Frank Newport | Gallup, June 4, 2019 (retrieved May 5, 2020) ^ Stephen J. Nichols: Jesus Made in America: A Cultural History from the Puritans to "The Passion of the Christ" pp. 204–209. Westmont, IL, 2008.

^ Shermer, Michael (July 21, 2010).

"Was Jesus a Conservative or a Liberal? – Michael Shermer – Skeptic" . True/Slant. Archived from the original on October 4, 2012 . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ "Biography of Mikhail Gorbachev" .

National Cold War Exhibition . Trustees of the Royal Air Force Museum . Retrieved August 10, 2012 .

^ Olasky, Marvin (February 1, 1994).

The Tragedy of American Compassion . Regnery Publishing.

ISBN 9780895267252 . Retrieved March 3, 2019 – via Google Books.

^ Boyarin, Daniel; Itzkovitz, Daniel; Pellegrini, Ann (June 19, 2012).

Queer Theory and the Jewish Question . Columbia University Press. p. 85.

ISBN 9780231508957 .

^ Miller, Patricia (December 12, 2016).

"Meet the New Christian Right, Same as The Old Christian Right" .

Religion Dispatches . Retrieved May 17, 2018 .

^ Star Parker (February 3, 2020).

"Faith Freed Clarence Thomas From Hate" .

The National Interest . Retrieved April 18, 2020 .

^ Kevin D. Williamson (November 7, 2019).

"The Gospel According to Kanye" .

National Review . Retrieved April 18, 2020 .

^ Christine A. Scheller (May 31, 2012).

"Talking Politics with Dr. Tony Evans" . UrbanFaith.com. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020 . Retrieved April 18, 2020 .

[Evans:] 'God would never have endorsed what the culture is allowing [regarding same-sex marriage].' [Interviewer:] 'Doesn't the combination of limited government and social conservatism just land you in the Republican party?' [Evans:] 'No, it doesn't, because I believe that we have conservative, blue-dog Democrats who would hold to non-abortion, who would hold to the definition of a family as a man and a woman, and who would at least hold to a smaller government than now exists.' ^ Emily Belz (October 5, 2012).

"Vote your priorities" .

World . Archived from the original on July 28, 2020 . Retrieved April 18, 2020 .

[Evans] makes clear he isn't endorsing anyone or any party, but he's clear in his criticism of President Obama's positions on abortion and the family. ... 'I will always [prioritize] the right to life .' ... 'Spending is totally out of control, because government's doing more than it was designed to do.' ... 'The Bible makes no provision for the redefinition of marriage and the family, other than the one that is prescribed in the Bible by God and Jesus to be between a man and a woman. It is an illegitimate issue to accept or promote from a Christian standpoint.' ^ "Why TCPC Advocates Equal Rights for Gay and Lesbian People" . Archived from the original on February 12, 2012.

^ "Equality for Gays and Lesbians" . December 1, 2005. Archived from the original on September 19, 2008.

^ Bible & Homosexuality Home Page Archived February 24, 2015, at the Wayback Machine . Pflagdetroit.org (December 11, 1998). Retrieved on August 24, 2013.

^ Mundy, David.

"How Can Someone Be A Christian And A Homosexual? | Whosoever" . Archived from the original on April 21, 2009.

^ "Alliance Defending Freedom" .

Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved June 29, 2021 .

^ a b Barron, Bruce. 1992.

Heaven on Earth? The Social & Political Agendas of Dominion Theology . Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan.

ISBN 0-310-53611-1 .

^ Davis, Derek H. and Hankins, Barry, 2003.

New Religious Movements and Religious Liberty in America , Baylor University Press.

^ Davidson, Carl; Harris, Jerry (2006). "Globalisation, theocracy and the new fascism: the US Right's rise to power".

Race and Class .

47 (3): 47– 67.

doi : 10.1177/0306396806061086 .

S2CID 143793920 .

^ Berlet, Chip and Matthew N. Lyons. 2000.

Right-Wing Populism in America: Too Close for Comfort . New York: Guilford Press.

^ Diamond, Sara, 1998.

Not by Politics Alone: The Enduring Influence of the Christian Right , New York: Guilford Press, p.213.

^ Ortiz, Chris 2007.

"Gary North on D. James Kennedy" Archived October 11, 2009, at the Wayback Machine , Chalcedon Blog , September 6, 2007.

^ Diamond, Sara. 1995.

Roads to Dominion: Right-Wing Movements and Political Power in the United States . New York: Guilford Press.

ISBN 0-89862-864-4 .

^ Diamond, Sara. 1989.

Spiritual Warfare: The Politics of the Christian Right . Boston: South End Press .

^ In her early work, Diamond sometimes used the term dominion theology to refer to this broader movement, rather than to the specific theological system of Reconstructionism.

^ Clarkson, Frederick, 1994.

Christian Reconstructionism: Theocratic Dominionism Gains Influence" , The Public Eye 8, Nos. 1 & 2, March/June 1994.

^ Clarkson, Frederick. 1997.

Eternal Hostility: The Struggle Between Theocracy and Democracy . Monroe, Maine: Common Courage.

ISBN 1-56751-088-4 ^ The Christian Right and the Rise of American Fascism By Chris Hedges Archived May 11, 2008, at the Wayback Machine , TheocracyWatch .

^ Hedges, Chris (May 2005).

"Feeling the hate with the National Religious Broadcasters" .

Harper's Magazine . Retrieved April 11, 2007 .

^ Hedges, Chris, American Fascists: The Christian Right and the War on America , Free Press, 2006.

^ Goldberg, Michelle 2006.

Kingdom Coming: The Rise of Christian Nationalism . New York: W. W. Norton.

ISBN 978-0-393-06094-2 ^ Phillips, Kevin 2006.

American Theocracy : The Peril and Politics of Radical Religion, Oil, and Borrowed Money in the 21st century ISBN 0-670-03486-X ^ McCarraher, Eugene 2006. "Empire Falls", Commonweal 133(9), May 5, 2006.

^ Yurica, Katherine 2004.

"The Despoiling of America" published February 11, 2004 Archived September 28, 2007, at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved October 3, 2007. And also published in Toward a New Political Humanism , edited by Barry F. Seidman and Neil J. Murphy, Prometheus Books, New York, 2004.

^ Yurica, Katherine 2004.

Blood Guilty Churches Archived September 30, 2009, at the Wayback Machine , January 19, 2005. Retrieved October 6, 2007.

^ Yurica, Katherine 2005.

Yurica Responds to Stanley Kurtz Attack Archived September 28, 2007, at the Wayback Machine , May 23, 2005. Retrieved October 6, 2007.

^ Maddox, Marion 2005.

God under Howard: The Rise of the Religious Right in Australian Politics , Allen & Unwin.

^ Rudin, James 2006.

The Baptizing of America: The Religious Right's Plans for the Rest of Us , New York: Thunder's Mouth Press.

^ Harris, Sam 2007. " God's dupes ", Los Angeles Times , March 15, 2007. Retrieved October 8, 2007.

^ "The Rise of the Religious Right in the Republican Party" Archived September 12, 2008, at the Wayback Machine , TheocracyWatch , Last updated: December 2005; URL accessed May 8, 2006.

^ a b Stanley Kurtz (May 2, 2005).

"Dominionist Domination: The Left runs with a wild theory" .

National Review Online . Retrieved October 6, 2007 .

^ Stanley Kurtz (April 28, 2005).

"Scary Stuff" .

National Review Online . Retrieved October 6, 2007 .

^ Miller, Lisa, 2011.

'Dominionism' beliefs among conservative Christians overblown .

Newsweek . Published August 18, 2011. Retrieved September 8, 2011.

^ Douthat, Ross 2011.

The New Yorker and Francis Schaeffer .

The New York Times . Published August 29, 2011. Retrieved September 11, 2011.

^ Carter, Joe, 2011.

A Journalism Lesson for the New Yorker .

First Things . Published August 10, 2011. Retrieved August 19, 2011.

^ Pierce, Jeremy, 2011.

Dominionismists .

First Things . Published August 14, 2011. Retrieved September 8, 2011.

^ Berlet, Chip, 2005.

The Christian Right, Dominionism, and Theocracy Archived September 18, 2008, at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved September 25, 2007.

^ Ellis Henican, "A spiritual olive branch for the far-right faithful" , Archived October 6, 2008, at the Wayback Machine Newsday , May 1, 2005. Reposted at YuricaReport.com. Retrieved September 23, 2006 ^ Diamond, Sara. 1995. " Dominion Theology ".

Z Magazine , February 1995 ^ "Pastors: Christian government not Jesus' cause" .

Anderson Independent-Mail . February 10, 2007. Archived from the original on March 14, 2012 . Retrieved December 26, 2011 .

^ "Pastors fret Christian group might be a threat" .

StarNewsOnline.com .

^ Curtis, Patriotism, Democracy, and Common Sense (2005) p 126 ^ Geiko Müller-Fahrenholz, America's battle for God: a European Christian looks at civil religion (2007) p xviii ^ Pettitt, Robin T. (June 24, 2014).

Contemporary Party Politics . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 66.

ISBN 9781137412645 .

Again, parties mobilised on religious grounds, most notable in the form of Christian Democratic parties found in, for example, Germany, but also, sometimes to a lesser extent, in much of the rest of Europe. Christian Democratic parties are also found in Chile and Mexico. It could be argued that the rise of the Christian right in the United States and its increased strength in the Republican Party is an example of this cleavage at work. The Christian right in the United States ... is equally driven by the debate over the role of the state and the church in political, social and moral life.

^ a b Robinson, Geoffrey (April 12, 2018).

"Why the Australian Christian right has weak political appeal" .

The Conversation . Retrieved September 14, 2022 .

^ Mackerras, N. R. M. (1958). "Why the DLP Exists".

Australian Institute of Policy and Science .

30 (4): 30– 34.

^ Parliament of Australia (2022).

"The Democratic Labor Party an overview" .

www.aph.gov.au . Retrieved September 14, 2022 .

^ Schneiders, Royce Millar, Ben (May 1, 2015).

"Why is the union that represents supermarket workers stopping gay marriage?" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved September 14, 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Retail and Fast Food Workers Union.

"SDA Facts – Retail and Fast Food Workers Union" . Archived from the original on September 14, 2022 . Retrieved September 14, 2022 .

^ "Denton lashes out at 'Catholic force' blocking euthanasia laws" .

ABC News . August 10, 2016 . Retrieved September 14, 2022 .

^ Parliament of Australia.

"Hon Tony Burke MP" .

www.aph.gov.au . Retrieved September 14, 2022 .

^ Fred Nile, Fred Nile: Autobiography (Sydney: Strand Publishing: 2001) ISBN 1-876825-79-0 ^ Sandeman, John (August 9, 2019).

"CDP crisis meeting for Fred Nile's party – Eternity News" .

www.eternitynews.com.au . Retrieved September 14, 2022 .

^ Lim, Anne (July 16, 2019).

"Christian Democrats – regrets, they have a few – Eternity News" .

www.eternitynews.com.au . Retrieved September 14, 2022 .

^ Sandeman, John (March 1, 2022).

"Winding up order issued for Christian Democratic party – Eternity News" .

www.eternitynews.com.au . Retrieved September 14, 2022 .

^ Sandeman, John (May 19, 2022).

"Fred Nile joins a new party, and introduces an Aboriginal rights bill – Eternity News" .

www.eternitynews.com.au . Retrieved September 14, 2022 .

^ "Bernardi's Australian Conservatives to merge with Family First" .

ABC News . April 25, 2017 . Retrieved September 14, 2022 .

^ "Christianity and the LNP" .

Brisbane Times . February 8, 2012.

^ "Social Credit" .

www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca . Retrieved February 13, 2025 .

^ "Harper reopens same-sex marriage debate" . CBC TV. November 30, 2005.

Archived from the original on July 14, 2007 . Retrieved February 29, 2008 .

^ "Harper declares same-sex marriage issue closed" . CTV. December 7, 2006. Archived from the original on January 6, 2007 . Retrieved February 29, 2008 .

^ "Position Paper #93: Religion and Abortion" (PDF) .

arcc-cdac.ca . September 2017 . Retrieved March 14, 2024 .

^ Hume, Chris (January 26, 2022).

"Canadian Law About Conversion Therapy Raises Concerns for Pastors" .

The Lancaster Patriot . Retrieved July 9, 2024 .

^ a b Freston, Paul (2008).

"The Changing Face of Christian Proselytization: New Actors from the Global South" . In Hackett, Rosalind I. J.

(ed.).

Proselytization Revisited: Rights Talk, Free Markets, and Culture Wars (1st ed.).

New York and London : Routledge . pp.

109– 138.

ISBN 9781845532284 .

LCCN 2007046731 .

^ Robbins, Joel (October 2004).

Brenneis, Don ; Strier, Karen B.

(eds.). "The Globalization of Pentecostal and Charismatic Christianity".

Annual Review of Anthropology .

33 .

Annual Reviews : 117– 143.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.anthro.32.061002.093421 .

ISSN 1545-4290 .

JSTOR 25064848 .

S2CID 145722188 .

^ Corrales, Javier (January 17, 2018).

"A Perfect Marriage: Evangelicals and Conservatives in Latin America" .

The New York Times . Retrieved June 2, 2018 .

^ a b c d Lissardy, Gerardo.

" "La fuerza política más nueva": cómo los evangélicos emergen en el mapa de poder en América Latina" . BBC . Retrieved June 2, 2018 .

^ Young, Julia (March 31, 2013).

"The Church in Latin America" .

Commonweal . Retrieved June 2, 2018 .

^ "Christianity and Conflict in Latin America" . Pew Research Center. April 6, 2006 . Retrieved June 2, 2018 .

^ Haynes, Naomi (March 2012).

"Pentecostalism and the morality of money: Prosperity, inequality, and religious sociality on the Zambian Copperbelt" (PDF) .

Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute .

18 (1).

Wiley-Blackwell on behalf of the Royal Anthropological Institute : 123– 139.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9655.2011.01734.x .

ISSN 1467-9655 .

JSTOR 41350810 .

S2CID 142926682 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on July 18, 2018 . Retrieved November 25, 2021 .

^ Smith, Daniel J. (March 2021).

"The Pentecostal prosperity gospel in Nigeria: Paradoxes of corruption and inequality" .

Journal of Modern African Studies .

59 (1).

Cambridge : Cambridge University Press : 103– 122.

doi : 10.1017/S0022278X2000066X .

ISSN 1469-7777 .

LCCN 2001-227388 .

OCLC 48535892 .

PMC 10312994 .

PMID 37398918 .

S2CID 232223673 .

^ Alan J. Day, Political parties of the world (2002) p 343 ^ Andrew Vincent, Modern Political Ideologies . John Wiley & Sons, 2009.

ISBN 1405154950 (p. 325).

^ Richard P. Davis, Mirror Hate: the Convergent Ideology of Northern Ireland paramilitaries, 1966–1992 . Dartmouth, 1994.

ISBN 1855215586 . (p.80) ^ Kentish, Ben (June 10, 2017).

"Conservative LGBT activists raise fears over DUP's 'appalling' record on gay rights" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on June 26, 2017 . Retrieved June 11, 2017 .

^ Karen Armstrong, A History of God: the 4000-year quest of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam . Ballantine Books, 1994 p. 390.

^ Walker, Shaun (July 14, 2019).

"Orbán deploys Christianity with a twist to tighten grip in Hungary" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

^ Wylesol, Sarah; Posner, George (March 15, 2019).

"Is Authoritarian Europe Becoming the New Hope of the Religious Right?" .

Vice .

^ Nadal, Kevin (2011).

Filipino American Psychology: A Handbook of Theory, Research, and Clinical Practice . John Wiley & Sons. p. 42.

ISBN 9781118019771 . Retrieved August 22, 2014 .

^ Coman, Julian (October 5, 2019).

"Family, faith, flag: the religious right and the battle for Poland's soul" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

^ "How the Russian Orthodox Church is backing Vladimir Putin's new world order" . March 3, 2016.

^ Alan J. Day, Political parties of the world (2002) p 449 ^ "An Interview with David Frost and Kirk Morrison" .

Christian Democracy . Retrieved June 23, 2016 .

There is a growing movement of people who adhere to Catholic Social Teaching and, because of that, find that they cannot find a home with either of the two major political parties in the United States. Their answer has been to form a political party based on Christian democratic principles. The name they have chosen is American Solidarity Party. ... Kirk, you have an article that will go into the first issue of Christian Democracy along with this interview. Christian democracy has been described as conservative on social issues and liberal on economic issues.

^ "Constitution Party National Platform" . Constitution Party.com. 2012 . Retrieved September 15, 2012 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Christian right .

Boston, Rob. 2000.

Close Encounters with the Religious Right: Journeys into the Twilight Zone of Religion and Politics .

Prometheus Books .

ISBN 978-1-57392-797-0 .

Boyd, James H., Politics and the Christian Voter .

Brown, Ruth Murray (2002).

For a "Christian America": A History of the Religious Right . Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.

ISBN 978-1-573-92973-8 .

Bruns, Roger A. 2002.

Preacher: Billy Sunday and Big-Time American Evangelism .

University of Illinois Press .

ISBN 978-0-252-07075-4 .

Compton, John W. 2020.

The End of Empathy: Why White Protestants Stopped Loving Their Neighbors . Oxford University Press.

Diamond, Sara. 1995.

Roads to Dominion: Right-Wing Movements and Political Power in the United States . New York: Guilford .

ISBN 0-89862-864-4 .

Dowland, Seth.

Family Values and the Rise of the Christian Right (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2015).

Gloege, Timothy.  2015.

Guaranteed Pure: The Moody Bible Institute, Business, and the Making of Modern Evangelicalism .

The University of North Carolina Press .

ISBN 1469621010 .

Green, John C., James L. Guth and Kevin Hill. 1993. "Faith and Election: The Christian right in Congressional Campaigns 1978–1988".

The Journal of Politics 55(1), (February): 80–91.

Green, John C. "The Christian Right and the 1994 Elections: A View from the States", PS: Political Science and Politics Vol. 28, No. 1 (Mar. 1995), pp. 5–8 JSTOR 420570 .

Hirschberger, Bernd; Voges, Katja (eds.): Religious Freedom and Populism: The Appropriation of a Human Right and How to Counter It. Bielefeld: transcript.

ISBN 978-3-8376-6827-8 Himmelstein, Jerome L. 1990.

To The Right: The Transformation of American Conservatism .

University of California Press .

Kruse, Kevin M.

One Nation Under God: How Corporate America Invented Christian America .

Basic Books , 2015.

ISBN 0465049494 .

Marsden, George.

Understanding Fundamentalism and Evangelicalism .

Marsh, Charles.

Wayward Christian Soldiers: Freeing the Gospel from Political Captivity (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007).

Martin, William. 1996.

With God on Our Side: The Rise of the Religious Right in America , New York: Broadway Books .

ISBN 0-7679-2257-3 .

Mascolo, Lo Gionathan. 2023.

The Christian Right in Europe  Movements, Networks, and Denominations . Bielefeldt. transcript.

ISBN 978-3-8376-6038-8 Micklethwait, John ; Wooldridge, Adrian (2004).

The Right Nation: Conservative Power in America . New York City: Penguin Books .

ISBN 978-1-59420-020-5 .

Noll, Mark. 1989.

Religion and American Politics: From the Colonial Period to the 1980s .

Noll, Mark and Rawlyk, George: Amazing Grace: Evangelicalism in Australia, Canada, Britain, Canada and the United States: Montreal : McGill-Queens University Press: 1994: ISBN 0-7735-1214-4 .

O'Donnell, Jonathon (September 2020).

Stausberg, Michael ; Engler, Steven (eds.). "The deliverance of the administrative state: Deep state conspiracism, charismatic demonology, and the post-truth politics of American Christian nationalism".

Religion .

50 (4).

Taylor & Francis : 696– 719.

doi : 10.1080/0048721X.2020.1810817 .

ISSN 1096-1151 .

S2CID 222094116 .

Preston, Andrew, Bruce J. Schulman, and Julian E. Zelizer, eds.

Faithful Republic: Religion and Politics in Modern America (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2015) viii, 213 pp.; Essays by scholars Ribuffo, Leo P. 1983.

The Old Christian right: The Protestant Far Right from the Great Depression to the Cold War . Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

ISBN 0-87722-598-2 .

Shields, Jon A., "Framing the Christian Right: How Progressives and Post-War Liberals Constructed the Religious Right", Journal of Church and State , 53 (Autumn 2011), 635–55.

Smith, Jeremy Adam, 2007, "Living in the Gap: The Ideal and Reality of the Christian Right Family".

The Public Eye , Winter 2007–08.

Wald, Kenneth. 2003.

Religion and Politics in the United States .

Wilcox, Clyde.

Onward Christian Soldiers: The Religious Right in American Politics . survey by two neutral scholars.

Williams, Daniel K. (2010).

God's Own Party: The Making of the Christian Right .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-534084-6 .

Wills, Garry (1990).

Under God: Religion and American Politics . New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-671-65705-5 .

v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category v t e Christianity and politics Christian left Christian right Key concepts Separation of church and state " Render unto Caesar " Two kingdoms doctrine Freedom of religion Movements Christian anarchism Christian democracy Clerical fascism Distributism Evangelical left Christian feminism Christian libertarianism Libertarian Christianity Christianism National Catholicism Christian pacifism Political Catholicism Christian reconstructionism Theoconservatism Paleoconservatism Integrism Christian communism Christian corporatism Christian socialism Theodemocracy Christian Zionism Christofascism Christian nationalism Christian Patriot movement Christian realism Identity Christianity Political influence of Evangelicalism in Latin America Liberal Catholicism Issues Abortion Homosexuality Poverty and wealth Christianity and environmentalism Theology Catholic social teaching Dominion theology Liberation theology Political theology China Korea Middle East Sub-Saharan Africa Social Gospel Prosperity gospel Symphonia Radical orthodoxy Integral mission Christian state Caesaropapism Christian republic Divine right of kings Related topics Christian views on genetically modified foods Christianity and other religions Civil religion State religion Theocracy Dallas Statement v t e Political spectrum Far-left Left Centre-left Centre Centre-right Right Far-right Political positions Post-leftism Ultra-leftism Anti-Stalinist left New Left Centrist Marxism Third Way Radical centrism New Right Political ideologies Anarchism Marxism Communism Socialism Social democracy Liberalism Christian democracy Conservatism Nationalism Fascism Nazism Religious politics Buddhist socialism Christian left Jewish left Islamic socialism Christian right Hindutva Islamism Religious Zionism Political pejoratives Baizuo Champagne socialist Hard left Liberal elite Limousine liberal Loony left Moonbat Red fascist Regressive left Social fascism Social imperialism Social justice warrior Soft left Wingnut Models Horseshoe theory Left–right political spectrum Nolan Chart Overton window Open–closed political spectrum Pournelle chart Right-wing authoritarianism See also Anti-authoritarianism Democratic transition Libertarianism Syndicalism Progressivism Green politics Identity politics Corporatism Authoritarianism Totalitarianism Revolutionary Reactionary Anti-establishment Collectivism Communitarianism The Establishment Individualism Hardline Populism Radical politics Triangulation v t e Religion in politics General concepts Anti-clericalism Anti-clericalism and Freemasonry Caesaropapism Civil religion Clericalism Clerical fascism Confessionalism Constitutional references to God Divine law Divine rule Engaged Spirituality Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Freedom of religion Humanism Identity politics Organized secularism Political religion Religious anarchism Religious anti-Masonry Religious anti-Zionism Religious communism Religious humanism Religious law Religious nationalism Religious pacifism Religion and peacebuilding Religious police Religious rejection of politics Religious segregation Religious separatism Religious socialism Religious views on same-sex marriage Secular humanism Secular liberalism Secular state Secularism Secularity Secularization Secular religion Separation of church and state Spiritual left State atheism State religion Theocracy Theonomy Christianity and politics Blaine Amendment Christian anarchism Christian anti-communism Christian anti-Masonry Papal ban Christian anti-Zionism Christian communism Christian corporatism Christian democracy Christian egalitarianism Christian environmentalism Evangelical environmentalism Christian fascism German Christians (movement) National Catholicism Positive Christianity Protestant Reich Church Christian feminism Mormon feminism Christian humanism Christian law Christian left Evangelical left Christian libertarianism Christian nationalism Christian pacifism Christian peacemaking Christian reconstructionism Christian republic Christian right Christian socialism In Utah Christian state Christian Zionism Cisalpinism Dominion Theology Febronianism Gallicanism Liberation theology Maronite politics Phoenicianism Papal state Pillarisation Political Catholicism Relations between the Catholic Church and the state In Argentina Sphere sovereignty Subsidiarity Temporal power Theodemocracy Ultramontanism Neo-ultramontanism Islam and politics Hui pan-nationalism Human Rights in Islam Imamate Islamic anarchism Islamic anti-Masonry Islamic anti-Zionism Islamic democracy Islamic fascism Islamic feminism Sharia law by country In Pakistan In South Asia Islamic pacifism Islamic republic Islamic socialism Islamic state Islamic Zionism Islamism Criticism Islamization Khilafat Petro-Islam Political quietism Taliban Talibanization Two-nation theory Judaism and politics Halachic state Jewish anarchism Jewish anti-Zionism Haredim Jewish Autonomism Jewish democracy Jewish fascism Kahanism Revisionist Maximalism Jewish feminism Jewish law Jewish left Jewish pacifism Jewish political movements Jewish right Jewish secularism Jewish socialism Bundism Poale Zion Zionism Religious World Agudath Israel Hinduism and politics Akhand Bharat Hindu feminism Gandhism Hindu law Hindu modernism Hindu nationalism Hindutva Hindu Rashtra Panun Kashmir Bangabhumi Hindu revolution Hindu revivalism Hindu environmentalism Integral humanism Indigenous Aryans Rama Rajya Saffronisation Shuddhi Uniform civil code Buddhism and politics Buddhist anti-communism Buddhist feminism Buddhist law Buddhist modernism Buddhist nationalism 969 Movement Nichirenism Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist socialism Engaged Buddhism Humanistic Buddhism Secular Buddhism Other American civil religion Disestablishmentarianism Imperial cult Ancient Rome Gottgläubig Khalistan movement Neopaganist feminism Religious aspects of Nazism Cult of personality State Shinto v t e Social conservatism in the United States Issues and ideas Anti-abortion Anti-LGBTQ ( Gay agenda ) Anti-pornography movement Culture of life Culture war Consistent life ethic Eminent domain Euthanasia Familialism Family values Gender roles Organized religion Parental rights movement Prohibition of drugs Public morality Religious liberty School prayer Friendly separation of church and state Advocates Abbott Ashcroft Bachmann Baldwin Bannon Barton Bennett Brownback Bryant Boebert Boykin Bozell III Buchanan Cameron Carlson Carson Coburn Colson Cruz DeLay DeMint DeSantis Dice Dobson Donohue D'Souza Falwell Sr.

Falwell Jr.

Frist George Gingrich Gohmert Harris Helms Hostettler Huckabee Johnson Jones Kennedy Keyes King Kirk Knowles LaHaye LaHaye Limbaugh Lott McCarthy Moore Owens Palin Parsley Pence (Greg) Pence (Mike) Perkins Peroutka Perry Phillips Prager Raichik Reed Robertson Robinson Ruzicka Santorum Scarborough Schlafly Schundler Scott Shapiro Stenzel Stuckey Tancredo Tatum Greene Thomas Trump Uihlein Walsh Groups American Principles Project Concerned Women for America Eagle Forum Faith and Freedom Coalition Family Research Council Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Heritage Foundation Moms for Liberty Moral Majority National Center on Sexual Exploitation National Organization for Marriage National Right to Life Committee Parents Television and Media Council Traditional Values Coalition Political parties American Solidarity Party Constitution Party Prohibition Party Republican Party Related Christian democracy Christian nationalism Christian right Culture war Factions in the Republican Party LGBT conservatism in the United States Manhattan Declaration Paleoconservatism Reactionary Social justice Straight pride Conservatism portal v t e Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Libertarian Moderate Movement Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Progressive Social Traditionalist Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian nationalism Classical liberalism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Gender essentialism Complementarianism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Militarism Moral absolutism Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Protectionism Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Tradition People Presidents Adams (John) Adams (John Quincy) G. H. W. Bush G. W. Bush Cleveland Coolidge Harding Hoover McKinley Nixon Reagan W. H. Taft Trump Washington Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan II Kavanaugh Kennedy O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft Thomas Vermeule Yoo Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Buckley Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eastman Eliot Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hazony Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kendall Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lasch Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet O'Connor Ong Ransom Rieff Santayana Sowell Strauss Viereck Voegelin Washington Weaver Yarvin Other figures Ailes Atwater Beck Breitbart Carlson Cheney Coulter Cruz DeSantis Dilling Elder Falwell Gingrich Giuliani Goldwater Hannity Ingraham Levin Limbaugh Lindbergh Lodge Lovecraft McCain McCarthy McConnell Novak O'Reilly Palin Rand Paul Ron Paul Pence Perot Quayle Romney Rove Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Schlafly Shapiro Stone Robert A. Taft Booker T. Washington Parties American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party of New York State Constitution Party Republican Party Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Movements Alt-right Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Dark Enlightenment Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBT Libertarian Republicans Militia movement Patriot movement Christian Radical Right Reactionary feminism Tea Party movement Trumpism Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Historical factions Bourbon Democrats Dixiecrats Loyalists Old Right Redeemers Southern Agrarians Other organizations 1789 Capital ATR FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Rockbridge Network Tea Party Patriots USCC Literature Democracy in America (1835–1840) Democracy and Leadership (1924) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) Losing Ground (1984) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Bell Curve (1994) A Republic, Not an Empire (1999) Hillbilly Elegy (2017) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) See also American nationalism Bibliography of conservatism in the United States List of American conservatives National conservatism Southern strategy Conservatism portal v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐b7884
Cached time: 20250815221608
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.740 seconds
Real time usage: 3.060 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 22519/1000000
Revision size: 181533/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 888355/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 23414/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 49/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 955585/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.530/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23552291/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2216.969      1 -total
 53.70% 1190.429      1 Template:Reflist
 16.39%  363.324     83 Template:Cite_web
  9.65%  213.960     42 Template:Cite_book
  9.57%  212.216     27 Template:Cite_journal
  9.00%  199.547     44 Template:Cite_news
  7.25%  160.623      1 Template:Conservatism_sidebar
  5.40%  119.799     12 Template:Refn
  4.98%  110.482     20 Template:Fix
  4.64%  102.886      2 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:63317:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815221608 and revision id 1304622195. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christian_right&oldid=1304622195 " Categories : Anti-abortion movement in the United States Anti-pornography movement in the United States Catholic Church in the United States Christian movements Christian nationalism Christian terminology Christian Zionism in the United States Christianity and political ideologies Conservatism in South America Conservatism in the United States Evangelicalism in South America Evangelicalism in the United States Neoconservatism New Right (United States) Opposition to same-sex marriage in the United States Orthodox Judaism in the United States Paleoconservatism Prohibition in the United States Republican Party (United States) Right-wing ideologies Right-wing populism in the United States Social conservatism in the United States The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the United States Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from July 2025 Articles with PDF format bare URLs for citations CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from March 2024 United States-centric Use mdy dates from March 2024 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from November 2020 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2020 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from July 2013 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2021 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 Citation overkill Articles tagged with the inline citation overkill template from June 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Articles containing Tagalog-language text Articles with excerpts Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 04:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christian right 24 languages Add topic

