Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Publications 4 Personal life 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Jacqueline Bhabha 3 languages Català Español مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British academic, and an attorney Jacqueline Bhabha Born Jacqueline Strimpel 1951 (age 73–74) Bombay , Bombay State , India Citizenship British Alma mater Oxford University (BA, MSc) The University of Law Occupation(s) Attorney , Academia Spouse Homi K. Bhabha Children 3, including Satya Jacqueline Strimpel Bhabha (born 1951) is a British academic, and an attorney. She is the Jeremiah Smith, Jr. lecturer in law at Harvard Law School and teaches public policy at Harvard Kennedy School .

[ 1 ] Her research and legal practice has focused on citizenship and rights of aliens, refugee law, trafficking, and smuggling. She is married to Homi K. Bhabha , the critical theorist, and they have three children.

Early life and education [ edit ] Bhabha was born Jacqueline Strimpel in Mumbai in 1951, the daughter of Jewish refugee parents who had moved to India to flee Nazi Germany .

[ 2 ] The family moved to Milan , Italy in 1961 when she was ten years old.

She matriculated at Bedales , a British boarding school. Bhabha received a first class honours degree in philosophy and psychology from Oxford University in 1973, and an MSc in applied social studies in 1975 at the Department of Social Policy and Intervention, University of Oxford . Despite claims made on her Harvard biography page and in other media that she holds a JD, she does not have a doctoral degree. Bhabha completed the Common Professional Examination to qualify as a solicitor at what was then the College of Law in London.

Career [ edit ] Bhabha started her career as a human rights lawyer in London and at the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg . In 1997, Bhabha entered academia when she joined the University of Chicago as the Director of the Human Rights Program – an appointment she continued till 2001.

[ 3 ] She later joined Harvard Law School and become a lecturer in law. She serves as the Director of Research at the Francois Bagnoud Xavier Center for Health and Human Rights at Harvard, and the University Adviser on Human Rights Education to the Provost at Harvard University . She is also a lecturer on public policy at Harvard Kennedy School .

In February 2022, Bhabha was one of 38 Harvard faculty to sign a letter to the Harvard Crimson defending Professor John Comaroff , who had been found to have violated the university's sexual and professional conduct policies. The letter defended Comaroff as "an excellent colleague, advisor and committed university citizen" and expressed dismay over his being sanctioned by the university.

[ 4 ] After students filed a lawsuit with detailed allegations of Comaroff's actions and the university's failure to respond, Bhabha was one of several signatories to say that she wished to retract her signature.

[ 5 ] Publications [ edit ] "Pertenecer a Europa: ciudadanía y derechos posnacionales" [ 6 ] Co-author Women's Movement: Women Under Immigration, Nationality and Refugee Law (1994), Editor Asylum Law And Practice in Europe and North America (1992), Article Get Back to Where You Once Belonged: Identity, Citizenship and Exclusion in Europe Human Rights Quarterly (1998), Article Internationalist Gatekeepers? The tension between asylum advocacy and human rights (2002), Article The Citizenship Deficit: On Being a Citizen Child (2003).

Article Reforming Immigration Policy Boston Review (2005) Article Moving Babies: Globalization, Markets, and Transnational Adoption The Fletcher Forum of World Affairs (2004) Personal life [ edit ] She is married to Homi K. Bhabha , the critical theorist.

[ 7 ] They have three children: Ishan, Satya (an actor), and Leah.

References [ edit ] ^ "Bio of Jacqueline Bhabha" (PDF) . Dl.lib.brown.edu . Retrieved 20 August 2012 .

^ "Jacqueline Bhabha" .

Harvard Magazine . 12 July 2015 . Retrieved 24 July 2015 .

^ "Bio at Harvard | Institute of Politics – Professor Jacqueline Bhabha" . Iop.harvard.edu . Retrieved 20 August 2012 .

^ "38 Harvard Faculty Sign Open Letter Questioning Results of Misconduct Investigations into Prof. John Comaroff" .

www.thecrimson.com . The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved 9 February 2022 .

^ "3 graduate students file sexual harassment suit against prominent Harvard anthropology professor" .

www.bostonglobe.com . The Boston Globe . Retrieved 9 February 2022 .

^ "International Social Science Journal | United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization" . UNESCO . Retrieved 24 July 2015 .

^ Eakin, Emily (17 November 2001).

"Harvard's Prize Catch, a Delphic Postcolonialist" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 3 May 2011 .

External links [ edit ] Bhabha's Profile at Harvard Kennedy School Profile Harvard Magazine University of Chicago article Jacqueline Bhabha Papers – Pembroke Center Archives, Brown University Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jacqueline_Bhabha&oldid=1279585277 " Categories : 1951 births Harvard Law School faculty Harvard Kennedy School faculty British Jews Living people People educated at Bedales School Indian people of German-Jewish descent Indian Jews British people of German-Jewish descent British women lawyers Alumni of the University of Law British women legal scholars Naturalised citizens of the United Kingdom People who lost Indian citizenship British solicitors Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2020 Use British English from February 2020 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 9 March 2025, at 11:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jacqueline Bhabha 3 languages Add topic

