Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classical philosophical interpretation Toggle Classical philosophical interpretation subsection 1.1 Eros 1.1.1 Eros as a god 1.1.2 Virtue 1.2 Ladder of Love 1.2.1 Tragedy and comedy 1.2.1.1 Tragedy 1.2.1.2 Comedy 2 Historical views of platonic love Toggle Historical views of platonic love subsection 2.1 Seven types of love 3 Modern interpretations Toggle Modern interpretations subsection 3.1 Definition 3.2 Complications 3.3 Queerplatonic love 3.4 Evolutionary theory 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Platonic love 52 languages Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bikol Central བོད་ཡིག Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Latviešu მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Non-romantic love Relationships ( Outline ) Types Genetic or adoptive Kinship Family Stepfamily Parent Father Mother Son Daughter Grandparent Sibling Brother Sister Cousin Aunt Uncle Niece and nephew By marriage Spouse Husband Wife Open marriage Polygamy Polyandry Polygyny Group marriage Mixed-orientation Partner(s) Significant other Boyfriend Girlfriend Cohabitation Long-distance Online Same-sex Queerplatonic Intimate and sexual Casual Committed Monogamy Non-monogamy Mutual monogamy Polyamory Polyfidelity Affair Cicisbeo Concubinage Courtesan Mistress Activities Bonding Courtship Dating Engagement Bachelor's Day Mating Meet market Romance Singles event Wedding Endings Breakup Legal / marital separation Annulment Divorce Widowhood Emotions and feelings Affinity Attachment Intimacy Jealousy Limerence Love Friend zone Platonic Romantic friendship Unconditional Passion Sexuality Non-romantic friendship Alliance Cross-sex Female Male Practices Bride price dower dowry service Homogamy Hypergamy Infidelity Sexual activity Transgression Repression Abuse Child Dating Domestic Elderly Narcissistic parent Controlling behavior Stalking v t e Part of a series on Love Red-outline heart icon Types of love Affection Bonding Broken heart Compassionate love Conjugal love Courtly love courtship troubadours Falling in love Friendship cross-sex romantic zone Infatuation Interpersonal relationship Intimacy Limerence Love addiction Love at first sight Love triangle Lovesickness Lovestruck Obsessive love Parental love Passion Passionate and companionate love Platonic love Puppy love Queerplatonic relationship Romance Self-love Amour de soi Unconditional love Unrequited love Social views Anarchist Free love Patriotism Chinese Ren Yuanfen French Amour-propre Greek words for love Agape Eros Ludus Mania Philautia Philia Pistis Pragma Storgḗ Xenia Indian Kama Bhakti Maitrī Islamic Ishq Jewish Chesed Latin Amor Caritas Portuguese Saudade Yaghan Mamihlapinatapai Concepts Color wheel theory of love Bhakti yoga Biology of romantic love Interpersonal attraction Love letter Love of Christ Love of God in Christianity Love magic Valentine's Day Philosophy Religious views love deities Sacred Heart Similarity Physical attractiveness Triangular theory of love v t e Platonic love [ 1 ] is a type of love in which sexual desire or romantic features are nonexistent or have been suppressed or sublimated , but it means more than simple friendship .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The term is derived from the name of Greek philosopher Plato , though the philosopher never used the term himself. Platonic love, as devised by Plato, concerns rising through levels of closeness to wisdom and true beauty, from carnal attraction to individual bodies to attraction to souls, and eventually, union with the truth.

[ 4 ] [ clarification needed ] Platonic love is contrasted with romantic love .

Classical philosophical interpretation [ edit ] Platonic love is examined in Plato's dialogue, the Symposium , which has as its topic the subject of love, or more generally the subject of Eros . It explains the possibilities of how the feeling of love began and how it has evolved, both sexually and non-sexually, and defines genuine platonic love as inspiring a person's mind and soul and directing their attention towards spiritual matters. Of particular importance is the speech of Socrates , who attributes to the prophet Diotima an idea of platonic love as a means of ascent to contemplation of the divine, an ascent known as the "Ladder of Love". For Diotima and Plato generally, the most correct use of love of human beings is to direct one's mind to love of divinity . Socrates defines love based on separate classifications of pregnancy (to bear offspring); pregnancy of the body, pregnancy of the soul, and direct connection to existence. Pregnancy of the body results in human children. Pregnancy of the soul, the next step in the process, produces " virtue "—which is the soul (truth) translating itself into material form.

[ 5 ] "... virtue for the Greeks means self-sameness ... in Plato's terms, Being or idea."(106) [ 5 ] Eros [ edit ] Pausanias, in Plato's Symposium (181b–182a), defines two types of the love known as "Eros": vulgar Eros, or earthly love, and divine Eros, or divine love . Pausanias defines vulgar Eros as material attraction towards a person's beauty for the purposes of physical pleasure and reproduction, and divine Eros as starting from physical attraction but transcending gradually to love for supreme beauty, placed on a similar level to the divine. This concept of divine Eros was later transformed into the term "platonic love".

Vulgar Eros and divine Eros were both considered to be connected, and part of the same continuous process of pursuing perfection of one's being, [ 6 ] with the purpose of mending one's human nature and eventually reaching a point of unity where there is no longer an aspiration or need to change.

[ 7 ] "Eros is ... a moment of transcendence ... in so far as the other can never be possessed without being annihilated in its status as the other, at which point both desire and transcendence would cease ... (84) [ 7 ] Eros as a god [ edit ] In the Symposium , Eros is discussed as a Greek god—more specifically, the king of the gods, with each guest of the party giving a eulogy in praise of Eros.

[ 6 ] Virtue [ edit ] Virtue, according to Greek philosophy , is the concept of how closely reality and material form equates good, positive, or benevolent. This can be seen as a form of linguistic relativity .

Some modern authors' perception of the terms "virtue" and "good" as they are translated into English from the Symposium are a good indicator of this misunderstanding. In the following quote, the author simplifies the idea of virtue as simply what is "good".

"... what is good is beautiful, and what is beautiful is good ..." [ 8 ] Ladder of Love [ edit ] The Ladder of Love is a metaphor that relates each step toward Being as consecutive rungs of a ladder. Each step closer to the truth further distances love from beauty of the body toward love that is more focused on wisdom and the essence of beauty.

[ 5 ] The ladder starts with carnal attraction of body for body, progressing to a love for body and soul. Eventually, in time, with consequent steps up the ladder, the idea of beauty is eventually no longer connected with a body, but entirely united with Being itself.

[ 6 ] "[...] decent human beings must be gratified, as well as those that are not as yet decent, so that they might become more decent; and the love of the decent must be preserved." [ 6 ] (187d, 17) - Eryximachus' "completion" of Pausanias' speech on Eros Tragedy and comedy [ edit ] Plato's Symposium defines two extremes in the process of platonic love; the entirely carnal and the entirely ethereal. These two extremes of love are seen by the Greeks in terms of tragedy and comedy. According to Diotima in her discussion with Socrates, for anyone to achieve the final rung in the Ladder of Love, they would essentially transcend the body and rise to immortality—gaining direct access to Being. Such a form of love is impossible for a mortal to achieve.

[ 5 ] What Plato describes as "pregnancy of the body" is entirely carnal and seeks pleasure and beauty in bodily form only. This is the type of love, that, according to Socrates, is practiced by animals.

[ 6 ] "Now, if both these portraits of love, the tragic and the comic, are exaggerations, then we could say that the genuine portrayal of Platonic love is the one that lies between them. The love described as the one practiced by those who are pregnant according to the soul, who partake of both the realm of beings and the realm of Being, who grasp Being indirectly, through the mediation of beings, would be a love that Socrates could practice." [ 5 ] Tragedy [ edit ] Diotima considers the carnal limitation of human beings to the pregnancy of the body to be a form of tragedy, as it separates someone from the pursuit of truth. One would be forever limited to beauty of the body, never being able to access the true essence of beauty.

[ 5 ] Comedy [ edit ] Diotima considers the idea of a mortal having direct access to Being to be a comic situation simply because of the impossibility of it. The offspring of true virtue would essentially lead to a mortal achieving immortality.

[ 8 ] Historical views of platonic love [ edit ] In the Middle Ages, new interest in the works of Plato, his philosophy and his view of love became more popular, spurred on by Georgios Gemistos Plethon during the Councils of Ferrara and Firenze in 1438–1439. Later in 1469, Marsilio Ficino put forward a theory of neo-platonic love, in which he defined love as a personal ability of an individual, which guides their soul towards cosmic processes, lofty spiritual goals and heavenly ideas.

[ 9 ] The first use of the modern sense of platonic love is considered to be by Ficino in one of his letters.

Though Plato's discussions of love originally centered on relationships which were sexual between members of the same sex, scholar Todd Reeser studies how the meaning of platonic love in Plato's original sense underwent a transformation during the Renaissance , leading to the contemporary sense of nonsexual heterosexual love.

[ 10 ] The English term "platonic" dates back to William Davenant 's The Platonick Lovers , performed in 1635, a critique of the philosophy of platonic love which was popular at Charles I 's court. The play was derived from the concept in Plato's Symposium of a person's love for the idea of good, which he considered to lie at the root of all virtue and truth. For a brief period, platonic love was a fashionable subject at the English royal court, especially in the circle around Queen Henrietta Maria , the wife of King Charles I. Platonic love was the theme of some of the courtly masques performed in the Caroline era , though the fashion for this soon waned under pressures of social and political change.

Seven types of love [ edit ] Throughout these eras, platonic love was slowly categorized into seven different classical definitions. These were: Eros : sexual or passionate love, or a modern perspective of romantic love.

Philia : the love of friendship or goodwill, often met with mutual benefits that can also be formed by companionship, dependability, and trust.

Storge : the love found between parents and children, often a unilateral love.

Agape : the universal love, consisting of love for strangers, nature, or God.

Ludus : playful and uncommitted love, intended for fun with no resulting consequences.

Pragma : love founded on duty and reason, and one's longer-term interests.

Philautia : self-love, both healthy or unhealthy; unhealthy if one places oneself above the gods (to the point of hubris ), and healthy if it is used to build self-esteem and confidence.

Despite the variety and number of definitions, the different distinctions between types of love were not considered concrete and mutually exclusive, and were often considered to blend into one another at certain points.

[ 11 ] [ better source needed ] Modern interpretations [ edit ] Definition [ edit ] "Platonic love in its modern popular sense is an affectionate relationship into which the sexual element does not enter, especially in cases where one might easily assume otherwise." [ 12 ] "Platonic lovers function to underscore a supportive role where the friend sees [their] duty as the provision of advice, encouragement, and comfort to the other person ... and do not entail exclusivity." [ 13 ] Complications [ edit ] One of the complications of platonic love lies within the persistence of the use of the title "platonic love" versus the use of "friend".

[ according to whom?

] It is the use of the word love that directs us towards a deeper relationship than the scope of a normal friendship.

Queerplatonic love [ edit ] Main article: Queerplatonic relationship Some in the aromantic and asexual communities, within the broader LGBT community , have coined the term "queerplatonic" to refer to formal intimate relationships between significant others that do not involve romance.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Queerplatonic feelings are often described, like romance, as involving a deeper and more profound emotional connection than friendship.

Julie Sondra Decker writes that queerplatonic love often "looks indistinguishable from romance when outside the equation", but should not be "assigned a romantic status if participants say it is not romantic". She also notes that it can also be misread by observers as close friendship in circumstances where overtly romantic gestures are socially expected. For Decker, the essence of queerplatonic attraction is its ambiguous position in relation to normative categories: she writes that QPR "is a platonic relationship, but it is ' queered ' in some way—not friends, not romantic partners, but something else".

[ 17 ] Evolutionary theory [ edit ] This paragraph is an excerpt from Biology of romantic love § Co-option of mother-infant bonding .

[ edit ] In 2003, Lisa Diamond suggested that adult pair bonding is an exaptation of the affectional bond between infants and caregivers, using this to explain instances of "platonic" infatuations, or i.e. "romantic" passion without sexual desire .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Some instances of this are reported by Dorothy Tennov in her study of " limerence " (i.e. love madness, commonly for an unreachable person), in which a younger woman who otherwise considered herself heterosexual would have this type of reaction towards an older woman.

[ 18 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] Among other examples are schoolgirls falling "violently in love with each other, and suffering all the pangs of unrequited attachment, desperate jealousy etc." (historically called a "smash"), and Native American men who seemed to fall in love with each other and form intense, but non-sexual bonds.

Helen Fisher 's theory that sexual desire is a separate system from romantic love and attachment is also given as theoretical evidence. Diamond argues that romantic love without sexual desire can even happen in contradiction to one's sexual orientation : because it would not have been adaptive for a parent to only be able to bond with an opposite sex child, so the systems must have evolved independently from sexual orientation. People most often fall in love because of sexual desire, but Diamond suggests time spent together and physical touch can serve as a substitute. Diamond believes the connection between romantic love and sexual desire is "bidirectional" in that either one can cause the other to occur because of shared oxytocin pathways in the brain.

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Plato and his students Casual dating Childhood sweetheart Emotional affair Fraternization Greek love Homosociality Heterosociality Infatuation Interpersonal attraction Interpersonal communication Puppy love Queerplatonic relationship Relationship anarchy Romantic friendship Soulmate Work spouse References [ edit ] ^ "8.60: When not to capitalize".

The Chicago Manual of Style (16th [electronic] ed.). Chicago University Press. 2010.

^ "platonic love" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster.

^ Gillette, Hope (12 April 2022).

"This Is Platonic Love" .

Psych Central .

^ Mish, F (1993).

Merriam-Webster's collegiate dictionary: Tenth Edition . Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster, Incorporated.

ISBN 978-08-7779-709-8 .

^ a b c d e f Rojcewicz, R. (1997). Platonic love: dasein's urge toward being.

Research in Phenomenology , 27 (1), 103.

^ a b c d e Benardete, S. (1986).

Plato's Symposium.

Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-04275-8 .

^ a b Miller, P. A. (2013). Duras and platonic love: The erotics of substitution.

Comparatist , 37 83-104.

^ a b Herrmann, F. (2013). Dynamics of vision in Plato's thought.

Helios , 40 (1/2), 281-307.

^ De Amore , Les Belles Lettres, 2012 ^ Reeser, T. (2015).

Setting Plato Straight: Translating Platonic Sexuality in the Renaissance . Chicago.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "These Are the 7 Types of Love" .

Psychology Today . Retrieved 3 May 2018 .

^ "Platonic love" .

ScienceDaily . Retrieved 5 October 2022 .

^ Messman, SJ (2000). "Motives to Remain Platonic, Equity, and the Use of Maintenance Strategies in Opposite-Sex Friendships".

Journal of Social and Personal Relationships .

17 : 67– 94.

doi : 10.1177/0265407500171004 .

S2CID 145745343 .

^ "Queerplatonic" .

21st-Century Interdisciplinary Dictionary: A William & Mary Lexicon of English Neologisms, Buzzwords, Keywords and Jargon . Retrieved 25 February 2022 .

^ "The 'A' in LGBT".

Counterpoint .

35 (1): 8. September 2013.

^ Chasin, C. J. DeLuzio (2015). "Making Sense in and of the Asexual Community: Navigating Relationships and Identities in a Context of Resistance".

Journal of Community & Applied Social Psychology .

25 (2): 167– 180.

doi : 10.1002/casp.2203 .

^ Decker, Julie Sondra (September 2014).

The Invisible Orientation: An Introduction to Asexuality . p. 25.

^ a b Diamond, Lisa M.

(2004).

"Emerging Perspectives on Distinctions Between Romantic Love and Sexual Desire" .

Current Directions in Psychological Science .

13 (3): 116– 119.

doi : 10.1111/j.0963-7214.2004.00287.x .

ISSN 0963-7214 .

^ a b Diamond, Lisa (January 2003). "What does sexual orientation orient? A biobehavioral model distinguishing romantic love and sexual desire".

Psychological Review .

110 (1): 173– 92.

doi : 10.1037/0033-295x.110.1.173 .

PMID 12529061 .

^ Tennov 1999 , pp. 24, 216 ^ Hayes, Nicky (2000), Foundations of Psychology (3rd ed.), London: Thomson Learning, pp.

457– 458, ISBN 1861525893 : "Tennov (1979) used the term limerence to refer to a kind of infatuated, all-absorbing passion — the kind of love that Dante felt for Beatrice, or that Juliet and Romeo felt for each other. Tennov argued that an important feature of limerence is that it should be unrequited, or at least unfulfilled. It consists of a state of intense longing for the other person, in which the individual becomes more or less obsessed by that person and spends much of their time fantasising about them. [...] Tennov suggests that limerence can only really last if external conditions are such that it remains unfulfilled: it is not uncommon for people to maintain a state of limerence about someone who is unreachable for some years; but if the desired person should actually come within reach, so that the desired relationship begins, then the limerence becomes extinguished and the attraction sometimes disappears very quickly." ^ Beam 2013 , pp. 72, 75: "[Tennov] discovered that many who considered themselves 'madly in love' had similar descriptions of their emotions and actions. She chose the label limerence to describe an intense longing and desire for another person that is much stronger than a simple infatuation, but not the same as a long-lived love that could last a life-time. [...] In 2002, Helen Fisher, PhD, in concert with other researchers, published the article 'Defining the Brain Systems of Lust, Romantic Attraction, and Attachment' in the Archives of Sexual Behavior . Considered a leading researcher [...], she and her research colleagues have identified several characteristics of a person who is 'madly in love,' or, as we put it, in limerence." Bibliography [ edit ] Dall'Orto, Giovanni (January 1989). " 'Socratic Love' as a Disguise for Same-Sex Love in the Italian Renaissance".

Journal of Homosexuality .

16 ( 1– 2): 33– 66.

doi : 10.1300/J082v16n01_03 .

PMID 3069924 .

Gerard, Kent; Hekma, Gert (1989).

The Pursuit of Sodomy: Male Homosexuality in Renaissance and Enlightenment Europe . New York: Harrington Park Press.

ISBN 978-0-918393-49-4 .

K. Sharpe, Criticism and Compliment.

Cambridge, 1987, ch. 2.

T. Reeser, Setting Plato Straight: Translating Platonic Sexuality in the Renaissance.

Chicago, 2015.

Burton, N., MD (25 June 2016).

These Are the 7 Types of Love.

Psychology Today.

Retrieved 3 May 2018.

Messman, S. J., Hause, D. J., & Hause, K. S. (2000). "Motives to Remain Platonic, Equity, and the Use of Maintenance Strategies in Opposite-Sex Friendships." Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 17 (1), 67–94.

doi : 10.1177/0265407500171004 Mish, F. C. (Ed.). (1993).

Merriam-Webster's collegiate dictionary: Tenth Edition.

Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster, Inc.

ISBN 08-7779-709-9 .

Rojcewicz, R. (1997). "Platonic love: dasein's urge toward being." Research in Phenomenology, 27 (1), 103.

Miller, P. A. (2013). "Duras and platonic love: The erotics of substitution." Comparatist , 37 83–104.

Benardete, S. (1986).

Plato's Symposium.

Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-04275-8 .

Herrmann, F. (2013). "Dynamics of vision in Plato's thought." Helios , 40 (1/2), 281–307.

Beam, Joe (2013).

The Art of Falling in Love . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-1-4516-7265-7 .

Tennov, Dorothy (1999).

Love and Limerence: The Experience of Being in Love . Lanham, MD: Scarborough House.

ISBN 978-0-8128-6286-7 .

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Platonic Love ".

Plato on Friendship and Eros – Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Human sexuality and sexology Sexual relationship phenomena Aromanticism Asexuality Gray asexuality Demisexuality Fictosexuality Bisexuality Pansexuality Casual relationship Casual sex Celibacy Love shyness Celibacy syndrome Herbivore men Committed relationship Conventional sex Flirting Free love Foreplay Friends with benefits relationships Group sex Heterosexuality Homosexuality Hypersexuality LGBTQ Marriage One-night stand Polyamory Promiscuity Female Romantic love Romantic orientation Queer heterosexuality Sex life Sexual abstinence Sexual orientation Sexual partner Sexual repression Single person Split attraction model Swinging Sexual dynamics Hypergamy Physical attractiveness Sexual attraction Sexual capital Sexual ethics Sexual frustration Sociosexuality See also Abortion-rights movement Adolescent sexuality Age of consent Decriminalization of sex work Dogging (sexual slang) Human female sexuality Human male sexuality LGBTQ rights by country or territory Porn for women Public sex Reproductive rights Right to privacy Right to sexuality Sex Addicts Anonymous Sex and drugs Sex worker movements Sex workers' rights Sexecology Sex-positive feminism Sex-positive movement Sexual addiction Sexual and reproductive health and rights Sexual jealousy Sexual norm Sexual revolution Sexual surrogate Sexuality and disability Stanley v. Georgia Women's erotica v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato v t e Interpersonal relationships Types Romantic Boyfriend Girlfriend Cohabitation Significant other Domestic partnership Same-sex relationship Monogamy Civil union Marriage Civil marriage Husband Wife Soulmate Widowhood Non-monogamy Open relationship Open marriage Polyamory Polyfidelity Polygamy Concubinage Mistress Sexual Casual sex Casual dating Friends with benefits Enjo kōsai Sexual partner One-night stand Courtesan Gigolo Queerplatonic relationship Sugar dating Non-romantic, Non-sexual Acquaintance Alliance Enemy Friendship Heterosociality Cross-sex Homosociality Bromance Female Male Womance Recession Kinship Family Siblings Platonic Stranger Familiar Consequential Rental Sycophancy Historical Cicisbeo Seraglio Plaçage Marriage à la façon du pays Royal mistress Royal favourite Maîtresse-en-titre Romantic friendship Events Initiation Flirting First date Matchmaking Meet market Singles event Bonding Courtship Dating Romance Mating Wedding Breakup Annulment Divorce Separation Legal Marital Emotions Affinity Attachment Compersion Fear of commitment Intimacy Jealousy Limerence Loneliness Love Passion Passionate and companionate love Unconditional love Practices Homogamy Hypergamy Bride price Mahr Dower Dowry Gold digging Infidelity Mésalliance Relationship anarchy Repression Sexual activity Transgression Abuse Child abuse Dating violence Domestic violence Elder abuse See also Agape Broken heart Free love Love addiction Lovesickness Obsessive love Single person Singleton (lifestyle) Unrequited love Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Platonic_love&oldid=1303060798 " Categories : Friendship Love Non-sexuality Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2020 Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2020 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2022 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2019 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 22:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Platonic love 52 languages Add topic

