Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Work 2 Selected bibliography 3 Film appearances 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Alberto Toscano 6 languages Català Français مصرى Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian scholar and translator For the Italian journalist, see Alberto Toscano (journalist) .

Alberto Toscano Born 1 January 1977 Moscow, Russian SFSR, USSR Nationality Italian Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Western Marxism Main interests Cultural criticism This article is part of a series on Communism in Italy People Battisti Bertinotti Berlinguer Berardi Bordiga Bombacci Cafiero Cagol Colletti Covelli Cossutta Curcio Damen Della Volpe Di Vittorio Diliberto Gennari Feltrinelli Federici Ferrando Ferrero Fortichiari Galleani Gramsci Grieco Iotti Lama Lazzari Losurdo Longo Maitan Malatesta Napolitano Natta Negri Occhetto Panzieri Pasolini Scuderi Screpanti Spinelli Togliatti Toscano Tronti Vattimo Vendola Virno History Biennio Rosso XVII Congress of the PSI I Congress of the PCd'I Proština rebellion Aventine Secession Italian Resistance Red Republic of Caulonia Third De Gasperi government Portella della Ginestra massacre May 1947 crises Manifesto of the 101 Years of Lead Hot Autumn Primavalle fire Assassination of Sergio Ramelli Kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro Mitterrand doctrine Movement of 1977 Murder of Francesco Di Cataldo Kidnapping of Ciro Cirillo Historic Compromise Ideologies Anarchist communism Autonomism Bordigism Christian communism Council communism Eurocommunism Italian road to socialism Left communism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Maoism Stalinism Marxist humanism Migliorismo Neo-Gramscianism Neo-Marxism Post-Marxism Trotskyism Western Marxism Workerism Principles Anti-clericalism Anti-fascism Anti-imperialism Antimilitarism Class conflict Cultural hegemony Counterhegemony Euroscepticism Feminism Organic centralism Passive revolution Proletarian internationalism Secularism Solidarity Subalterns Current organisations Lotta Comunista (Communist Struggle) Anticapitalist Left CARC Party Communist Alternative Party Communist Front Communist Party Communist Refoundation Party GC Communist Struggle Countercurrent Italian Communist Party (2016) Italian General Confederation of Labour Italian Marxist–Leninist Party Network of Communists People's Union Revolutionary Communist Party Trotskyist League of Italy Unified Communist Party of Italy Workers' Communist Party Defunct organisations Armed Proletarians for Communism Autonomia Operaia Communist Party of Italy (2014) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Red Line Critical Left Front Line Italian Communist Party FGCI The Left – The Rainbow Lotta Continua Movement of Unitarian Communists October 22 Group Party of the Christian Left Party of Italian Communists FGCI Popular Democratic Front Proletarian Democracy Proletarian Unity Party Red Brigades Volante Rossa Workers' Power Media Liberazione il manifesto Pattuglia Il Pioniere Il Politecnico La Plebe Quaderni piacentini Quaderni Rossi Rinascita Società l'Unità Vie Nuove Related topics Anarchism in Italy Bandiera Rossa Bella ciao Christian left Christian socialism Democratic socialism Fischia il vento History of Italy Italian neorealism Politics of Italy Prison Notebooks Social democracy Socialism in Italy Craxism Communism portal Italy portal v t e Alberto Toscano (born 1 January 1977) is an Italian cultural critic , social theorist , philosopher , and translator . He has translated the work of Alain Badiou , including Badiou's The Century and Logics of Worlds . He served as both editor and translator of Badiou's Theoretical Writings and On Beckett .

Work [ edit ] Toscano was born in Moscow, Russian SFSR, USSR, on 1 January 1977. He studied philosophy at the Eugene Lang College, New School for Social Research , where he received his BA Liberal Arts in 1997. He received his MA in Continental Philosophy at the University College Dublin in 1999. He then went on to pursue a PhD in philosophy at the University of Warwick , which he completed in 2003.

[ 1 ] Toscano works across critical social theory and philosophy . His current research is divided into three main strands: [ 1 ] a theoretical and historical inquiry into the politics of authoritarianism and their links to the racial , geopolitical and gendered crises of capital , set out in his recent book Late Fascism: Race, Capitalism and the Politics of Crisis ; the study of tragedy as a framework through which to understand collective politics and its discontents, from decolonisation to climate action ; the development of ‘real abstraction’ as a heuristic for the analysis contemporary capitalism , notably in its nexus with processes of racialization , automation and digitalization .

His work has been described both as an investigation of the persistence of the idea of communism in contemporary thought and a genealogical inquiry into the concept of fanaticism .

[ 2 ] He is the author of The Theatre of Production (2006), and his book Fanaticism: On the Uses of an Idea was published in 2010. Toscano has published on contemporary philosophy, politics and social theory. In an  article on the Tarnac 9 case, written for The Guardian in December 2009, [ 3 ] Toscano argues that society is losing its ability to distinguish between vandalism and terrorism.

Formerly Reader in Sociology at Goldsmiths, University of London , Toscano is currently Term Research Associate Professor at the School of Communication, Simon Fraser University .

[ 4 ] He is a member of the editorial board of the journal Historical Materialism: Research in Critical Marxist Theory . According to Alex Callinicos this journal "has been one of the main drivers of the academic revival of Marxism " [ 5 ] since the mid-1990s. Toscano is also the series editor of The Italian List for Seagull Books.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Selected bibliography [ edit ] Translated books Alain Badiou, Logics of Worlds , London: Continuum, 2009.

Alain Badiou, The Century , London: Polity, 2007.

(with M. Mandarini) Antonio Negri , Political Descartes: Reason, Ideology and the Bourgeois Project , London: Verso, 2007.

Alain Badiou, Handbook of Inaesthetics , Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2004.

(with Ray Brassier ) Alain Badiou, Theoretical Writings , London: Continuum, 2004.

(with E.R. Albert), Éric Alliez, The Signature of the World, Or, What is Deleuze and Guattari's Philosophy?

, London: Continuum, 2004.

(with Nina Power) Alain Badiou, On Beckett , London: Clinamen Press, 2003.

(with Benjamin Noys ) Georges Bataille , Critical Essays . London and Calcutta: Seagull, 2023.

Edited books (with an introduction by Brenna Bhandar and Alberto Toscano) Ruth Wilson Gilmore , Abolition Geography: Essays in Liberation . London and New York: Verso, 2022.

Authored books The Theatre of Production: Philosophy and Individuation between Kant and Deleuze . Basingstoke: Palgrave , 2006.

Fanaticism: On the Uses of an Idea . New York: Verso , 2010; 2017, 2nd ed..

Le Fanatisme. Modes d'emploi .

La fabrique , 2011 (FR).

Cartographies of the Absolute (with Jeff Kinkle). Winchester, UK: Zero Books , 2015.

The Communist Differend: Essays on Toni Negri and Alain Badiou . Tokyo: Koshisha, 2017.

Una visión compleja. Hacia una estética de la economía . Lima: Meier Ramirez, 2020.

La abstracción real. Filosofia, estética y capital . Santiago, Chile: Palinodia, 2021.

The SAGE Handbook of Marxism , in 3 vol. (with Sara Farris, Bev Skeggs and Svenja Bromberg). London: SAGE , 2022.

Terms of Disorder: Keywords for an Interregnum . London and Calcutta: Seagull Books , 2023.

Late Fascism: Race, Capitalism and the Politics of Crisis . London and New York:Verso, 2023.

Film appearances [ edit ] Marx Reloaded , ZDF / Arte , April 2011.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Speculative realism References [ edit ] ^ a b Goldsmiths, University of London, Professor Alberto Toscano ^ "V2_ Lab for the Unstable Media" .

V2_ Lab for the Unstable Media .

^ Toscano, Alberto (January 28, 2009).

"Criminalising dissent" .

The Guardian .

^ https://www.sfu.ca/communication/people/faculty/Alberto-Toscano.html Alberto Toscano profile page Simon Fraser University ^ Alex Callinicos (July 1, 2010).

"Marxism 2010: fixing a broken system" . guardian.co.uk.

Archived from the original on 4 July 2010 . Retrieved July 6, 2010 .

^ The Italian List . Series Editor: Alberto Toscano seagullbooks.org ^ Untimely Italians: A Profile of The Italian List and Interview with Alberto Toscano , itself.blog , 22 July, 2014.

^ "Marx Reloaded Film" .

Marx Reloaded . 2012-02-10.

Archived from the original on 2012-09-11 . Retrieved 2025-07-26 .

External links [ edit ] Toscano's Faculty Homepage at Goldsmiths, University of London website Toscano's Author Page at Institute for the Unstable Media Chronicles of Insurrection -  Tronti, Negri and the Subject of Antagonism , an on-line reprint of an essay by Toscano first published in Cosmos and History 5.1 (2009) The Nonstate Intellectual: Franco Fortini and Communist Criticism , an article by Alberto Toscano first published in Occasion: Interdisciplinary Studies in the Humanities v. 3 (March 1, 2012) The Long Shadow of Racial Fascism , by Alberto Toscano, Boston Review .

The Rise of the Far Right Is a Global Phenomenon , by Alberto Toscano, inthesetimes.com , November 21, 2023.

The War on Gaza and Israel’s Fascism Debate , by Alberto Toscano, versobooks.com ,  19 October 2023.

Articles by Alberto Toscano at ResearchGate Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii PhilPeople Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alberto_Toscano&oldid=1302532741 " Categories : Living people British philosophers Italian social philosophers British sociologists French–English translators Marxist theorists 1977 births Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 01:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alberto Toscano 6 languages Add topic

