Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Medieval courts 2 Anglicanism Toggle Anglicanism subsection 2.1 Church of England 2.1.1 Guernsey 2.2 Episcopal Church in the United States of America 3 Catholicism Toggle Catholicism subsection 3.1 First instance 3.2 Appeal 3.3 Other tribunals 4 Eastern Orthodoxy 5 Methodism 6 Mormonism 7 Presbyterianism 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Ecclesiastical court 17 languages العربية Brezhoneg Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Lietuvių Nederlands Polski Português Русский Simple English Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Court having jurisdiction in Christian religious matters This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Ecclesiastical court" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In organized Christianity , an ecclesiastical court , also called court Christian or court spiritual , is any of certain non-adversarial courts conducted by church-approved officials having jurisdiction mainly in spiritual or religious matters. Historically, they interpret or apply canon law . One of its primary bases was the Corpus Juris Civilis of Justinian , which is also considered the source of the civil law legal tradition.

In the United Kingdom, secular courts that took over the functions of the ecclesiastic courts, e.g. in family law, are still known as courts ecclesiastical as distinct from courts temporal .

[ 1 ] Medieval courts [ edit ] In the Middle Ages , ecclesiastical courts had much wider powers in many areas of Europe than they did after the development of nation states . They held jurisdiction over not only religious matters, but also family law, equitable relief, probate, and cases involving priests, religious communities, or public heretics.

[ citation needed ] Secular courts in medieval times were numerous and decentralized: each secular division (king, prince, duke, lord, abbot or bishop as landholder, manor, [ 2 ] city, forest, market, etc.) could have their own courts, customary law , bailiffs and gaols [ a ] with arbitrary and unrecorded procedures, including in Northern Europe trial by combat and trial by ordeal , and in England trial by jury .

Ecclesiastical courts generally followed the better regulated inquisition , accusation or denunciation judicial procedures. In medieval times, they had a very wide jurisdiction including family law and dowry disputes, [ b ] probate , equity , defamation, [ 5 ] failure to observe holy days, [ 6 ] and cases involving priests and religious communities and individuals or public heretics.

Anglicanism [ edit ] See also: Canon law of the Anglican Communion Church of England [ edit ] In the Church of England , the ecclesiastical courts are a system of courts, held by authority of the Crown , who is ex officio the Supreme Governor of the Church of England . The courts have jurisdiction over matters dealing with the rights and obligations of church members, since the 19th century limited to controversies in areas of church property and ecclesiastical disciplinary proceedings.

[ 7 ] In England these courts, unlike common law courts, are based upon and operate along civil law procedures and Canon law -based jurisprudence.

The ecclesiastical courts formerly had jurisdiction over the personal estates of deceased persons to grant probate or administration . This jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical Courts was transferred to the Court of Probate by the Court of Probate Act 1857 .

Offences against ecclesiastical laws are dealt with differently based on whether the laws in question involve church doctrine. For non-doctrinal cases, the lowest level of the court is the Archdeaconry Court , which is presided over by the local archdeacon. The next court in the hierarchy is the bishop's court, which is in the Diocese of Canterbury called the Commissary Court and in other dioceses the consistory court . The Commissary Court is presided over by a commissary-general; a consistory Court is presided over by a chancellor. The chancellor or commissary-general must be thirty years old and either have a seven-year general qualification under the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 section 71 or have held high judicial office.

Specialist courts in the Province of Canterbury are the Court of Faculties , the Court of Peculiars and the Court of the Vicar-General of the Province of Canterbury . In the northern province there is the Court of the Vicar-General of the Province of York .

The next court is the archbishop's court, which is in Canterbury called the Arches Court , and in York the Chancery Court . Each court includes five judges; one judge is common to both courts. The common judge is called the Dean of Arches in Canterbury and the Auditor in York; he or she is appointed jointly by both archbishops with the approval of the Crown, and must either hold a ten-year High Court qualification under the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 , s 71, or have held high judicial office. Two members of each court must be clergy appointed by the Prolocutor of the Lower House of the provincial convocation.

[ c ] Two further members of each court are appointed by the Chairman of the House of Laity of the General Synod; [ d ] these must possess such legal qualifications as the Lord High Chancellor of Great Britain requires.

In cases involving church doctrine, ceremony or ritual, the aforementioned courts have no jurisdiction. Instead, the Court of Ecclesiastical Causes Reserved hears the case. The Court is composed of three diocesan bishops and two appellate judges; it has jurisdiction over both of the provinces of Canterbury and York. The Court, however, meets very rarely.

Appeal from the Arches Court and Chancery Court (in non-doctrinal cases) lies to the King-in-Council . In practice, the case is heard by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council , which includes present and former Lords Chancellor , a number of Lords of Appeal and other high judicial officers. The King-in-Council does not have jurisdiction over doctrinal cases from the Court of Ecclesiastical Causes Reserved , which instead go to an ad hoc Commission of Review , composed of two diocesan bishops and three Lords of Appeal (who are also members of the Judicial Committee).

Commissions of Convocation are appointed by the Upper House of the Convocation of Canterbury or of York to try a bishop for an offence (except for an offence of doctrine). Both Convocations make the appointment if an archbishop is prosecuted. This would comprise four diocesan bishops and the Dean of the Arches.

The Ecclesiastical Courts Acts 1787 to 1860 is the collective title of the following Acts: [ 8 ] The Ecclesiastical Suits Act 1787 ( 27 Geo. 3 . c. 44) – repealed by Statute Law Revision Act 1948 , The Ecclesiastical Courts Act 1813 ( 53 Geo. 3 . c. 127) – repealed by Statute Law (Repeals) Act 1971 , The Proctors (Ireland) Act 1814 ( 54 Geo. 3 . c. 68) – repealed by Statute Law Revision Act (Northern Ireland) 1954 , The Ecclesiastical Courts Act 1829 ( 10 Geo. 4 . c. 53) – repealed by Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Measure 1963 , The Privy Council Appeals Act 1832 ( 2 & 3 Will. 4 . c. 92) – repealed by Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Measure 1963 , The Ecclesiastical Courts (Contempt) Act 1832 ( 3 & 4 Will. 4 . c. 93) – repealed by Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Measure 1963 , The Ecclesiastical Courts Act 1840 ( 3 & 4 Vict.

c. 93) – repealed by Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Measure 1963 , The Ecclesiastical Courts Act 1844 ( 7 & 8 Vict.

c. 68) – repealed by Statute Law Revision Act 1959 , The Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Act 1847 ( 10 & 11 Vict.

c. 98) – repealed by Church of England (Miscellaneous Provisions) Measure 1992 , The Ecclesiastical Courts Act 1854 ( 17 & 18 Vict.

c. 47) – repealed by Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Measure 1963 , The Ecclesiastical Courts Act 1855 ( 18 & 19 Vict.

c. 41) – repealed by Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Measure 1963 , The Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Act 1858 ( 21 & 22 Vict.

c. 50) – repealed by Statute Law Revision Act 1950 , The Ecclesiastical Courts Jurisdiction Act 1860 ( 23 & 24 Vict.

c. 32) – amended.

Guernsey [ edit ] The Ecclesiastical Court in Guernsey predates its first written evidence from the 13th Century. Its powers have been reduced over the centuries but it still meets weekly to prove wills and to grant marriage licences.

[ 9 ] Episcopal Church in the United States of America [ edit ] Ecclesiastical courts in the American Episcopal Church have jurisdiction only over disciplinary cases involving clergy and are divided into two separate systems: one for trials of bishops (at the level of the national Episcopal Church) and the other for trials of priests and deacons (at the level of the diocese for original jurisdiction and at the provincial level for appeals).

[ 10 ] (At least one diocese, however, Diocese of Minnesota , has provided in its canons for a court with broader jurisdiction over a wide range of canonical issues, although such a court has not yet been implemented by the convention of that diocese.

[ 11 ] ) In each disciplinary case, two courts are provided, one for trials and one for appeals. When a charge is first made, it is brought before an initial review committee (similar to a grand jury in secular criminal law) whose job is to determine when a case should be brought and to supervise the Church Attorney who acts as a sort of prosecutor .

[ 12 ] Courts and procedure for trials of bishops are provided for by the Canons of the General Convention (the triennial legislative body of the national church).

[ 13 ] There is one Court for the Trial of a bishop, composed of nine bishops (though there have been proposals to include lay persons and lower clergy in this court). Appeals are heard by the Court of Review for the Trial of a bishop, also comprising nine bishops. The Constitution of the national Episcopal Church provides that this court must be composed only of bishops.

[ 10 ] For priests and deacons, initial trial is held by an ecclesiastical court established by the diocese in which the cleric is canonically resident.

[ 14 ] Appeals are taken to the Court of Review for the Trial of a Priest or Deacon, one of which is established in each of the nine provinces of the Episcopal Church (a province is a geographic combination of dioceses).

[ 15 ] Dioceses have some discretion about the procedure and membership for the ecclesiastical court, but most rules and procedure are established church-wide by the national canons. Trial courts are made up of lay persons and of priests or deacons, with the clergy to have a majority by one. The various courts of review comprise one bishop, three priests or deacons, and three lay persons.

Since the 18th century the Constitution of the national Episcopal Church has permitted the creation of a national Court of Appeal, which would be "solely for the review of the determination of any Court of Review on questions of Doctrine, Faith, or Worship".

[ 10 ] No such court has ever been created, though proposals have occasionally been made to establish the House of Bishops itself as such a court.

Catholicism [ edit ] Part of a series on the Canon law of the Catholic Church Ius vigens (current law) 1983 Code of Canon Law Omnium in mentem Magnum principium Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Ad tuendam fidem Ex corde Ecclesiae Indulgentiarum Doctrina Praedicate evangelium Veritatis gaudium Custom Matrimonial nullity trial reforms of Pope Francis Documents of the Second Vatican Council Christus Dominus Lumen gentium Optatam totius Orientalium ecclesiarum Presbyterorum ordinis Sacrosanctum concilium Precepts of the Church Legal history Jus antiquum ( c.

33 –1140) Ancient Church Orders Didache The Apostolic Constitutions Canons of the Apostles Collections of ancient canons Collectiones canonum Dionysianae Collectio canonum quadripartita Collectio canonum Quesnelliana Collectio canonum Wigorniensis Gelasian Decree Symmachian forgeries Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals Donation of Constantine Gregorian Reform Lay investiture controversy Dictatus papae Libertas ecclesiae Plenitudo potestatis Jus novum ( c.

1140 –1563) Corpus Juris Canonici Decretum Gratiani Decretist Canon Episcopi Margaritae Jus commune Decretals of Gregory IX Decretalist Regulæ Juris Extravagantes Liber Septimus Jus novissimum ( c.

1563 –1918) Council of Trent Benedictus Deus Tametsi Apostolicae Sedis moderationi Jus codicis (1918-present) 1917 Code of Canon Law Ecclesiae Sanctae 1983 Code of Canon Law Other Contractum trinius Papal judge-delegate Right of option Eastern law Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Eastern Canonical Reforms of Pius XII Nomocanon Eparchy Exarchate Ordinariate for Eastern Catholic faithful Protosyncellus Liturgical law Latin Church General Roman Calendar Ranking of liturgical days in the Roman Rite General Instruction of the Roman Missal Code of Rubrics Sacrosanctum Concilium Mysterii Paschalis Musicam sacram Scripturarum thesaurus Liturgiam authenticam Quattuor abhinc annos Ecclesia Dei Summorum Pontificum Magnum principium Traditionis custodes Red Mass Holy day of obligation Sacramental law Communicatio in sacris Ex opere operato Omnium in mentem Validity and liceity Sacraments Holy Orders Impediment (Catholic canon law) Abstemius Defect of birth Obligation of celibacy Nullity of Sacred Ordination Apostolicae curae Dimissorial letters Episcopal consecrators Approbation (Catholic canon law) Confession Penitential canons Paenitentiale Theodori Seal of the Confessional Internal and external forum Note on the importance of the internal forum and the inviolability of the Sacramental Seal Apostolic Penitentiary Canon penitentiary Complicit absolution Sacramentum Poenitentiae Eucharist Eucharistic discipline Canon 915 Celebret Mass stipend Sacramentals Indulgence Indulgentiarum doctrina Sacred places Altars Major basilica Minor basilica Oratory (chapel) Sacred times Feast days Fast days and abstinence Paenitemini Holy day of obligation Matrimonial law Canonical form (Latin Church) Tametsi Ne Temere Banns of marriage Declaration of Nullity Dignitas connubii Matrimonial Nullity Trial Reforms of Pope Francis Vetitum Defender of the Bond Impediments to Marriage Affinity Clandestinity Impediment of crime Disparity of cult Ligamen Public propriety Matrimonial dispensation Ratum sed non consummatum Sanatio in radice Natural marriage Pauline privilege Petrine privilege Supreme authority, particular churches , and canonical structures Supreme authority of the Church Roman Pontiff Papal conclave College of Bishops Supra-diocesan/eparchal structures College of Cardinals Conference of bishops Synod of Bishops Particular churches Churches sui juris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Local particular churches Appointment of bishops Abbacy nullius Apostolic vicariate Apostolic vicar Apostolic administration Apostolic administrator Diocese/Archdiocese Aeque principaliter Cathedraticum In persona episcopi Diocesan Curia Moderator of the Curia Chancery Deanery Vicar forane Eparchy Eparchal curia Military ordinariate Mission sui juris Personal ordinariate Anglicanorum Coetibus Juridic persons Parish Team of priests in solidum Collegiate church Parish register Lay trusteeism Roman Curia Dicastery Congregation Pontifical council Personal prelature Types of membership of Opus Dei Association of the Christian faithful Vicar general Quinquennial visit ad limina Jurisprudence Canonical coronation Canonically crowned images Computation of time Custom Delegata potestas non potest delegari Derogation Dispensation Taxa Innocentiana Faculty Indult Impediment Donation Interpretation Pontifical Council for Legislative Texts Jurisdiction Peritus Obreption & subreption Obrogation Promulgation Resignation of the Roman Pontiff Sede vacante Simony Vacatio legis Validity and liceity Visitation Apostolic visitor Philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law Theology Ecclesiology Treatise on Law Determinatio Temporal goods (property) Benefice Cathedraticum Contract law Mass stipend Stole fee Temporalities Law of persons Person (Catholic canon law) Formal act of defection from the Catholic Church Canonical age Emancipation Exemption Heresy Clerics Secular clergy Regular clergy Obligation of celibacy Clerics and public office Incardination and excardination Laicization (dispensation) Canonical faculties Office Canonical provision Canonical election Juridic and physical persons Jus patronatus Associations of the faithful Consecrated life Canonical documents Acta Apostolicae Sedis Acta Sanctae Sedis Censor librorum Imprimatur Imprimi potest Notary Protonotary apostolic Apostolic constitution Canon Concordat Decree Decretal Encyclical Motu proprio Ordinance Papal brief Papal bull Penitential Positive law Rescript Parish register Ecclesiastical Latin Penal law Canon 1324 Canon 1397 §2 Censure (Catholic canon law) De delictis gravioribus Complicit absolution Crimen sollicitationis Excommunication List of excommunicable offences in the Catholic Church List of people excommunicated by the Catholic Church List of cardinals excommunicated by the Catholic Church Interdict Laicization (penal) Latae sententiae and ferendae sententiae Lifetime of prayer and penance Canonical admonitions Ecclesiastical prison Procedural law Pars statica (tribunals & ministers/parties) Tribunals Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura Tribunal of the Roman Rota Apostolic Penitentiary Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith Ministers of Justice Judicial Vicar / Officialis Auditor Parties Defender of the Bond Procurator Pars dynamica (trial procedure) Dignitas connubii (matrimonial causes) Appeal as from an abuse Presumption Penal procedure Vos estis lux mundi Canonization Congregation for the Causes of Saints Maiorem hac dilectionem Advocatus Diaboli Oblatio vitae Positio Beatification and canonization process in 1914 Election of the Roman Pontiff Current law Universi Dominici gregis Papal renunciation Reforms of Pope Benedict XVI Historical Cum proxime Jus exclusivae Papal appointment Aeterni Patris Filius Romano Pontifici eligendo Ingravescentem aetatem Ubi periculum Quia propter Legal practice and scholarship List of legal abbreviations Academic degrees Licentiate of Canon Law Doctor of Canon Law Doctor of both laws Journals and Professional Societies Canon Law Society of America The Jurist Faculties of canon law Catholic University of America School of Canon Law Canonists Medieval Gratian Hostiensis Jean Lemoine Raymond of Penyafort Rufinus Johannes Teutonicus Geoffrey of Trani Burchard of Worms Brocard Modern & Contemporary Eugenio Corecco John D. Faris Pietro Gasparri Ladislas Orsy Edward N. Peters Law of consecrated life Solemn vow Exclaustration Manifestation of Conscience Canonical erection of a house of religious Pontifical right Diocesan right Congregation for Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life Institute of consecrated life Religious institute Congregation Order Monasticism Canons regular Mendicant orders Clerics regular Secular institute Cum Sanctissimus Primo Feliciter Provida Mater Ecclesia Society of apostolic life Decretum laudis Catholicism portal v t e Part of a series on Integralism Principles Anti-communism Anti-liberalism Anti-Masonry Anti-Zionism Catholic social teaching Common good Confessionalism Consistent life ethic Corporatism Counter-revolution Decentralization ( Fueros ) Medievalism ( Medieval Church-State Estamentalism Manorialism Feudal duties Medieval Communalism ) Organicism Doctrine of the two swords Distributism ( Cooperativism Guildism ) By the Grace of God ( Deposing power ) Ecclesiastical court " Error has no rights " Familialism Gelasian Diarchy Integral Education Integral nationalism Integral state Monarchism ( Accidentalism ) Natural law Panhispanism Patriotism Political traditionalism Res publica Christiana Sun and Moon allegory Social Kingship Solidarity Traditionalist Catholicism Ultramontanism Variants Brazilian Neo- Catholic French Lusitano Spanish Thinkers Ambrose Aquinas Augustine Balmes Barbey d'Aurevilly Billot Blanc de Bonald Chesterton Castellani de Chateaubriand Corrêa de Oliveira Cuesta Delassus Donoso Cortés Eyzaguirre Ezcurra Feser Fita Fontcuberta Gago Gaume Gelasius I Genta Gómez Gómez Davila González Groulx Hahn Koneczny Madiran Maeztu Maurras Meinvielle Menéndez y Pelayo Ousset Pemán Pie Pius IX Pius X le Play Raposo Reale Salgado Salvany dos Santos Sardinha Solana Taparelli Urquiza Valdivieso Vázquez de Mella Vermeule Veuillot Politicians Abascal Ahimeir Barroso Charlemagne Clavarana Constantine I Estévanez Fernández García Gomar Gómez Lamamié (José) Lamamié (Juan) Larraín Louis IX Maurras Moreno Nocedal Olazábal du Pin Pujo Quiroga Rocamora Sánchez Santamaria dos Santos Senante Theodosius I de Villèle Works Catholic Bible The City of God De regno, ad regem Cypri Treatise on Law El liberalismo es pecado Papal documents ( Famuli vestrae pietatis Mirari Vos Quanta Cura Immortale Dei Rerum novarum Pascendi Dominici Gregis ) El Siglo Futuro Mes idées politiques O que é o Integralismo Organizations Action Française Acción Española Brazilian Patrianovist Imperial Action Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Integralist Front Catalan Patriotic Movement Catholic and Royal Army Cristeros Integrist Party Milícia Catalana Palmarian Catholic Church Los TECOS El Yunque Popular Representation Party Sanfedisti Spanish Catholic Movement Viva Maria Related Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Traditionalism Legitimism Federales Carlism Christ the King Deus vult Miguelism Neocatólicos Sodalitium Pianum Clerico-nationalism Clerical fascism ( Estado Novo Falangism Francoism Tacuara ) Nacionalismo Person Dignity Theory Orthodox Peronism Third Position Common good constitutionalism Gremialismo High Tory Politics portal v t e The tribunals of the modern-day Catholic Church are governed by the 1983 Code of Canon Law in the case of the Western Church ( Latin Church ), and the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches in the case of the Eastern Catholic Churches (Byzantine, Ukrainian, Maronite, Melkite, etc.). Both systems of canon law underwent general revisions in the late 20th century, resulting in the new code for the Latin Church in 1983, and the compilation for the first time of the Eastern Code in 1990.

First instance [ edit ] This subsection relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Ecclesiastical court" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2024 ) Cases normally originate in the tribunal of the particular church (i.e. the diocese or eparchy ) of the parties to the case. This tribunal in canon law is called the tribunal of first instance . The bishop of the church possesses the power to judge for his church; however, since the bishop has many different duties in his diocese, most cases are handled by judges whom he appoints, led by a priest known as the judicial vicar or officialis .

A single judge can handle normal contentious and penal cases. A college of at least three judges, however, must try cases involving an excommunication, the dismissal of a cleric , or the annulment of the bond of marriage or of sacred ordination (can. 1425 §1). The bishop can assign up to five judges to a case that is very difficult or important (can. 1425 §2). Otherwise, the judicial vicar assigns cases to the judges and, in those cases which require three or more judges, presides over the panel or assigns one of his assistant judicial vicars to preside, if there are any. The judicial vicar and the assistant judicial vicars must be priests with doctorates or at least licentiates in canon law . The other judges need only be clerics with licentiates, but the episcopal conference can permit members of the laity with the same academic qualifications to serve as judges on a panel.

There are other officers of the tribunal. The promoter of justice, for instance, is a canon lawyer whose job is to represent the diocese as the prosecutor in penal cases and who also can intervene in contentious cases if they concern the "public good", acting as a watch dog for the people of the diocese. Another important officer is the defender of the bond, another canon lawyer whose job is to present reasons to the tribunal why a marriage is valid in cases of alleged nullity and why an ordination is valid in the rare cases of alleged nullity of Holy Orders . The tribunal also has notaries who swear in witnesses and commit their testimony to writing. Parties in a case have the right to appoint an advocate who can argue for them at the tribunal. If a person cannot afford an advocate, the tribunal can assign one to them free of charge.

Unlike courts of common law tradition, ecclesiastical tribunals do not follow the adversarial system . Based on the same Roman civil law that is behind much European law, the procedure of a canonical court is more akin to the inquisitorial system , with the judges leading the investigation. As a general rule, the defendant has the favorable presumption of law, which means that the defendant will win by default unless a majority of the judges is convinced with moral certainty of the petitioner's case (can. 1608).

[ 16 ] This presumption also applies in penal cases (can. 1728). There are few exceptions to this rule; in those cases, the burden shifts to the defendant.

Some matters cannot be introduced at the diocesan level and can only be introduced before the following: Appellate tribunal for the diocese: cases against the diocese itself or an institution represented by the diocesan bishop Roman Rota : cases against the heads of religious orders, cases against dioceses or church institutions that are immediately subject to the Holy See , and non-penal cases against bishops The Pope himself: any case where a cardinal , Eastern rite patriarch , papal legate , or head of state is a defendant and any penal case involving a bishop .

Appeal [ edit ] The appellate tribunal is known as the tribunal of second instance .

[ 17 ] Normally the second instance tribunal is the tribunal of the metropolitan bishop . In the case where the appeal is from a first instance decision of the metropolitan's own tribunal, the appeal is taken to a court which the metropolitan designated with approval of the Holy See , usually another nearby metropolitan, thus ensuring that appeals from one diocese are never heard by the same diocese. As an example, a case in the Diocese of Springfield, Massachusetts , would be appealed to the tribunal of the Archdiocese of Boston , but a case originating in the Archdiocese of Boston would be appealed to the tribunal of the Archdiocese of New York , by agreement between the archbishops of New York and Boston.

Some cases are automatically appealed (for instance, when a marriage was found to be null prior to Pope Francis’ 2015 reforms). The appealing party does not need to appeal to the metropolitan; the party can instead appeal to the Holy See , in which case the Roman Rota would hear the case in the second instance. If the case was before the Rota in the first instance, then a different panel of the Rota hears it in the second instance.

With the exception of cases regarding personal status, if the first instance and second instance tribunals agree on the result of the case, then the case becomes res judicata and there is no further appeal. If they disagree, then the case can be appealed to the Roman Rota, which serves as the tribunal of third instance . The Rota is a court of fifteen judges called auditors who take cases in panels of three and serve as the final arbiters of most cases.

There is no appeal from a court case that the Pope has decided personally.

Other tribunals [ edit ] The Roman Curia has two other tribunals which either deal with specialized cases or which do not deal with cases at all. The first is the Apostolic Signatura , a panel of five cardinals which serves as the highest court in the Roman Catholic Church. Normal cases rarely reach the Signatura, the exception being if a party appeals to the Pope and he assigns the case to them or if the Pope on his own initiative pulls a case from another court and gives it to them. The court mainly handles cases regarding the use of administrative power, including penal cases which were decided using executive instead of judicial power, which is the usual case. It also handles disputes between dicasteries and other tribunals over jurisdiction, complaints that a Rotal decision is null and should be retried, and matters regarding advocates and inter-diocesan tribunals.

There is normally no right of appeal from the decision of the Apostolic Signatura (can. 1629 #1); however, laypersons and clerics have, on rare occasions, convinced the Pope to hear their case afterwards. This is usually reserved for cases where they are facing excommunication or some other form of severe censure, such as the loss of the right to teach theology or to administer the sacraments . Facing censure , a theologian and priest got Pope John Paul II to hear his case and even asked the Pope to alter his own decision, though the Pope did not reverse the ruling in either case.

The other tribunal is the Apostolic Penitentiary . This tribunal has no jurisdiction in what is known as "the external forum", meaning cases and events which are publicly known, only matters of the "internal forum", which involve entirely confidential and secret matters, including (but not limited to) what is confessed in the Sacrament of Penance . It primarily deals with cases that arise only within the confessional and which by their nature are private, confidential or whose facts are secret. Such cases are normally brought before the court by a person's confessor, who writes up the relevant facts of the cases, but only what is absolutely necessary, using standardized Latin pseudonyms. The confidentiality of the person, and the priest's absolute obligation to preserve the secrecy of the Sacrament of Penance, are still in force in such cases. This court, under the authority of the Cardinal Major Penitentiary, who acts in the Pope's name, answers the confessor and empowers him to impose a penance and lift a penalty. For instance, the act of desecrating the Eucharist is one which incurs an automatic excommunication for the person who so acts (an excommunication from the moment of the act, which no court need actually meet to impose), and the power to lift this excommunication is reserved by the Pope to himself. Should this person then approach a priest in confession, repentant, and explain his act and the fact that he acted in secret, the confessor would write to the tribunal laying out the simplest outline of facts, keeping the person's identity secret, and would most likely be empowered to lift the excommunication and impose some private act of penance on the person.

Eastern Orthodoxy [ edit ] The dioceses of many Eastern Orthodox denominations, such as the Russian Orthodox Church , have their own ecclesiastical courts. In addition, the Russian Orthodox Church has a General Ecclesiastical Court with jurisdiction throughout the Russian Orthodox Church, as well as the Court of the Bishops’ Council which serves as the court of final appeal.

[ 18 ] Under the Russian Empire , Russian Orthodox ecclesiastical courts held jurisdiction over cases of adultery , incest , bestiality , and blasphemy . They also held responsibility for divorce, which could only be obtained in cases of adultery.

[ 19 ] The Greek Eastern Orthodox churches have ecclesiastical courts. For example, the Archdiocese of Thyateira and Great Britain under the spiritual jurisdiction of the Patriarchate of Constantinople has such courts for determining whether to grant divorce after the State has.

[ 20 ] Methodism [ edit ] The Judicial Council is the highest court in the United Methodist Church . It consists of nine members, both laity and clergy, elected by the General Conference for an eight-year term. The ratio of laity to clergy alternates every four years.

[ 21 ] The Judicial Council interprets the Book of Discipline between sessions of General Conference, and during General Conference the Judicial Council rules on the constitutionality of laws passed by General Conference. The Council also determines whether actions of local churches, annual conferences, church agencies, and bishops are in accordance with church law. The Council reviews all decisions of law made by bishops [ 22 ] The Judicial Council cannot create any legislation; it can only interpret existing legislation. The Council meets twice a year at various locations throughout the world. The Judicial Council also hears appeals from those who have been accused of chargeable offenses that can result in defrocking or revocation of membership.

Mormonism [ edit ] Main article: Church membership council In the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , church courts are formally known as church membership councils . Church courts consider possible membership withdrawal or restriction based on a member's violation of church standards. Any stake , ward , or mission of the church may convene a church court.

The Common Council of the Church —which has only been convened twice—is a church court which has the authority to remove a president of the church or one of his counselors in the First Presidency for misbehavior.

Presbyterianism [ edit ] The Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) has Permanent Judicial Commissions for each synod, presbytery and the General Assembly of the denomination, all of which are elected by members and are composed of ministers and elders subject to its jurisdiction. The PJC of the General Assembly consists of one member from each of the sixteen synods which compose the denomination and the PJC has original jurisdiction over remedial cases and appeals.

See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Acta Curiae Courts of England and Wales Ecclesiastical crime Ecclesiastical ordinances Ecclesiastical prison Trial by ordeal Notes [ edit ] ^ "Medieval England was legally plural: there were not just many jurisdictions, but many different kinds of jurisdiction in co-existence." [ 3 ] As well, centuries of rewarding special rights to favorites by royal charter or papal dispensation complicated matters.

^ Jewish courts were recognized in some places, especially for family law issues.

[ 4 ] ^ Canterbury and York each have a bicameral Convocation, made up of the Upper House (composed of bishops) and the Lower House (composed of representatives of the clergy).

^ The General Synod, a tricameral body, is the highest governing body of the Church. The House of Bishops is composed of the Upper Houses of the two convocations; the House of Clergy is composed of the Lower Houses of the two convocations; the House of Laity includes representatives of lay members of the Church.

References [ edit ] ^ "The Ecclesiastical Courts - Hansard - UK Parliament" .

hansard.parliament.uk .

^ Briggs, Chris; Schofield, Phillipp R. (2 January 2020).

"The Evolution of Manor Courts in Medieval England, c. 1250–1350: The Evidence of the Personal Actions" (PDF) .

The Journal of Legal History .

41 (1): 1– 28.

doi : 10.1080/01440365.2020.1731189 .

^ Johnson, Tom (1 November 2017). "The Tree and the Rod: Jurisdiction in Late Medieval England*".

Past & Present (237): 13– 51.

doi : 10.1093/pastj/gtx051 .

^ Roth, Pinchas (2017).

"Jewish Courts in Medieval England" .

Jewish History .

31 (1/2): 67– 82.

doi : 10.1007/s10835-017-9279-8 .

ISSN 0334-701X .

JSTOR 48698359 .

^ Pedersen, Frederik (2002).

"Review of Lower Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in Late-Medieval England: The Courts of the Dean and Chapter of Lincoln, 1336-1349 and the Deanery of Wisbech, 1458-1484" .

The Economic History Review .

55 (3): 564.

ISSN 0013-0117 .

JSTOR 3091683 .

^ Kirkland, Justin Scott (25 June 2020). "Failing to observe holy days: The evaluation of defense arguments in late medieval English ecclesiastical courts".

Tijdschrift voor Rechtsgeschiedenis .

88 ( 1– 2): 122– 148.

doi : 10.1163/15718190-00880A02 .

^ "Religious courts" . Humanists UK . Retrieved 5 March 2025 .

^ The Short Titles Act 1896 , section 2(1) and Schedule 2 ^ "Ecclesiastical Court" . Guernsey Royal Court. 2 September 2011.

^ a b c Constitution and Canons of The Episcopal Church revised 2006, Article IX, p. 8.

^ Canons of the Episcopal Diocese of Minnesota, revised 31 October 2009, Canon 401: Consistory Court, p. 32.

^ Constitution and Canons of The Episcopal Church revised 2006, Canon IV.3, pp. 124-135.

^ Constitution and Canons of The Episcopal Church revised 2006, Canon IV.5-IV.6, pp. 144-152.

^ Constitution and Canons of The Episcopal Church revised 2006, Canon IV.4.(A), pp. 136-139.

^ Constitution and Canons of The Episcopal Church revised 2006, Canon IV.4.(B), pp. 139-143.

^ Waters, Ian (14 March 2019).

"The Catholic Church is investigating George Pell's case. What does that mean?" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 14 March 2019 .

^ Doe, Norman (2013-09-12).

Christian Law: Contemporary Principles . Cambridge University Press. p. 165.

ISBN 978-1-107-46986-0 .

^ "Statute of the Russian Orthodox Church, VII. The Ecclesiastical Court" . Russian Orthodox Church.

^ Figes, Orlando (1996).

A People's Tragedy: The Russian Revolution, 1891-1924 . London: Jonathan Cape. p. 64.

ISBN 0-224-04162-2 .

OCLC 35657827 .

^ "Archdiocese of Thyateira & Great Britain" .

www.thyateira.org.uk . Retrieved 22 August 2018 .

^ "First United Methodist Church" . Archived from the original on 30 June 2012 . Retrieved 22 August 2018 .

^ "UMC.org Archives" .

archives.umc.org . Retrieved 22 August 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Catholic history of court Courts of the Church of England (brief) Courts of the Church of England, detailed (archive link) Archives of the Court of Arches at Lambeth Palace Library v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Korea Vatican Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐6cj5j
Cached time: 20250814224143
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.672 seconds
Real time usage: 0.844 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3434/1000000
Revision size: 30969/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 199090/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12652/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 102342/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.406/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25893018/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  633.687      1 -total
 27.95%  177.097      2 Template:Reflist
 17.51%  110.939      8 Template:Cite_web
 16.85%  106.754      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.16%   89.746      1 Template:Canon_Law
 12.42%   78.702      1 Template:Lang
 10.54%   66.794      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  9.67%   61.283      1 Template:Short_description
  7.67%   48.584      3 Template:Ambox
  7.16%   45.379      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:221223:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814224143 and revision id 1302381542. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecclesiastical_court&oldid=1302381542 " Categories : Anglicanism Canon law Ecclesiastical courts Religious courts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from January 2024 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Articles needing additional references from January 2024 This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 02:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ecclesiastical court 17 languages Add topic

