Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Fields of research 3 Publications 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Alfréd Haar 20 languages Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano עברית Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hungarian mathematician Alfréd Haar Born 11 October 1885 Budapest , Kingdom of Hungary Died 16 March 1933 (1933-03-16) (aged 47) Szeged , Hungary Nationality Hungarian Alma mater University of Göttingen Known for Haar measure Haar space Haar transform Haar wavelet Haar's Tauberian theorem Scientific career Fields Mathematics Institutions Franz Joseph University University of Szeged Doctoral advisor David Hilbert Doctoral students Béla Szőkefalvi-Nagy Alfréd Haar ( Hungarian : Haar Alfréd ; 11 October 1885, Budapest – 16 March 1933, Szeged ) was a Hungarian mathematician . In 1904 he began to study at the University of Göttingen . His doctorate was supervised by David Hilbert . The Haar measure , Haar wavelet , and Haar transform are named in his honor. Between 1912 and 1919 he taught at Franz Joseph University in Kolozsvár . Together with Frigyes Riesz , he made the University of Szeged a centre of mathematics. He also founded the Acta Scientiarum Mathematicarum journal together with Riesz.

Biography [ edit ] Conference at the University of Szeged , 1928.

Left to right, standing: Frigyes Riesz , Béla Kerékjártó , Alfréd Haar, Gyula Kőnig , Rudolf Ortvay [ hu ] , on chairs: József Kürschák , George David Birkhoff , O.D. Kellog, Leopold Fejér , sitting on the floor: Tibor Radó , István Lipka [ hu ] , László Kalmár , Pál Szász [ hu ] Haar was born to a Hungarian-Jewish [ 1 ] family in Budapest on 11 October 1885 to parents Ignác Haar and Emma Fuchs. He graduated in 1903 from the secondary school Fasori Evangélikus Gimnázium where he was a student of László Rátz . He started his university studies in Budapest, later moving on to Göttingen reading mathematics and sciences. Among the many famous professors he was taught by, he could count Loránd Eötvös , József Kürschák , Constantin Carathéodory , David Hilbert , Felix Christian Klein and Ernst Zermelo .

During years of the secondary school, he collaborated with the mathematical journal for secondary school students Középiskolai Matematikai Lapok , and won the national Eötvös Loránd Mathematical Competition. He enrolled to the Technical University of Budapest as a student of chemical engineering, but in the same year he moved on to the University of Budapest , and after a year to the University of Göttingen . His doctoral research was supervised by Hilbert graduating in June 1909. His 49-page thesis studies systems of Sturm–Liouville functions and spherical functions , introducing the now widely used Haar orthogonal systems. In the same year he habilitated to become a private professor of the university.

In 1912, the Franz Joseph University in Kolozsvár, Austria-Hungary (now Cluj-Napoca in Romania ) invited him along with Gyula Farkas and Frigyes Riesz to join as faculty, and he became the professor of 'Quatitics'. A number of his lecture notes from the time became established books later. After the Treaty of Trianon , which ceded Transylvania to Romania, the university had to move to Szeged , the closest city within the new boundaries, where he with Riesz established the Centre of Mathematics, and the first internationally recognised Hungarian mathematical journal, the Acta Scientiarum Mathematicarum .

One of his doctoral students at the University of Szeged was Béla Szőkefalvi-Nagy .

Haar died of stomach cancer on 16 March 1933.

Fields of research [ edit ] His results are from the fields of mathematical analysis and topological groups , in particular he researched orthogonal systems of functions , singular integrals , analytic functions , differential equations , set theory , function approximation and calculus of variations .

Publications [ edit ] Haar, A., Zur Theorie der orthogonalen Funktionensysteme , ( Erste Mitteilung ), Math. Ann.

69 (1910), 331–371 (at GDZ). (This is Haar's thesis, written under the supervision of David Hilbert.) Haar, A., Die Minkowskische Geometrie und die Annäherung an stetige Funktionen , Math. Ann. 78 (1918), 294–311 (at GDZ).

References [ edit ] ^ Transcending Tradition: Jewish Mathematicians in German Speaking Academic Culture , Birgit Bergmann, (Springer 2012), page 63 External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Alfréd Haar" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Alfréd Haar at the Mathematics Genealogy Project .

Literature by and about Alfréd Haar in the German National Library catalogue.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Israel Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alfréd_Haar&oldid=1299017481 " Categories : 1885 births 1933 deaths 20th-century Hungarian mathematicians Academic staff of the University of Szeged Hungarian Jews Hungarian expatriates in Germany Writers from Budapest Academic staff of Franz Joseph University Mathematicians from Austria-Hungary Deaths from stomach cancer in Hungary Fasori Gimnázium alumni Measure theorists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Hungarian-language text This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 02:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alfréd Haar 20 languages Add topic

