Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Navigation 2 Elements 3 Deployment 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Web page 93 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ अंगिका العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Bosanski Català Čeština ChiTumbuka الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kiswahili Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Мокшень Монгол Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русский Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Wolof 吴语 粵語 中文 ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Content provided by a website The home page of NASA from 2008 A web page (or webpage ) is a Web document that is accessed in a web browser .

[ 1 ] A website typically consists of many web pages linked together under a common domain name . The term "web page" is therefore a metaphor of paper pages bound together into a book.

Navigation [ edit ] Main article: Web navigation Each article on the Wikipedia website is a distinct web page. The URL is visible in the browser's address bar at the top.

Each web page is identified by a distinct Uniform Resource Locator (URL). When the user inputs a URL into their web browser , the browser retrieves the necessary content from a web server and then transforms it into an interactive visual representation on the user's screen.

[ 2 ] If the user clicks or taps a link , the browser repeats this process to load the new URL, which could be part of the current website or a different one. The browser has features , such as the address bar , that indicate which page is displayed.

Elements [ edit ] A web page is a structured document . The core element is a text file written in the HyperText Markup Language (HTML). This specifies the content of the page, [ 3 ] including images and video .

Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) specify the presentation of the page.

[ 3 ] CSS rules can be in separate text files or embedded within the HTML file.

The vast majority [ 4 ] of pages have JavaScript programs , enabling a wide range of behavior.

[ 3 ] The newer WebAssembly language can also be used as a supplement .

[ 5 ] The most sophisticated web pages, known as web apps , combine these elements in a complex manner .

Deployment [ edit ] From the perspective of server-side website deployment, there are two types of web pages: static and dynamic . Static pages are retrieved from the web server's file system without any modification, [ 6 ] while dynamic pages must be created by the server on the fly , typically reading from a database to fill out a template , before being sent to the user's browser.

[ 7 ] An example of a dynamic page is a search engine results page .

See also [ edit ] Single-page application Progressive web app Web Components References [ edit ] ^ "Web page – definition of web page by The Free Dictionary" .

Archived from the original on 23 April 2021 . Retrieved 23 April 2021 .

^ "Behind the scenes of modern web browsers" . Tali Garsiel.

Archived from the original on 18 April 2018 . Retrieved 21 April 2018 .

^ a b c Flanagan, David (18 April 2011).

JavaScript: the definitive guide . Beijing; Farnham: O'Reilly. p. 1.

ISBN 978-1-4493-9385-4 .

OCLC 686709345 .

JavaScript is part of the triad of technologies that all Web developers must learn: HTML to specify the content of web pages, CSS to specify the presentation of web pages, and JavaScript to specify the behavior of web pages.

^ "Usage Statistics of JavaScript as Client-side Programming Language on Websites" .

W3Techs . Retrieved 27 February 2024 .

^ "The State of WebAssembly 2023" . Scott Logic. 18 October 2023 . Retrieved 18 April 2024 .

^ Melendez, Steven (10 August 2018).

"The Difference Between Dynamic & Static Web Pages" .

Chron . Archived from the original on 20 March 2019 . Retrieved 20 March 2019 .

Static by definition means something that does not change. The first pages on the World Wide Web were largely static and unchanged, delivering the same information about a particular topic to anyone who visited. In some cases, sites may evolve slightly over time but are still largely static, meaning that they only change when manually changed by their creators, not on a regular and automated basis.

^ "Definition of: dynamic Web page" .

PC Magazine . Archived from the original on 17 January 2017 . Retrieved 20 March 2019 .

A Web page that provides custom content for the user based on the results of a search or some other request.

v t e Web interfaces Server-side Protocols HTTP v2 v3 Encryption WebDAV CGI SCGI FCGI AJP WSRP WebSocket Server APIs C NSAPI C ASAPI C ISAPI COM ASP Jakarta Servlet container CLI OWIN ASP.NET Handler Python WSGI Python ASGI Ruby Rack JavaScript JSGI Perl PSGI Portlet container Apache modules mod_include mod_jk mod_lisp mod_mono mod_parrot mod_perl mod_php mod_proxy mod_python mod_wsgi mod_ruby Phusion Passenger Topics Web service vs.

Web resource WOA vs.

ROA Open API Webhook Application server comparison Scripting Client-side Browser APIs C NPAPI LiveConnect XPConnect C NPRuntime C PPAPI NaCl ActiveX BHO XBAP Web APIs WHATWG Audio Canvas DOM SSE Video WebSockets Web messaging Web storage Web worker XMLHttpRequest W3C DOM events EME File Geolocation IndexedDB MSE SVG WebAssembly WebAuthn WebGPU WebRTC WebXR Khronos WebCL WebGL Others Gears Web SQL Database (formerly W3C) WebUSB Topics Ajax and Remote scripting vs.

DHTML Browser extension Cross-site scripting and CORS Hydration Mashup Persistent data Web IDL Scripting Related topics Frontend and backend Microservices REST GraphQL Push technology Solution stack Web page Static Dynamic Web standards Web API security Web application Rich Single-page Progressive Web framework Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Latvia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Web_page&oldid=1302938527 " Categories : Web design Website management Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2024 This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 06:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Web page 93 languages Add topic

