Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Human behaviour 3 Use of the term in specific areas 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Opportunism 42 languages العربية Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Taking advantage of circumstances This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Opportunism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Opportunity Seized, Opportunity Missed , engraving by Theodoor Galle , 1605 Opportunism is the practice of taking advantage of circumstances — with little regard for principles or with what the consequences are for others. Opportunist actions are expedient actions guided primarily by self-interested motives. The term can be applied to individual humans and living organisms, groups, organizations, styles, behaviors and trends.

Opportunism or "opportunistic behaviour" is an important concept in such fields of study as biology , transaction cost economics , game theory , ethics , psychology , sociology and politics .

Etymology [ edit ] In the early 19th century, the term "opportunist" as a noun or adjective was already known and used in several European languages, but initially, it rarely referred to political processes or to a political tendency. The English term "opportunism" is possibly borrowed originally from the Italian expression opportunismo . In 19th-century Italian politics, it meant "exploiting the prevailing circumstances or opportunities to gain an immediate advantage for oneself or one's own group".

[ 1 ] However, it is more likely that the English expression was directly borrowed from the French term, when it began to refer specifically to the opportunist Republicans , since the term first entered the English language in the early 1870s.

[ 2 ] In this sense the meaning "opportunism" has mutated: from those who claimed to advocate a principle (in the original French case, an amnesty for the Communards ) but said that the time was not yet "opportune", to what may be thought of as the opposite – those who act without principle.

[ 3 ] Human behaviour [ edit ] In human behavior, opportunism concerns the relationship between people's actions, and their basic principles when faced with opportunities and challenges. The opportunist seeks to gain a personal advantage when an opportunity presents itself, putting self-interest ahead of some other interest, in a way contrary either to a previously established principle or another principle that ought to have higher priority . Hence opportunist behavior is usually regarded at least as questionable or dubious, and at most as unjustifiable or completely illegitimate. Opportunism is regarded as unhealthy, as a disorder or as a character deficiency, if selfishly pursuing an opportunity is blatantly anti-social (involves disregard for the needs, wishes and interests of others). However, behavior can also be regarded as "opportunist" by scholars without any particular moral evaluation being made or implied (simply as a type of self-interested behavior).

[ citation needed ] Use of the term in specific areas [ edit ] Intellectual opportunism Sexual opportunism Political opportunism – Practice of taking advantage of every situation to maintain political influence Economic opportunism Legal opportunism Spiritual opportunism See also [ edit ] Business opportunity – Sale or lease enabling the start of a business Corruption – Dishonest or fraudulent conduct by those in power Enlightened self-interest – Ethical philosophy Individualism – Concept regarding the moral worth of the individual Jeitinho brasileiro – Brazilian cultural convention Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Meritocracy – Political system in which capital is assigned on the basis of competence Opportunity cost – Benefit lost by a choice between options Positive accounting References [ edit ] ^ Salomone, A. William (October 1962).

"The Risorgimento between Ideology and History: The Political Myth of rivoluzione mancata" .

The American Historical Review .

68 (1): 38– 56.

doi : 10.2307/1847182 .

JSTOR 1847182 .

^ According to the Grand Larousse encyclopédique , opportunism was the name given to the cautious reformism and nationalism of French Republicans , who advocated moderate policies to consolidate the French Third Republic after the eviction of the monarchists . The French Opportunists did not call themselves by this name; rather, the term was used by French radicals to describe centrist and center-left politics in the country. Possibly, the term was originally popularized by Victor Henri Rochefort, Marquis de Rochefort-Luçay , who used it in his criticisms of Léon Gambetta .

^ Butterworth, Alex (2010).

The World That Never Was: A True Story of Schemers, Anarchists, and Secret Agents .

Vintage Press . p. 153.

ISBN 9780099551928 .

v t e Narcissism Similar personality concepts Egomania Egotism God complex Grandiosity Healthy narcissism Hubris Messiah complex Superiority complex In society Collective narcissism In the workplace Leadership Me generation Narcissus (mythology) Parents Pathological narcissism Narcissistic personality disorder history Malignant narcissism Narcissistic Personality Inventory Phenomena Narcissistic injury neurosis elation mortification supply withdrawal defences Related psychology concepts Compensation Dark triad Empathy Entitlement Grandiosity Manipulation (psychology) Selfishness Category Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Opportunism&oldid=1292240096 " Categories : Opportunism Human behavior Political terminology Psychological attitude Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2013 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 23:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Opportunism 42 languages Add topic

