Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins of the term 2 Origins and history of classical Neoplatonism Toggle Origins and history of classical Neoplatonism subsection 2.1 Hellenism 2.2 Ammonius Saccas 2.3 Plotinus 2.4 Porphyry 2.5 Iamblichus 2.6 Academies 2.7 Hypatia 2.8 Proclus 3 Ideas Toggle Ideas subsection 3.1 The One 3.2 Emanations 3.2.1 Demiurge or nous 3.2.2 World-soul 3.2.3 Phenomenal world 3.3 Celestial hierarchy 3.4 Evil 3.5 Return to the One 4 Influence Toggle Influence subsection 4.1 Early Christianity 4.1.1 Augustine 4.1.2 Origen and Pseudo-Dionysius 4.1.3 Gnosticism 4.2 Byzantine education 4.3 Islamic neoplatonism 4.4 Jewish thought 4.5 Medieval Christian Thought 4.6 Western Renaissance 4.7 Cambridge Platonists (17th century) 4.8 Modern neoplatonism 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Neoplatonism 70 languages Alemannisch العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو Võro 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Neoplatonic ) Philosophical system Not to be confused with Modern Platonism .

Part of a series on Neoplatonism Reconstructed bust believed to represent Plotinus, the founder of Neoplatonism Concepts Emanationism Hypostasis Porphyrian tree Demiurge Anima mundi Henology Henosis Theurgy Okhema Kenoma Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Works Chaldean Oracles Enneads Isagoge On the Cave of the Nymphs On the Mysteries Elements of Theology De Coelesti Hierarchia Commentarii in Somnium Scipionis The Consolation of Philosophy Theology of Aristotle Book of Causes De divisione naturae People Plotinus ( students ) Porphyry Iamblichus Julian the Apostate Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius of Cilicia Olympiodorus the Younger Asclepius of Tralles Pseudo-Dionysius Martianus Capella Macrobius Boethius Maximus the Confessor Al-Kindi Johannes Scotus Eriugena Related topics Platonic Academy Platonism Middle Platonism Neopythagoreanism Commentaries on Plato Commentaries on Aristotle Neoplatonism and Christianity / Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Isma'ilism Druze Kabbalah School of Chartres Platonism in the Renaissance Cambridge Platonists Philosophy portal v t e Neoplatonism is a version of Platonic philosophy that emerged in the 3rd century AD against the background of Hellenistic philosophy and religion .

[ 1 ] [ note 1 ] [ note 2 ] The term does not encapsulate a set of ideas as much as a series of thinkers. Among the common ideas it maintains is monism , the doctrine that all of reality can be derived from a single principle, "the One".

[ 2 ] Neoplatonism began with Ammonius Saccas and his student Plotinus ( c.

204/5 – 271 AD) and stretched to the sixth century.

[ 3 ] After Plotinus there were three distinct periods in the history of neoplatonism: the work of his student Porphyry (third to early fourth century); that of Iamblichus (third to fourth century); and the period in the fifth and sixth centuries, when the academies in Alexandria and Athens flourished.

[ 4 ] Neoplatonism had an enduring influence on the subsequent history of Western philosophy and religion. In the Middle Ages , Neoplatonic ideas were studied and discussed by Christian , Jewish , and Muslim thinkers.

[ 5 ] In the Islamic cultural sphere, Neoplatonic texts were available in Arabic and Persian translations, and notable philosophers such as al-Farabi , Solomon ibn Gabirol ( Avicebron ), Avicenna ( Ibn Sina ), and Maimonides incorporated Neoplatonic elements into their own thinking.

[ 6 ] Christian philosopher and theologian Thomas Aquinas (1225–1274) had direct access to the works of Proclus , Simplicius of Cilicia , and Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite , and he knew about other neoplatonists, such as Plotinus and Porphyry, through second-hand sources.

[ 7 ] The German mystic Meister Eckhart ( c.

1260 – c.

1328 ) was also influenced by neoplatonism, propagating a contemplative way of life which points to the Godhead beyond the nameable God. Neoplatonism also had a strong influence on the perennial philosophy of the Italian Renaissance thinkers Marsilio Ficino and Giovanni Pico della Mirandola , and continues through 19th-century Universalism and modern-day spirituality .

Origins of the term [ edit ] Neoplatonism is a modern term.

[ note 1 ] The term neoplatonism has a double function as a historical category. On the one hand, it differentiates the philosophical doctrines of Plotinus and his successors from those of the historical Plato . On the other, the term makes an assumption about the novelty of Plotinus's interpretation of Plato. In the nearly six centuries from Plato's time to Plotinus', there had been an uninterrupted tradition of interpreting Plato which had begun with Aristotle and with the immediate successors of Plato's Academy and continued on through a period of Platonism which is now referred to as middle Platonism . The term neoplatonism implies that Plotinus' interpretation of Plato was so distinct from those of his predecessors that it should be thought to introduce a new period in the history of Platonism. Some contemporary scholars, however, have taken issue with this assumption and have doubted that neoplatonism constitutes a useful label. They claim that merely marginal differences separate Plotinus' teachings from those of his immediate predecessors. As a pupil of philosopher Ammonius Saccas , Plotinus used the knowledge of his teacher and predecessors in order to inspire the next generation.

[ 10 ] Whether neoplatonism is a meaningful or useful historical category is itself a central question concerning the history of the interpretation of Plato. For much of the history of Platonism, it was commonly accepted that the doctrines of the neoplatonists were essentially the same as those of Plato. The Renaissance neoplatonist Marsilio Ficino , for instance, thought that the neoplatonic interpretation of Plato was an authentic and accurate representation of Plato's philosophy.

[ 11 ] Although it is unclear precisely when scholars began to disassociate the philosophy of the historical Plato from the philosophy of his neoplatonic interpreters, they had clearly begun to do so at least as early as the first decade of the nineteenth century. Contemporary scholars often identify the German theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher as an early thinker who took Plato's philosophy to be separate from that of his neoplatonic interpreters. However, others have argued that the differentiation of Plato from neoplatonism was the result of a protracted historical development that preceded Schleiermacher's scholarly work on Plato.

[ 12 ] Origins and history of classical Neoplatonism [ edit ] Part of a series on Platonism Life Works Theory of forms Intelligible form Hyperuranion Theory of soul Nous Thumos Phren Epistemology Anamnesis Peritrope Dianoia Cardinal virtues Moral rationalism Political philosophy Mimesis Orthotes onomaton Euthyphro dilemma The Republic Allegory of the cave Analogy of the Sun Analogy of the divided line Form of the Good Noble lie Philosopher king Plato's number Ship of State Ring of Gyges Myth of Er Timaeus Atlantis Demiurge World soul Organicism Classical element Platonic solid Tertium quid Khôra Related articles Commentaries The Academy in Athens Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Pseudo-Platonica Related categories Plato Philosophy portal v t e See also: Plato's unwritten doctrines Neoplatonism started with Plotinus in the 3rd century AD.

[ 1 ] [ note 2 ] Three distinct phases in classical neoplatonism after Plotinus can be distinguished: the work of his student Porphyry ; that of Iamblichus and his school in Syria; and the period in the 5th and 6th centuries, when the Academies in Alexandria and Athens flourished.

[ 4 ] Hellenism [ edit ] Main article: Hellenistic philosophy Neoplatonism synthesized ideas from various philosophical and religious cultural spheres. The most important forerunners from Greek philosophy were the Middle Platonists , such as Plutarch , and the Neopythagoreans , especially Numenius of Apamea .

Philo , a Hellenized Jew, translated Judaism into terms of Stoic , Platonic, and Neopythagorean elements, and held that God is "supra rational" and can be reached only through "ecstasy". Philo also held that the oracles of God supply the material of moral and religious knowledge. The earliest Christian philosophers , such as Justin Martyr and Athenagoras of Athens , who attempted to connect Christianity with Platonism, and the Christian Gnostics of Alexandria , especially Valentinus and the followers of Basilides , also mirrored elements of Neoplatonism.

[ 14 ] Ammonius Saccas [ edit ] Ammonius Saccas (died c.

240–245 AD ) was a teacher of Plotinus. Through Ammonius Saccas, Plotinus may have been influenced by Indian thought. The similarities between Neoplatonism and Indian philosophy , particularly Samkhya , have led several authors to suggest an Indian influence in its founding, particularly on Ammonius Saccas.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Both Christians (see Eusebius , Jerome , and Origen ) and Pagans (see Porphyry and Plotinus) claimed him a teacher and founder of the neoplatonic system.

[ 18 ] Porphyry stated in On the One School of Plato and Aristotle , that Ammonius' view was that the philosophies of Plato and Aristotle were in harmony. Eusebius and Jerome claimed him as a Christian until his death, whereas Porphyry claimed he had renounced Christianity and embraced pagan philosophy.

Plotinus [ edit ] Presumed depiction of Plotinus and his disciples on a Roman sarcophagus in the Museo Gregoriano Profano, Vatican Museums , Rome Plotinus ( c.

205 – c.

270 ) is widely considered the father of Neoplatonism. Much of our biographical information about him comes from Porphyry's preface to his edition of Plotinus' Enneads . While he was himself influenced by the teachings of classical Greek , Persian , and Indian philosophy and Egyptian theology , [ 19 ] his metaphysical writings later inspired numerous Pagan , Jewish , Christian , Gnostic , and Islamic metaphysicians and mystics over the centuries.

Plotinus taught that there is a supreme, totally transcendent "One", containing no division, multiplicity, nor distinction; likewise, it is beyond all categories of being and non-being. The concept of "being" is derived by us from the objects of human experience and is an attribute of such objects, but the infinite, transcendent One is beyond all such objects and, therefore, is beyond the concepts which we can derive from them. The One "cannot be any existing thing" and cannot be merely the sum of all such things (compare the Stoic doctrine of disbelief in non-material existence) but "is prior to all existents".

Porphyry [ edit ] Porphyry (c. 233 – c. 309) wrote widely on astrology, religion, philosophy, and musical theory. He produced a biography of his teacher, Plotinus. He is important in the history of mathematics because of his commentary on Euclid's Elements , which Pappus used when he wrote his own commentary. Porphyry is also known as an opponent of Christianity and as a defender of paganism ; of his Adversus Christianos ( Against the Christians ) in 15 books, only fragments remain. He famously said, "The gods have proclaimed Christ to have been most pious, but the Christians are a confused and vicious sect." Iamblichus [ edit ] Iamblichus ( c.

245 – c.

325 ) influenced the direction taken by later neoplatonic philosophy. He is perhaps best known for the compendium The Life of Pythagoras , his commentary on Pythagorean philosophy, and his De Mysteriis . In Iamblichus' system, the realm of divinities stretched from the original One down to material nature itself, where soul, in fact, descended into matter and became "embodied" as human beings. The world is thus peopled by a crowd of superhuman beings influencing natural events and possessing and communicating knowledge of the future, and who are all accessible to prayers and offerings. Iamblichus had salvation as his final goal (see henosis ). The embodied soul was to return to divinity by performing certain rites, or theurgy , literally, 'divine-working'.

Academies [ edit ] After Plotinus (around 205–270) and his student Porphyry (around 232–309), Aristotle's (non-biological) works entered the curriculum of Platonic thought. Porphyry's introduction ( Isagoge ) to Aristotle's Categoria was important as an introduction to logic , and the study of Aristotle became an introduction to the study of Plato in the late Platonism of Athens and Alexandria . The commentaries of this group seek to harmonise Plato, Aristotle, and, often, the Stoics .

[ 20 ] Some works of neoplatonism were attributed to Plato or Aristotle.

De Mundo , for instance, is thought not to be the work of a ' pseudo-Aristotle ' though this remains debatable.

[ 21 ] Hypatia [ edit ] Hypatia ( c.

360 – 415) was a Greek philosopher and mathematician who served as head of the Platonist school in Alexandria, Egypt, where she taught philosophy, mathematics and astronomy. She was murdered in a church by a fanatical mob of Coptic Parabalani monks because she had been advising the prefect of Egypt Orestes during his feud with Cyril , Alexandria's dynastic archbishop.

[ 22 ] The extent of Cyril's personal involvement in her murder remains a matter of scholarly debate.

Proclus [ edit ] Proclus Lycaeus (February 8, 412 – April 17, 485) was a Greek neoplatonist philosopher, one of the last major Greek philosophers (see Damascius ). He set forth one of the most elaborate, complex, and fully developed neoplatonic systems, providing also an allegorical way of reading the dialogues of Plato. The particular characteristic of Proclus' system is his insertion of a level of individual ones, called henads , between the One itself and the divine Intellect, which is the second principle. The henads are beyond being, like the One itself, but they stand at the head of chains of causation ( seirai or taxeis ) and in some manner give to these chains their particular character. They are also identified with the traditional Greek gods, so one henad might be Apollo and be the cause of all things apollonian, while another might be Helios and be the cause of all sunny things. The henads serve both to protect the One itself from any hint of multiplicity and to draw up the rest of the universe towards the One, by being a connecting, intermediate stage between absolute unity and determinate multiplicity. In the Middle Ages most Plotinus' insights will be presented as authored by Proclus.

Ideas [ edit ] The Enneads of Plotinus are the primary and classical document of neoplatonism. As a form of mysticism , it contains theoretical and practical parts. The theoretical parts deal with the high origin of the human soul , showing how it has departed from its first estate. The practical parts show the way by which the soul may again return to the Eternal and Supreme.

[ 14 ] The system can be divided between the invisible world and the phenomenal world, the former containing the transcendent , absolute One from which emanates an eternal, perfect, essence ( nous , or intellect), which, in turn, produces the world-soul .

The One [ edit ] See also: Henology and Henosis For Plotinus, the first principle of reality is "the One", an utterly simple, ineffable, beyond being and non-being, unknowable subsistence which is both the creative source of the Universe [ 23 ] and the teleological end of all existing things. Although, properly speaking, there is no name appropriate for the first principle, the most adequate names are "the One" or "the Good". The One is so simple that it cannot even be said to exist or to be a being. Rather, the creative principle of all things is beyond being, a notion which is derived from Book VI of the Republic , [ 24 ] when, in the course of his famous analogy of the Sun , Plato says that the Good is beyond being (ἐπέκεινα τῆς οὐσίας) in power and dignity.

[ 25 ] In Plotinus' model of reality, the One is the cause of the rest of reality, which takes the form of two subsequent " hypostases " or substances: Nous and Soul ( psyché ). Although neoplatonists after Plotinus adhered to his cosmological scheme in its most general outline, later developments in the tradition also departed substantively from Plotinus' teachings in regards to significant philosophical issues, such as the nature of evil.

Emanations [ edit ] Main article: Emanationism From the One emanated different levels of lesser realities known as "Hypostases." At the highest level of reality exists "the One" from which emanates the Nous or the mind. It is the first principle after the One and contains all knowledge in a unified form. It is both the knower, the known, and the act of knowing, embodying a complete unity. The Platonic realm of the Forms is contained within the Nous and acts as the archetype of the sensible world. From the Nous emanates a lesser reality known as the Soul, which receives information from the Nous and actualizes it. This act of "actualization" is the same as the creation of the sensible world, the realm of multiplicity, time, and space. This sensible realm is an imperfect copy of the Nous and the Platonic realm of the Forms. The process of Emanation is beyond temporality as time does not exist in the One, the Nous, or the Soul, but only in the sensible world. Despite their distinctions, these four realities are all part of the same unified reality unfolding within the One.

Demiurge or nous [ edit ] The original Being initially emanates, or throws out, the nous (νοῦς), which is a perfect image of the One and the archetype of all existing things. It is simultaneously both being and thought, idea and ideal world. As image, the nous corresponds perfectly to the One, but as derivative, it is entirely different. What Plotinus understands by the nous is the highest sphere accessible to the human mind , [ 14 ] while also being pure intellect itself.

Nous is the most critical component of idealism , Neoplatonism being a pure form of idealism.

[ note 3 ] The demiurge (the nous ) is the energy, or ergon (does the work), which manifests or organises the material world into perceivability .

World-soul [ edit ] The image and product of the motionless nous is the world-soul , which, according to Plotinus, is immaterial like the nous . Its relation to the nous is the same as that of the nous to the One. It stands between the nous and the phenomenal world, and it is permeated and illuminated by the former, but it is also in contact with the latter. The nous/spirit is indivisible; the world-soul may preserve its unity and remain in the nous , but, at the same time, it has the power of uniting with the corporeal world and thus being disintegrated. It therefore occupies an intermediate position. As a single world-soul, it belongs in essence and destination to the intelligible world; but it also embraces innumerable individual souls; and these can either allow themselves to be informed by the nous , or turn aside from the nous and choose the phenomenal world and lose themselves in the realm of the senses and the finite.

[ 14 ] Phenomenal world [ edit ] The soul, as a moving essence, generates the corporeal or phenomenal world. This world ought to be so pervaded by the soul that its various parts should remain in perfect harmony. Plotinus is no dualist in the sense of certain sects, such as the Gnostics; in contrast, he admires the beauty and splendour of the world. So long as idea governs matter, or the soul governs the body, the world is fair and good. It is an image – though a shadowy image – of the upper world, and the degrees of better and worse in it are essential to the harmony of the whole. But, in the actual phenomenal world, unity and harmony are replaced by strife or discord; the result is a conflict, a becoming and vanishing, an illusive existence. And the reason for this state of things is that bodies rest on a substratum of matter. Matter is the indeterminate: that with no qualities. If destitute of form and idea, it is evil; as capable of form, it is neutral.

[ 14 ] Evil here is understood as a parasite, having no-existence of its own (parahypostasis), an unavoidable outcome of the Universe, having an "other" necessity, as a harmonizing factor.

[ 28 ] Celestial hierarchy [ edit ] Later neoplatonic philosophers, especially Iamblichus, added hundreds of intermediate beings such as gods , angels , demons , and other beings as mediators between the One and humanity. The neoplatonist gods are omni-perfect beings and do not display the usual amoral behaviour associated with their representations in the myths.

The One: God, The Good. Transcendent and ineffable.

The Hypercosmic Gods: those that make Essence, Life, and Soul The Demiurge : the Creator The Cosmic Gods: those who make Being, Nature, and Matter—including the gods known to us from classical religion.

[ citation needed ] Evil [ edit ] Neoplatonists did not believe in an independent existence of evil . They compared it to darkness, which does not exist in itself but only as the absence of light. So, too, evil is simply the absence of good. Things are good insofar as they exist; they are evil only insofar as they are imperfect, lacking some good which they should have.

Return to the One [ edit ] Neoplatonists believed human perfection and happiness were attainable in this world, without awaiting an afterlife . Perfection and happiness—seen as synonymous—could be achieved through philosophical contemplation .

All people return to the One, from which they emanated.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] The neoplatonists believed in the pre-existence, and immortality of the soul.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] The human soul consists of a lower irrational soul and a higher rational soul ( mind ), both of which can be regarded as different powers of the one soul. It was widely held that the soul possesses a "vehicle" ( okhêma ), [ 34 ] accounting for the human soul's immortality and allowing for its return to the One after death.

[ 35 ] After bodily death, the soul takes up a level in the afterlife corresponding with the level at which it lived during its earthly life.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] The neoplatonists believed in the principle of reincarnation . Although the most pure and holy souls would dwell in the highest regions, the impure soul would undergo a purification, [ 33 ] before descending again, [ 38 ] to be reincarnated into a new body, perhaps into animal form.

[ 39 ] Plotinus believed that a soul may be reincarnated into another human or even a different sort of animal. However, Porphyry maintained, instead, that human souls were only reincarnated into other humans.

[ 40 ] A soul which has returned to the One achieves union with the cosmic universal soul [ 41 ] and does not descend again; at least, not in this world period.

[ 38 ] Influence [ edit ] Early Christianity [ edit ] Main article: Neoplatonism and Christianity Augustine [ edit ] Certain central tenets of neoplatonism served as a philosophical interim for the Christian theologian Augustine of Hippo on his journey from dualistic Manichaeism to Christianity.

[ 42 ] As a Manichaen, Augustine had held that evil has substantial being and that God is made of matter; when he became a neoplatonist, he changed his views on these things. As a neoplatonist, and later a Christian, Augustine believed that evil is a privation of good [ 43 ] and that God is not material.

[ 44 ] When writing his treatise 'On True Religion', even several years after his baptism in 387 CE, Augustine's Christianity was still tempered by neoplatonism.

The term logos was interpreted variously in neoplatonism. Plotinus refers to Thales [ 45 ] in interpreting logos as the principle of mediation, the interrelationship between the hypostases [ 46 ] (Soul, Spirit (nous) and the 'One').

St. John introduces a relation between Logos and the Son, Christ , [ 47 ] whereas Paul calls it 'Son', 'Image', and 'Form'.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] Victorinus subsequently differentiated the Logos interior to God from the Logos related to the world by creation and salvation.

[ 47 ] For Augustine, the Logos " took on flesh " in Christ, in whom the Logos was present as in no other man.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] He strongly influenced early medieval Christian philosophy .

[ 53 ] Origen and Pseudo-Dionysius [ edit ] Some early Christians, influenced by neoplatonism, identified the neoplatonic One, or God, with Yahweh . The most influential of these would be Origen , the pupil of Ammonius Saccas ; and the sixth-century author known as Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite , whose works were translated by John Scotus in the ninth century for the West. Both authors had a lasting influence on Eastern Orthodox and Western Christianity , and the development of contemplative and mystical practices and theology.

Gnosticism [ edit ] Main article: Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Neoplatonism also had links with Gnosticism, which Plotinus rebuked in his ninth tractate of the second Enneads : "Against Those That Affirm The Creator of The Cosmos and The Cosmos Itself to Be Evil" (generally known as "Against The Gnostics").

Because their belief was grounded in Platonic thought, the neoplatonists rejected Gnosticism's vilification of Plato's demiurge , the creator of the material world or cosmos discussed in the Timaeus . Neoplatonism has been referred to as orthodox Platonic philosophy by scholars like John D. Turner ; this reference may be due, in part, to Plotinus' attempt to refute certain interpretations of Platonic philosophy, through his Enneads. Plotinus believed the followers of Gnosticism had corrupted the original teachings of Plato and often argued against likes of Valentinus who, according to Plotinus, had given rise to doctrines of dogmatic theology with ideas such as that the Spirit of Christ was brought forth by a conscious god after the fall from Pleroma . According to Plotinus, The One is not a conscious god with intent, nor a godhead , nor a conditioned existing entity of any kind, but is rather a requisite principle of totality which is also the source of ultimate wisdom.

[ 54 ] Byzantine education [ edit ] See also: Platonic Academy § Neoplatonic Academy After the Platonic Academy was destroyed in the first century BC, philosophers continued to teach Platonism , but it was not until the early 5th century (c. 410) that a revived academy (which had no connection with the original Academy) was established in Athens by some leading neoplatonists.

[ 55 ] It persisted until 529 AD when it was finally closed by Justinian I because of active paganism of its professors. Other schools continued in Constantinople , Antioch , Alexandria and Gaza which were the centers of Justinian's empire.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 58 ] After the closure of the neoplatonic academy, neoplatonic and/or secular philosophical studies continued in publicly funded schools in Alexandria and Gaza. In the early seventh century, the neoplatonist Stephanus of Alexandria brought this Alexandrian tradition to Constantinople, where it would remain influential, albeit as a form of secular education.

[ 57 ] The university maintained an active philosophical tradition of Platonism and Aristotelianism , with the former being the longest unbroken Platonic school, running for close to two millennia until the fifteenth century [ 57 ] Michael Psellos (1018–1078), a Byzantine monk, writer, philosopher, politician and historian, wrote many philosophical treatises, such as De omnifaria doctrina . He wrote most of his philosophy during his time as a court politician at Constantinople in the 1030s and 1040s.

Gemistos Plethon ( c.

1355 – 1452; Greek: Πλήθων Γεμιστός) remained the preeminent scholar of neoplatonic philosophy in the late Byzantine Empire. He introduced his understanding and insight into the works of neoplatonism during the failed attempt to reconcile the East–West Schism at the Council of Florence . At Florence, Plethon met Cosimo de' Medici and influenced the latter's decision to found a new Platonic Academy there. Cosimo subsequently appointed as head Marsilio Ficino, who proceeded to translate all Plato's works, the Enneads of Plotinus, and various other neoplatonist works into Latin.

Islamic neoplatonism [ edit ] Main article: Platonism in Islamic philosophy The major reason for the prominence of neoplatonic influences in the historical Muslim world was availability of neoplatonic texts: Arabic translations and paraphrases of neoplatonic works were readily available to Islamic scholars greatly due to the availability of the Greek copies, in part, because Muslims conquered some of the more important centres of the Byzantine Christian civilization in Egypt and Syria.

[ citation needed ] Various Persian and Arabic scholars, including Avicenna (Ibn Sina), Ibn Arabi , al-Kindi , al-Farabi , and al-Himsi , adapted neoplatonism to conform to the monotheistic constraints of Islam.

[ 59 ] The translations of the works which extrapolate the tenets of God in neoplatonism present no major modification from their original Greek sources, showing the doctrinal shift towards monotheism .

[ 60 ] Islamic neoplatonism adapted the concepts of the One and the First Principle to Islamic theology, attributing the First Principle to God.

[ 61 ] God is a transcendent being, omnipresent and inalterable to the effects of creation.

[ 60 ] Islamic philosophers used the framework of Islamic mysticism in their interpretation of Neoplatonic writings and concepts.

[ note 4 ] Jewish thought [ edit ] Main article: Jewish philosophy This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( September 2024 ) In the Middle Ages, neoplatonist ideas influenced Jewish thinkers, such as the Kabbalists Isaac the Blind , Azriel of Gerona and Nachmanides and the earlier Jewish neoplatonic philosopher Solomon ibn Gabirol ( Avicebron ), who modified it in the light of their own monotheism.

Medieval Christian Thought [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( September 2024 ) The works of Pseudo-Dionysius were primarily instrumental in the flowering of western medieval mysticism , most notably the German mystic Meister Eckhart (c. 1260 – c. 1328).

Neoplatonism also influenced Latin scholasticism , for example through the reception and translation of Neoplatonic conception by Eriugena . Aquinas, for example, have some Neoplatonic elements in his philosophical conceptions that he adapts within an Aristotelian vocabulary.

Western Renaissance [ edit ] Main article: Platonism in the Renaissance Neoplatonism ostensibly survived in the Eastern Christian Church as an independent tradition and was reintroduced to the West by Pletho ( c.

1355 – 1452/1454), an avowed pagan and opponent of the Byzantine Church, inasmuch as the latter, under Western scholastic influence, relied heavily upon Aristotelian methodology. Pletho's Platonic revival, following the Council of Florence (1438–1439), largely accounts for the renewed interest in Platonic philosophy which accompanied the Renaissance .

"Of all the students of Greek in Renaissance Italy, the best-known are the neoplatonists who studied in and around Florence" (Hole). Neoplatonism was not just a revival of Plato's ideas, it is all based on Plotinus' created synthesis, which incorporated the works and teachings of Plato, Aristotle, Pythagoras, and other Greek philosophers.

The Renaissance in Italy was the revival of classic antiquity, and this started at the fall of the Byzantine empire, who were considered the "librarians of the world", because of their great collection of classical manuscripts and the number of humanist scholars that resided in Constantinople (Hole).

Neoplatonism in the Renaissance combined the ideas of Christianity and a new awareness of the writings of Plato.

Marsilio Ficino (1433–1499) was "chiefly responsible for packaging and presenting Plato to the Renaissance" (Hole). In 1462, Cosimo I de' Medici, patron of arts, who had an interest in humanism and Platonism, provided Ficino with all 36 of Plato's dialogues in Greek for him to translate. Between 1462 and 1469, Ficino translated these works into Latin, making them widely accessible, as only a minority of people could read Greek. And, between 1484 and 1492, he translated the works of Plotinus, making them available for the first time to the West.

Giovanni Pico della Mirandola (1463–1494) was another neoplatonist during the Italian Renaissance. He could speak and write Latin and Greek, and had knowledge on Hebrew and Arabic. The pope banned his works because they were viewed as heretical – unlike Ficino, who managed to stay on the right side of the church.

The efforts of Ficino and Pico to introduce neoplatonic and Hermetic doctrines into the teaching of the Roman Catholic Church has recently been evaluated in terms of an attempted "Hermetic Reformation".

[ 63 ] Cambridge Platonists (17th century) [ edit ] Main article: Cambridge Platonists In the seventeenth century in England, neoplatonism was fundamental to the school of the Cambridge Platonists , whose luminaries included Henry More , Ralph Cudworth , Benjamin Whichcote and John Smith , all graduates of the University of Cambridge .

Coleridge claimed that they were not really Platonists, but "more truly Plotinists": "divine Plotinus", as More called him.

Later, Thomas Taylor (not a Cambridge Platonist) was the first to translate Plotinus' works into English.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Modern neoplatonism [ edit ] Notable modern neoplatonists include Thomas Taylor , "the English Platonist", who wrote extensively on Platonism and translated almost the entire Platonic and Plotinian corpora into English, and the Belgian writer Suzanne Lilar .

The science fiction writer Philip K. Dick identified as a neoplatonist and explored related mystical experiences and religious concepts in his theoretical work, compiled in The Exegesis of Philip K. Dick .

[ 66 ] Julius Evola incorporated Neoplatonic metaphysics into his vision of Roman pagan revival , aligning with his Traditionalist critique of modernity.

Arturo Reghini , an Italian esotericist and collaborator of Evola, also promoted Neoplatonic ideas in his efforts to revive ancient Roman religion .

[ 67 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Allegorical interpretations of Plato Antiochus of Ascalon Asclepigenia Atticus (philosopher) Bahá'í cosmology Baruch Spinoza Brethren of Purity Dehellenization of Christianity Henology International Society for Neoplatonic Studies List of ancient Greek philosophers Monism Panentheism Pantheism Perennial philosophy Peripatetic school Sikhism Syrianus Notes [ edit ] ^ a b The term first appeared in 1827.

[ 8 ] According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , "The term 'neoplatonism' is an invention of early 19th century European scholarship and indicates the penchant of historians for dividing 'periods' in history. In this case, the term was intended to indicate that Plotinus initiated a new phase in the development of the Platonic tradition." [ 9 ] ^ a b Pauliina Remes: "'Neoplatonism' refers to a school of thought that began in approximately 245 CE, when a man called Plotinus moved [to] the capital of the Roman Empire [and] began teaching his interpretation of Plato's philosophy. Out of the association of people in Rome [...] emerged a school of philosophy that displays enough originality to be considered a new phase of Platonism".

[ 13 ] ^ Schopenhauer wrote of this neoplatonist philosopher: "With Plotinus there even appears, probably for the first time in Western philosophy , idealism that had long been current in the East even at that time, for it taught (Enneads, iii, lib. vii, c.10) that the soul has made the world by stepping from eternity into time , with the explanation: 'For there is for this universe no other place than the soul or mind ' (neque est alter hujus universi locus quam anima), indeed the ideality of time is expressed in the words: 'We should not accept time outside the soul or mind' (oportet autem nequaquam extra animam tempus accipere)." [ 26 ] Similarly, professor Ludwig Noiré wrote: "For the first time in Western philosophy we find idealism proper in Plotinus ( Enneads , iii, 7, 10), where he says, "The only space or place of the world is the soul," and "Time must not be assumed to exist outside the soul." [ 27 ] It is worth noting, however, that, like Plato, but unlike Schopenhauer and other modern philosophers, Plotinus does not worry about whether or how we can get beyond our ideas in order to know external objects.

^ Morewedge: "The greatest cluster of neoplatonic themes is found in religious mystical writings, which in fact transform purely orthodox doctrines such as creation into doctrines such as emanationism , which allow for a better framework for the expression of neoplatonic themes and the emergence of the mystical themes of the ascent and mystical union." [ 62 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Moore, Edward (n.d.).

"Neoplatonism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2 May 2019 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: year ( link ) ^ Halfwassen, Jens (2014).

"The Metaphysics of the One" . In Remes, Pauliina; Slaveva-Griffin, Svetla (eds.).

The Routledge Handbook of Neoplatonism . Routledge Handbooks in Philosophy.

Abingdon, Oxfordshire and New York : Routledge . pp.

182– 199.

ISBN 9781138573963 .

^ Siorvanes, Lucas (2018).

"Plotinus and Neoplatonism: The Creation of a New Synthesis" . In Keyser, Paul T.; Scarborough, John (eds.).

Oxford Handbook of Science and Medicine in the Classical World .

New York : Oxford University Press . pp.

847– 868.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199734146.013.78 .

ISBN 9780199734146 .

LCCN 2017049555 .

^ a b Wear, Sarah Klitenic (16 October 2018) [26 August 2013].

"Neoplatonism" .

oxfordbibliographies.com .

Oxford : Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/obo/9780195389661-0201 .

ISBN 978-0-19-538966-1 .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2019 . Retrieved 5 August 2021 .

^ Armstrong, Karen (1993).

A History of God . New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 978-0345384560 .

^ Kreisel, Howard (1997). "Moses Maimonides". In Frank, Daniel H. Frank; Leaman, Oliver (eds.).

History of Jewish Philosophy . Routledge history of world philosophies. London and New York: Routledge . pp.

245 –280.

ISBN 978-0-415-08064-4 .

^ "Wayne Hankey, "Aquinas, Plato, and Neo-Platonism" " (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-07-07 . Retrieved 2017-09-06 .

^ etymonline.com, Neoplatonism ^ Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Plotinus ^ Wildberg, Christian (2021), "Neoplatonism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2021 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-11-08 ^ Allen, Michael J.B. (Summer 1977). "Ficino's Lecture on the Good?".

Renaissance Quarterly .

30 (2): 160– 171.

doi : 10.2307/2860654 .

JSTOR 2860654 .

S2CID 163651079 .

^ Tigerstedt, E. N. The Decline and Fall of the Neoplatonic Interpretation of Plato. 1974 ^ Pauliina Remes (2008), Neoplatonism . Acumen publishing, page 1.

^ a b c d e One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Adolf Harnack ; John Malcolm Mitchell (1911). " Neoplatonism ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 19 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

372– 378.

{{ cite encyclopedia }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ J. Bussanich. The roots of Platonism and Vedanta. International Journal of Hindu Studies. January 2005, Volume 9, Issue 1, pp 1–2 ^ Harris, R. Baine (ed.), Neoplatonism and Indian Thought, Norfolk Va., 1982: The International Society for Neoplatonic Studies ^ J.F. Staal, Advaita and Neoplatonism. A Critical Study in Comparative Philosophy. University of Madras, Madras 1961 ^ "Neoplatonism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2021.

^ Porphyry, On the Life of Plotinus and the Order of His Books , Ch. 3 (Armstrong's Loeb translation).

"he became eager to make acquaintance with the Persian philosophical discipline and that prevailing among the Indians" ^ Handboek Geschiedenis van de Wijsbegeerte I, Article by Frans de Haas ^ De Mundo, Loeb Classical Library, Introductory Note, D. J. Furley ^ Hypatia of Alexandria (Revealing Antiquity) by Maria Dzielska (author), F. Lyra (translator), Harvard University Press; reprint edition (October 1, 1996), ISBN 978-0674437760 , pp. 38–39.

^ Brenk, Frederick (January 2016).

"Pagan Monotheism and Pagan Cult" .

"Theism" and Related Categories in the Study of Ancient Religions . SCS/AIA Annual Meeting. Vol. 75.

Philadelphia : Society for Classical Studies ( University of Pennsylvania ).

Archived from the original on 6 May 2017 . Retrieved 14 October 2020 .

Historical authors generally refer to "the divine" ( to theion ) or "the supernatural" ( to daimonion ) rather than simply "God." [...] The Stoics , believed in a God identifiable with the logos or hegemonikon (reason or leading principle) of the universe and downgraded the traditional gods , who even disappear during the conflagration ( ekpyrosis ). Yet, the Stoics apparently did not practice a cult to this God.

Middle and Later Platonists, who spoke of a supreme God, in philosophical discourse, generally speak of this God, not the gods, as responsible for the creation and providence of the universe. They, too, however, do not seem to have directly practiced a religious cult to their God.

^ Dodds, E.R. "The Parmenides of Plato and the Origin of the Neoplatonic 'One'".

The Classical Quarterly , Jul–Oct 1928, vol. 22, p. 136 ^ Plato, Republic 509b ^ Parerga and Paralipomena , Volume I, "Fragments for the History of Philosophy," § 7) ^ Ludwig Noiré, Historical Introduction to Kant 's Critique of Pure Reason .

^ Richard T. Wallis and Jay Bregman (1992), Neoplatonism and Gnosticism , SUNY Press, pp. 42–45 ^ D. G. Leahy, Faith and Philosophy: The Historical Impact , pages 5–6 . Ashgate Publishing, Ltd.

^ Enneads VI 9.6 ^ Richard T. Wallis and Jay Bregman (1992), SUNY Press, page 173.

^ Plotinus, iv. 7, " On the immortality of the Soul.

" ^ a b Glen Warren Bowersock, Peter Brown, Peter Robert Lamont Brown, Oleg Grabar, 1999, Late Antiquity: A Guide to the Postclassical World , page 40. Harvard University Press.

^ See Plato's Timaeus , 41d, 44e, 69c, for the origin of this idea.

^ Paul S. MacDonald, 2003, History of the Concept of Mind: Speculations About Soul, Mind and Spirit from Homer to Hume , page 122. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd.

^ Plotinus, iii.4.2 ^ Andrew Smith, 1974, Porphyry's Place in the Neoplatonic Tradition: A Study in Post-Plotinian Neoplatonism , page 43. Springer.

^ a b Andrew Smith, 1974, Porphyry's Place in the Neoplatonic Tradition: A Study in Post-Plotinian Neoplatonism , page 58. Springer.

^ "Whether human souls could be reborn into animals seems to have become quite a problematical topic to the later neoplatonists." – Andrew Smith, (1987), Porphyrian Studies since 1913 , ANRW II 36, 2.

^ Remes, Pauliina, Neoplatonism (University of California Press, 2008), p. 119.

^ James A. Arieti, Philosophy in the Ancient World: An Introduction , page 336. Rowman & Littlefield ^ Augustine, Confessions Book 7 ^ Augustine, Confessions, Book 7.12.18 ^ Augustine, Confessions, Book 7.1.1–2 ^ Handboek Geschiedenis van de Wijsbegeerte I, Article by Carlos Steel ^ The journal of neoplatonic studies, Volumes 7–8, Institute of Global Cultural Studies, Binghamton University, 1999, P 16 ^ a b c Theological treatises on the Trinity, By Marius Victorinus, Mary T. Clark, P25 ^ Col. 1:15 ^ Phil. 2:5–7 ^ Augustine, Confessions, Book 7.9.13–14 ^ De immortalitate animae of Augustine: text, translation and commentary, By Saint Augustine (Bishop of Hippo.), C. W. Wolfskeel, introduction ^ 1 John 1:14 ^ Handboek Geschiedenis van de Wijsbegeerte I, Article by Douwe Runia ^ "PLOTINUS, Ennead, Volume I: Porphyry on the Life of Plotinus. Ennead I" .

www.loebclassics.com .

^ Alan Cameron, "The last days of the Academy at Athens," in Proceedings of the Cambridge Philological Society vol 195 (n.s. 15), 1969, pp 7–29.

^ Lindberg, David C. "The Beginnings of Western Science", page 70 ^ a b c Encyclopædia Britannica, Higher Education in the Byzantine Empire, 2008, O.Ed.

^ Masalha, Nur (24 February 2022).

Palestine Across Millennia: A History of Literacy, Learning and Educational Revolutions . Bloomsbury Publishing. pp.

81– 88.

ISBN 978-0-7556-4296-0 . Retrieved 8 January 2024 .

^ Cleary, John J., ed. (1997).

The perennial tradition of Neoplatonism . Leuven: Univ. Press. p.

443 .

ISBN 978-90-6186-847-7 .

^ a b Cleary, John J., ed. (1997).

The perennial tradition of Neoplatonism . Leuven: Univ. Press. pp.

420 –437.

ISBN 978-90-6186-847-7 .

^ Cleary, John J., ed. (1997).

The perennial tradition of Neoplatonism . Leuven: Univ. Press. p.

431 .

ISBN 978-90-6186-847-7 .

^ Morewedge, Parviz, ed. (1992).

Neoplatonism and Islamic thought . Albany: State University of New York Press. p. 9.

ISBN 978-0-7914-1335-7 .

^ Heiser, James D., Prisci Theologi and the Hermetic Reformation in the Fifteenth Century , Repristination Press: Texas, 2011.

ISBN 978-1-4610-9382-4 ^ Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy – entry for Plotinus ^ Notopoulos, James A. (1936). "Shelley and Thomas Taylor".

Proceedings of the Modern Language Association of America .

51 (2): 502– 517.

doi : 10.2307/458067 .

JSTOR 458067 .

S2CID 163842278 .

^ Dick, Philip K.

(2011). Jackson, Pamela; Lethem, Jonathan (eds.).

The Exegesis of Philip K. Dick . Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

ISBN 978-0-547-54927-9 .

^ Giudice, Christian (2022).

Occult Imperium: Arturo Reghini, Roman Traditionalism, and the Anti-Modern Reaction in Fascist Italy . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0197610244 .

Further reading [ edit ] Addey, Crystal. 2014. Divination and Theurgy in Neoplatonism: Oracles of the Gods. Farnham; Burlington : Ashgate.

Blumenthal, Henry J., and E. G. Clark, eds. 1993.

The Divine Iamblichus: Philosopher and Man of Gods. Proceedings of a Conference held at the University of Liverpool on 23–26 September 1990.

Bristol, UK: Bristol Classical Press.

Catana, Leo 2013. "The Origin of the Division between Middle Platonism and Neoplatonism." Apeiron: A Journal for Ancient Philosophy and Science 46: 2: 166–200.

Chiaradonna, Riccardo (2023).

Ontology in early Neoplatonism: Plotinus, Porphyry, Iamblichus . Berlin: De Gruyter.

ISBN 9783110997514 .

Chiaradonna, Riccardo and Franco Trabattoni eds. 2009.

Physics and Philosophy of Nature in Greek Neoplatonism: Proceedings of the European Science Foundation Exploratory Workshop, Il Ciocco, Castelvecchio Pascoli, 22–24 June 2006 . Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.

Chlup, Radek. 2012.

Proclus: An Introduction.

Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.

Dillon, John M. and Lloyd P. Gerson eds. 2004.

Neoplatonic Philosophy. Introductory Readings . Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Co.

Gersh, Stephen. 2012. "The First Principles of Latin Neoplatonism: Augustine, Macrobius, Boethius." Vivarium 50.2: 113–138.

Gerson, Lloyd P. ed. 1996.

The Cambridge Companion to Plotinus . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Gertz, Sebastian R. P. 2011.

Death and Immortality in Late Neoplatonism: Studies on the Ancient Commentaries on Plato's Phaedo.

Leiden: Brill.

Hadot, Ilsetraut. 2015. "Athenian and Alexandrian Neoplatonism and the Harmonization of Aristotle and Plato." Translated by Michael Chase. Leiden; Boston: Brill.

Hartmann, Udo (2018).

Der spätantike Philosoph. Die Lebenswelten der paganen Gelehrten und ihre hagiographische Ausgestaltung in den Philosophenviten von Porphyrios bis Damaskios (in German). 3 volumes. Bonn: Habelt, ISBN 978-3-7749-4172-4 Herkert, Felix (2023).

Körperlichkeit im theurgischen Neuplatonismus: Immanente Pforten zur Transzendenz . Berlin; Boston: De Gruyter.

ISBN 9783111246017 .

O’Meara, Dominic J. 1993.

Plotinus: An Introduction to the Enneads.

Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.

Rangos, Spyridon. 2000. "Proclus and Artemis: On the Relevance of Neoplatonism to the Modern Study of Ancient Religion." Kernos 13: 47–84.

Remes, P. 2008.

Neoplatonism.

Stocksfield, UK: Acumen.

Remes, Pauliina and Slaveva-Griffin, Svetla eds. 2014.

The Routledge Handbook of Neoplatonism , New York: Routledge.

Smith, Andrew. 1974.

Porphyry's Place in the Neoplatonic Tradition: A Study in Post-Plotinian Neoplatonism.

The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.

Whittaker, Thomas. 1901.

The Neo-Platonists: A Study in the History of Hellenism.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Portal:Neoplatonism Library resources about Neoplatonism Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries The London Philosophy Study Guide Archived 2009-09-23 at the Wayback Machine : Post-Aristotelian philosophy Archived 2021-02-28 at the Wayback Machine Wildberg, Christian.

"Neoplatonism" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Neoplatonism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

International Society for Neoplatonic Studies Christian Platonists and Neoplatonists: Historical and Modern Islamic Platonists and Neoplatonists Aristotle's Categories at Gutenberg Confessiones (Book I-XIII) – Augustine at Gutenberg De immortalitate animae of Augustine (Google Books) Enneads public domain audiobook at LibriVox Elements of Theology public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato v t e Platonists Ancient Academics Old Plato Aristotle Eudoxus Philip of Opus Aristonymus Coriscus and Erastus of Scepsis Demetrius of Amphipolis Euaeon of Lampsacus Heraclides and Python of Aenus Hestiaeus of Perinthus Lastheneia of Mantinea Timolaus of Cyzicus Speusippus Axiothea of Phlius Heraclides Ponticus Menedemus of Pyrrha Xenocrates Crantor Polemon Crates of Athens Skeptics Middle Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus New Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Dio of Alexandria Middle Platonists Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Anonymous Theaetetus Commentator Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Justin Martyr Gaius Albinus Alcinous Alexander Peloplaton Apuleius Atticus Maximus of Tyre Numenius of Apamea Ammonius Saccas Longinus Clement of Alexandria Origen Origen the Pagan Calcidius Neoplatonists Plotinus Students Amelius Porphyry of Tyre Iamblichus Sopater Eustathius of Cappadocia Sosipatra Aedesius Dexippus Chrysanthius Theodorus of Asine Julian Salutius Maximus of Ephesus Eusebius of Myndus Priscus of Epirus Antoninus Hypatia Gaius Marius Victorinus Augustine Macrobius Boethius Academy Plutarch of Athens Asclepigenia Hierocles Syrianus Hermias Aedesia Proclus Marinus Isidore Ammonius Hermiae Asclepiodotus Hegias Zenodotus Agapius Damascius Simplicius Priscian John Philoponus Olympiodorus David the Invincible Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Medieval John Scotus Eriugena Al-Farabi Anselm Peter Abelard Bernard Gilbert Thierry Henry of Ghent Bonaventure Theodoric of Freiberg Meister Eckhart Berthold of Moosburg Paul of Venice Modern Renaissance Florentine Academy Plethon Marsilio Ficino Cristoforo Landino Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Giordano Bruno Blaise Pascal Cambridge Ralph Cudworth Henry More Anne Conway Thomas Taylor Emanuel Swedenborg Josiah Royce Aleksei Losev Contemporary Analytic Gottlob Frege Bertrand Russell Kurt Gödel Roderick Chisholm W. V. O. Quine Jan Łukasiewicz Crispin Wright Edward N. Zalta Continental Edmund Husserl Leo Strauss v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐79fd654b9f‐qhl5q
Cached time: 20250818132701
Cache expiry: 21600
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, vary‐revision, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.325 seconds
Real time usage: 1.664 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7287/1000000
Revision size: 54948/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 590007/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8448/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 20/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 210488/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.700/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18329830/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1090.233      1 -total
 25.15%  274.218      2 Template:Reflist
 14.21%  154.938     31 Template:Navbox
  9.42%  102.719      4 Template:Cite_web
  9.18%  100.086      1 Template:Wikisource
  8.91%   97.101      1 Template:Wikisource/outer_core
  8.87%   96.747      1 Template:Transliteration
  8.64%   94.212      2 Template:Side_box
  8.60%   93.744      1 Template:Wikisource/inner_core
  8.55%   93.247      2 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:23385833:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818132701 and revision id 1306568035. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neoplatonism&oldid=1306568035 " Categories : Neoplatonism Classical theism Esoteric schools of thought Monism Mysticism Theurgy Universalism Western esotericism Hidden categories: CS1 maint: year CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Articles to be expanded from September 2024 All articles to be expanded Wikisource templates with missing id Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 13:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neoplatonism 70 languages Add topic

