Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Cargo hatch 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Citations 5.2 General and cited sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Hold (compartment) 21 languages Беларуская Български Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Hold (ship) ) Parts of a ship View of the hold of a container ship A ship's hold or cargo hold is a space for carrying cargo in a ship or airplane compartment .

Description [ edit ] Cargo in holds may be either packaged in crates, bales, etc., or unpackaged ( bulk cargo ). Access to holds is by a large hatch at the top. Ships have had holds for centuries; an alternative way to carry cargo is in standardized shipping containers , which may be loaded into appropriate holds or carried on deck.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Holds in older ships were below the orlop deck , the lower part of the interior of a ship's hull , especially when considered as storage space, as for cargo. In later merchant vessels it extended up through the decks to the underside of the weather deck.

Some ships have built in cranes and can load and unload their own cargo. Other ships must have dock side cranes or gantry cranes to load and unload.

[ 3 ] Cargo hatch [ edit ] Six large cargo hatch covers on a capesize bulk carrier ship as she approaches the Egyptian-Japanese Friendship Bridge A cargo hatch or deck hatch or hatchway is type of door used on ships and boats to cover the opening to the cargo hold or other lower part of the ship. To make the cargo hold waterproof, most cargo holds have cargo hatch. This can be a waterproof door, like a trap door with hinges or a cover that is places on top of the cargo hold opening, covered and held down with a tarp or a latching system. Cargo hatch can also be flexible and roll up on to a pole. A small cargo hatch to a small storage locker is called a Lazarette . Should a cargo hatch fail in a storm, the ship is at risk of sinking, such that has happened on bulk carrier hatches . Some ships that sank due to cargo hatch failure: MV Derbyshire , MV Christinaki , Bark Marques , SS Henry Steinbrenner , SS El Faro , SS Marine Electric , and the SS Edmund Fitzgerald . Most cargo hatches have a coaming , a raised edge around the hatch, to help keep out water. The term batten down the hatches is used prepare the ship for bad weather. This may included securing cargo hatch covers with wooden battens , to prevent water from entering from any angle. The term cargo hatch can also be a used for any deck opening leading to the cargo holds.

Aircraft and spacecraft may also use the term for their cargo doors.

[ 4 ] Basic types: Lifting (up to remove) Rolling (rolls up on to a pole, trap type) Folding (fold up like paper or an accordion Sliding (slides on to the deck or over the side of ship) Roll stowing (roll up on to a pole, plates) Gallery [ edit ] A weathered cargo hatch cover on the SS Stevens Cargo hatch coaming (bottom right) on a bugeye Cargo hatch of the ship Port of Nagoya A sliding Cargo hatch cover on the OBO-carrier Maya The cargo holds of a container ship Deck hatch of the Omega , the last square-rigged sailing cargo ship USS Henderson (AP-1) at Panama Canal in 1933. With two open cargo hatches forward of the bridge.

Layout from above of the five cargo holds of a Liberty ship and a Victory ship from Port Chicago disaster .

Holds of U.S. Army Engineer Port Repair ship The cargo hold of USS Rankin (AKA-103) for combat loading Wood cargo hold on the SS Charles W. Morgan at Mystic Seaport Loading scrap iron in to a cargo hold with sliding covers Positioning wool bales in a hold in 1933 into the Magdalene Vinnen (1921) The sliding hatch covers of Zaira.

Bulk carrier hold midship cross section view Sabrina I with five large holds Cargo hold A lazarette with a white cargo hatch cover See also [ edit ] Plug door Cargo aircraft Edward Edgar Foden Ships with holds: Container ship newer mode Liberty ship Thames sailing barge Type C1 ship Type C2 ship Type C3 ship Victory ship References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ The ship cargo hold and the types of bulk cargoes Archived 2017-02-23 at the Wayback Machine ^ Cargo ship: general structure, equipment and arrangement Archived 2017-01-09 at the Wayback Machine ^ Cargo hold tour, SS Lane Archived 2016-08-02 at the Wayback Machine ^ marineinsight.com Different Types and Designs of Hatch Covers Used for Ships, by Tanumoy Sinha, January 8, 2021 General and cited sources [ edit ] Sawyer, L. A. and W. H. Mitchell.

Victory ships and tankers: The history of the 'Victory' type cargo ships and of the tankers built in the United States of America during World War II , Cornell Maritime Press, 1974, 0-87033-182-5.

Victory Ships built by the U.S. Maritime Commission during World War II —United States Maritime Commission Oregon Shipyards Record Breakers Page 2: Victory Cargo Ships Archived 2005-09-22 at the Wayback Machine —World War II U.S. Navy Armed Guard and World War II U.S. Merchant Marine External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Holds (ship part) .

SS Jeremiah O'Brien , Liberty museum ship moored at Fisherman's Wharf, San Francisco, California Liberty Ships built by the United States Maritime Commission in World War II Liberty Ships and Victory Ships, America's Lifeline in War Archived 2007-06-11 at the Wayback Machine A lesson on Liberty ships and Victory ships from the National Park Service's Teaching with Historic Places.

v t e World War II Maritime Commission ship designs Cargo designs Type C1 Type C2 Type C3 Type C4 Type C5 ( Type C6 ) ( Type C7 ) ( Type C8 ) ( Type C9 ) Type N3 Emergency cargo Liberty ship ("EC2-S-C1") Victory ship ("VC2-S-AP1") Tanker T1 tanker T2 tanker T3 tanker Liberty ship ("Z-ET1-S-C3") Special-purpose Type S2 (" Tacoma -class frigate ") Type S3-S2-BP (" Landing Ship, Tank ") Type S3-S2-BP1 (" Neptune -class cable layer ") Type S4-S2-BB3 (" Casablanca -class escort carrier ") Type S4-SE2-BD1 (" Gilliam -class attack transport ") Type S4-SE2-BE1 (" Artemis -class attack cargo ship ") " Crane vessel - Derrick Barge " Miscellaneous-cargo Type L6 ("Lakers") Type N ("Coastal Cargo") Type P1 ("Passenger") Type P2 ("Passenger") Type R ("Refrigerated") Type B ("Barge") Tugs Type V ("Tugs") See also:- Empire ship , Fort ship , Park ship , Ocean ship .

v t e Victory ships Lists List of Victory ships Subtypes Haskell -class attack transport Boulder Victory -class cargo ship Greenville Victory -class cargo ship Kingsport -class telemetry ship Range Sentinel -class telemetry ship List of Subtypes Museum ships SS American Victory SS Lane Victory SS Red Oak Victory Other Port Chicago disaster Attack on the SS Baton Rouge Victory SS Columbia Eagle incident Sunk in action SS Canada Victory SS Hobbs Victory SS Logan Victory Damaged in action SS Bozeman Victory SS Brown Victory SS Bucknell Victory USS Colbert SS Elmira Victory USS Hinsdale USS La Grange SS Minot Victory SS Oshkosh Victory SS Pratt Victory SS Swarthmore Victory USS Telfair SS United Victory Sunk in service SS Clarksdale Victory SS Drexel Victory SS Escanaba Victory SS Georgetown Victory SS Luray Victory SS Middlebury Victory SS Northeastern Victory SS Park Victory SS Quinault Victory Damaged in service SS Attleboro Victory SS Baton Rouge Victory SS Baylor Victory SS Colombia Victory SS Berea Victory SS Cuba Victory SS Enid Victory SS Frontenac Victory SS Morgantown Victory SS St. Lawrence Victory Sank in private use SS Alamo Victory SS Augustana Victory SS Brainerd Victory SS Cody Victory SS Hagerstown Victory SS Lewiston Victory SS Lincoln Victory SS Luxembourg Victory SS India Victory SS New Bern Victory SS Mandan Victory SS Philippines Victory SS Rushville Victory SS Rutland Victory SS Skagway Victory SS Smith Victory SS St. Albans Victory SS Tufts Victory SS U.S.S.R. Victory Seagoing cowboys ships SS Adrian Victory SS Attleboro Victory SS Battle Creek Victory SS Beloit Victory SS Blue Island Victory SS Boulder Victory SS Bucknell Victory SS Calvin Victory SS Carroll Victory SS Cedar Rapids Victory SS Clarksville Victory SS Creighton Victory SS DePauw Victory SS Earlham Victory SS Flagstaff Victory SS Frontenac Victory SS Gainesville Victory SS Harvard Victory SS Hattiesburg Victory SS Jefferson City Victory SS Lahaina Victory SS Lanaina Victory SS Lindenwood Victory SS Mercer Victory SS Moline Victory SS Morgantown Victory SS Norwalk Victory SS Occidental Victory SS Ouachita Victory SS Park Victory SS Pass Christian Victory SS Pierre Victory SS Plymouth Victory SS Queens Victory SS Rock Hill Victory SS Rockland Victory SS Roswell Victory SS Saginaw Victory SS Santa ClaraVictory SS South Bend Victory SS Spartanburg Victory SS Villanova Victory SS Virginia City Victory SS Wesleyan Victory SS Woodstock Victory SS Yugoslavia Victory See also Liberty ship (predecessor) Article Category List See also, similar role:- Empire ship , Fort ship , Park ship , Ocean ship .

v t e Liberty ships Lists A B C D E F G H I Ja-Je J. F-J. W K L M N O P R S-Z Subtypes Acubens -class general stores issue ship Armadillo class tanker Crater -class cargo ship Guardian -class radar picket ship List of Subtypes Survivors SS John W. Brown SS Jeremiah O'Brien SS Arthur M. Huddell SS Albert M. Boe Other Liberty Fleet Day Port Chicago disaster Project Liberty Ship See also Park ship (Canadian equivalent) Fort ship (British equivalent) Ocean ship (Anglo-American predecessor) Victory ship (American follow-on) Empire ship (British ships owned by the Ministry of War Transport ) Category List v t e Parts of a sailing ship Aftercastle Afterdeck Anchor Anchor windlass Apparent wind indicator Beakhead Bilge Bilgeboard Bitts Bollard Boom brake Bow or prow Bowsprit Cable Capstan Cathead Carpenter's walk Centreboard Chains Cockpit Companionway Crow's nest Daggerboard Deck Figurehead Floor timber Forecastle Frame Gangway Gunwale Head Hold Hull Jackline Jibboom Keel Canting Kelson Leeboard Mast Orlop deck Outrigger Poop deck Port Porthole Quarter gallery Quarterdeck Rib Rudder Ship's wheel Skeg Stem Starboard Stern or poop Sternpost Strake Taffrail Tiller Top Transom Whipstaff Winch Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hold_(compartment)&oldid=1301198008 " Categories : Ship compartments Shipping Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 16:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hold (compartment) 21 languages Add topic

