Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Professional career 3 Recent research 4 Awards and honours 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Brenda Milner 26 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Suomi தமிழ் Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British-Canadian neuroscientist and neuropsychologist (born 1918) Brenda Milner CC GOQ FRS FRSC Milner at TEDxMcGill in 2011 Born Brenda Langford ( 1918-07-15 ) 15 July 1918 (age 107) Manchester , England Alma mater Newnham College, Cambridge McGill University Known for Study of memory and cognition ; Work with patient H.M.

Spouse Peter Milner ​ ​ ( m.

1944; died 2018 ) ​ Awards Companion of the Order of Canada Karl Spencer Lashley Award (1979) NAS Award in the Neurosciences (2004) Gairdner Award (2005) Balzan Prize for Cognitive Neurosciences (2009) Kavli Prize in Neuroscience (2014) Scientific career Fields Neuropsychology Institutions McGill University , Montreal Neurological Institute Thesis Intellectual effects of temporal-lobe damage in man (1952) Doctoral advisor Donald Olding Hebb Doctoral students Suzanne Corkin Ingrid Johnsrude Doreen Kimura Neuropsychology Topics Brain regions Clinical neuropsychology Cognitive neuropsychology Cognitive neuroscience Dementia Human brain Neuroanatomy Neurophysiology Neuropsychological assessment Neuropsychological rehabilitation Traumatic brain injury Brain functions Arousal Attention Consciousness Decision making Executive functions Natural language Learning Memory Motor coordination Perception Planning Problem solving Thought People Alan Baddeley Arthur L. Benton David Bohm Antonio Damasio Phineas Gage Norman Geschwind Elkhonon Goldberg Patricia Goldman-Rakic Donald O. Hebb Kenneth Heilman Eric Kandel Edith Kaplan Muriel Lezak Benjamin Libet Rodolfo Llinás Alexander Luria Brenda Milner Karl H. Pribram Pasko Rakic Oliver Sacks Mark Rosenzweig Roger W. Sperry Hans-Lukas Teuber Henry Molaison ("H.M.", patient) K.C.

(patient) Tests Benton Visual Retention Test Continuous Performance Task Halstead–Reitan Neuropsychological Battery Hayling and Brixton tests Lexical Decision Task Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery Mini–mental state examination Rey–Osterrieth complex figure Stroop Test Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale Wechsler Memory Scale Wisconsin Card Sorting Task Psychology portal Philosophy portal Medicine portal v t e Brenda Milner ( née Langford ; born 15 July 1918) is a British-Canadian neuropsychologist who has contributed extensively to the research literature on various topics in the field of clinical neuropsychology .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Milner is a professor in the Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery at McGill University and a professor of Psychology at the Montreal Neurological Institute .

[ 3 ] As of 2020 [update] , she holds more than 25 honorary degrees and she continued to work in her nineties.

[ 2 ] Her work covers many aspects of neuropsychology including her lifelong interest in the involvement of the temporal lobes in episodic memory.

[ 4 ] She is sometimes referred to as one of the founders of neuropsychology [ 5 ] [ 6 ] and has been essential in its development. She received the Balzan Prize for Cognitive Neuroscience in 2009, and the Kavli Prize in Neuroscience, together with John O'Keefe , and Marcus E. Raichle , in 2014. She turned 100 in July 2018.

[ 7 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Brenda Langford was born on 15 July 1918, in Manchester , England.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Her father Samuel Langford was a musical critic, journalist, and teacher, and her mother (née Leslie Doig) was one of his students.

[ 9 ] Though she was a daughter to two musically talented parents, she had no interest in music.

[ 9 ] She was tutored by her father in mathematics and the arts until the age of 8." [ 9 ] She attended Withington Girls' School , [ 5 ] which led her to attend Newnham College, Cambridge , [ 8 ] to study mathematics, having received a scholarship in 1936.

[ 10 ] However, after realising she was not "perceptive" enough for mathematics, Milner changed her field of study to psychology.

[ 8 ] In 1939, Milner graduated with a B.A. degree in experimental psychology , [ 8 ] which at that time was considered a moral science .

[ 10 ] One of her supervisors in the Department of Experimental Psychology, Cambridge was Oliver Zangwill and to him she owed her first interest in human brain function, [ 8 ] and the value of studying brain lesions .

[ 11 ] After her graduation near the time of World War II Newnham College awarded her a Sarah Smithson Research Studentship, which allowed her to attend Newnham for the following two years.

[ 8 ] As a result of World War II, the work of the Cambridge Psychological Laboratory, under Bartlett's leadership, was diverted almost overnight to applied research in the selection of aircrew.

[ 8 ] Milner's position was to devise perceptual tasks for future use in selecting aircrew. More specifically, she was on a team interested in distinguishing fighter pilots from bomber pilots using aptitude tests .

[ 6 ] [ 8 ] [ 11 ] "Later in the war, from 1941 to 1944, she worked in Malvern as an Experimental Officer for the Ministry of Supply, investigating different methods of display and control to be used by radar operators." [ 5 ] [ 8 ] In 1941 Brenda met her husband, Peter Milner .

[ 12 ] Both Brenda and her husband were working on radar research. He was an electrical engineer who had also been recruited for the war effort.

[ 12 ] In 1944, they married and left for Canada where Peter had been invited to work with physicists on atomic research.

[ 8 ] [ 12 ] They travelled to Boston on the ship the Queen Elizabeth together with "war brides" who were travelling to the United States to live with their husbands' families during the war. Upon arrival in Canada, she began teaching psychology at the University of Montreal, where she stayed for 7 years.

In 1949, Brenda Milner graduated with a M.A. in experimental psychology in Cambridge.

[ 13 ] In Montreal, she became a Ph.D. candidate in physiological psychology at McGill University , under the direction of Donald Olding Hebb .

[ 12 ] [ 14 ] While working on her Ph.D., Milner and Hebb presented research on their patient P.B. who had undergone a medial temporal lobectomy and had subsequent memory impairment. This garnered the attention of Wilder Penfield . In 1950, Hebb gave Milner an opportunity to study with him at the Montreal Neurological Institute.

[ 8 ] [ 12 ] Under the supervision of Penfield, she studied the behaviour of young adult epileptic patients treated with elective focal ablation of brain tissue to treat uncontrolled seizures.

[ 5 ] [ 14 ] In 1952, Milner earned her Ph.D. in experimental psychology [ 15 ] with a thesis on the cognitive effects of temporal lobe damage in man.

[ 16 ] Milner has been awarded a  number of honorary degrees including an honorary Sc.D from the University of Cambridge in 2000.

[ 17 ] Professional career [ edit ] In 1954, Milner published an article in the McGill University Psychological Bulletin entitled 'Intellectual Function of the Temporal Lobes'.

[ 18 ] In this publication, she presented data that showed that temporal lobe damage can cause emotional and intellectual changes in humans and lower primates.

[ 19 ] Her review of neuroscience studies conducted in animals discouraged many neurosurgeons from completing surgeries on humans that could negatively impact their lives.

[ 5 ] "Milner's early work on the temporal lobes was influenced by the results of ablation work with lower primates, and particularly by Mishkin and Pribram's discovery of the role of the inferotemporal neocortex in visual discrimination learning." [ 14 ] Milner was a pioneer in the field of neuropsychology and in the study of memory and other cognitive functions in humankind. She was invited to Hartford to study Henry Molaison , formerly known as patient H.M., who became the most famous patient in cognitive neuroscience . He "had undergone a bilateral temporal lobectomy that included removal of major portions of the hippocampus." [ 20 ] She studied the effects of this damage to the medial temporal lobe on memory and systematically described the cognitive deficits exhibited by H.M.

In the early stages of her work with H.M., Milner wanted to completely understand his memory impairments. Milner showed that the medial temporal lobe amnestic syndrome is characterised by an inability to acquire new memories and an inability to recall established memories from a few years immediately before damage, while memories from the more remote past and other cognitive abilities, including language , perception and reasoning were intact.

[ 21 ] For example, Milner spent three days with H.M. as he learned a new perceptual-motor task in order to determine what type of learning and memory were intact in him. This task involved reproducing the drawing of a star by looking at it in a mirror.

[ 20 ] His performance improved over those three days. However, he subsequently retained absolutely no memory of any events that took place during those three days.

[ 20 ] This led Milner to speculate that there are different types of learning and memory, each dependent on a separate system of the brain .

[ 22 ] She was able to demonstrate two different memory systems - episodic memory and procedural memory .

[ 23 ] Milner discovered from H.M. and other case studies that "bilateral medial temporal-lobe resection in man results in a persistent impairment of recent memory whenever the removal is carried far enough posteriorly to damage portions of the anterior hippocampus and hippocampal gyrus." [ 24 ] She showed that in patients with this syndrome the ability to learn certain motor skills remained normal.

[ 24 ] This finding introduced the concept of multiple memory systems within the brain and stimulated an enormous body of research. Milner stated in an interview with the McGill Journal of Medicine , "To see that H.M. had learned the task perfectly but with absolutely no awareness that he had done it before was an amazing dissociation. If you want to know what was an exciting moment of my life, that was one." [ 22 ] She has made major contributions to the understanding of the role of the frontal lobes in memory processing, in the area of organizing information. "Dr. Milner's seminal research has provided many landmark discoveries in the study of human memory and the brain's temporal lobes, which play a key role in emotional responses, hearing , memory and speech ." [ 24 ] She demonstrated the critical role of the dorsolateral frontal cortex for the temporal organization of memory and her work showed that there is partial separability of the neural circuits subserving recognition memory from those mediating memory for temporal order. She described the inflexibility in problem solving that is now widely recognized as a common consequence of frontal-lobe injury. These refinements in the understanding of memory and exposition of the relevant brain regions revealed the anatomically diffuse nature of complex cognitive functions in the brain.

Milner helped describe the lateralization of function in the human brain and has shown how the neural substrate of language in the cerebral hemispheres can vary in left-handed, right-handed and ambidextrous individuals (see handedness ). She used the Wada test to show that for any handedness, the left hemisphere is dominant for language in most people.

[ 25 ] These studies of the relationship between hand preference and speech lateralization led to an understanding of the effects of early unilateral brain lesions on the pattern of cerebral organization at maturity. Her studies were among the first to demonstrate convincingly that damage to the brain can lead to dramatic functional reorganization.

Using mostly prize money from her numerous awards, Milner donated 1 million dollars to the Montreal Neurological Institute in 2007, after establishing a foundation in her name.

[ 26 ] Recent research [ edit ] Brenda Milner in 2014 In more recent times, Milner has expanded her research to the study of brain activity in normal subjects using functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) and positron emission tomography (PET).

[ 23 ] These studies focus on the identification of brain regions associated with spatial memory and language, including the neural substrates of monolingual and bilingual speech processing.

[ 23 ] In another series of PET studies, she has sought to delineate further the role of the right hippocampal region in memory for the spatial location of objects.

[ 27 ] Milner kept some involvement in teaching and researching past her 100th birthday.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] She is the Dorothy J. Killam Professor at the Montreal Neurological Institute, and a professor in the Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery at McGill University.

[ 23 ] One of Milner's current collaborators is Denise Klein , an assistant professor in the Neurology/Cognitive Neuroscience unit at McGill.

[ 31 ] Their research on bilingualism entails investigating the difference in neural pathways used to acquire new and native languages.

[ 31 ] In 2018, Milner celebrated her 100th birthday in Montreal with about 30 friends, including fellow researcher Denise Klein.

[ 28 ] [ 32 ] Although she never expected to reach this age, Milner stated that she has "every intention of continuing for many more birthdays." [ 28 ] The Montreal Neurological Institute held a symposium in September 2018, celebrating her accomplishments.

[ 33 ] That same year, Milner participated in a video series, launched by the Montreal Neurological Institute, dedicated to promoting female scientists and researchers.

[ 34 ] [ 33 ] [ 35 ] During the interview, Milner spoke about her early life and gave an overview of her career.

[ 35 ] Awards and honours [ edit ] Milner has received numerous awards for her contributions to neuroscience and psychology including Fellowships in the Royal Society of London , the Royal Society of Canada and membership of the National Academy of Sciences .

[ 5 ] [ 23 ] In total, she has been awarded honorary degrees from more than 20 different universities across Canada, Europe, and the United States.

[ 36 ] Early on, Milner was awarded a Sarah Smithson Research Studentship by Newnham College, Cambridge after her graduation, which allowed her to continue her work at Newnham College.

[ 8 ] In 1984 Milner was made an Officer of the Order of Canada and was promoted to Companion in 2004. In 1987, she was awarded the Ralph W. Gerard Prize in Neuroscience . She was also awarded the National Academy of Sciences Award in the Neurosciences in 2004 for her seminal investigations of the role of the temporal lobes and other brain regions in learning, memory, and language.

[ 37 ] In 1985, she was made an Officer of the National Order of Quebec and was promoted to Grand Officer in 2009.

[ 14 ] She was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2007.

[ 38 ] She was awarded the Balzan Prize for her contributions to Cognitive Neurosciences in a ceremony held in the Swiss Parliament in December 2009.

[ 3 ] Milner was awarded the Kavli Prize in Neuroscience in 2014.

[ 5 ] Other awards and recognition include: Election to the National Academy of Sciences (1976), the Metlife Foundation Award for Medical Research in Alzheimer's Disease (1996), election to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (2005), the Dan David Prize (2014), the Prix Hommage du 50e anniversaire from the Ordre des psychologues du Québec (2014), induction into the Canadian Science and Engineering Hall of Fame (2012), recipient of a medal of honour from the National Assembly of Quebec (2018), [ 28 ] Pearl Meister Greengard Prize (2011), the Norman A. Anderson Lifetime Achievement Award (2010), the Goldman-Rakic Prize for Outstanding Achievement in Cognitive Neuroscience by NARSAD (2009), the NSERC Medal of Excellence (2009 and 2010), the Gairdner Foundation International Award (2005), the Prix Wilder-Penfield (Prix du Québec) (1993), and election as a Fellow of the Royal Society of London, and Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada.

References [ edit ] ^ Birchard, Karen (November 6, 2011) "'Nosy' and Observant, a Neuroscientist Continues Her Memorable Career at 93" , Chronicle of Higher Education ^ a b "Brenda Milner" .

Canadian Encyclopedia . Retrieved June 3, 2020 .

^ a b Brenda Milner Wins Balzan Prize for Cognitive Neurosciences . (2011). Government of Canada.

Archived 2010-12-24 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Brenda Milner: List of Publications" .

Archived from the original on January 23, 2021.

^ a b c d e f g Perdue, Mitzi (April 15, 2015).

"Science Legend Dr. Brenda Milner" .

Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology News (Paper). Vol. 35, no. 8. pp.

6– 7.

^ a b "Pioneering Memory Researcher Brenda Milner To Receive Pearl Meister Greengard Prize" . Medical News Today. May 26, 2011 . Retrieved May 14, 2013 .

^ "Pioneering neuropsychologist Brenda Milner turns 100" .

Thesuburban.com . July 15, 2018 . Retrieved November 30, 2018 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l No Authorship Indicated (1974). "Distinguished Scientific Contribution Awards for 1973".

American Psychologist .

29 : 27– 43.

doi : 10.1037/h0020147 .

^ a b c d "Dr. Brenda Milner - Biography" .

The Great Canadian Psychology Website . Milner_bio1.html. Worth Publishers . Retrieved June 20, 2016 .

^ a b "Dr. Brenda Milner - Biography" .

The Great Canadian Psychology Website . Milner_bio2.html. Worth Publishers . Retrieved June 20, 2016 .

^ a b "Dr. Brenda Milner: Biography" .

The Great Canadian Psychology Website . Worth Publishers. p. 3 . Retrieved June 20, 2016 .

^ a b c d e "Dr. Brenda Milner: Biography" .

The Great Canadian Psychology Website . Worth Publishers. p. 4 . Retrieved June 20, 2016 .

^ "McGill University Staff" .

Archived from the original on September 16, 2020.

^ a b c d "Brenda Milner" .

Membres de l'Ordre national du Québec (in French). Gouvernement du Québec . Retrieved January 1, 2012 .

^ "Dr. Brenda Milner - Biography" .

The Great Canadian Psychology Website . Milner_bio5.html. Worth Publishers . Retrieved June 20, 2016 .

^ Milner, Brenda (1952).

"Intellectual effects of temporal-lobe damage in man" .

Digitool.library . Retrieved September 15, 2016 .

^ "Brenda Milner List of Awards and Degrees" .

Archived from the original on August 3, 2020.

^ Milner, Brenda (1954). "Intellectual Function of the Temporal Lobes".

Psychological Bulletin .

51 (1): 42– 62.

doi : 10.1037/h0054728 .

PMID 13237374 .

^ Milner, B (1954). "Intellectual function of the temporal lobes".

Psychological Bulletin .

51 (1): 42– 62.

doi : 10.1037/h0054728 .

PMID 13237374 .

^ a b c Turner, M. S. (2010).

Tracing Permanent Memories Archived February 12, 2012, at the Wayback Machine . The DANA Foundation.

^ "Dr Brenda Milner, CC" . McGill University . Retrieved May 14, 2013 .

^ a b Xia, C. (2006).

"Understanding the human brain: A lifetime of dedicated pursuit. Interview with Dr. Brenda Milner" .

McGill Journal of Medicine .

9 (2): 165– 172.

PMC 2323518 .

PMID 18523614 .

^ a b c d e "Dr. Brenda Milner" . Canadians for Health Research. June 2005. Archived from the original on October 8, 2014 . Retrieved May 14, 2013 .

^ a b c Scoville, W. B.; Milner, B. (1957).

"Loss of Recent Memory After Bilateral Hippocampal Lesions" .

Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry .

20 (1): 11– 21.

doi : 10.1136/jnnp.20.1.11 .

PMC 497229 .

PMID 13406589 .

^ Andrew-Gee, Eric (April 7, 2023).

"At 104 years old, memory scientist Brenda Milner seems to remember almost everything" .

Globe and Mail . Retrieved January 4, 2024 .

she showed that the left hemisphere is dominant for language in the vast majority of people, regardless of handedness.

^ "Mind of her own: Montreal neuroscientist Brenda Milner on turning 100" .

Montrealgazette.com . July 19, 2018 . Retrieved November 30, 2018 .

^ Milner, B.; Johnsrude, I.; Crane, J. (1997).

"Right medial temporal-lobe contribution to object-location memory" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences .

352 (1360): 1469– 1474.

Bibcode : 1997RSPTB.352.1469M .

doi : 10.1098/rstb.1997.0133 .

PMC 1692061 .

PMID 9368935 .

^ a b c d "As she turns 100, 'there's no stopping' trailblazing Montreal neuroscientist Brenda Milner - CBC News" .

Cbc.ca . Retrieved November 30, 2018 .

^ Dreifus, Claudia (May 20, 2013).

"Still Charting Memory's Depths" .

New York Times .

^ Carey, Benedict (May 15, 2017).

"Brenda Milner, Eminent Brain Scientist, Is 'Still Nosy' at 98" .

New York Times .

People think because I'm 98 years old I must be emerita. Well, not at all. I'm still nosy, you know, curious.

^ a b The Great Canadian Psychologist Website.

(2008).

^ Média, Bell.

"Meet the brainy Montrealer who, at 100, is still going to work" .

Iheartradio.ca . Retrieved November 30, 2018 .

^ a b "Montréal enSanté MES V10N3 Été/Summer 2018" .

View.joomag.com . Retrieved November 30, 2018 .

^ [1] xxceptional-women, McGill University ^ a b [2] , youtube.com ^ "Awards & Honours of Brenda Milner" .

Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital: About .

Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital . Retrieved January 21, 2019 .

^ Nas Award in the Neurosciences.

(2012).

^ "Book of Members, 1780–2010: Chapter M" (PDF) . American Academy of Arts and Sciences . Retrieved July 25, 2014 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Brenda Milner .

Order of Canada citation (archived) Great Canadian Psychology Website – Brenda Milner Biography Interview on Futures in Biotech (2008) "Still Charting Memory's Depths – A Conversation with Brenda Milner" , The New York Times (2013) v t e Inductees into the Canadian Medical Hall of Fame A Maude Abbott Oswald Avery Albert Aguayo B Elizabeth Bagshaw Frederick Banting Henry J. M. Barnett Murray Barr Charles Thomas Beer John Bel Bernard Belleau Philip B. Berger Michel G. Bergeron Alan Bernstein Charles Best Norman Bethune John Bienenstock Wilfred Gordon Bigelow Michael Bliss Stephen Blizzard Adolfo J. de Bold Roberta Bondar John Bradley Henri Breault G. Malcolm Brown John Browne Alan C. Burton C Elaine A. Carty Brock Chisholm Harvey Max Chochinov Bruce Chown Michel Chrétien William Arthur Cochrane May Cohen James Collip Douglas Harold Copp Max Cynader D Paul David Naranjan Dhalla Thomas A. Dignan John Dirks James Dosman Tommy Douglas Charles George Drake Daniel J. Drucker Jacalyn Duffin Jean Dussault E Connie Eaves John Robert Evans F Ray Farquharson Sylvia Fedoruk William Feindel Brett Finlay C. Miller Fisher John G. FitzGerald Claude Fortier Terry Fox Armand Frappier Clarke Fraser Henry Friesen G William Gallie Jacques Genest Gustave Gingras Phil Gold Richard Goldbloom Jean Gray Wilfred Grenfell Gordon Guyatt H Vladimir Hachinski Antoine Hakim Emmett Matthew Hall Judith Goslin Hall Michael R. Hayden Donald Olding Hebb Carol Herbert Félix d'Herelle Jack Hirsh Charles Hollenberg James C. Hogg David Hubel Charles B. Huggins J Herbert Jasper David J. Jenkins Harold E. Johns K Wilbert Keon Leonora King L Marc Lalonde Bernard Langer Charles Philippe Leblond Maurice LeClair Heinz Lehmann Peter Lougheed M Jeanne Mance Ernest McCulloch John McEachern Walter Mackenzie Peter Macklem David MacLennan John Macleod John McCrae Ian McWhinney Tak Wah Mak Marco Marra Joseph B. Martin Pierre Masson Jonathan Campbell Meakins Maud Menten Ronald Melzack Brenda Milner Julio Montaner Frederick Montizambert Balfour Mount Thomas John Murray Fraser Mustard William Thornton Mustard N Arnold Naimark David Naylor Robert Noble O Annette O'Connor William Osler P Anthony Pawson Wilder Penfield Vera Peters Q Rémi Quirion R Cheryl Rockman-Greenberg Allan Ronald Noralou P. Roos Jean-Lucien Rouleau Claude Roy Ian Rusted S David Sackett Robert B. Salter Charles Scriver Hans Selye Louis Siminovitch F. Estelle R. Simons Duncan G. Sinclair Michael Smith Nahum Sonenberg Bette Stephenson Calvin Stiller Emily Stowe T Charles Tator Lucille Teasdale-Corti James Till Lap-Chee Tsui Endel Tulving Sir Charles Tupper D. Lorne Tyrrell V Mladen Vranic W Mark Wainberg Samuel Weiss Ronald Worton Y Marie-Marguerite d'Youville Salim Yusuf v t e Kavli Prize laureates Astrophysics Maarten Schmidt , Donald Lynden-Bell (2008) Jerry E. Nelson , Raymond N. Wilson , Roger Angel (2010) David C. Jewitt , Jane Luu , Michael E. Brown (2012) Alan Guth , Andrei Linde , Alexei Starobinsky (2014) Ronald Drever , Kip Thorne , Rainer Weiss (2016) Ewine van Dishoeck (2018) Andrew Fabian (2020) Roger Ulrich, Jørgen Christensen-Dalsgaard , Conny Aerts (2022) Sara Seager , David Charbonneau (2024) Nanoscience Louis E. Brus , Sumio Iijima (2008) Donald Eigler , Nadrian Seeman (2010) Mildred Dresselhaus (2012) Thomas Ebbesen , Stefan Hell , John Pendry (2014) Gerd Binnig , Christoph Gerber , Calvin Quate (2016) Emmanuelle Charpentier , Jennifer Doudna , Virginijus Šikšnys (2018) Harald Rose , Maximilian Haider , Knut Urban , Ondrej Krivanek (2020) Jacob Sagiv, Ralph G. Nuzzo , David L. Allara, George M. Whitesides (2022) Robert S. Langer , Armand Paul Alivisatos , Chad A. Mirkin (2024) Neuroscience Sten Grillner , Thomas Jessell , Pasko Rakic (2008) Richard Scheller , Thomas C. Südhof , James Rothman (2010) Cornelia Bargmann , Winfried Denk , Ann Graybiel (2012) Brenda Milner , John O'Keefe , Marcus Raichle (2014) Eve Marder , Michael Merzenich , Carla J. Shatz (2016) A. James Hudspeth , Robert Fettiplace , Christine Petit (2018) David Julius , Ardem Patapoutian (2020) Jean-Louis Mandel , Harry T. Orr, Christopher A. Walsh , Huda Zoghbi (2022) Nancy Kanwisher , Winrich Freiwald, Doris Ying Tsao (2024) v t e Human memory Basic concepts Encoding Storage Recall Attention Consolidation Neuroanatomy Types Sensory Echoic Eidetic Eyewitness Haptic Iconic Motor learning Visual Short-term " The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two " Working memory Long-term Active recall Autobiographical Explicit Declarative Episodic Semantic Flashbulb Hyperthymesia Implicit Meaningful learning Personal-event Procedural Rote learning Selective retention Tip of the tongue Forgetting Amnesia anterograde childhood post-hypnotic post-traumatic dissociative (psychogenic) retrograde selective transient global Decay theory Forgetting curve Interference theory Memory erasure Memory inhibition Motivated forgetting avoidance repression suppression Repressed memory Retrieval-induced forgetting Weapon focus Memory errors Confabulation Cryptomnesia Hindsight bias Imagination inflation Memory biases Memory conformity Misattribution of memory Misinformation effect Source-monitoring error False memory Deese–Roediger–McDermott paradigm False memory syndrome Memory implantation Lost in the mall technique Recovered-memory therapy Research methods Exceptional memory Indirect tests of memory Memory disorder In groups Collective memory Politics of memory Cultural memory Memory and social interactions Memory conformity Transactive memory Other topics Aging Art of memory chunking encoding memorization mnemonic rehearsal repetition Effects of alcohol Effects of exercise Effects of stress Emotion Memory improvement Nutrition Sleep Trauma In society Memory sport World Memory Championships Shas Pollak Related Absent-mindedness Atkinson–Shiffrin memory model Context-dependent and state-dependent memory Childhood memory Exosomatic memory Free recall Intermediate-term memory Involuntary memory flashbacks Levels of Processing model Metamemory Muscle memory Priming intertrial Prospective and retrospective memory The Seven Sins of Memory People Researchers Richard C. Atkinson Robert A. Bjork Stephen J. Ceci Susan Clancy Hermann Ebbinghaus Sigmund Freud Patricia Goldman-Rakic Ivan Izquierdo Marcia K. Johnson Eric Kandel Elizabeth Loftus Geoffrey Loftus James McGaugh Eleanor Maguire George Armitage Miller Brenda Milner Lynn Nadel Henry L. Roediger III Daniel Schacter Richard Shiffrin Arthur P. Shimamura Larry Squire Susumu Tonegawa Anne Treisman Endel Tulving Robert Stickgold Patients HM KC NA Clive Wearing Other Jonathan Hancock Paul R. McHugh Dominic O'Brien Ben Pridmore Cosmos Rossellius Andriy Slyusarchuk Category Psychology portal Philosophy portal v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt William James Ivan Pavlov Sigmund Freud Edward Thorndike Carl Jung John B. Watson Clark L. Hull Kurt Lewin Jean Piaget Gordon Allport J. P. Guilford Carl Rogers Erik Erikson B. F. Skinner Donald O. Hebb Ernest Hilgard Harry Harlow Raymond Cattell Abraham Maslow Neal E. Miller Jerome Bruner Donald T. Campbell Hans Eysenck Herbert A. Simon David McClelland Leon Festinger George A. Miller Richard Lazarus Stanley Schachter Robert Zajonc Albert Bandura Roger Brown Endel Tulving Lawrence Kohlberg Noam Chomsky Ulric Neisser Jerome Kagan Walter Mischel Elliot Aronson Daniel Kahneman Paul Ekman Michael Posner Amos Tversky Bruce McEwen Larry Squire Richard E. Nisbett Martin Seligman Ed Diener Shelley E. Taylor John Anderson Ronald C. Kessler Joseph E. LeDoux Richard Davidson Susan Fiske Roy Baumeister Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Category Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Academics Scopus Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Brenda_Milner&oldid=1299477235 " Categories : 1918 births Living people Alumni of Newnham College, Cambridge British emigrants to Canada British women academics Canadian women academics English psychologists English neuroscientists Canadian cognitive neuroscientists Companions of the Order of Canada Female fellows of the Royal Society Fellows of Newnham College, Cambridge Fellows of the Royal Society of Canada Scientists from Manchester Grand Officers of the National Order of Quebec Academic staff of McGill University McGill University Faculty of Science alumni Neuropsychologists Canadian women neuroscientists Foreign associates of the National Academy of Sciences Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Fellows of the Royal Society People educated at Withington Girls' School Fellows of the Cognitive Science Society Canadian women centenarians British women centenarians Canadian women psychologists Kavli Prize laureates in Neuroscience Canadian fellows of the Royal Society APA Distinguished Scientific Award for an Early Career Contribution to Psychology recipients Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from October 2014 Articles with hCards Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2020 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing French-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 16:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Brenda Milner 26 languages Add topic

