Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Behavior of animals in captivity 3 Why animals are placed in captivity 4 Zoos' impact on animal captivity 5 List of wild animals in America commonly held in captivity 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Captivity (animal) 18 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Português සිංහල Simple English Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Animal being held by humans Monkey in a cage Part of a series on Animal rights Overview Animal welfare Around the world History Timeline Animal cruelty Veganism Vegetarianism Primate rights in research Movement Advocates Vegans Vegetarians Groups Animal abuse Animal–industrial complex Killing Mutilation Wild animals Consumption Dogs Horses Cats Cattle Eating live seafood Bloodsports Bullfighting Hunting Fishing Animal testing Cosmetic Captivity Zoos Circuses Oceanariums Chick culling Fur farming Goldfish swallowing Companion animals Puppy mills Abandonment Ideas Animal ethics Abolitionism Animal protectionism Bambi effect Carnism Personism Sentientism Speciesism Related topics Cultured meat Environmentalism Radical Deep ecology Humanism Welfarism Animals portal v t e Animal captivity is the confinement of domestic and wild animals.

[ 1 ] More specifically, animals that are held by humans and prevented from escaping are said to be in captivity .

[ 2 ] The term animal captivity is usually applied to wild animals that are held in confinement, but this term may also be used generally to describe the keeping of domesticated animals such as livestock or pets . This may include, for example, animals in farms , private homes, zoos , aquariums , public aquariums and laboratories . Animal captivity may be categorized according to the particular motives, objectives, and conditions of the confinement.

History [ edit ] Animal husbandry All throughout history, domestic animals like pets and livestock were kept in captivity and tended by humans. However, pets and livestock were not the only animals to be put in captivity and receive human care because wild animals had this as well. Despite the fact that wild animals have been harbored by humans for thousands of years, this captivity has not always come close to present zoos. Some were failed domestication attempts. Furthermore, the wealthy, predominantly the aristocrats and kings, collected wild animals for various reasons. The affluent built the first zoos as personal collections to demonstrate their dominance and wealth. These private collections of animals were known as menageries . Contrary to domestication, the ferociousness and natural behaviour of the wild animals were preserved and exhibited. Today, zoos claim to have other reasons for keeping animals under human care: conservation , education and science .

Behavior of animals in captivity [ edit ] Captive animals, especially those not domesticated, sometimes can develop abnormal behaviours .

One type of abnormal behaviour is stereotypical behaviors , i.e. repetitive and apparently purposeless motor behaviors. Examples of stereotypical behaviours include pacing, self-injury, route tracing and excessive self-grooming. These behaviors are associated with stress and lack of stimulation.

Many who keep animals in captivity attempt to prevent or decrease stereotypical behavior by introducing stimuli, a process known as environmental enrichment . The goals of environmental enrichment are to make environments more complex and fluid, offer more engaging and complex processes, and give animals more chances to make decisions. Techniques that are commonly used to provide environmental enrichment include social, occupation, physical, sensory, and nutritional.

[ 3 ] Another type of abnormal behavior shown in captive animals is self-injurious behavior (SIB). Self-injurious behavior indicates any activity that involves biting, scratching, hitting, hair plucking, or eye poke that may result in injuring oneself.

[ 4 ] Although its reported incidence is low, self-injurious behavior is observed across a range of primate species, especially when they experience social isolation in infancy.

[ 5 ] Self-bite involves biting one's own body—typically the arms, legs, shoulders, or genitals. Threat bite involves biting one's own body—typically the hand, wrist, or forearm—while staring at the observer, conspecific, or mirror in a threatening manner. Self-hit involves striking oneself on any part of the body. Eye poking is a behavior (widely observed in primates ) that presses the knuckle or finger into the orbital space above the eye socket.

Hair plucking is a jerking motion applied to one's own hair with hands or teeth, thus resulting in its excessive removal.

[ 4 ] The proximal causes of self-injurious behavior have been widely studied in captive primates ; either social or nonsocial factors can trigger this type of behavior. Social factors include changes in group composition, stress, separation from the group, approaches by or aggression from members of other groups, conspecific male individuals nearby, separation from females, and removal from the group.

[ 5 ] Social isolation , particularly disruptions of early mother-rearing experiences, is an important risk factor.

[ 4 ] Studies have suggested that, although mother-reared rhesus macaques still exhibit some self-injurious behaviors, [ 6 ] nursery-reared rhesus macaques are much more likely to self-abuse than mother-reared ones.

[ 4 ] Nonsocial factors include the presence of a small cut, a wound or irritant, cold weather, human contact, and frequent zoo visitors.

[ 5 ] For example, a study has shown that zoo visitors density positively correlates with the number of gorillas banging on the barrier, and that low zoo visitors density caused gorillas to behave in a more relaxed way. Captive animals often cannot escape the attention and disruption caused by the general public, and the stress resulting from this lack of environmental control may lead to an increased rate of self-injurious behaviors.

[ 7 ] There are studies that suggest the many abnormal captive behaviors, including self-injurious behavior , can be successfully treated by pair housing. Pair housing provides a previously single-housed animal with a same-sex social partner.

[ 8 ] This method is especially effective with primates, which are widely known to be social animals .

[ 9 ] Social companionship provided by pair housing encourages social interaction, thus reducing abnormal and anxiety-related behavior in captive animals as well as increasing their locomotion .

[ 8 ] Why animals are placed in captivity [ edit ] Wild animals may be placed in captivity for conservation, studies, exotic pet trade, and farming .

[ 10 ] Places of captivity that are connected with the AZA, ( Association of Zoos and Aquariums ), may hold animals’ captive as a means to save them from extinction . For example, the AZA SAFE, (Save Animals From Extinction), promotes well-being and care of animals, conservation, and additional disciplines in order to protect and aid the wildlife. The organization focuses on creating recovery plans , cooperation between AZA workers, and advancement of conservation. Furthermore, the AZA and the zoos and aquariums accredited with the AZA use the help of educators , veterinarians , and people doing research. With their assistance, zoos and aquariums are able to have the proper necessities needed in recovery programs to prevent animals from going extinct.

[ 11 ] Kiger wild horse auction.

Annually, it is subjected that thousands of wild animals end up in captivity due to the wild animal trade. These animals can be held in captivity because of the overabundance of their population in roadside zoos. Additional reasons as to why animals may end up in captivity is because animals are captured from their original habitat, come from animal breeders , or come from the black market . When wild animals are captured and held in captivity, then they may be sold in pet stores , auction sales , or the World Wide Web .

[ 12 ] Zoos' impact on animal captivity [ edit ] Photo of a lion at a captive breeding center.

Zoos are known as a place where visitors come in to see wild animals.

[ 13 ] This means zoos may keep animals in confinement. For example, zoos may keep animals captive as a means to save them from going extinct. More specifically, in 2020 the Science Advances published a study where they concluded that the work and population of human beings has affected the growth of animals going extinct around the world. The uproar of animals going extinct has caused zoos to use their captive breeding programs on endangered animals in an effort to create a stronger population. It is said that zoos are responsible for reducing the number of animals on the endangered species list and from extinction.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Zoos could also be known as a place where animals are put into after they are taken out of their natural habitat . When animals are pulled out from their native habitat and taken to a location they are unfamiliar with, then it is said that animals may experience shock and poor mental health. Furthermore, some wild animals have died inside zoos due to the shock of being placed in an unknown setting. To be more specific, this can also mean that taking animals away from their native habitat can possibly disrupt their way of living.

[ citation needed ] List of wild animals in America commonly held in captivity [ edit ] Name of animal and classification [ citation needed ] Animal description Lifespan in the wild Lifespan in captivity Photo of animal Alligators reptile The American alligators are considered to be crocodilians . Alligators may grow taller than 12 feet and weigh around 1,000 pounds (454 kg). This creature may be found in the southeastern area of the United States.

[ 16 ] More specifically, places such as Florida , Southern Virginia Border, Rio Grande ( Texas ), and west of the Gulf Coast . Alligators live in areas such as lakes, rivers, swamps, and wetlands. Furthermore, alligators' bodies are covered with scutes (scales) or osteoderms (bone skin) [ 17 ] [ 18 ] 35–50 years 65–80 years [ 19 ] Photo of the American alligator.

Bears mammalia  ( mammals ) Bears come in all different shapes and sizes due to where they live and how much food they have in their environment.

[ 20 ] For example, the panda can weigh around 300 pounds (136 kg) [ 21 ] and the male polar bear can weigh from 550-1700 pounds (249 to 771 kg).

[ 22 ] The range of bear heights can go from the panda who can be 4 feet tall [ 23 ] to the polar bear who can be up to 11 feet tall.

[ 24 ] 20–30 years Around 40 years [ 25 ] Photo that includes the bear subspecies.

Cougars mammalia (mammals) Cougars are considered to be mountain lions or pumas . The cougars' appearance is said to look like a larger version of a cat . The adult male cougar may weigh 200 pounds (91 kg) and the adult female may weigh 120 pounds (54 kg).

[ 26 ] The range of length for an adult cougar is said to be from 42 to 54 inches, including the tail that is 3 feet long.

[ 27 ] Around 12 years Up to 20 years [ 28 ] Photo of a cougar.

Chimpanzees mammalia (mammals) Chimpanzees are said to be social animals and their habitat is in the forests of Central Africa .

[ 29 ] In terms of appearance, chimpanzees have long black or brown hair that covers their body.

[ 30 ] Additionally, chimpanzees can be 3 feet tall. The females may weigh from 70 to 100 pounds (32 to 45 kg) and the males may weigh from 90 to 120 pounds (41 to 54 kg).

About 33 years [ 31 ] 31.7 years for males and 38.7 years for females [ 32 ] Photo of a chimpanzee.

Lions mammalia (mammals) Lions are considered to be muscular and have broad bodies. In terms of their appearance, male lions have a mane of hair that surrounds the neck area. Lions also tend to have a yellow to gold coat. Additionally, male lions tend to be 10 feet in length and weigh around 330 to 550 pounds (150 kg to 249 kg). On the other hand, female lions, also known as lionesses, [ 33 ] tend to be 9 feet in length and weigh between 265 and 395 pounds (120 kg to 179).

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Moreover, lions can be found in continents such as Africa , Asia , and Europe . More specifically, lions live in places such as Benin , Botswana , Cameroon , India , Kenya , Mozambique , Namibia , South Africa , Tanzania , and Zambia .

[ 36 ] 12 to 16 years Around 25 years [ 37 ] Photo of Lion (right) and Lioness (left) together.

Ocelots mammalia (mammals) Ocelots are medium-sized animals. They have golden brown to silver colored fur as well as brown and black spots. Also, ocelots have stripes that starts at the inner edges of their eyes. Without the tail, ocelots are 3 feet long and weigh about 30 pounds (14 kg). This animal can be found in Arizona , Southern Texas and Northern Argentina . Furthermore, ocelots are night time animals. This is because they rest during the day and hunt during the night.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] About 12 years Around 20 years [ 41 ] Photo of an ocelot in the zoo.

Servals mammalia (mammals) Servals , a slender wild cat , has stripes and spots on its body. Serval can be small to medium-sized in length. To be more specific, this animal is approximately between 1 and 2 meters long. In terms of weight, Servals weigh around 20 to 40 pounds (9 to 19 kg).

[ 42 ] This animal lives close to the savannas in the central and south area of Africa. More specifically, servals live where there are rivers and streams .

[ 43 ] 10 to 12 years Up to 20 years and higher [ 44 ] Photo of a serval.

Tigers mammalia (mammals) Tigers have many subspecies and are known as one of the largest cats in the world. More specifically, Amur tigers are 10 feet long and weigh around 660 pounds (300 kg). In contrast, the Sumatran tigers , the smaller subspecies of tigers, are about 8 feet long and weigh around 310 pounds (141 kg). The female tigers for every subspecies are stated to be smaller in size and lighter in weight compared to the males. Furthermore, tigers may be found in South and Southeast Asia , Eastern Russia , and China .

[ 45 ] 10 to 25 years Up to 20 years [ 46 ] Photo of amur tigers (largest subspecies in tigers) in the zoo. In the image, there appears to be the mother tiger with one of her cubs.

Photo of sumatran tiger (smallest subspecies in tigers).

Wolves mammalia (mammals) There are different subspecies of wolves such as grey, timer, or canines. In terms of looks, the grey wolves stated to look similar to the German shepherd . In terms of sizes, where they live impacts how big or small they are. For example, wolves in the north are considered to be bigger in contrast to the wolves in the south. Additionally, for length, wolves tend to be 3 to 5 feet long. Their tails often are one to two feet long in length. The male wolves can weight anywhere around 70 to 145 pounds (32 to 66 kg) and the female wolves can weigh anywhere from 60 to 100 pounds (27 to 45 kg). The gray wolf can be found in serval American states such as Alaska , North Idaho , North Michigan , North Wisconsin , Northeast Oregon , West Montana , and in Yellowstone park which is located in Wyoming .

[ 47 ] Typically no more than 10 years [ 48 ] Up to 20 years [ 49 ] Photo of the gray wolf.

Honey Badgers mammalia (mammals) Mellivora capensis , commonly known as honey badgers, are considered small mammals that weigh from 11 to 35 pounds.

[ 50 ] Mellivora Capensis have been observed to defend themselves against Leopards, Pythons, and Crocodiles. Honey Badgers can be found in dry areas, grasslands, and forests in Africa, Asia, and the Indian Subcontinent.

[ 51 ] Honey Badgers are considered solitary mammals and have black and white fur with large sharp claws as distinctive features.

[ 51 ] 7-8 years in the wild [ 52 ] Approximately 24 years (longest recorded 31 years) [ 52 ] Photo of a Honey Badger within an enclosure at a zoo.

Giraffes mammalia (mammals) Giraffes are the tallest land animals, native to Africa, known for their long necks, spotted coats, and graceful gait. They feed on leaves, primarily from acacia trees, using their long tongues and necks to reach high branches. Social and gentle, giraffes live in loose herds and are a keystone species in their ecosystems.

[ 53 ] Up to 25 years 20-27 years photo of a giraffe Meerkats mammalia (mammals) Meerkats are small, social mammals native to southern Africa. They are known for their upright stance and cooperative behavior. Living in groups called mobs, they share tasks like foraging, babysitting, and watching for predators. These diurnal creatures primarily eat insects but also small animals and plants.

[ 54 ] 15 years 20.6 years photo of a meerkat See also [ edit ] Animal husbandry Agriculture Animal husbandry Animal testing Domestication Intensive animal farming Free-range Livestock Working animal Animal rights Animal–industrial complex Animal rights Animal sacrifice Animal welfare Blood sport Cruelty to animals List of animal welfare and animal rights groups Personhood#Non-human animals Testing cosmetics on animals World Animal Protection Wild animal keeping Animal sanctuary Aquarium Behavioral enrichment Beluga whale#Captivity Captive elephants Captive killer whales Circus#Animal acts Dolphinarium Game reserve Human-animal communication Marine mammal park Menagerie Oceanarium Public Aquarium Safari Park Species reintroduction Wildlife trade Zoological garden Insectarium References [ edit ] ^ "Is that animal wild or domesticated? | World Animal Protection" .

www.worldanimalprotection.ca . Retrieved 2023-04-25 .

^ Definitions, 1911 Chapter 27 1 and 2 Geo 5; "...the expression "captive animal" means any animal (not being a domestic animal) of whatsoever kind or species, and whether a quadruped or not, including any bird, fish, or reptile, which is in captivity, or confinement, or which is maimed, pinioned, or subjected to any appliance or contrivance for the purpose of hindering or preventing the animals escape from captivity or confinement..."; Protection of Animals Act 1911; http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/Geo5/1-2/27 ^ "Environmental enrichment" .

www.ufaw.org.uk . Retrieved 2022-10-26 .

^ a b c d Rommeck, Ina; Anderson, Kristen; Heagerty, Allison; Cameron, Ashley; McCowan, Brenda (2009).

"Risk factors and remediation of self-injurious and self-abuse behavior in rhesus macaques" .

Journal of Applied Animal Welfare Science .

12 (1): 61– 72.

doi : 10.1080/10888700802536798 .

PMC 4443667 .

PMID 17209750 .

^ a b c Hosey, Geoff R.; Skyner, Lindsay J. (2007). "Self-injurious behavior in zoo primates".

International Journal of Primatology .

28 (6): 1431– 1437.

doi : 10.1007/s10764-007-9203-z .

S2CID 29918666 .

^ Erwin, J.; Mitchell, G.; Maple, Terry (1973). "Abnormal behavior in non-isolate-reared rhesus monkeys".

Psychological Reports .

33 (2): 515– 523.

doi : 10.2466/pr0.1973.33.2.515 .

PMID 4202533 .

S2CID 21576022 .

^ Wells, Deborah L. (2005). "A note on the influence of visitors on the behavior and welfare of zoo-housed gorillas".

Applied Animal Behaviour Science .

93 ( 1– 2): 13– 17.

doi : 10.1016/j.applanim.2005.06.019 .

^ a b Baker, Kate C.; Bloomsmith, Mollie A.; Oettinger, Brooke; Neu, Kimberly; Griffis, Caroline; Schoof, Valérie; Maloney, Margaret (2012).

"Benefits of pair housing are consistent across a diverse population of rhesus macaques" .

Applied Animal Behaviour Science .

137 ( 3– 4): 148– 156.

doi : 10.1016/j.applanim.2011.09.010 .

PMC 4307811 .

PMID 25635151 .

^ Weed, J.L.; Wagner, P.O.; Byrum, R.; Parrish, S.; Knezevich, M.; Powell, D.A. (2003). "Treatment of persistent self-injurious behavior in rhesus monkeys through socialization: A preliminary report".

Contemporary Topics in Laboratory Animal Science .

42 (5): 21– 23.

PMID 14510519 .

^ Fischer, Clare Parker; Romero, L Michael (2019-01-01). Cooke, Steven (ed.).

"Chronic captivity stress in wild animals is highly species-specific" .

Conservation Physiology .

7 (1): coz093.

doi : 10.1093/conphys/coz093 .

ISSN 2051-1434 .

PMC 6892464 .

PMID 31824674 .

^ "How Zoos and Aquariums Protect Endangered Species" .

www.aza.org . Retrieved 2023-04-29 .

^ "Captive Animals - Most states have no laws governing captive wild animals" .

Animal Legal Defense Fund . Retrieved 2023-04-29 .

^ "zoo" .

education.nationalgeographic.org . Retrieved 2023-05-09 .

^ Barrelet, Agnes (2021-06-24).

"How Zoos Improve the Lives of Animals" .

Children's Nature Retreat . Retrieved 2023-05-09 .

^ Society, National Geographic (2010-11-11).

"Captive Breeding and Species Survival" .

National Geographic Society . Retrieved 2023-05-09 .

^ "American Alligator" .

National Wildlife Federation . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ "American Alligator - Alligator Mississippiensis - NatureWorks" .

nhpbs.org . Retrieved 2023-05-11 .

^ "Osteoderm Fossils: More than Skin Deep | State Historical Society of North Dakota Blog" .

blog.statemuseum.nd.gov . Retrieved 2023-05-11 .

^ "American Alligator | Stone Zoo" .

www.zoonewengland.org . Retrieved 2023-05-09 .

^ "Bears of North America" .

Be Bear Aware Campaign . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ Schmidt, Amanda (10 June 2020).

"Panda Fact Sheet | Blog | Nature | PBS" .

Nature . Retrieved 2023-05-11 .

^ Schmidt, Amanda (9 December 2020).

"Polar Bear Fact Sheet | Blog | Nature | PBS" .

Nature . Retrieved 2023-05-11 .

^ Schmidt, Amanda (10 June 2020).

"Panda Fact Sheet | Blog | Nature | PBS" .

Nature . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ dfg.webmaster@alaska.gov.

"Polar Bear Species Profile, Alaska Department of Fish and Game" .

www.adfg.alaska.gov . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ "How Long Do Brown Bears Live? Discover the Brown Bear Lifespan (with Photos) - WildlifeTrip" .

wildlifetrip.org . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ "Cougar Facts for Kids - NatureMapping" .

naturemappingfoundation.org . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ "Cougar Facts - NatureMapping" .

naturemappingfoundation.org . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ "Cougar: Key Facts" .

Forest Wildlife . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ "Chimpanzees | Species | WWF" .

World Wildlife Fund . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ "Chimpanzee | San Diego Zoo Animals & Plants" .

animals.sandiegozoo.org . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ Cummings, Mike (2017-03-20).

"Yale-led study: Wild chimpanzees have surprisingly long life spans" .

YaleNews . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ J.B (2013-03-08).

"How long do chimpanzees live?" .

Chimpanzee Sanctuary Northwest . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ "Meet the Lion Family - Male, Female & Cub" .

Alert . Retrieved 2023-05-08 .

^ "Lion" .

Smithsonian's National Zoo . 2016-04-25 . Retrieved 2023-05-08 .

^ Schmidt, Amanda (3 September 2020).

"Lion Fact Sheet | Blog | Nature | PBS" .

Nature . Retrieved 2023-05-08 .

^ "10 Places Where Lions Live in the Wild (with Photos) - WildlifeTrip" .

wildlifetrip.org . Retrieved 2023-05-08 .

^ Society, National Geographic (2011-09-21).

"Big Cats in Captivity" .

National Geographic Society . Retrieved 2023-05-08 .

^ "Natural history" .

www.biologicaldiversity.org . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ "Ocelot - Leopardus pardalis - NatureWorks" .

nhpbs.org . Retrieved 2023-05-11 .

^ "Ocelot (Leopardus pardalis)" .

tpwd.texas.gov . Retrieved 2023-05-12 .

^ Admin (2016-08-23).

"Ocelot" .

Carolina Tiger Rescue . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ "Serval Facts and Information | SeaWorld Parks & Entertainment" .

seaworld.org . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ "Serval | San Diego Zoo Animals & Plants" .

animals.sandiegozoo.org . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ Admin (2016-08-23).

"Serval" .

Carolina Tiger Rescue . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ "Tiger" .

Smithsonian's National Zoo . 2016-04-25 . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ "Tiger" .

Smithsonian's National Zoo . 2016-04-25 . Retrieved 2023-05-09 .

^ "Gray Wolf" .

National Wildlife Federation . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ Mech, David (1988).

"Longevity wild wolves" (PDF) .

^ "FAQ about wolves" .

IFAW . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ "Honey Badger (Mellivora Capensis)" .

A-Z-Animals . March 14, 2024 . Retrieved March 14, 2024 .

^ a b "Honey Badger (Ratel) | San Diego Zoo Animals & Plants" .

animals.sandiegozoo.org . Retrieved 2024-04-23 .

^ a b "Honey badger (Mellivora capensis) longevity, ageing, and life history" .

genomics.senescence.info . Retrieved 2024-04-23 .

^ "Reticulated giraffe" (PDF) .

^ "Meerkat (Suricata suricatta) longevity, ageing, and life history" .

External links [ edit ] Pet-Abuse.com World Association of Zoos and Aquaria New York Zoos and Aquarium WSPA international website v t e Zoos , aquariums , and aviaries Types of zoos Animal sanctuary Animal theme park Aquarium Aviary Bear pit Butterfly house Dolphinarium Herpetarium Insectarium Nature center Marine mammal park Menagerie Oceanarium Penguinarium Pheasantry Petting zoo Reptile centre Safari park Virtual zoo Vivarium Zoo Conservation Biodiversity Captive breeding Conservation biology Endangered species Ex situ conservation In situ conservation Species reintroduction Lists Zoos Aquariums largest Animal sanctuaries Butterfly houses Dolphinariums Conservation topics Former zoos and aquariums Nature centers Zoo associations WAZA members Related Animal rights Animal cruelty Animals in captivity Animal training Behavioral enrichment Frozen zoo Immersion exhibit Nocturnal house Wildlife conservation Zookeeper Zoo emergency response team Zoo key Zoological society Zoology Animals portal Category: Zoos Category: Aquariums v t e Animal rights Topics (overviews, concepts, issues, cases) Overviews Movement History ( Ancient world ) Timeline Europe United States By country or territory Argentina Australia Austria Azerbaijan Brazil Canada China Denmark Ethiopia France Germany Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Malaysia Mexico Netherlands Russia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom United States Anarchism Punk subculture Religion Christianity Indian religions Islam Women Concepts Abolitionism Ahimsa Animal cognition Animal consciousness Animal–industrial complex Animal law Animal machine Animal protectionism Animal trial Animal welfare Animal-free agriculture Anthropocentrism Argument from marginal cases Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness Carnism Equal consideration of interests Emotion in animals Ethics of eating meat Ethics of uncertain sentience Holocaust analogy Insects in ethics Intrinsic value Meat paradox Mentophobia Moral circle expansion Nonviolence Nonkilling Open rescue Opposition to hunting Painism Personism Replaceability argument Sentientism Speciesism Total liberation Veganism Vegaphobia Vegetarianism Issues Animal husbandry Animal product Animal husbandry Battery cage Bile bear Chick culling Crocodiles CAFOs Cow-calf separation Feedback Fish Foam depopulation Fur Fur trade Insects Intensive Pigs Livestock Live export Poultry Wildlife Slaughter Slaughterhouse Ventilation shutdown Blood sport Badger-baiting Bear-baiting Boar-baiting Bull-baiting Donkey-baiting Duck-baiting Hog-baiting Human-baiting Hyena-baiting Lion-baiting Monkey-baiting Rat-baiting Wolf-baiting Cruelty Pest control ( Varmint hunting ) Sacrifice Working animal Animal testing History Alternatives Regulations Countries banning non-human ape experimentation Non-human primates Cosmetics Model organism Vivisection ( Anti-vivisection movement ) Organizations Huntingdon Life Sciences Nafovanny Green Scare ( Operation Backfire ) Animal welfare Abandoned pets Captivity Euthanasia ( insects ) Farmed insects Killing of animals Live food Pain Amphibians Cephalopods Crustaceans Fish Invertebrates Laboratory animals Sports Fishing Bait Commercial Farming Recreational Wild animals Culling Farming Hunting Techniques Coursing Spotlighting Trail hunting Trapping Treeing Trophy hunting Upland hunting Animals Alligators Bats Bears Birds Bison Boar Raccoons Deer Dolphins Foxes Hares Jackals Lions Mink Petrels Quail Rabbit Rooks Seals Squirrels Tigers Turtles Waterfowl Wild birds Whales Wolves Management Predation problem Suffering Trade Primates Ivory Welfare Cases Brown Dog affair Cambridge University primates McLibel case Monkey selfie copyright dispute Pit of despair SHAC Silver Spring monkeys University of California, Riverside 1985 laboratory raid Unnecessary Fuss War of the currents Studies Animal ethics Anthrozoology Critical animal studies Ethology Vegan studies Methodologies Direct Action Everywhere Hunt sabotage Observances World Animal Day World Day for Farmed Animals World Day for the End of Speciesism World Day for Laboratory Animals World Day for the End of Fishing World Vegan Day World Vegetarian Day Advocates (academics, writers, activists) Academics and writers Contemporary Carol J. Adams Aysha Akhtar Kristin Andrews Marc Bekoff Steven Best Paola Cavalieri Stephen R. L. Clark Alasdair Cochrane J. M. Coetzee Alice Crary David DeGrazia Daniel Dombrowski Sue Donaldson Josephine Donovan Joan Dunayer Mylan Engel Catia Faria Lawrence Finsen Michael W. Fox Gary L. Francione Robert Garner Valéry Giroux Lori Gruen John Hadley Oscar Horta Christine Korsgaard Dale Jamieson Kyle Johannsen Melanie Joy Hilda Kean Will Kymlicka Renan Larue Thomas Lepeltier Andrew Linzey Clair Linzey Dan Lyons David Nibert Martha Nussbaum Clare Palmer Charles Patterson David Pearce Jessica Pierce Evelyn Pluhar Mark Rowlands Richard D. Ryder Steve F. Sapontzis Jeff Sebo Jérôme Segal Peter Singer Gary Steiner Cass Sunstein David Sztybel Michael Tye Tatjana Višak Paul Waldau Corey Lee Wrenn Historical Tom Beauchamp Jeremy Bentham David Renaud Boullier Stephen St. C. Bostock Brigid Brophy Peter Buchan Mona Caird Priscilla Cohn Sherry Colb Henry Crowe Herman Daggett Richard Dean Wilhelm Dietler William Hamilton Drummond Edward Payson Evans T. Forster John Galsworthy Thomas G. Gentry V. A. Holmes-Gore Arthur Helps John Hildrop John Zephaniah Holwell Francis Hutcheson Soame Jenyns Marie Jungius Karl Christian Friedrich Krause John Lawrence Charles R. Magel Jean Meslier Mary Midgley J. Howard Moore José Ferrater Mora Robert Morris Leonard Nelson Edward Nicholson Siobhan O'Sullivan John Oswald Rod Preece Humphrey Primatt James Rachels Tom Regan Joseph Ritson Nathaniel Peabody Rogers Bernard Rollin Henry Stephens Salt Arthur Schopenhauer Laurids Smith John Styles Thomas Tryon Gary Varner Johann Friedrich Ludwig Volckmann Mary Anne Warren Adam Gottlieb Weigen Johann Heinrich Winckler Steven M. Wise Jon Wynne-Tyson Voltaire Thomas Young Activists Contemporary James Aspey Greg Avery Matt Ball Martin Balluch Carole Baskin Barbi Twins Brigitte Bardot Gene Baur Yves Bonnardel Joey Carbstrong Aymeric Caron Jake Conroy Rod Coronado Karen Dawn Chris DeRose John Feldmann Bruce Friedrich Juliet Gellatley Tal Gilboa Antoine Goetschel Mark Gold Brigitte Gothière Alex Hershaft Wayne Hsiung Charlotte Laws Ronnie Lee Howard Lyman Evanna Lynch Bill Maher Keith Mann Jim Mason Dan Mathews Joaquin Phoenix Jo-Anne McArthur Luísa Mell Virginia McKenna Morrissey Ingrid Newkirk Heather Nicholson Jack Norris Ric O'Barry David Olivier Alex Pacheco Craig Rosebraugh Jasmin Singer Kim Stallwood Lynda Stoner Marianne Thieme Darren Thurston Christine Townend Wendy Turner-Webster Jerry Vlasak Louise Wallis Ed Winters Gary Yourofsky That Vegan Teacher Historical Cleveland Amory Henry B. Amos Bob Barker Ernest Bell William Brown Edith Carrington Joseph Collinson Frances Power Cobbe Joan Court Karen Davis Royal Dixon Muriel Dowding Elizabeth Farians Emarel Freshel André Géraud Lewis Gompertz James Granger Barry Horne Marie Huot Lizzy Lind af Hageby Jessie Mackay Alfred Mansfield Mitchell J. Isaac Pengelly Norm Phelps Jill Phipps Maud Ingersoll Probasco Hans Ruesch Magnus Schwantje Nell Shipman Henry Spira Joseph Stratton Andrew Tyler Gretchen Wyler Movement (groups, parties) Groups Contemporary American Anti-Vivisection Society Animal Aid Animal Ethics Animal Justice Animal Justice Project Animal Legal Defense Fund Animal Liberation Animal Liberation Front Animal Liberation Press Office Animal Liberation Victoria Animal Rights Militia Animal Rising AnimaNaturalis Anti-Vivisection Coalition Anonymous for the Voiceless Beauty Without Cruelty Born Free Foundation Centre for Animals and Social Justice Chinese Animal Protection Network Cruelty Free International Direct Action Everywhere Doctors Against Animal Experiments Equanimal Every Animal Farm Animal Rights Movement Faunalytics Great Ape Project Hunt Saboteurs Association In Defense of Animals Korea Animal Rights Advocates L214 Last Chance for Animals Massachusetts Animal Rights Coalition Mercy for Animals Oxford Centre for Animal Ethics People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Revolutionary Cells – Animal Liberation Brigade Rise for Animals Sentience Politics Uncaged Campaigns United Activists for Animal Rights United Poultry Concerns UPF-Centre for Animal Ethics Viva!

Voice for Animals Humane Society Voiceless Historical Canadian Anti-Vivisection Society Humanitarian League (1891–1919) Millennium Guild Order of the Golden Age Oxford Group Parties Animal Justice Party (Australia) Animal Politics EU (Europe) Animal Protection Party of Canada (Canada) Animal Justice Party of Finland (Finland) Animals' Party (Sweden) Animalist Movement (Italy) Animalist Party with the Environment (Spain) DierAnimal (Belgium) Human Environment Animal Protection Party (Germany) Italian Animalist Party (Italy) Party for the Animals (Netherlands) People Animals Nature (Portugal) V-Partei³ (Germany) Activism Animal Rights National Conference Media (books, films, periodicals, albums) Books On Abstinence from Eating Animals (3rd century) A Reasonable Plea for the Animal Creation (1746) A System of Moral Philosophy, in Three Books (1755) The Cry of Nature (1791) An Essay on Humanity to Animals (1798) An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty (1802) Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes (1824) The Rights of Animals (1838) The Ethics of Diet (1883) A Plea for Vegetarianism and Other Essays (1886) Animals' Rights: Considered in Relation to Social Progress (1892) Evolutional Ethics and Animal Psychology (1897) Better-World Philosophy (1899) The Logic of Vegetarianism (1899) The Universal Kinship (1906) The New Ethics (1907) Animals, Men and Morals (1971) Animal Liberation (1975) The Case for Animal Rights (1983) Morals, Reason, and Animals (1987) Zoos and Animal Rights (1993) Animals, Property, and the Law (1995) The Lives of Animals (1999) Eternal Treblinka (2001) Do Animals Have Rights?

(2005) Striking at the Roots (2008) An American Trilogy (2009) An Introduction to Animals and Political Theory (2010) Animal Rights Without Liberation (2012) Political Animals and Animal Politics (2014) Animal (De)liberation (2016) Beating Hearts: Abortion and Animal Rights (2016) Sentientist Politics (2018) Wild Animal Ethics (2020) Animal Ethics in the Wild (2022) Making a Stand for Animals (2022) Animal Rights Law (2023) The Moral Circle (2025) Films The Animals Film (1981) A Cow at My Table (1998) Shores of Silence (2000) The Witness (2000) Meet Your Meat (2002) Legally Blonde 2 (2003) The Meatrix (2003) Peaceable Kingdom (2004) Earthlings (2005) Behind the Mask (2006) Your Mommy Kills Animals (2007) Food, Inc.

(2009) The Cove (2009) Peaceable Kingdom: The Journey Home (2009) Forks Over Knives (2011) Vegucated (2011) An Apology to Elephants (2013) Speciesism: The Movie (2013) The Ghosts in Our Machine (2013) Unlocking the Cage (2016) Land of Hope and Glory (2017) Carnage (2017) Okja (2017) Dominion (2018) Seaspiracy (2021) Periodicals Journals Animal Sentience Between the Species Cahiers antispécistes Etica & Animali Journal of Animal Ethics Relations. Beyond Anthropocentrism The Animals' Defender Magazines Arkangel Bite Back Muutoksen kevät No Compromise Satya Albums Animal Liberation (1987) Tame Yourself (1991) Manifesto (2008) Salvation of Innocents (2014) Onward to Freedom (2014) Fairs and exhibitions Holocaust on your Plate (2003) Category ( 138 ) v t e Animal welfare Issues Abandoned pets Animal husbandry Animal testing Animals in sport Artificial insemination Barn fire Battery cage Beak trimming Bile bear Blood sports Captivity Chick culling Culling Concentrated animal feeding operation Cow-calf separation Dairy farming Discretionary invasive procedures on animals Eating live animals Eating live seafood Eyestalk ablation Feedback (pork industry) Foam depopulation Foie gras controversy Forced molting Fur farming Gestation crate Hunting Horse pain caused by the bit Intensive animal farming Intensive pig farming Livestock branding Livestock dehorning Livestock transportation Pet rental Poultry farming Puppy mill Testing cosmetics on animals Ventilation shutdown Vivisection Welfare of farmed insects Wild animal welfare Wildlife farming Zoos Concepts Abnormal behaviours in animals Animal psychopathology Animal shelter Animal welfare science Anthrozoology Behavioral enrichment Compassionate conservation Conservation welfare Ethics of uncertain sentience Ethical omnivorism Five Domains model Five Freedoms Humane law enforcement Intrinsic value in animal ethics Rescue group RSPCA Assured Three Rs principles Welfare biology Pain Pain in amphibians Pain in cephalopods Pain in crustaceans Pain in fish Pain in invertebrates Grimace scale Organisations ASPCA Animal Defence and Anti-Vivisection Society Animal Defenders International Animal Welfare Committee Animal Welfare Party Animals' Friend Society American Humane Animal Aid Unlimited Animal Welfare Board of India Animal Welfare Institute Animal Welfare Investigations Project Badger Trust Band of Mercy Battersea Best Friends Animal Society Blue Cross Blue Cross of India Care for the Wild International Cats Protection Church Society for the Promotion of Kindness to Animals Compassion in World Farming CAWF Cinnamon Trust Dogs Trust DSPA DSPCA Eurogroup for Animals Ferne Animal Sanctuary Four Paws FRAME Hedgehog Care Humane Canada Humane Farm Animal Care HSUS Humane Society International Humane Slaughter Association International Animal Rescue IFAW International Society for Applied Ethology ISPCA List of animal welfare organizations League Against Cruel Sports Marine Connection National Society for the Abolition of Cruel Sports Network for Animals Lord Dowding Fund for Humane Research MSPCA-Angell National Animal Welfare Trust National Anti-Vivisection Society National Council for Animals' Welfare OneKind Party for Animal Welfare People for Animals People's Dispensary for Sick Animals RNZSPCA RSPCA RSPCA Australia Save Me Scottish Animal Welfare Commission SSPCA Tiggywinkles Toronto Humane Society UFAW Wildlife Aid Foundation World Animal Protection World Horse Welfare Publications American Humane Magazine Animal Protection Animal Welfare AWI Quarterly Cruel Sports Human Advocate Journal of Applied Animal Welfare Science Our Dumb Animals The Animals' Friend The Animals' Guardian The Cat The Zoophilist Books A Few Notes on Cruelty to Animals (1846) Black Beauty (1877) Diet for a New America (1987) Min ko vill ha roligt (1990) Miracle Dog (2005) Striking at the Roots (2007) Pawprints of Katrina (2008) No Animals Were Harmed (2011) Activists and workers Contemporary Michael C. Appleby Cynthia Bathurst Matthew E. Bershadker Christa Blanke Moira Brown Jan Cameron Judy MacArthur Clark Kendra Coulter Peter Ronald Davies Petra Deimer Alanna Devine Robin Ganzert Celia Hammond Alison Hanlon Brian Hare Kathrin Glock Emily Patterson-Kane Philip Lymbery Damien Mander Christine Nicol Wayne Pacelle Sharon Pincott Ilka Reinhardt Jill Robinson Naomi Sagara Sepehr Salimi Adolfo Sansolini Rakesh Shukla Karen Stockin Patti Strand Sally Varma Tina M. Widowski Historical Gertrude Ansell Emily Appleton Gertrude Baillie-Weaver H. Baillie-Weaver Madeleine Bemelmans Henry Bergh Annie Bradshaw Victoria Braithwaite Mary Brancker Benjamin Bryan Roger A. Caras Ada Cole Edith Cole Jim Cronin Brian Davies Gerard Lysley Derriman Maria Dickin Marjorie Doggett Muriel Dowding Alice Drakoules Sarah J. Eddy Thomas Erskine Agnes Estcourt-Oswald Edward G. Fairholme Aida McAnn Flemming Lucy Furman Basil Goldstone Julia Goddard Robert Gower Norman Child Graham Colesworthey Grant George Greenwood Peter Gurney Catherine Victoria Hall Edward Hemingway Rachel Hirschfeld Sjoerd Hofstra Clive Hollands Douglas Houghton John A. Hoyt W. Hugenholtz Rowland Johns Velma Bronn Johnston Albert Knapp Agnes von Konow Titus Lander Carla Lane Etta Lemon Victoria Lidiard George Watson Little Alasdair Alpin MacGregor Terry Maple Fergus MacCunn Frederick Messer Richard Martin Shirley McGreal Lady Mount Temple Harriet Nevins Felix Ortt Catherine Louisa Pirkis Eliza Phillips Maude Gillette Phillips Duchess of Portland Samuel Jackson Pratt Nancy Price Wilfred Risdon Peter Roberts Jules Rühl Jan Salter Olive Smith-Dorrien Catherine Smithies Thomas Bywater Smithies Herbert Snow Ellin Prince Speyer Christine Stevens Douglas S. S. Steuart Elisabeth Svendsen Mary Tealby Ralph Waldo Trine Sidney Trist Ethel Venton M. Dudley Ward Jessey Wade Abiathar Wall Christopher Wathes Franz Weber Caroline Earle White Emily Williamson H. Fergie Woods Alice Morgan Wright Gretchen Wyler Scholars and writers Contemporary Arnold Arluke Jonathan Balcombe Michael Balls Geoffrey Barstow Marc Bekoff Donald Broom Marian Dawkins Bob Fischer Bruce Fogle Jane Goodall Temple Grandin Celia Haddon Jane Hurst Erich Hoyt Barbara J. King Alistair Lawrence David Macdonald Jeremy Marchant Jeff McMahan Daniel Mills Sy Montgomery Virginia Morell Yew-Kwang Ng Caitlin O'Connell-Rodwell Clare Palmer Susan J. Pearson Dale Peterson Jessica Pierce Diana Reiss Carl Safina Matthew Scully Paul Shapiro Jennifer Skiff Brian Tomasik Peter Wohlleben Historical George T. Angell Patrick Bateson Beddow Bayly Ernest Bell Edward Berdoe Arthur Broome Jean Burden Gerald Carson W. H. Cock Stephen Coleridge Christian Adam Dann J. Morewood Dowsett Audrey Eyton George Fleming Ralph Fletcher Ruth Harrison Caroline van der Hucht-Kerkhoven C. W. Hume E. Douglas Hume Beatrice Lindsay James Macaulay Basheer Ahmad Masri Francis Orpen Morris George Nicholson Siobhan O'Sullivan Charles Reinhardt Francis H. Rowley W. M. S. Russell Chris Sherwin Colin Spedding William O. Stillman John Styles Bell Taylor Ernst von Weber D. G. M. Wood-Gush Frans de Waal Meta Wellmer Hugh Wirth William Youatt Thomas Young Categories Animal advocacy parties Animal killing Animal rights Animal welfare and rights legislation Animal welfare in sports Animal sacrifice Animal sanctuaries Animal testing Animal welfare and rights by country Cruelty to animals Dishes involving the consumption of live animals Ethically disputed business practices towards animals Fur trade Pain in animals People associated with animal welfare Vivisection Whaling Religious considerations Dhabihah Jhatka Kutha Shechita Tza'ar ba'alei chayim Rituals and festivals Blessing of animals Bous al carrer Cock throwing Combat de Reines Eid al-Adha Gadhimai festival Goat throwing Goose pulling International Primate Day Kapparot Dog Meat Festival Monkey Buffet Festival October Horse Pushkar Camel Fair Rapa das Bestas of Sabucedo Running of the bulls Surin Elephant Round-up Toro embolado World Animal Day Legislation Animal testing regulations Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 (UK) Animal Welfare Act 1999 (NZ) Animal Welfare Act 2006 (UK) Animal Welfare Act of 1966 (US) Animal Welfare (Sentience) Act 2022 (UK) Cruelty to Animals Act 1876 (UK) EU Directive 2010/63/EU (EU) EU Directive 1999/74/EC (EU) Horse Protection Act of 1970 (US) Hunting Act 2004 (UK) List of international animal welfare conventions Philippine Animal Welfare Act 1998 (Philippines) Related List of animal rights advocates List of animal sanctuaries Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Captivity_(animal)&oldid=1296206922 " Categories : Zoos Animals in captivity Cultural history Cultural studies Animal rights Cruelty to animals Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 This page was last edited on 18 June 2025, at 14:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Captivity (animal) 18 languages Add topic

