Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Support 2 Criticism 3 Future prospects 4 Ethics of terraforming in fiction 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Ethics of terraforming 2 languages Català Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical debate This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Ethics of terraforming" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The ethics of terraforming has constituted a philosophical debate within biology , ecology , and environmental ethics as to whether terraforming other worlds is an ethical endeavor.

Support [ edit ] On the pro-terraforming side of the argument, there are those like Robert Zubrin and Richard L. S. Taylor who believe that it is humanity's moral obligation to make other worlds suitable for Terran life, as a continuation of the history of life transforming the environments around it on Earth . They also point out that Earth will eventually be destroyed as nature takes its course, so that humanity faces a long-term choice between terraforming other worlds or allowing all Earth life to become extinct. Dr. Zubrin further argues that even if native microbes have arisen on Mars, for example, the fact that they have not progressed beyond the microbe stage by this point, halfway through the lifetime of the Sun, is a strong indicator that they never will; and that if microbial life exists on Mars, it is likely related to Earth life through a common origin on one of the two planets, which spread to the other as an example of panspermia . Since Mars life would then not be fundamentally unrelated to Earth life, it would not be unique, and competition with such life would not be fundamentally different from competing against microbes on Earth.

[ 1 ] Zubrin summed up this view: Some people consider the idea of terraforming Mars heretical—humanity playing God. Yet others would see in such an accomplishment the most profound vindication of the divine nature of the human spirit, exercised in its highest form to bring a dead world to life. My own sympathies are with the latter group. Indeed, I would go farther. I would say that failure to terraform Mars constitutes failure to live up to our human nature and a betrayal of our responsibility as members of the community of life itself. Today, the living biosphere has the potential to expand its reach to encompass a whole new world. Humans, with their intelligence and technology, are the unique means that the biosphere has evolved to allow it to make that land grab, the first among many. Countless beings have lived and died to transform the Earth into a place that could create and allow human existence. Now it's our turn to do our part.

[ 2 ] Richard Taylor more succinctly exemplified this point of view with the slogan, "move over microbe".

[ 3 ] Some human critics label this argument as an example of anthropocentrism . These critics may view the homocentric view as not only geocentric but short-sighted, and tending to favour human interests to the detriment of ecological systems . They argue that an anthropocentrically driven approach could lead to the extinction of indigenous extraterrestrial life , or interplanetary contamination .

[ citation needed ] Martyn J. Fogg rebutted these ideas by delineating four potential rationales on which to evaluate the ethics of terraforming— anthropocentrism , zoocentrism , ecocentrism , and preservationism —roughly forming a spectrum from placing the most value on human utility to placing the most value on preserving nature . While concluding that arguments for protecting alien biota can be made from any of these standpoints, he also concludes with an argument, similar to Zubrin's, that strict preservationism is "untenable", since "it assumes that human consciousness, creativity, culture and technology stand outside nature, rather than having been a product of natural selection. If Homo sapiens is the first space faring species to have evolved on Earth, space settlement would not involve acting 'outside nature', but legitimately 'within our nature'." [ 4 ] Criticism [ edit ] See also: Space advocacy § Decolonizing space , and Planetary chauvinism Strong ecocentrists like Richard Sylvan feel there is an intrinsic value to life, and seek to preserve the existence of native lifeforms. This idea is usually referred to as biocentrism . In response to these objections, weak anthropocentrism incorporates biocentric ethics, allowing for various degrees of terraforming.

[ citation needed ] Christopher McKay strikes a position between these two, what may be termed weak ecocentrism, proposing that an entire biosphere of alien life, even if only microbial life, has far more value than individual microbes, and should not be subject to interference by Earth life. However, he also proposed that it would be valuable and desirable to terraform a planet to nurture the alien life, to allow it to thrive as well as to exhibit a broader range of behavior for scientific study, and that such activity is ultimately justified by the utilitarian value to humans of being able to study and appreciate the still somewhat undisturbed alien life. McKay put his views in these words: If we discover living or dormant organisms on Mars and these forms represent a different type of life than the life we have on Earth, then we should not bring life from Earth to Mars. Instead, we should alter the Martian environment so that this native Martian life can expand to fill a planetary scale biosphere. [...] [I]t is essential to maintain the categorical distinction between killing individual microorganisms and extinguishing an entire alternative system of life. There is no logical argument against killing microorganisms per se, either for research, medical, sanitary, or even casual reasons. However [...] it does not logically follow that destroying or displacing the first example of life beyond Earth is acceptable if the only examples of that life are microscopic. [...] If we terraformed Mars to allow the expansion of that life we would then reap the maximum benefits from the scientific study of that life form and its development into a full scale global biosphere. We would also enjoy the educational and [aesthetic] benefits of life in a biologically richer solar system.

[ 5 ] Even this "help" would be seen as a type of terraforming to the strictest of ecocentrists, who would say that all life has the right, in its home biosphere, to evolve at its own pace as well as its own direction, free of any outside interference. The impact of the human species on otherwise untouched worlds and the possible interference with or elimination of alien life forms are good reasons to leave these other worlds in their natural states; this is an example of a strong biocentric view, or object-centered ethic.

[ 6 ] Critics claim this is a form of anti-humanism and they assert that rocks and bacteria can not have rights, nor should the discovery of alien life prevent terraforming from occurring.

Pragmatists argue that humanity on other planets is sociologically impractical. The basis is that being on another planet would not change human nature , so it would not be long until pollution and destruction by humankind began, and on a planet that has probably only known peace since its formation. Since life on Earth will ultimately be destroyed by planetary impacts or the red giant phase of the Sun, all native species will perish if not allowed to move to other objects.

[ citation needed ] Some advocates of animal welfare have pointed out the ethical issues associated with spreading Earth-based wild-animal life by terraforming. In particular, they claim it may be ethically objectionable to bring into existence large numbers of animals that suffer greatly during their often short lives in the wild.

[ 7 ] There are also concerns that even with full terraformation, distinct differences between Earth and Mars, such as gravity, lengths of the day and night cycles, and differing/lacking magnetic fields, would cause harm to many introduced species that have evolved for millions of years under Earth conditions. Though some species may survive, and others possibly could be adapted through genetic modification, if the introduced species were isolated on Mars and not frequently interbred with Earth counterparts, the species would eventually evolve through many generations in order to better suit their new environment, possibly leading to different evolutionary lines. Thus, the introduced life may eventually look and act different from their Earthly counterparts and/or ancestors.

Another aspect of terraforming ethics deals with an opposing extreme in this debate. Terraforming could be seen as a potential waste of precious materials, in light of alternative uses.

[ citation needed ] Critics [ who?

] believe that it would constrict the growth potential of humanity by encapsulating the material inside of an astronomical object. Once the surface is terraformed and people have taken residence there, all the interior material is needed to sustain the maximum gravity potential for those inhabitants. If all of the material were utilized to produce space habitation systems, a much greater number of lives would then be supported.

[ citation needed ] Future prospects [ edit ] The contrasts between these arguments are fully explored in the field of environmental ethics. Debates often focus on how much time and effort should be expended on investigating the possibility of any microscopic life on a planet before deciding whether to terraform, and what level of sophistication or chances for future development alien life would deserve varying levels of commitment to non-interference.

[ clarification needed ] Such debates have been engaged in live, between Zubrin and McKay and others, at various conferences of the Mars Society , which has made written and video records of the debates available. For example, a written account of some of these debates is available in On to Mars: Colonizing a New World , as a joint article, "Do Indigenous Martian Bacteria have Precedence over Human Exploration?" (pp. 177–182) Ethics of terraforming in fiction [ edit ] A fairly thorough non-fictional analysis of the ethics of terraforming is also presented under the guise of the fictional Mars trilogy by Kim Stanley Robinson , particularly between the characters Ann Clayborne and Sax Russell , with Clayborne epitomizing an ecocentric ethic of non-interference and Russell embodying the anthropocentric belief in the virtue of terraforming.
The idea of interplanetary colonization and its ethical implications are also explored by C.S. Lewis in the first book of his Space Trilogy Out of the Silent Planet published in 1938.

The plot of the 1982 film Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan is based around the use of the so-called "Genesis Device" to create the conditions and organic building-blocks for life on previously lifeless planets. In debating the ethics of the device, Dr. McCoy , Spock and Admiral Kirk reflect on the Device's ability to replace any existing lifeforms with "its new matrix". McCoy describes the ethics of the Device in the following terms: "According to myth, the Earth was created in six days. Now watch out - here comes Genesis! We'll do it for you in six minutes!" The technology is shown to be flawed in the 1984 sequel, Star Trek III: The Search for Spock .

Star Trek: The Next Generation dealt with terraforming. In the episode " Home Soil ", terraformers are causing harm to the native lifeforms on Velara III, with disastrous consequences.

In the novel Revelation Space by Alastair Reynolds , there was a political dispute in the human colony of a fictional planet called Resurgam between a faction who were in support of terraforming the planet and another faction of archeologists who were against terraforming due to the discovery of the remains of an extinct alien civilisation on the planet and due to the fear that any attempt to terraform the planet would destroy the valuable artifacts that still might be buried underground.

The ethics of terraforming, as well as deep space colonization , are recurring themes in Firefly , in which they are compared to the issues of expansionism and imperialism in the American Old West .

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Suffering risks Space ethics References [ edit ] ^ "Why life on Mars may help change the paradigm" . By Bernardo Kastrup (December 2, 2012) . Retrieved May 19, 2013 .

^ Robert Zubrin, The Case for Mars: The Plan to Settle the Red Planet and Why We Must , pp. 248-249, Simon & Schuster/Touchstone, 1996, ISBN 0-684-83550-9 ^ Fogg, Martyn J. (1995).

Terraforming: Engineering Planetary Environments . SAE International, Warrendale, PA.

^ "The Ethical Dimensions of Space Settlement" (PDF) . Retrieved 2006-05-15 .

^ Christopher McKay and Robert Zubrin, "Do Indigenous Martian Bacteria have Precedence over Human Exploration?", pp. 177-182, in On to Mars: Colonizing a New World , Apogee Books Space Series, 2002, ISBN 1-896522-90-4 ^ "Terraforming" . By Global Oneness Commitment . Archived from the original on December 22, 2010 . Retrieved May 19, 2013 .

^ Tomasik, Brian (2015-11-02).

"The Importance of Wild-Animal Suffering" .

Relations. Beyond Anthropocentrism .

3 (2): 133– 152.

doi : 10.7358/rela-2015-002-toma .

ISSN 2280-9643 .

Further reading [ edit ] Sparrow, Robert. "The Ethics of Terraforming." Environmental Ethics 21.3 (Fall 1999): 227(1).

Otto, Eric. "Kim Stanley Robinson's Mars Trilogy and the Leopoldian Land Ethic." Utopian Studies 14.2 (Spring 2003): 118(19).

Pinson, Robert. "Ethical Considerations for Terraforming Mars," 32 Environmental Law Reporter 11333 (2002).

Schwartz, James. "On the Moral Permissibility of Terraforming." Ethics and the Environment 18.2 (2013): 1-31.

York, Paul. "The Ethics of Terraforming." Philosophy Now: A Magazine of Ideas.

(Oct/Nov 2002).

Cathcart, R.B., Badescu, V. with Ramesh Radhakrishnan, MACRO-ENGINEERS' DREAMS (23 November 2006), a cost-free downloadable 176-page exposition made available at http://textbookrevolution.org Archived 2009-01-05 at the Wayback Machine in its engineering selection of textbooks.

v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐779wd
Cached time: 20250812031609
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.419 seconds
Real time usage: 0.539 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2996/1000000
Revision size: 15597/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 80018/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13053/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 34625/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.253/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7021095/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  462.679      1 -total
 24.20%  111.962      1 Template:Reflist
 22.06%  102.078      1 Template:Ethics
 21.60%   99.951      1 Template:Navbox
 17.20%   79.580      3 Template:Cite_web
 14.18%   65.613      1 Template:Citations_needed
 13.12%   60.722      1 Template:Short_description
 12.90%   59.673      1 Template:Ambox
 11.79%   54.565      7 Template:Fix
  7.74%   35.834      5 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5161347:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812031609 and revision id 1278751646. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ethics_of_terraforming&oldid=1278751646 " Categories : Planetary engineering Ethics of science and technology Environmental ethics Terraforming Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2021 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2010 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2021 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 4 March 2025, at 10:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ethics of terraforming 2 languages Add topic

