Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classifying fires 2 Components 3 Balanced approach 4 Building operation in conformance with design 5 Government Guidelines of Fire Protection and Fire Safety 6 See also 7 Notes 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Fire protection 29 languages العربية বাংলা Boarisch Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Հայերեն हिन्दी മലയാളം မြန်မာဘာသာ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Measures that prevent or mitigate unwanted fire Fire protection is the study and practice of mitigating the unwanted effects of potentially destructive fires .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It involves the study of the behaviour, compartmentalisation , suppression and investigation of fire and its related emergencies, as well as the research and development, production, testing and application of mitigating systems . In structures, be they land-based, offshore or even ships, owners and operators may be responsible for maintaining their facilities in accordance with a design-basis rooted in law, including local building and fire codes.

[ 3 ] Buildings must be maintained in accordance with the current fire code, enforced by fire prevention officers of a local fire department.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In the event of fire emergencies, Firefighters , fire investigators, and other fire prevention personnel are called to mitigate, investigate and learn from the damage of a fire .

[ 6 ] Classifying fires [ edit ] Main article: Fire classification When deciding on what fire protection is appropriate for any given situation, it is important to assess the types of fire hazards that may be faced.

[ 7 ] Some jurisdictions operate systems of classifying fires using letter codes.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Fires are sometimes categorized as "one alarm", "two alarm", "three alarm" (or higher) fires.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] There is no standard definition for what this means, though it always refers to the level of response by local authorities. In some cities the numeric rating refers to the number of fire stations that have been summoned to the fire. In others, the number counts the number of "dispatches" for additional personnel and equipment.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Components [ edit ] Personnel training and fire training alarm in Karelian Research Centre of RAS , 2018.

Fire protection in land-based buildings , offshore construction or on board ships is typically achieved via all of the following: Passive fire protection (PFP) — the installation of firewalls and fire rated floor assemblies to form fire compartments intended to limit the spread of fire , high temperatures, and smoke .

Active fire protection (AFP) — manual and automatic detection and suppression of fires, such as fire sprinkler systems and ( fire alarm ) systems.

Education — the provision of information regarding passive and active fire protection systems to building owners, operators, occupants, and emergency personnel so that they have a working understanding of the intent of these systems and how they perform in the fire safety plan .

Balanced approach [ edit ] Passive fire protection in the form of compartmentalisation was developed prior to the invention of or widespread use of active fire protection, mainly in the form of automatic fire sprinkler systems. During this time, PFP was the dominant mode of protection provided in facility designs. With the widespread installation of fire sprinklers in the past 50 years, the reliance on PFP as the only approach was reduced.

Building operation in conformance with design [ edit ] Effective fire protection within a structure relies upon careful and expert design, including compliance with local building and fire codes, by the architect and other building design consultants, [ 14 ] and installation in turn being done in compliance with the agreed upon design. Deviations from the original design during installation should be made known to the appropriate authority for review. After installation the system may require testing, and a building permit may then be issued after review by an appropriate authority.

The system may require periodic inspection and testing throughout the lifetime of the structure to identify and repair any faulty components or other defects. Modifications to a structure through its lifetime may require expert consideration of the fire protection system, to ensure that any modifications to the structure do not compromise the safety system.

Government Guidelines of Fire Protection and Fire Safety [ edit ] INDIA USA UAE EUROPE UK See also [ edit ] Fire prevention Automatic fire suppression Building code Firefighting Fire test Listing and approval use and compliance Passive fire protection Compartmentalization Firestop Intumescent Endothermic Firestop pillow Fire door Fireproofing Fire-resistance rating Active fire protection External water spray system Fire sprinkler Fire alarm Fire alarm system Fire alarm control panel Fire detection Fire extinguisher Manual call point Fire sprinkler system Smoke detector Hypoxic air fire prevention system Gaseous fire suppression Condensed aerosol fire suppression Fire protection engineering Flame detector Notes [ edit ] ^ NFPA Fire Protection Handbook, pg. 2-19 ^ RANA, JAGENDRA (2023-06-29).

RISK ENGINEERING . Blue Rose Publishers. p. 218.

^ RANA, JAGENDRA (2023-06-29).

RISK ENGINEERING . Blue Rose Publishers. p. 215.

^ BHUYAN, DEVAJIT (2015-06-01).

Complete Guide to Career Planning (in German). V&S Publishers.

ISBN 978-93-5057-403-4 .

^ Bhuyan, Devajit (2004-12-01).

Multiple Career Choices . Pustak Mahal. p. 201.

ISBN 978-81-223-0779-5 .

^ BHUYAN, DEVAJIT (2015-06-01).

Complete Guide to Career Planning (in German). V&S Publishers.

ISBN 978-93-5057-403-4 .

^ Ward, Michael J. (2019-12-18).

Fire Officer: Principles and Practice includes Navigate Advantage Access: Principles and Practice . Jones & Bartlett Learning. p. 405.

ISBN 978-1-284-17239-3 .

^ Jr, A. Maurice Jones; Jones (2013-12-27).

Fire Protection Systems . Jones & Bartlett Publishers. p. 29.

ISBN 978-1-284-03538-4 .

^ Binggeli, Corky (2008).

Materials for Interior Environments . John Wiley & Sons. p. 3.

ISBN 978-0-470-11428-5 .

^ Paper Industry . Paper Industry Management Association. 1965. p. 53.

^ Paine, Whiton Stewart (1981).

Proceedings, First National Conference on Burnout, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, November 2-4, 1981 . Gwynedd Mercy College/Mercy Catholic Medical Center. p. 117.

^ "Paying for Donated Blood, Ethanol in Lawn Mowers, Numbered Alarm Fires: 5/12/06 - Money News Story - WRC | Washington" . Archived from the original on 2007-11-23 . Retrieved 2007-11-23 .

^ "Four-alarm fire on Avenue B" .

www.thevillager.com . Archived from the original on 29 December 2015 . Retrieved 3 April 2018 .

^ Ballast, David Kent (2021-07-20).

PPI NCIDQ Interior Design Reference Manual, 7th Edition—Includes Complete Coverage of Content Areas for All Three Sections of the NCIDQ Exam . Simon and Schuster. pp.

28– 18.

ISBN 978-1-59126-842-0 .

Further reading [ edit ] Huang, Kai. 2009. Population and Building Factors That Impact Residential Fire Rates in Large U.S. Cities. Applied Research Project. Texas State University.

http://ecommons.txstate.edu/arp/287/ Archived 2012-03-08 at the Wayback Machine .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fire Protection .

National Fire Protection Association (US) National Fire Sprinkler Association (US) Fire Equipment Manufacturers' Association (US) v t e Fire protection Fundamental concepts Backdraft Boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE) Boilover Combustibility and flammability Conflagration Dangerous goods (HAZMAT) Deflagration Detonation Dust explosion Enthalpy of vaporization Explosive Fire classification Fire control Fire loading Fire point Fire triangle Flammability diagram Flammability limit Flammable liquid Flashover Flash point Friction loss Gas leak Heat transfer Jet fire K-factor (fire protection) Pool fire Pyrolysis Spontaneous combustion Structure fire Thermal radiation Water pressure Technology Active fire protection Automatic fire suppression Condensed aerosol fire suppression Detonation flame arrester External water spray system Fire bucket Fire prevention Fire protection Fire retardant Fire-retardant fabric Fire retardant gel Fire-safe polymers Fire safety Fire sprinkler system Fire suppression system Firefighting foam Flame arrester Flame retardant Flashback arrestor Fusible link Gaseous fire suppression Hypoxic air technology for fire prevention Inerting system Intumescent Passive fire protection Personal protective equipment (PPE) Relief valve Spark arrestor Tank blanketing Vehicle fire suppression system Building design Annulus (firestop) Area of refuge Booster pump Compartmentation Crash bar Electromagnetic door holder Electromagnetic lock Emergency exit Emergency light Exit sign Fire curtain Fire cut Fire damper Fire door Fire escape Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire pump Fire sprinkler Firestop Firestop pillow Firewall (construction) Grease duct Heat and smoke vent Packing (firestopping) Penetrant (mechanical, electrical, or structural) Penetration (firestop) Pressurisation ductwork Safety glass Smoke control Smoke damper Smoke exhaust ductwork Smokeproof enclosure Standpipe (firefighting) Fire alarm systems Aspirating smoke detector Carbon monoxide detector Circuit integrity Explosive gas leak detector Fire alarm call box Fire alarm control panel Fire alarm notification appliance Fire drill Flame detector Heat detector Manual fire alarm activation Smoke detector Professions, trades, and services Duct cleaning Fire insurance Fire protection engineering Fireproofing Fire-resistance rating Fire Safety Evaluation System (FSES) Fire test Kitchen exhaust cleaning Listing and approval use and compliance Sprinkler fitting Industry organizations Institution of Fire Engineers (IFE) National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Society of Fire Protection Engineers (SFPE) Underwriters Laboratories (UL) Standards CE marking EN 3 EN 54 EN 16034 Flame spread GHS hazard statements GHS precautionary statements Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) List of R-phrases List of S-phrases Safety data sheet UL 94 Awards Arthur B. Guise Medal Harry C. Bigglestone Award See also Template:Fire Template:Firefighting Template:HVAC Category Commons Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Poland Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fire_protection&oldid=1297103517 " Categories : Fire protection Building engineering Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 04:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fire protection 29 languages Add topic

