Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Discovery Toggle Discovery subsection 1.1 Name 2 Structure Toggle Structure subsection 2.1 Encapsulated DNA 3 Reproduction and life cycle 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Thiomargarita magnifica 20 languages العربية বাংলা Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano മലയാളം Nederlands Polski Português Русский Simple English Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Largest known bacteria species Thiomargarita magnifica Light microscopy montage of the upper half of a Ca. T. magnifica cell, with a broken basal part revealing a tube-like morphology due to the large central vacuole and numerous spherical intracellular sulfur granules (a tardigrade is shown for scale) Scientific classification Domain: Bacteria Kingdom: Pseudomonadati Phylum: Pseudomonadota Class: Gammaproteobacteria Order: Thiotrichales Family: Thiotrichaceae Genus: Thiomargarita Species: T. magnifica Binomial name Thiomargarita magnifica Volland et al.

, 2022 [ 1 ] Candidatus Thiomargarita magnifica is a species of sulfur-oxidizing gammaproteobacteria , found growing underwater on detached leaves of red mangroves from the Guadeloupe archipelago in the Lesser Antilles .

[ 2 ] These filament-shaped bacteria are the largest known, with an average length of 1 cm , and some individuals reaching 2 centimetres (0.79 in), [ 3 ] making the bacteria visible to humans by unaided eye.

[ 1 ] Discovery [ edit ] The bacterium was discovered during the early 2010s by Olivier Gros from the University of the French Antilles at Pointe-à-Pitre , but initially did not attract much attention as Gros thought his find to be a fungus ; [ 4 ] it took Gros and other researchers five years to determine that it was a bacterium, and a few more years until Jean-Marie Volland, a graduate student supervised by Gros, determined its unusual properties.

[ 3 ] The bacterium was described formally in a 2022 publication.

[ 1 ] Name [ edit ] Thiomargarita means "sulfur pearl" in Latin . This refers to the appearance of the cells; they contain microscopic sulfur granules that scatter incident light, giving them a pearly lustre. The name magnifica means "magnificent", and was chosen by researcher Silvina González Rizzo, who identified Ca.

T. magnifica as a bacterium.

[ 5 ] Structure [ edit ] In bacteria, both nutrients and waste products of metabolism respectively reach and exit the interior of the cell by diffusion , which places an upper limit on the size of these organisms. Cells of the large sulfur bacterium Thiomargarita namibiensis , discovered in 1999, contain a large sac ( vacuole ) filled with water and nitrates , which pushes most of the cytoplasm close to the inner surface of the plasma membrane , so that the distances required for diffusion are relatively small (life processes occur only along the outer boundary of the cell).

Ca.

T. magnifica ' s cell includes a similar vacuole [ 3 ] that occupies most of the cell (65–80% by volume) and pushes the cytoplasm to the periphery of the cell (the thickness of cytoplasm varies from 1.8 to 4.8 microns ).

[ 1 ] The size of this bacterium and its extreme polyploidy [ clarification needed ] [ this refers back to a topic that has not been introduced ] are explained partially by its genome , which lacks many common bacterial cell division genes.

[ 1 ] The outside of the cell lacks epibiotic bacteria; their "surprising absence" can be explained by Ca.

T. magnifica possibly producing biologically active or even antibiotic chemical compounds .

[ 1 ] Encapsulated DNA [ edit ] Another sac or compartment within the organism contains its DNA . Researchers have named these compartments pepins . This structure is very different from the free-floating DNA found in most other bacteria.

[ 6 ] This arrangement is important, in as much as it suggests a form intermediate between prokaryotes , primitive single-cell organisms that do not have a cell nucleus (their DNA floats in the cytoplasm), and eukaryotes , which have DNA surrounded by a nuclear envelope .

[ 1 ] Reproduction and life cycle [ edit ] Like all prokaryotes, Ca.

T. magnifica reproduces asexually. However, there are slight differences in reproduction compared to other Thiomargarita species. Instead of dividing into equally-sized daughter cells , its life cycle is dimorphic .

[ 1 ] Researchers observed a process of reproduction similar to budding . During this process, Ca.

T. magnifica shares only some of its pepins with the much smaller daughter cell. It is believed that the smaller daughter cell serves as a method of dispersion, and helps it to spread over greater distances.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Largest organisms References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i Volland, Jean-Marie; Gonzalez-Rizzo, Silvina; Gros, Olivier; Tyml, Tomáš; Ivanova, Natalia; Schulz, Frederik; Goudeau, Danielle; Elisabeth, Nathalie H.; Nath, Nandita; Udwary, Daniel; Malmstrom, Rex R.; Guidi-Rontani, Chantal; Bolte-Kluge, Susanne; Davies, Karen M.; Jean, Maïtena R.; Mansot, Jean-Louis; Mouncey, Nigel J.; Angert, Esther R.; Woyke, Tanja; Date, Shailesh V. (24 June 2022).

"A centimeter-long bacterium with DNA contained in metabolically active, membrane-bound organelles" .

Science .

376 (6600): 1453– 1458.

Bibcode : 2022Sci...376.1453V .

bioRxiv 10.1101/2022.02.16.480423 .

doi : 10.1126/science.abb3634 .

eISSN 1095-9203 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 35737788 .

S2CID 249990020 .

^ "Record bacterium discovered as long as human eyelash" .

BBC News . 23 June 2022 . Retrieved 23 June 2022 .

^ a b c Pennisi, Elizabeth .

"Largest bacterium ever discovered has unexpectedly complex cells" .

Science . science.org . Retrieved 24 February 2022 .

^ Rogers, Peter (6 March 2022).

" "Impossibly big" bacteria rattle the field of microbiology" .

BigThink . Retrieved 22 March 2022 .

^ Ansede, Manuel (1 March 2022).

"Scientists discover one-centimeter long bacterium that's visible to the naked eye" .

El País . Retrieved 23 June 2022 .

^ Ferreira, Becky (23 June 2022).

"Government Scientists Discover Biggest Bacteria Ever, Visible to Naked Eye" .

Vice .

Taxon identifiers Thiomargarita magnifica Wikidata : Q111017090 Wikispecies : Thiomargarita magnifica GBIF : 12244919 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thiomargarita_magnifica&oldid=1302910933 " Categories : Thiotrichales Bacteria described in 2022 Gram-negative bacteria Candidatus taxa Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2020 Articles with 'species' microformats Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2025 This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 02:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thiomargarita magnifica 20 languages Add topic

