Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Evaluations 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Visible hand (economics) 1 language 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For a book by American business historian Alfred D. Chandler Jr., see The Visible Hand .

Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Part of a series on Macroeconomics Basic concepts Aggregate demand Aggregate supply Business cycle CAGR Deflation Demand shock Disinflation Effective demand Expectations Adaptive Rational Financial crisis Growth Inflation Demand-pull Cost-push Interest rate Investment Liquidity trap Measures of national income and output GDP GNI NNI Microfoundations Money Endogenous Money creation Demand for money Liquidity preference Money supply National accounts SNA Nominal rigidity Price level Recession Shrinkflation Stagflation Supply shock Saving Unemployment Policies Fiscal Monetary Commercial Central bank Universal basic income Models IS–LM AD–AS Keynesian cross Multiplier Accelerator Phillips curve Arrow–Debreu Harrod–Domar Solow–Swan Ramsey–Cass–Koopmans Overlapping generations General equilibrium DSGE Endogenous growth Matching theory Mundell–Fleming Overshooting NAIRU Related fields Econometrics Economic statistics Monetary economics Development economics Evolutionary economics International economics Schools Mainstream Keynesian Neo- New Monetarism New classical Real business-cycle theory Stockholm New neoclassical synthesis Saltwater and freshwater Heterodox Austrian Chartalism Modern monetary theory Ecological Post-Keynesian Circuitism Disequilibrium Marxian Market monetarism Supply-side People François Quesnay Adam Smith Thomas Robert Malthus Karl Marx Léon Walras Knut Wicksell Irving Fisher Wesley Clair Mitchell John Maynard Keynes Alvin Hansen Michał Kalecki Gunnar Myrdal Simon Kuznets Joan Robinson Friedrich Hayek John Hicks Richard Stone Hyman Minsky Milton Friedman Paul Samuelson Lawrence Klein Edmund Phelps Robert Lucas Jr.

Edward C. Prescott Peter Diamond William Nordhaus Joseph Stiglitz Thomas J. Sargent Paul Krugman N. Gregory Mankiw See also Macroeconomic model Publications in macroeconomics Economics Applied Microeconomics Political economy Mathematical economics Money portal Business portal v t e The " visible hand " [ 1 ] is an economic concept that describes the replacement of the regulatory function of the market mechanism by government intervention .

[ 2 ] Simply put, it refers to government intervention.

[ 3 ] In economics the "visible hand" is generally considered to be the macro-fiscal policy of John Keynes that emerged in the 1930s as a remedy for the shortcomings of Adam Smith 's " invisible hand " and advocated government intervention in the economy.

[ 4 ] Actually, Smith already identified the disadvantages of the "invisible hand".

[ 5 ] Since then, economists have been building on his insights to explain when and why markets get into trouble and how the visible hand of the government can enable the invisible hand to be more effective.

[ 6 ] In the 1930s Keynes and other economists became clearly aware of the problems of the market economy. He called these problems " market failure " and introduced the idea of adding a "visible hand" to Smith's "invisible hand" to strengthen the regulation of the market economy.

[ 7 ] Mariana Mazzucato has argued that the "visible hand" fosters innovation .

Background [ edit ] The Great Depression exposed the flaws of the market economy and forced economists to change course in search of new theories and ways out. So after the 1930s the theory of the "visible hand" emerged.

[ 8 ] Keynesianism advocates replacing the "invisible hand" with the "visible hand" and replacing the "night-keeper" with the identity of the "intervener".

[ 9 ] Evaluations [ edit ] Economist Mariana Mazzucato suggests that state involvement is not incidental but critical, [ 10 ] and that "it was the visible hand of the state which made these innovations ( iPhone , CPU , Siri , and so on) happen." [ 11 ] She warned that had we waited for the "market" and business to do it alone...these major innovations wouldn't have come about.

[ 12 ] She also states that one of the secrets of Silicon Valley 's success has been its active and visible hand.

[ 13 ] In 2012 an article from The Economist claims that the "invisible hand" of the market is giving way to the "visible hand" of the state capitalism , [ 14 ] and that hand is often an authoritarian one.

[ 15 ] In 2015 an article from The Financial Times argues that markets are being dramatically reshaped and that the "visible hand" of economic policy is on the rise. The article also suggests that it is a clearly Keynesian world of muscular policy makers who have brought in deliberate distortions to improve growth and reduce volatility.

[ 16 ] Market liberalism believes that social distribution by the "visible hand" is morally improper, regardless of its effects, because it will infringe on people's freedom.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Invisible hand Vanishing hand References [ edit ] ^ Manas Chatterji (March 2, 2017).

Economic Globalization in Asia . Routledge. pp. 10–.

ISBN 978-1-351-94189-1 .

^ Yu Zongxian; Wang Jinli (November 30, 2003).

A Visible Hand . Linking Publishing Co., Ltd. pp. 3–.

ISBN 978-957-08-2645-6 .

^ "Abbott's message to the world: governments should stand back" .

The Conversation . January 24, 2014.

^ "Theoretical Economics" .

Theoretical Economics : 33–. 2002.

ISSN 1005-4286 .

^ Jacob S. Hacker and Paul Pierson.

"Making America Great Again : The Case for the Mixed Economy" .

Foreign Affairs . March 21, 2016.

^ Jacob S. Hacker; Paul Pierson (February 14, 2017).

American Amnesia: How the War on Government Led Us to Forget What Made America Prosper .

Simon and Schuster . pp. 4–.

ISBN 978-1-4516-6783-7 .

^ Jiang Chang (2004).

Towards Elegant Survival: A Study of Social Value Choices in 21st Century China .

China Social Sciences Press . pp. 186–.

ISBN 978-7-5004-4467-1 .

^ Ma Yunrui (2007).

Study of Chinese Government Governance Models . Zhengzhou University Press.

ISBN 978-7-81106-724-8 .

^ Mao Fei (2008).

A study of China's civil service pay system reform .

China Social Sciences Press . pp. 81–.

ISBN 978-7-5004-6646-8 .

^ Robert Clark.

"Biden's billions a throwback to Cold War innovation" .

Light Reading . June 10, 2021.

^ R. Sassower (March 4, 2015).

Compromising the Ideals of Science . Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 47–.

ISBN 978-1-137-51942-9 .

^ Rosemary Papa; Shadow W. J. Armfield (April 19, 2018).

The Wiley Handbook of Educational Policy . Wiley. pp. 44–.

ISBN 978-1-119-21844-9 .

^ Mariana Mazzucato.

"Taxpayers Helped Apple, but Apple Won't Help Them" .

Harvard Business Review . March 8, 2013.

^ Adrian Wooldridge.

"The visible hand" .

The Economist . January 21, 2012.

^ The Economist Publications (PUK Rights) (May 1, 2012).

The Economist: State Capitalism: The Visible Hand . Penguin Books Limited. pp. 10–.

ISBN 978-0-241-96389-0 .

^ Subitha Subramaniam.

"The rise of the visible hand in economic policy" .

Financial Times . May 2, 2015.

^ Zhou Baosong (July 15, 2015).

The Ethics of Politics: From a Liberal Perspective . The Chinese University of Hong Kong Press. pp. 146–.

ISBN 978-962-996-664-5 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Visible_hand_(economics)&oldid=1262990939 " Categories : Economic theories Keynesian economics John Maynard Keynes Social philosophy Hidden category: Use mdy dates from October 2021 This page was last edited on 14 December 2024, at 01:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Visible hand (economics) 1 language Add topic

