Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Synopsis 2 Crew 3 Reception 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents What Would Jesus Buy?

1 language Cymraeg Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from What Would Jesus Buy ) 2007 American film What Would Jesus Buy?

Theatrical release poster Directed by Rob VanAlkemade Produced by Morgan Spurlock Peter Hutchison Stacey Offman Starring Bill Talen Music by Steve Horowitz Wade Tonken William Moses Distributed by Warrior Poets Release date 2007 ( 2007 ) Running time 90 minutes Country United States Language English What Would Jesus Buy?

is a 2007 documentary film produced by Morgan Spurlock and directed by Rob VanAlkemade. The title is a take-off on the phrase, " what would Jesus do?

". The film debuted on the festival circuit on March 11, 2007, at the South By Southwest (SXSW) conference in Austin, Texas . It went into general U.S. release on November 16, 2007.

[ 1 ] The film follows the exploits of the satirical group Reverend Billy and the Church of Stop Shopping . Although founded as a performance collective rather than an actual religious organization, members of the group express spiritual viewpoints against excessive consumerism and materialism , particularly in the context of Christmas . The aforementioned Reverend Billy, played by social activist Bill Talen, is intended by its non-Christian performer not as parody but as a living example of past radical preachers.

Synopsis [ edit ] The film focuses on the issues of the commercialization of Christmas , materialism , the over-consumption in American culture, globalization , and the business practices of large corporations , as well as their economic and cultural effects on American society, as seen through the prism of activist and performance artist Bill Talen, who goes by the alias of " Reverend Billy ", and his troupe of activists, whose street theater performances take the form of a church choir called "The Church of Stop Shopping", that sings anti-shopping and anti-corporate songs. The film follows Billy and his choir as they take a cross-country trip in the month prior to Christmas 2005, and spread their message against what they perceive as the evils of patronizing the retail outlets of several different large corporate chains.

Crew [ edit ] The film was produced by Morgan Spurlock , with cinematography by Alan Deutsch, Daniel Marracino, Martin Palafox, Alex Stikich and Rob VanAlkemade. The film was edited by Gavin Coleman and Stela Georgieva.

Reception [ edit ] The film received mixed reviews. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 56%, based on 57 reviews, and an average rating of 5.96/10. The site's critical consensus reads, " WWJB is an eye opening doc about consumerism that manages to be both funny and informative." [ 2 ] The film has a score of 60 on Metacritic , indicating "mixed or average reviews".

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Film portal Buy Nothing Christmas Buy Nothing Day Festivus References [ edit ] ^ "Information on What Would Jesus Buy?

at ioncinema.com" .

Archived from the original on May 25, 2024 . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ "WHAT WOULD JESUS BUY? (2007)" .

Rotten Tomatoes . Fandango Media.

Archived from the original on December 3, 2017 . Retrieved September 2, 2019 .

^ "What Would Jesus Buy?" .

Metacritic .

Archived from the original on March 2, 2017 . Retrieved June 9, 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Official website What Would Jesus Buy?

at IMDb What Would Jesus Buy?

at Rotten Tomatoes What Would Jesus Buy?

at Metacritic v t e Morgan Spurlock Films Super Size Me Where in the World Is Osama bin Laden?

Freakonomics POM Wonderful Presents: The Greatest Movie Ever Sold Comic-Con Episode IV: A Fan's Hope Mansome One Direction: This Is Us Rats Super Size Me 2: Holy Chicken!

Television I Bet You Will 30 Days The Simpsons 20th Anniversary Special – In 3-D! On Ice!

A Day in the Life Morgan Spurlock's New Britannia Morgan Spurlock Inside Man Related What Would Jesus Buy?

Don't Eat This Book: Fast Food and the Supersizing of America Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=What_Would_Jesus_Buy%3F&oldid=1281036096 " Categories : 2007 films American documentary films Documentary films about consumerism Documentary films about Christianity in the United States 2007 documentary films Criticism of the commercialization of Christmas 2000s Christmas films 2000s English-language films 2000s American films English-language documentary films English-language Christmas films Hidden categories: Use American English from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from May 2018 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Template film date with 1 release date Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Rotten Tomatoes ID same as Wikidata Rotten Tomatoes template using name parameter This page was last edited on 17 March 2025, at 22:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents What Would Jesus Buy?

1 language Add topic

