Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Taxonomy 2 Physical characteristics and appearance Toggle Physical characteristics and appearance subsection 2.1 Sexual dimorphism 3 Natural habitat 4 Behavior 5 Diet 6 Reproduction and growth 7 Conservation status 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Yellow-footed tortoise 30 languages العربية Български Català Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Diné bizaad Español Euskara فارسی Français Italiano עברית Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 پنجابی Polski Português Runa Simi Русский Српски / srpski Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Species of reptile Yellow-footed tortoise Yellow-footed tortoise, Yasuni National Park, Ecuador Conservation status Vulnerable ( IUCN 3.1 ) Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Reptilia Order: Testudines Suborder: Cryptodira Superfamily: Testudinoidea Family: Testudinidae Genus: Chelonoidis Species: C. denticulatus Binomial name Chelonoidis denticulatus ( Linnaeus , 1766) Synonyms [ 1 ] Testudo denticulata Linneasus 1766 Testudo tabulata Walbaum, 1782 ( nomen illegitimum ) Testudo tessellata Schneider, 1792 Testudo tabulata Schoepff, 1793 Testudo terrestris americana Schweigger, 1812 Testudo terrestris brasiliensis Schweigger, 1812 Testudo terrestris var.

cayennensis Schweigger, 1812 Testudo terrestris surinamensis Schweigger, 1812 Chersine denticulata Merrem, 1820 Chersine tessellata Merrem, 1820 Testudo cagado Spix, 1824 Testudo hercules Spix, 1824 Testudo sculpta Spix, 1824 Chersine tabulata Gravenhorst, 1829 Testudo planata Gmelin, 1831 ( nomen nudum ) Testudo foveolata Schinz, 1833 (nomen nudum) Geochelone (Chelonoidis) tabulata Fitzinger, 1835 Geochelone (Geochelone) denticulata Fitzinger, 1835 Chelonoides tabulata Agassiz, 1857 Chelonoidis tabulata Agassiz, 1857 Chelonoidis denticulata Fróes, 1957 Chelonoides denticulata Obst, 1980 Geochelone denticulta Richard, 1999 ( ex errore ) The yellow-footed tortoise ( Chelonoidis denticulatus ), also known as the Brazilian giant tortoise , [ 2 ] is a species of tortoise in the family Testudinidae and is closely related to the red-footed tortoise ( C. carbonarius ). It is found in the Amazon Basin of South America . The species name has often been misspelled as denticulata , an error introduced in the 1980s when Chelonoidis was elevated to genus and mistakenly treated as feminine, an error recognized and fixed in 2017.

[ 3 ] With an average length of 40 cm (15.75 in) and the largest known specimen at 94 cm (37 in), this is the sixth-largest tortoise species on Earth, after the Galapagos tortoise, the Aldabra tortoise, the African spurred tortoise ( Geochelone sulcata , typical size 76 cm (30 in)), the leopard tortoise ( Stigmochelys pardalis ), and the Asian forest tortoise ( Manouria emys emys , typical size 60 cm (23.6 in)).

Taxonomy [ edit ] Illustration of C. denticulatus showing underside of shell The yellow-footed tortoise is also called the yellow-foot or yellow-legged tortoise, the Brazilian giant tortoise, or South American forest tortoise, as well as local names such as jabuti-tinga [ what language is this?

] , jabuti [ what language is this?

] , morrocoy [ what language is this?

] , woyamou [ what language is this?

] or wayamo [ what language is this?

] , or some variation of jabuta [ what language is this?

] . Many of the local names are shared with the similar red-footed tortoise.

[ 4 ] Originally, Karl Linnaeus assigned all turtles and tortoises to the genus Testudo and described this species as Testudo denticulata in 1766. Soon the term Testudo was only being used for tortoises as opposed to all chelonians, with tortoises defined by completely terrestrial behaviors, heavy shells, and elephant-like limbs with nails but no visible toes. The species got several other names, as well, for several reasons such as difficulty in distinguishing it from the red-footed, confusion over locations, researchers thinking they had discovered a new species in collections or in the field, etc.

Leopold Fitzinger created the genus Geochelone for medium-to-large tortoises that did not come from the Mediterranean area (which remained Testudo ), or have other special characteristics such as the hinged shells of the genus Kinixys . Fitzinger further used the term Chelonoidis as a subgenus to categorize Geochelone from South America. Neither term was widely used until they were resurrected by researchers such as Williams in 1960.

[ 5 ] Researchers such as Roger Bour and Charles Crumly separated Geochelone into different genera based largely on their skulls. They created or re-established several genera: Aldabrachelys , Astrochelys , Cylindraspis , Indotestudo , Manouria , and Chelonoidis . The debate is on-going over the definitions and validity of some of these genera.

Chelonoidis is primarily defined as being from South America, lacking a nuchal scute (the marginal scute located over the neck) and  a large, undivided supracaudal (the scute or scutes directly over the tail).

[ 6 ] Chelonoidis is made up of two very different-looking groups: the C. carbonarius group with the yellow-footed and red-footed tortoises; and the C. chilensis group with the Galapagos tortoises ( C. niger ), Argentine tortoise ( C. chilensis ), and Chaco tortoise ( C. petersi ). The taxonomic and evolutionary relationship of these two groups is poorly understood.

[ 7 ] Physical characteristics and appearance [ edit ] 1830's drawing by James De Carle Sowerby Yellow-footed tortoises are a large species – fifth-largest overall and third-largest mainland species, after the Aldabra giant tortoise ( Aldabrachelys gigantea ), Galapagos giant tortoise ( Chelonoidis niger ), African spurred tortoise, and Asian forest tortoise. Typical sizes average 40 cm (15.75 in), but much larger specimens are common. The largest known specimen is a female that was 94 cm (37 in) long.

[ 8 ] They closely resemble the red-footed tortoise, and can sometimes be difficult to tell apart, especially as a preserved specimen, which led to quite a bit of confusion over the names and ranges.

The carapace (shell top) is a long oval with parallel sides and a high-domed back that is generally flat along the vertebrals (scutes or shell scales along the top of the carapace) with a slight peak near the hind end. There are five vertebral scutes, four pairs of costals, eleven pairs of marginals, no nuchal scute (the marginal over the neck) and a large, undivided supracaudal (the marginals over the tail). The front and rear marginals (scutes along the edge of the carapace) are slightly serrated in front and rear of young yellow-footed tortoises. The carapace is yellowish brown to dark brown or even black at the edges of the scutes. The areola in each scute are pale yellow, orange or light brown and blend into the darker carapace.

The plastron (shell bottom) is thick around the edges, and the gulars (front pair of plastron scutes) do not project past the carapace. The plastron is yellow-brown turning nearly black near the seams.

The head is relatively small and longer than wide. The upper jaw has three tooth-like points. There are large black eyes with a tympanum behind each eye. The skin of the head and limbs is black with yellow to orange scales on top and around the eye and ear. The forelimbs have five claws, are long and slightly flattened. They are covered with fine, dark scales and slightly overlapping larger scales on front in the same color as the head. The hind limbs are elephant-like with four claws, and are covered in small scales colored like the forelimbs. The tail varies in length by gender and has a row of colored scales on the sides.

[ 9 ] Sexual dimorphism [ edit ] Adult males average slightly larger than females, but the largest specimens tend to be females.  Males develop a distinctive incurving of sides, giving them a well-defined "waist", and a deeply in-curved plastron. The female has a short, conical tail, while the male has a longer, more muscular tail that is generally carried tucked along one side. The anal notch of the male is also larger, presumably to allow better tail mobility.

[ 10 ] Natural habitat [ edit ] There is some disagreement as to which habitat is the preferred type for yellow-footed tortoises. Some feel they prefer grasslands and dry forest areas, and that rain-forest habitat is most likely marginal. Others suggest humid forest is the preferred habitat. Regardless, they are found in drier forest areas, grasslands, and the savanna, or rainforest belts adjoining more open habitats. The red-footed tortoise shares some of its range with the yellow-footed tortoise. In ranges shared in Surinam, the red-footed tortoise has moved out of the forests into grasslands (created a result of slash-and-burn agriculture), while the yellow-footed tortoise has remained in the forest.

Behavior [ edit ] These tortoises make a sound like a baby cooing with a raspy voice. Tortoises also identify each other using body language. The male tortoise makes head movements toward other males, but the female does not make these head movements. Male tortoises also swing their heads back and forth in a continuous rhythm as a mating ritual . Mating occurs all year round for the yellow-footed tortoise. There is no parental care of the young and the baby tortoises will fend for themselves, starting by eating calcium -rich plant matter.

Diet [ edit ] At Yasuni National Park , Ecuador The yellow-footed tortoise eats many kinds of foliage . They are too slow to capture any fast animals. In the wild, their diets consist of grasses , flowers, fallen fruit, carrion , plants, bones , mushrooms, excrement, and slow-moving invertebrates such as snails , worms, and others they are able to capture.

[ 11 ] In captivity, they are fed oranges, apples, melons, endive, collard greens , dandelions , plantain, ribwort, clover, shredded carrots, insects, worms, cuttlebone, tortoise vitamins, edible flowers, and alfalfa pellets. Each yellow-footed tortoise in the wild reaches the age of maturity at about 8–10 years. The fecundity of a female generally depends on her size; the bigger they are, the more eggs they can produce. On average, a female will create about six to 16 eggs per year, although some female individuals may not reproduce each year. The eggs have brittle shells and are elongated to spherical, about 3–6 cm in diameter. The egg size will increase with the body size of the tortoise. The young are self-sufficient from birth. The yellow-footed tortoise can live around 50–60 years.

Reproduction and growth [ edit ] Breeding is synchronized with the onset of the rainy season (from July to September), where a general increase in activity is noted. Males identify each other by eliciting a characteristic head movement, a series of jerks away from and back to mid-position. Another male will make the same head movements. No head movement in response is the first indication that the other tortoise is a female. Scientific experimentation and observation has also indicated head coloration has to be correct. He will then sniff the cloacal region of the other tortoise. Copulation usually follows, though sometimes there is a period of biting at the legs. During courtship and copulation, the male makes clucking sounds very much like those of a chicken, with a set pattern in pitches of the clucking sounds. Rival males will battle, attempting to overturn each other, but neither the males nor females will defend a territory. They are considered nomadic in their movements. In almost every tortoise species where male combat occurs, the males are always larger than the females. This is in comparison to aquatic species, where the males are usually smaller than the females and do not engage in male-to-male combat. Species with male combat are thought to have evolved larger males because they have a better chance of winning a bout and mating with a female, thus passing on their larger size to their offspring. Species with smaller males evolved because smaller males are more mobile and can mate with a large number of females, thus passing on their genes.

Conservation status [ edit ] Chelonoidis denticulatus is an endangered species. The major populations located in South America are protected under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species , Appendix II.

As with many species of turtles and tortoises, many yellow-footed tortoises end up as food items in local markets.

In Peru yellow-footed tortoise eggs are a delicacy. While illegal, their trade is common in the Peruvian amazon.

[ 12 ] This species of tortoise is popular in the pet trade.

References [ edit ] ^ Fritz Uwe; Peter Havaš (2007).

"Checklist of Chelonians of the World" (PDF) .

Vertebrate Zoology .

57 (2): 269– 270.

doi : 10.3897/vz.57.e30895 .

ISSN 1864-5755 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 May 2011 . Retrieved 29 May 2012 .

^ "The Brazilian Giant Tortoise by M. A. Cohen" (PDF) .

^ Turtle Taxonomy Working Group (2017).

Turtles of the world : Annotated checklist and atlas of taxonomy, synonymy, distribution, and conservation status (8th Ed.) (PDF) . New York: Chelonian Research Foundation.

ISBN 978-1-5323-5560-8 .

OCLC 1124067380 .

^ Vinke 2008, p. 31–33 ^ Vinke 2008, p. 16–18 ^ Crumly, Charles (1982). "A cladistic analysis of Geochelone using cranial osteology".

Journal of Herpetology .

16 (3): 215– 234.

doi : 10.2307/1563715 .

JSTOR 1563715 .

^ Vinke 2008, p. 19.

^ Vinke 2008, p. 99–90.

^ Vinke 2008, p. 85–87.

^ Vinke 2008, p. 91–92.

^ "Chelonoidis denticulata (Yellow-footed Tortoise or Morocoy)" (PDF) .

sta.uwi.edu . The Online Guide to the Animals of Trinidad and Tobago.

^ Ryan Biller (18 March 2024).

"In Peru, conservationists and authorities struggle to get turtle eggs off the menu" .

Mongabay . Retrieved 16 April 2024 .

Vinke, Sabine; Holger Vetter; Thomas Vinke; Susanne Vetter (2008).

South American Tortoises (Chelonian Library Vol. 3) . Germany: Edition Chimera.

ISBN 978-389973-603-8 .

Further reading [ edit ] Alderton, David.

Turtles and Tortoises of the World . New York: Facts on File Publications,1988.

ISBN 9780816017331 .

Bjorndal, Karen A. (March 1989). "Flexibility of digestive responses in two generalist herbivores, the tortoises Geochelone carbonaria and Geochelone denticulata ".

Oecologia .

78 (3): 317– 321.

Bibcode : 1989Oecol..78..317B .

doi : 10.1007/bf00379104 .

PMID 28312576 .

S2CID 2667016 .

Ebenhack, Amanda (2009).

Redfoots and Yellowfoots; The Natural History, Captive Care, and Breeding of 'Chelonoidis carbonaria' and 'Chelonoidis denticulata' (Turtles of the World, Testudinidae, Number 3) . Living Art Publishing.

ISBN 978-0978755638 .

Hagan, J.W. (1989).

"What's the Difference: Differentiating Geochelone denticulata and Geochelone carbonaria " .

www.tortoise.org . Tortuga Gazette.

Halliday, Dr. Tim, and Dr. Kraig Adler, eds.

The Encyclopedia of Reptiles and Amphibians . New York: Facts on File Publications, 1986.

ISBN 0-8160-1359-4 .

Moskovits, Debra K. (1985). "The Behavior and Ecology of the Two Amazonian Tortoises, Geochelone carbonaria and Geochelone denticulata , in Northwestern Brazil".

University of Chicago . PhD Dissertation.

Pritchard, Peter C. H.; Pedro Trebbau (1984).

The Turtles of South America, Contributions to Herpetology: No. 2 . Society for the Study of Amphibians and Reptiles.

Strong, Joel N.; Jose M. V. Fragoso (2006).

"Seed Dispersal by Geochelone carbonaria and G. denticulata in Northwestern Brazil" .

Biotropica .

38 (5): 683– 686.

doi : 10.1111/j.1744-7429.2006.00185.x .

S2CID 83502696 .

Vargas-Ramirez, Mario; Jerome Maran; Uwe Fritz (2010).

"Red- and yellow-footed tortoises, Chelonoidis carbonaria and C. denticulata (Reptilia: Testudines: Testudinidae), in South American savannahs and forests: do their phylogeographies reflect distinct habitats?" (PDF) .

Organisms Diversity & Evolution .

10 (2): 161– 172.

Bibcode : 2010ODivE..10..161V .

doi : 10.1007/s13127-010-0016-0 .

S2CID 28894541 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-10-04 . Retrieved 2012-08-13 .

Ward, B. Sedgwick County Zoo. 2 May 2001.

[1] External links [ edit ] Media related to Geochelone denticulata at Wikimedia Commons Data related to Geochelone denticulata at Wikispecies Yellow Foot Tortoise AVPH - Turtles and Tortoises v t e Tortoise family Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Reptilia Subclass: Anapsida Order: Testudines Suborder: Cryptodira Superfamily: Testudinoidea Family: Testudinidae Genera Species of the tortoise family Agrionemys Russian tortoise Aldabrachelys Aldabra giant tortoise (subspecies: A. g. arnoldi † A. g. daudinii A. g. hololissa ) † Aldabrachelys abrupta † Aldabrachelys grandidieri Astrochelys Angonoka tortoise Radiated tortoise † Astrochelys rogerbouri Centrochelys African spurred tortoise † Centrochelys atlantica † Centrochelys burchardi † Centrochelys vulcanica Chelonoidis Chaco tortoise Red-footed tortoise Yellow-footed tortoise † Chelonoidis alburyorum † Chelonoidis cubensis † Chelonoidis lutzae † Chelonoidis monensis † Chelonoidis sellovii † Chelonoidis sombrerensis Galápagos tortoise Chelonoidis complex Cerro Azul giant tortoise Chatham Island giant tortoise Eastern Santa Cruz tortoise Fernandina Island tortoise † Floreana Island tortoise Hood Island giant tortoise ( Diego ) Santa Fe Island tortoise † Pinta Island tortoise †( Lonesome George ) Santiago Island giant tortoise Pinzón Island giant tortoise Sierra Negra giant tortoise Volcán Alcedo giant tortoise Volcán Darwin giant tortoise Volcán Wolf giant tortoise Western Santa Cruz tortoise † Cheirogaster † Cheirogaster bacharidisi † Cheirogaster gymnesica † Cheirogaster schafferi Chersina Angulate tortoise Chersobius Nama padloper Karoo padloper Speckled padloper † Cylindraspis † Domed Mauritius giant tortoise † Domed Rodrigues giant tortoise † Réunion giant tortoise † Saddle-backed Mauritius giant tortoise † Saddle-backed Rodrigues giant tortoise Geochelone Burmese star tortoise Indian star tortoise Gopherus Bolson tortoise Desert tortoise Goode's thornscrub tortoise Gopher tortoise Sonoran Desert tortoise Texas tortoise † Hadrianus † Hadrianus corsoni † Hadrianus majusculus † Hadrianus octonaria † Hadrianus robustus † Hadrianus schucherti † Hadrianus utahensis † Hadrianus vialovi † Hesperotestudo † Hesperotestudo percrassa Homopus Common padloper Greater padloper Indotestudo Elongated tortoise Forsten's tortoise Travancore tortoise Kinixys Bell's hinge-back tortoise Forest hinge-back tortoise Home's hinge-back tortoise Lobatse hinge-back tortoise Natal hinge-back tortoise Speke's hinge-back tortoise Malacochersus Pancake tortoise Manouria Asian forest tortoise Impressed tortoise † Megalochelys † Megalochelys atlas † Megalochelys cautleyi † Megalochelys margae † Megalochelys sondaari Psammobates Geometric tortoise Serrated tortoise Tent tortoise Pyxis Flat-backed spider tortoise Spider tortoise Stigmochelys Leopard tortoise † Stylemys † Stylemys botti † Stylemys calaverensis † Stylemys canetotiana † Stylemys capax † Stylemys conspecta † Stylemys copei † Stylemys emiliae † Stylemys frizaciana † Stylemys karakolensis † Stylemys nebrascensis † Stylemys neglectus † Stylemys oregonensis † Stylemys pygmea † Stylemys uintensis † Stylemys undabuna Testudo Hermann's tortoise Kleinmann's tortoise Marginated tortoise Spur-thighed tortoise † Testudo brevitesta Phylogenetic arrangement of turtles based on turtles of the world 2017 update: Annotated checklist and atlas of taxonomy, synonymy, distribution, and conservation status . Key: †=extinct.

v t e Testudines Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Reptilia Clade : Diapsida Order: Testudines Suborder Superfamily Family Genus Cryptodira Chelonioidea (Sea turtles) Cheloniidae † Allopleuron Caretta † Carolinochelys Chelonia † Eochelone Eretmochelys † Gigantatypus † Glarichelys † Itilochelys Lepidochelys † Mexichelys † Miocaretta Natator † Pacifichelys † Syllomus † Tasbacka Dermochelyidae † Arabemys † Corsochelys † Cosmochelys Dermochelys † Eosphargis † Mesodermochelys † Psephophorus † Euclastes † Peritresius † Procolpochelys † Protosphargis † Puppigerus Kinosternoidea Dermatemydidae Dermatemys Kinosternidae Claudius † Hoplochelys Kinosternon Staurotypus Sternotherus Testudinoidea Emydidae † Acherontemys Chrysemys Clemmys Deirochelys Emys Actinemys Emydoidea Glyptemys Graptemys Malaclemys Pseudemys Terrapene Trachemys † Wilburemys Geoemydidae Batagur † Banhxeochelys Cuora Cyclemys Geoclemys Geoemyda Hardella Heosemys Leucocephalon Malayemys Mauremys Melanochelys Morenia Notochelys Orlitia Pangshura Rhinoclemmys Sacalia Siebenrockiella Vijayachelys Platysternidae Platysternon Testudinidae Aldabrachelys Astrochelys Centrochelys Chelonoidis Chersina Cylindraspis † Cymatholcus † Floridemys Geochelone Gopherus † Hadrianus † Hesperotestudo Homopus Indotestudo Kinixys Malacochersus Manouria † Megalochelys † Oligopherus Psammobates Pyxis † Solitudo Stigmochelys † Stylemys Testudo Trionychia Carettochelyidae † Allaeochelys † Anosteira Carettochelys Trionychidae Amyda Apalone † Axestemys Chitra Cyclanorbis Cycloderma † Drazinderetes Dogania † Gilmoremys † Hutchemys † Khunnuchelys Lissemys Nilssonia Palea † Palaeoamyda Pelochelys Pelodiscus Rafetus Trionyx † Basilochelys † Sinaspideretes Chelydridae Chelydra † Chelydrops † Chelydropsis † Emarginachelys † Macrocephalochelys Macrochelys † Planiplastron † Protochelydra † Nanhsiungchelyidae † Anomalochelys † Basilemys † Jiangxichelys † Protostegidae † Alienochelys † Archelon † Atlantochelys † Bouliachelys † Calcarichelys † Cratochelone † Desmatochelys † Iserosaurus † Notochelone † Ocepechelon † Pneumatoarthrus † Protostega † Rhinochelys † Santanachelys † Terlinguachelys † Adocus † Argillochelys † Bashuchelys † Ctenochelys † Prionochelys † Toxochelys Pleurodira † Araripemydidae † Araripemys † Bothremydidae † Araiochelys † Arenila † Azabbaremys † Bothremys † Cearachelys † Chedighaii † Chupacabrachelys † Eotaphrosphys † Foxemys † Galianemys † Ilatardia † Inaechelys † Itapecuruemys † Jainemys † Kinkonychelys † Kurmademys † Labrostochelys † Nigeremys † Phosphatochelys † Polysternon † Puentemys † Rosasia † Rhothonemys † Sankuchemys † Taphrosphys † Ummulisani † Zolhafah Chelidae Acanthochelys Chelodina Chelus Elseya Elusor Emydura Hydromedusa † Lomalatachelys Mesoclemmys Myuchelys Phrynops Platemys † Prochelidella Pseudemydura Rheodytes Rhinemys † Yaminuechelys Pelomedusidae Pelomedusa Pelusios Podocnemididae † Albertwoodemys † Bauruemys † Brontochelys † Caninemys † Carbonemys † Cerrejonemys † Cordichelys Erymnochelys † Lapparentemys † Latentemys Peltocephalus Podocnemis † Stupendemys † Sahonachelyidae † Sahonachelys † Sokatra † Caribemys † Caririemys † Tacuarembemys Phylogenetic arrangement of turtles based on Turtles of the World 2017 Update: Annotated Checklist and Atlas of Taxonomy, Synonymy, Distribution, and Conservation Status . † = extinct.

See also List of Testudines families Taxon identifiers Chelonoidis denticulata Wikidata : Q18867 Wikispecies : Chelonoidis denticulatus EoL : 52231905 GBIF : 5220281 iNaturalist : 539451 IRMNG : 10361812 ITIS : 551776 IUCN : 9008 NCBI : 101697 Observation.org : 98039 Open Tree of Life : 1050326 Paleobiology Database : 358470 RD : denticulatus Species+ : 68362 Testudo denticulata Wikidata : Q55384899 GBIF : 2441638 IRMNG : 10521963 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Yellow-footed_tortoise&oldid=1306365091 " Categories : IUCN Red List vulnerable species Chelonoidis Turtles of South America Fauna of the Amazon Turtles of Brazil Reptiles of Colombia Reptiles of Ecuador Reptiles of French Guiana Reptiles of Guyana Reptiles of Venezuela Vulnerable animals Vulnerable biota of South America Reptiles described in 1766 Animal taxa named by Carl Linnaeus Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats All articles with unidentified words Articles with unidentified words from June 2022 Commons link is locally defined Taxonbars with automatically added original combinations Taxonomy articles created by Polbot Taxobox binomials not recognized by IUCN This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 10:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Yellow-footed tortoise 30 languages Add topic

