Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Edited works 2.2 Commentaries 2.3 Original works 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Theon of Alexandria 30 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Magyar مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Winaray Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek scholar and mathematician (c. 335–405) Not to be confused with the 1st century philosopher from Alexandria, Theon (1st century BC) .

For other uses, see Theon (disambiguation) .

Theon of Alexandria ( / ˌ θ iː ə n , - ɒ n / ; Ancient Greek : Θέων ὁ Ἀλεξανδρεύς ; c.

AD 335 – c.

405 ) was a Greek [ 1 ] scholar and mathematician who lived in Alexandria , Egypt . He edited and arranged Euclid 's Elements and wrote commentaries on works by Euclid and Ptolemy . His daughter Hypatia also won fame as a mathematician.

Life [ edit ] Little is known about the life of Theon. He made predictions and observations of solar and lunar eclipses in 364 which show he was active at that time, and he is said to have lived during the reign of Theodosius I (379–395).

[ 2 ] The Suda , a tenth-century Byzantine encyclopedia, calls Theon a "man of the Mouseion ".

[ 3 ] However, both the Library of Alexandria and the original Mouseion were destroyed in the first century BC and according to classical historian Edward J. Watts, Theon was probably the head of a school called the "Mouseion", which was named in emulation of the Hellenistic Mouseion that had once included the Library of Alexandria, but which had little other connection to it.

[ 4 ] Theon's school was exclusive, highly prestigious, and doctrinally conservative.

[ 4 ] Neither Theon nor his daughter Hypatia seems to have had any connections to the militant Iamblichean Neoplatonists who taught in the Serapeum of Alexandria and instead preferred Plotinian neoplatonism .

[ 4 ] Theon was the father of the mathematician Hypatia , who succeeded him as head of his school [ 5 ] Theon dedicated his commentary on the Almagest to a boy named Epiphanius, who may have been his son.

[ 6 ] Also, in his commentary on the Almagest he states that his daughter Hypatia contributed to Book III of the Almagest stating "the edition having been prepared by the philosopher, my daughter Hypatia." [ 7 ] A lunar crater, Theon Junior , now bears Theon's name.

Works [ edit ] Edited works [ edit ] It is known that Theon edited the Elements of Euclid . He may also have edited some other works by Euclid and Ptolemy , although here the evidence is less certain. The editions ascribed to Theon are: Euclid's Elements . Theon's edition of the Elements was the only known version until François Peyrard discovered an older copy of the Elements in the Vatican Library in 1808.

[ 8 ] Comparison of the two versions show that Theon's edition attempts to remove difficulties that might be felt by learners in studying the text.

[ 9 ] Hence he amplified Euclid's text whenever he thought that an argument was too brief; attempted to standardise the way that Euclid wrote; and he corrected mistakes in the text, although occasionally he introduced his own errors.

[ 2 ] Thomas Little Heath notes on Theon's edits include, "remarkably close approximations (stated in sexagesimal fractions)".

[ 10 ] Ptolemy's Handy Tables . A collection of astronomical tables originally compiled by Ptolemy.

[ 11 ] It has often been claimed in modern times that Theon edited this text.

[ 12 ] However, none of the surviving manuscripts mention Theon, [ 13 ] and the evidence suggests that  the surviving tables must be very similar to the tables Ptolemy provided.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] It has, however, been thought possible that his daughter Hypatia edited (or verified) the Handy Tables , since the Suda refers to her work on the "Astronomical Canon".

[ 13 ] Euclid's Optics . Euclid's work on optics survives in two versions, and it has been argued that one version may be an edition by Theon.

[ 14 ] Commentaries [ edit ] Of his commentaries, those which are extant are: Commentary on the Data of Euclid. This work is written at a relatively advanced level as Theon tends to shorten Euclid's proofs rather than amplify them.

[ 2 ] Commentary on the Optics of Euclid. This elementary-level work is believed to consist of lecture notes compiled by a student of Theon.

[ 2 ] Commentary on the Almagest . Originally a commentary on all thirteen books of Ptolemy's Almagest , but now missing book 11 and most of book 5. The commentary is a reworking of Theon's own lecture notes, and is useful chiefly for including information from lost works by writers such as Pappus .

[ 1 ] It is also useful for Theon's account of the Greek method of operating with the sexagesimal system as it was applied to calculations.

[ 2 ] Great Commentary on Ptolemy's Handy Tables . This work partially survives. It originally consisted of 5 books, of which books 1–3 and the beginning of book 4 are extant. It describes how to use Ptolemy's tables and gives details on the reasoning behind the calculations.

[ 1 ] Little Commentary on Ptolemy's Handy Tables . This work survives complete. It consists of one book and is intended as a primer for students.

[ 1 ] In this work Theon mentions that certain (unnamed) ancient astrologers believed that the precession of the equinoxes , rather than being a steady unending motion, instead reverses direction every 640 years, and that the last reversal had been in 158 BC.

[ 15 ] Theon describes but did not endorse this theory. This idea inspired Thābit ibn Qurra in the 9th century to create the theory of trepidation to explain a variation which he (incorrectly) believed was affecting the rate of precession.

[ 15 ] Commentary on Aratus . Some extant scholia on the Phaenomena of Aratus are attributed doubtfully to Theon.

[ 6 ] Original works [ edit ] Treatise on the Astrolabe . Both the Suda and Arabic sources attribute to Theon a work on the astrolabe . This work has not survived, but it may have been the first ever treatise on the astrolabe, and it was important in transmitting Greek knowledge on this instrument to later ages. The extant treatises on the astrolabe by the 6th century Greek scholar John Philoponus and by the 7th century Syriac scholar Severus Sebokht draw heavily on Theon's work.

[ 16 ] Catoptrics . The authorship of this treatise, ascribed to Euclid, is disputed.

[ 17 ] It has been argued that Theon wrote or compiled it.

[ 2 ] The Catoptrics concerns the reflection of light and the formation of images by mirrors.

[ 17 ] Among Theon's lost works, the Suda mentions On Signs and Observation of Birds and the Sound of Crows ; On the Rising of the Dog[-Star] ; and On the Inundation of the Nile .

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Agora (film) Theon of Smyrna References [ edit ] ^ a b c d John M. McMahon, "Theon of Alexandria" entry in Virginia Trimble, Thomas Williams, Katherine Bracher (2007), Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers , pages 1133-4. Springer ^ a b c d e f O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Theon of Alexandria" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews ^ a b Suda ^ a b c Edward Jay Watts, (2008), City and School in Late Antique Athens and Alexandria , page 191-192. University of California Press ^ Edward Jay Watts, (2006), City and School in Late Antique Athens and Alexandria . "Hypatia and pagan philosophical culture in the later fourth century" , pages 197–198. University of California Press ^ a b Smith, William ; Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology , London (1873).

"Theon" ^ Rome, Adolphe (1931–1943).

Commentaires de Pappus et de Théon d'Alexandrie sur l'Almageste. Tome III . Italy: Vatican. p. 807.

^ Frank J. Swetz, (1994), Learning Activities from the History of Mathematics , page 18 ^ T L Heath, (1921), A History of Greek Mathematics , Vol. 1, page 57. Oxford ^ Thomas Little Heath (1921).

A history of Greek mathematics . Oxford, The Clarendon Press.

^ a b James Evans, (1998), The History and Practice of Ancient Astronomy , page 240 and footnote 35. Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-509539-1 ^ a b Anne Tihon, "Theon of Alexandria and Ptolemy's Handy Tables " in Noel M. Swerdlow, (1999), Ancient Astronomy and Celestial Divination , page 359. MIT Press.

ISBN 0262194228 ^ a b Alan Cameron, Jacqueline Long, (1993), Barbarians and Politics at the Court of Arcadius , page 45. University of California Press.

ISBN 0520065506 ^ A. Mark Smith, (1999), Ptolemy and the Foundations of Ancient Mathematical Optics , page 16. American Philosophical Society.

ISBN 0871698935 ^ a b James Evans, (1998), The History and Practice of Ancient Astronomy , page 276. Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-509539-1 ^ James Evans, (1998), The History and Practice of Ancient Astronomy , page 156. Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-509539-1 ^ a b James Evans, (1998), The History and Practice of Ancient Astronomy , page 90. Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-509539-1 Further reading [ edit ] Tihon, Anne, "Theon of Alexandria and Ptolemy's Handy Tables", in Ancient Astronomy and Celestial Divination . Dibner Institute studies in the history of science and technology. Edited by N.M. Swerdlow. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999, p. 357.

A Rome, Commentaires de Pappus et de Théon d'Alexandrie sur l'Almageste Tome III . Théon d'Alexandrie (Rome, 1943).

A Tihon (ed.), Le 'Petit Commentaire' de Théon d'Alexandrie aux 'Tables faciles' de Ptolémée (Vatican City, 1978).

A Tihon (ed.), Le 'Grand commentaire' de Théon d'Alexandrie aux 'Tables faciles' de Ptolémée Livre I (Vatican City, 1985).

A Tihon (ed.), Le 'Grand commentaire' de Théon d'Alexandrie aux 'Tables faciles' de Ptolémée Livre II, III (Vatican City, 1991).

External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Theon of Alexandria" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands 2 Norway Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theon_of_Alexandria&oldid=1270617145 " Categories : 330s births 405 deaths 4th-century Romans 5th-century Romans 4th-century Byzantine scientists 5th-century Byzantine scientists Ancient Greek science writers Ancient Greek mathematicians Roman-era librarians of Alexandria Hypatia 4th-century mathematicians 5th-century mathematicians Byzantine astronomers 4th-century astronomers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 20 January 2025, at 11:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theon of Alexandria 30 languages Add topic

