Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Climate 2 Ecology Toggle Ecology subsection 2.1 Flora 2.2 Fauna 3 Gallery 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Egmont National Park 25 languages Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Cebuano Deutsch Español Français Galego 한국어 עברית ქართული Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Polski Русский Slovenščina Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 39°16′0″S 174°6′0″E ﻿ / ﻿ 39.26667°S 174.10000°E ﻿ / -39.26667; 174.10000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia National park in New Zealand Te Papa-Kura-o-Taranaki IUCN category II ( national park ) Taranaki Maunga Interactive map of Egmont National Park Location Taranaki , New Zealand Nearest city New Plymouth , New Zealand Coordinates 39°16′0″S 174°6′0″E ﻿ / ﻿ 39.26667°S 174.10000°E ﻿ / -39.26667; 174.10000 Area 341.7 km 2 (131.9 sq mi) Established 1900 Governing body Department of Conservation NASA satellite picture of Taranaki Maunga showing the nearly-circular national park surrounding it Egmont National Park , officially known as Te Papa-Kura-o-Taranaki , is a national park located south of New Plymouth , close to the west coast of the North Island of New Zealand . The park covers three volcanic cones: Taranaki Maunga and its slopes, Pouākai and Kaitake .

[ 1 ] The park was first created in 1881 as a forest reserve and went on to become New Zealand’s second national park , preceded by Tongariro National Park , in 1900.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The forest reserve was created within a six-mile (9.7 km) radius around the cone of the dormant Taranaki Maunga volcano . Areas encompassing the older volcanic remnants of Pouākai and Kaitake were later added to the reserve at the northwest side. The forest is surrounded on all sides by pasture , giving it a distinctly circular shape.

The official name of the park was changed from Egmont National Park to Te Papa-Kura-o-Taranaki on 1 April 2025.

[ 4 ] Climate [ edit ] The park receives massive annual rainfall . Moist westerlies from the Tasman Sea form orographic precipitation when they reach Taranaki Maunga and the adjacent Pouākai and Kaitake ranges. Since the area has high annual rainfall and a mild coastal climate there is a lush rainforest covering the foothills, a forest that is nationally significant for the total absence of beech trees (genus Nothofagus ).

Ecology [ edit ] Flora [ edit ] A rich northern rātā / rimu / broadleaf forest is present, although the entire park ecosystem displays distinct patterns of altitudinal zonation – the former two large species of tree are common at lower elevations whereas kāmahi tends to dominate the stunted high elevation forest. In these old growth forests the crown fern ( Blechnum discolor ) is a dominant understory plant species.

[ 5 ] The character of the plant communities continues to change with increasing elevation, to subalpine and alpine shrublands at high elevations, which are in stark contrast to the surrounding pasture farmlands. Notable among the geographical features of the park is its clear radial drainage pattern , which can be discerned in the satellite picture at right.

The Ahukawakawa Swamp is a rare high-elevation (920 m) sphagnum moss wetland located between Taranaki Maunga and the Pouākai Range . It contains many endemic species adapted to acid soils and low temperatures.

[ 6 ] Fauna [ edit ] The national park is integral habitat for many species of birds that rely on the large forest. Threatened bird species within the park include blue duck (whio) , North Island brown kiwi and fernbird . Nearly half of New Zealand's indigenous fish species are found in the park, including threatened giant kōkopu , shortjaw kōkopu , banded kōkopu and kōaro .

[ 1 ] Introduced feral goats have historically degraded the forest understory. However, the park was declared free of feral goats in 2022, the first national park in New Zealand to be free of ungulates , as it was already free of feral pigs and deer. Pest animals present include possums, rodents, hares, stoats, weasels and ferrets.

[ 7 ] Gallery [ edit ] Entrance sign, Egmont National Park Low on the trail to the summit of Taranaki Maunga References [ edit ] ^ a b "Te Papa-Kura-o-Taranaki: Nature and conservation" .

Department of Conservation . Retrieved 11 April 2025 .

^ "Te Papa-Kura-o-Taranaki: History and culture" .

Department of Conservation . Retrieved 11 April 2025 .

^ "Volcano Fact Sheet: Mount Taranaki / Egmont Volcano" (PDF) . GNS Science. 2010 . Retrieved 10 January 2012 .

^ "Notice of a Discontinued Crown Protected Area Name, New Crown Protected Area Name and Altered and Confirmed Geographic Names for the Taranaki Maunga Collective Redress Act 2025" .

New Zealand Gazette . 2 April 2025 . Retrieved 11 April 2025 .

^ C. Michael Hogan (2009).

"Crown Fern: Blechnum discolor " .

GlobalTwitcher.com . Archived from the original on 13 February 2012 . Retrieved 10 January 2012 .

^ "Ahukawakawa swamp" .

Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand .

^ "Goats successfully eradicated at Taranaki national park" .

RNZ News . 27 March 2022 . Retrieved 31 March 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Egmont National Park at Wikimedia Commons Te Papa-Kura-o-Taranaki , Department of Conservation v t e Te Papa-Kura-o-Taranaki , New Zealand Mountains and ranges Kaitake Range Pouākai Range Taranaki Maunga Swamps Ahukawakawa Swamp Rivers Hangatahua River Manganui River Ōākuramatapū River Pātea River Waiaua River Waingongoro River Waiwhakaiho River Lakes Mangōraukawa / Lake Dive Waterfalls Te Rere o Kapuni Ski fields and structures Manganui Ski Area Mount Egmont Branch v t e Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation parks Ahuriri Aorangi Aotea Catlins Coromandel Craigieburn Eyre Mountains/Taka Ra Haka Hakatere Hāwea Hanmer Kaimai Mamaku Kaimanawa Kaweka Ka Whata Tu O Rakihouia Korowai / Torlesse Tussocklands Lake Sumner Mavora Lakes Mount Richmond Northland North-west Nelson Oteake Pirongia Pureora Remutaka Ruahine Raukumara Ruataniwha Tararua Te Kahui Kaupeka Te Papanui Victoria Whakarewarewa Whirinaki Te Pua-a-Tāne Ecological islands Brook Waimārama Sanctuary Bushy Park Sanctuary Mountain Maungatautari Orokonui Ecosanctuary Tawharanui Open Sanctuary Zealandia Government purpose reserves Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Pukaha / Mount Bruce National Wildlife Centre Historic reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Maungauika / North Head Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Stony Batter Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Marine reserves Akaroa Auckland Islands Cape Rodney-Okakari Point Hautai Hawea (Clio Rocks) Hikurangi Horoirangi Kahukura (Gold Arm) Kahurangi Kapiti Kermadec Islands Kutu Parera (Gaer Arm) Long Bay-Okura Long Island-Kokomohua Moana Uta (Wet Jacket Arm) Motu Manawa-Pollen Island Moutere Hauriri / Bounty Islands Moutere Ihupuku / Campbell Island Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Parininihi Piopiotahi (Milford Sound) Pohatu / Flea Bay Poor Knights Islands Punakaiki Taipari Roa (Elizabeth Island) Tapuae Taputeranga Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Tauparikākā Tāwharanui Te Angiangi Te Awaatu Channel (The Gut) Te Hapua (Sutherland Sound) Te Matuku Te Paepae o Aotea (Volkner Rocks) Te Tapuwae o Hua (Long Sound) Te Tapuwae o Rongokako Tonga Island Tuhua (Mayor Island) Ulva Island-Te Wharawhara Waiau Glacier Coast Westhaven (Te Tai Tapu) Whanganui-A-Hei (Cathedral Cove) Whangarei Harbour National parks Current Abel Tasman Aoraki / Mount Cook Arthur's Pass Egmont Fiordland Kahurangi Mount Aspiring Nelson Lakes Paparoa Rakiura Tongariro Westland Tai Poutini Whanganui Former Te Urewera National reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Lewis Pass Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Subantarctic Islands Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Recreation reserves Bastion Point Otago Central Rail Trail Truby King Recreation Reserve Regional parks Akatarawa Ambury Ashley Rakahuri Ātiu Creek Auckland Botanic Gardens Āwhitu Battle Hill Farm Belmont Duder East Harbour Ferrymead Glenfern Sanctuary Hunua Ranges Kaitoke Lake Tekapo Long Bay Mahurangi Motukorea Browns Island Muriwai Mutukaroa / Hamlins Hill Ōmana Onekawa Te Mawhai Orere Point Pākiri Pakuratahi Papamoa Hills Queen Elizabeth Scandrett Shakespear Tāpapakanga Tāwharanui Tawhitokino Te Ārai Te Muri Te Rau Pūriri Waharau Waimakariri River Wainuiomata Regional Park Waitākere Ranges Waitawa Wenderholm Whakanewha Whakatīwai Scenic reserves Alice Eaves Reserve Bruce Park Goldie Bush Peel Forest Park Waro Limestone Wetlands Awarua Wetland Farewell Spit Firth of Thames Kopuatai Peat Dome Manawatū Estuary Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Wairarapa Moana Whangamarino Other areas Fensham Reserve Hutt Water Collection Area Northern Pegasus Bay Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Whitireia Other Amenity area Ecological area Sanctuary area Wilderness area Wildlife management area Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Egmont_National_Park&oldid=1294809248 " Categories : IUCN Category II National parks of New Zealand Protected areas of Taranaki Protected areas established in 1900 Egmont National Park Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use New Zealand English from August 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Use dmy dates from August 2019 Use New Zealand English from February 2024 Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 22:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Egmont National Park 25 languages Add topic

