Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition and origin 2 Habitability 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Volcanic island 45 languages العربية Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Bikol Central Български Català Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Русиньскый Русский Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Island of volcanic origin "High island" redirects here. For places named High Island, see High Island (disambiguation) .

For the GPU series, see Volcanic Islands (GPU family) .

Mo'orea , a volcanic island where the central island is still prominent Stromboli is one of the eight Aeolian Islands , a volcanic arc north of Sicily Taal Volcano , Philippines Geologically, a volcanic island is an island of volcanic origin. The term high island can be used to distinguish such islands from low islands , which are formed from sedimentation or the uplifting of coral reefs (which have often formed on sunken volcanoes).

[ 1 ] Definition and origin [ edit ] There are a number of volcanic islands that rise no more than 1 metre (3 ft 3 in) above sea level , often classified as islets or rocks, while some low islands, such as Banaba , Henderson Island , Makatea , Nauru , and Niue , rise over 50 metres (160 ft) above sea level.

The two types of islands are often found in proximity to each other, especially among the islands of the South Pacific Ocean , where low islands are found on the fringing reefs that surround most volcanic islands. Volcanic islands normally rise above a hotspot or subduction zone .

Habitability [ edit ] Volcanic islands usually range in size between 1 and 104 square kilometres (0.4 and 40 sq mi).

[ 2 ] Islands above a certain size usually have fresh groundwater , while low islands often do not, so volcanic islands are more likely to be habitable.

Many volcanic islands emerge from the deep abyss of the ocean, and feature rough or mountainous landscapes in their interiors and a diverse array of summit elevations. Researchers have observed that the island will often be covered by dense tropical forest. These limit settlement on the interior of many islands, forcing communities to develop along the coast.

[ 3 ] Larger islands may have rivers, resulting in flood hazards. Rivers deliver sediment downstream, which can dominate the shape of the coast and contribute to erosion. Tall volcanic islands are often surrounded by protective fringing or barrier reefs, creating lagoons.

[ 3 ] The unique geological and geographical characteristics of volcanic islands make them prone to many natural hazards, which are expected to worsen due to climate change . These include volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, tsunamis, landslides, and severe weather events like hurricanes or typhoons. Studies have highlighted the importance of implementing effective risk mitigation plans that include nature-based solutions to improve societal safety on these islands. These involve leveraging natural processes and ecosystems to reduce hazard impacts. This can include the restoration of natural barriers like mangroves or coral reefs that protect against tsunamis and storm surges or the maintenance of natural water catchments that can mitigate flood risks.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Islands portal Archipelagic apron – Fan-shaped gently sloping region of sea floor found around oceanic islands Atoll – Ring-shaped coral reef Canary Islands – Spanish archipelago and region in the Atlantic Ocean Galápagos Islands – Ecuadorian volcanic archipelago Guyot – Flat-topped underwater mountain Krakatoa Archipelago – Archipelago in the Sunda Strait, Indonesia Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Seamount – Mountain rising from the ocean seafloor that does not reach to the water's surface Submarine landslide – Landslides that transport sediment across the continental shelf and into the deep ocean Volcanic arc – Chain of volcanoes formed above a subducting plate References [ edit ] ^ Murphy, Raymond E. (July 1949). " "High" and "Low" Islands in the Eastern Carolines".

Geographical Review .

39 (3).

American Geographical Society : 425– 439.

Bibcode : 1949GeoRv..39..425M .

doi : 10.2307/210643 .

JSTOR 210643 .

^ Condie, Kent C. (2022-01-01), Condie, Kent C. (ed.), "Chapter 2 – The crust" , Earth as an Evolving Planetary System (Fourth Edition) , Academic Press, pp.

9– 37, ISBN 978-0-12-819914-5 , retrieved 2023-12-28 ^ a b Velmurugan, Ayyam (2008-01-01), Sivaperuman, Chandrakasan; Velmurugan, Ayyam; Singh, Awnindra Kumar; Jaisankar, Iyyappan (eds.), "Chapter 1 – The Nature and Characters of Tropical Islands" , Biodiversity and Climate Change Adaptation in Tropical Islands , Academic Press, pp.

3– 30, ISBN 978-0-12-813064-3 , retrieved 2023-12-28 ^ López-Saavedra, Marta; Martí, Joan; Planagumà, Llorenç (2023).

"How Effective Risk Assessment and Management Is the Key to Turning Volcanic Islands into a Source of Nature-Based Solutions" .

Land .

12 (3): 686.

Bibcode : 2023Land...12..686L .

doi : 10.3390/land12030686 .

ISSN 2073-445X .

External links [ edit ] Micronesian culture: High island and low island cultures at Britannica.com.

Retrieved 2011-09-22.

v t e Earth 's landforms List of landforms Mountainous Butte Flat Hill Mountain range Plateau Ridge Tableland Valley Continental plain Ice sheet Plain Steppe Tundra Fluvial Alluvial fan Beach Canyon Cave Channel Cliff Floodplain Lake island Levee Meander Oasis Pond Rapids River delta mouth Strait Swamp Valley Waterfall Glacial Arête Cirque Esker Fjord Glacier Ice field Tunnel valley Oceanic and coastal landforms Atoll Bay Cape Channel Coast Continental shelf Coral reef Estuary Island Isthmus Lagoon Mid-ocean ridge Oceanic trench Peninsula Seamount Volcanic island Volcanic Caldera Geyser Guyot Lava dome Lava field Submarine volcano Volcanic crater Volcanic crater lake Volcanic dam Volcanic island Volcanic plateau Volcanic plug Volcano Wall rock Aeolian Desert Dry lake Dune Sandhill Tundra Artificial Artificial island Artificial reef Bridge Building Canal Dam Ditch Land reclamation Levee Polder Quarry Reservoir Road Tunnel See also: Geographical feature Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Volcanic_island&oldid=1292749744 " Categories : Islands by type Volcanic islands Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 16:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Volcanic island 45 languages Add topic

