Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types 2 Effects Toggle Effects subsection 2.1 Supply-side tax cut 2.2 Corporate income tax cut 2.3 Personal income tax cut 2.4 Value-added Tax 3 Costs and Benefits Study 4 Countries Toggle Countries subsection 4.1 United States 4.1.1 John F. Kennedy 4.1.2 Lyndon B. Johnson 4.1.3 Ronald Reagan 4.1.4 George W. Bush 4.1.5 Barack Obama 4.1.6 Donald Trump 4.1.7 Joe Biden 4.2 United Kingdom 4.2.1 Margaret Thatcher 4.3 Germany 4.3.1 Gerhard Schröder 4.4 Argentina 4.4.1 Javier Milei 5 Multiplier Effect 6 Tax Cuts and Productivity 7 Reasons Toggle Reasons subsection 7.1 Fairness 7.2 Tax Equity 7.3 Efficiency 7.4 Incentives 7.5 Tax burden 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Tax cut 5 languages العربية Português Svenska Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Reduction in the tax charged by a government "Low tax" redirects here. For other uses, see Lowtax (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may require copy editing for grammar, style, cohesion, tone, or spelling .

You can assist by editing it .

( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Tax cut" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Taxation An aspect of fiscal policy Policies Economic justice Government revenue Property tax equalization Tax revenue Non-tax revenue Tax law Tax bracket Flat tax Tax threshold Taxation as theft Tax shift Tax cut Tax advantage Tax incentive Tax reform Double taxation Tax harmonization Tax competition Voluntary taxation Representation Economics General Theory Price effect Excess burden Tax efficiency Tax incidence Laffer curve Optimal tax Fiscal illusion Theories Optimal capital income taxation Distribution of Tax Tax rate Flat Progressive Regressive Proportional Collection Economic nexus in the United States Revenue service Revenue stamp Tax assessment Taxable income Tax lien Tax refund Tax shield Tax residence Tax preparation Tax protester Tax investigation Tax collector Tax withholding Private tax collection Noncompliance Legal tax avoidance Base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) Double Irish Single Malt CAIA Dutch Sandwich Estate planning Fuel dye Repatriation tax avoidance Share repurchase Tariff engineering Tax credit Tax deduction Tax exemption Taxpayer groups Tax holiday Tax inversion Tax farming Tax patent Tax shelter Illegal tax evasion Tax amnesty Black market Debtors' prison Tax exile Smuggling Tax resistance Transfer mispricing Unreported employment Locations Tax havens Corporate havens Offshore financial centres (OFCs) Offshore magic circle Conduit and sink OFCs Financial centres Financial Secrecy Index Major examples Ireland as a tax haven Ireland v. Commission Leprechaun economics Liechtenstein tax affair Luxembourg Leaks Offshore Leaks Paradise Papers Panama Papers Swiss Leaks United States as a tax haven Panama as a tax haven Types Direct Indirect Per unit Ad valorem Aviation Airport improvement Landing Solidarity Capital gains Expatriation Consumption Departure Hotel Sales Stamp Television Tourist Value-added Digital goods Dividend Environmental tax Carbon Eco-tariff Landfill Natural resources consumption Severance Steering Stumpage Excise Alcohol Cigarette Fat Meat Sin Sugary drink Tobacco General Georgist Gift Gross receipts Hidden Hypothecated Income Inheritance (estate) Land value Luxury On childlessness Payroll Pigouvian Property Resource rent Single Stealth Surtax Turnover Use User charge / fee Congestion Fuel Road / GNSS Toll Vehicle miles traveled Corporate profit Excess profits Windfall Negative (income) Wealth International Financial transaction tax ATTAC Currency transaction tax European Union Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base (CCCTB) Global minimum corporate tax rate Robin Hood tax Tobin tax Spahn tax Tax equalization Tax treaty Exchange of Information Permanent establishment Transfer pricing European Union FTT Foreign revenue rule Trade Custom Duty Tariff Import Export Tariff war Free trade Free-trade zone Trade agreement ATA Carnet Research Academic Mihir A. Desai Dhammika Dharmapala James R. Hines Jr.

Ronen Palan Joel Slemrod Gabriel Zucman Advocacy groups Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy (ITEP) Oxfam (UK) Tax Foundation (US) Tax Justice Network (TJN) Tax Policy Center (US) Religious Church tax Eight per thousand Teind Tithe Fiscus Judaicus Leibzoll Temple tax Tolerance tax Jizya Kharaj Khums Nisab Zakat By country All Countries List of countries by tax rates Tax revenue to GDP ratio Tax rates in Europe Individual Countries Albania Algeria Argentina Armenia Australia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bhutan Brazil Bulgaria BVI Canada China Colombia Croatia Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Lithuania Malta Morocco Namibia Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Palestine Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Russia South Africa Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tanzania United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Business portal Money portal v t e A tax cut typically represents a decrease in the amount of money taken from taxpayers to go towards government revenue . This decreases the revenue of the government and increases the disposable income of taxpayers.

Tax rate cuts usually refer to reductions in the percentage of tax paid on income, goods and services. As they leave consumers with more disposable income, tax cuts are an example of an expansionary fiscal policy . Tax cuts also include reduction in tax in other ways, such as tax credit, deductions and loopholes.

[ 1 ] However, sometimes a tax cut can increase tax revenue, as economist Thomas Sowell explains: "What actually followed the cuts in tax rates in the 1920s were rising output, rising employment to produce that output, rising incomes as a result and rising tax revenues for the government because of the rising incomes, even though the tax rates had been lowered." [ 2 ] How a tax cut affects the economy depends on which tax is cut. Policies that increase disposable income for lower- and middle-income households are more likely to increase overall consumption and "hence stimulate the economy".

[ 3 ] Tax cuts in isolation boost the economy because they increase government borrowing. However, they are often accompanied by spending cuts or changes in monetary policy that can offset their stimulative effects.

[ 4 ] Types [ edit ] Tax cuts are typically cuts in the tax rate. However, other tax changes that reduce the amount of tax can be seen as tax cuts. These include deductions, credits, exemptions, and adjustments. Additionally, adjusting tax brackets may indirectly reduce the amount of income that is subjected to higher tax rates.

Term Definition Example Rate cut A reduction in the fraction of the taxed item that is taken.

An income tax rate cut reduces the percentage of income that is paid in tax.

Deduction A reduction in the amount of the taxed item that is subject to the tax An income tax deduction reduces that amount of taxable income.

Credit A reduction in the amount of tax paid. Credits are usually fixed amounts.

A tuition tax credit reduces the amount of tax paid by the amount of the credit. Credits can be refundable, i.e., the credit is given to the taxpayer even when no actual taxes are paid (such as when deductions exceed income).

Exemption The exclusion of a specific item from taxation Food might be exempted from a sales tax.

Adjustment A change in the amount of an item that is taxed based on an external factor An inflation adjustment reduces the amount of tax paid by the rate of inflation.

Effects [ edit ] Since a tax cut represents a decrease in the amount of tax a taxpayer is obliged to pay, it results in an increase in disposable income. This greater income can then be used to purchase additional goods and services that otherwise would not have been possible.

[ citation needed ] Tax cuts result in workers being better off financially.

[ citation needed ] With more money to spend, we would expect to see consumer spending to increase. Consumer spending is a large component of aggregate demand . This increase in aggregate demand can lead to an increase in economic growth, if other factors hold even. Thus, income tax cuts increase the after-tax rewards of working, saving, and investing, increasing work effort and leading to contributing to economic growth.

If tax cuts are not financed by immediate spending cuts, there is a chance that they can lead to an increase in the national deficit, which can hinder economic growth in the long-term from increases in interest rates hindering investment. It also decreases national saving, and therefore decreases the national capital stock and income for future generations. For this reason, the structure of the tax cut and the way it is financed is crucial for achieving economic growth.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Supply-side tax cut [ edit ] Supply-side tax cuts are designed to stimulate capital formation by lowering the price level of a good and therefore increasing the demand for the good. Aggregate supply and aggregate demand will be shifted as a result.

Corporate income tax cut [ edit ] Corporate income tax cuts generate sustained effects on research and development (R&D) expenditures, productivity, and output, therefore increasing GDP . To evaluate the impact of appointed tax policy, studying R&D expenditure and technological adoption are crucial.

[ 7 ] Personal income tax cut [ edit ] Personal income tax cuts only lead to a momentary boost to GDP and productivity, having no long-term effect on the GDP as they trigger extensive but short-lived response of capital expenditure, productivity and output. The key to evaluating the effect of personal income tax cut is the variable of labor utilization.

[ 7 ] Value-added Tax [ edit ] Value-added tax (VAT) is a general, broadly based consumption tax assessed on the value added to goods and services collected fractionally.

[ 8 ] Cutting VAT can have significant repercussions on a country's economy. While it may stimulate short-term consumer spending and encourage business investment, there are trade-offs. Lower VAT rates reduce immediate government revenue, potentially impacting public services and infrastructure. However, if managed well, such cuts can contribute to long-term economic growth and fiscal stability. Policymakers must carefully balance the benefits of VAT reduction with the need for sustainable revenue collection.

[ 9 ] One notable example of a focused VAT cut occurred in the UK during the pandemic. The standard rate of VAT dropped from 20% to 5%, specifically applying to the hospitality sector. This reduction aimed to support struggling businesses and boost consumer spending. However, it's essential to recognize that the main drawback of a VAT reduction lies in the fact that suppliers are not obligated to pass those savings directly to consumers. Therefore, while a VAT cut may create a small hole in overall VAT revenue, its impact on prices remains uncertain. EU regulations also allow for reduced VAT rates, but several countries have maintained VAT levels above the minimum thresholds.

[ 10 ] Costs and Benefits Study [ edit ] The working paper from 2017 for IMF listed three major factors regarding the effects of tax cuts: 1.

The tax cuts can boost the economy in the short term; however, these effects are never strong enough to prevent loss of revenue.

[ 11 ] Any tax cuts will significantly reduce tax revenues in the first place. The growing tax revenue from economic growth will never fully offset this fact. Thus, the gap needs to be compensated and financed by an increase in public debt, raising other taxes, or cutting spending. Usually, cuts in income tax are compensated by an increase in consumption taxes, but there are several ways a government may compensate for tax cuts: a)   By spending cuts The final equity and change in aggregate demand will be equal to zero as some individuals will be better of from tax cuts while others will have to cut their spending as the government decreases welfare payments. At the end of the day, there is no change in overall welfare circulating in the economy.

b)  By government borrowing The government may compensate for the loss in revenue by borrowing money and issuing bonds. The overall result of this type of compensation may vary based on the situation of the economy. In a recession, borrowing would probably result in higher aggregate demand. In the boom, the borrowing may result in crowding out – a situation in which the private sector has fewer finances for their investments as they buy the bonds.

c)   By cutting taxes in boom Chancellor Nigel Lawson 's tax cuts in 1988 occurred during a period of economic growth. These taxes led to a further increase in economic growth, however, also led to an increase of inflation causing a boom-and-bust cycle .

d)  By improved productivity If the tax cuts leads to a more productive economy, the tax revenue may counterintuitively stabilize following tax cuts, given that the economy grows in a stable manner for a few years.

[ 12 ] 2.

The tax cuts may help low-income groups even if they do not get the tax cuts directly.

[ 11 ] When the middle or upper class receives tax cuts, they often spend more money on the services which are provided by low-income individuals. On average, wealthier people tend to spend proportionally more of their income on services. With tax cuts, the expenditures of wealthier people increase together with the demand for services.

3.

There is a tradeoff between growth and income inequality depending on what classes receive tax cuts.

[ 11 ] Even though upper class tax cuts may increase demand for services from the lower class, income inequality and polarization tend to increase. Income tax credits for the lower class do not make as large of an impact on the income gap as tax cuts for the upper class. On the other hand, targeting the middle class with tax cuts reduces income inequality and polarization but may provide lower dividends from growth.

[ 13 ] Countries [ edit ] United States [ edit ] Notable examples of tax cuts in the United States include: The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 lowered the corporate tax rate to 20%, while also lowering income tax rates, among other changes.

The 2008 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act included a tax credit of $400, lower payroll tax rates, and higher earned income tax credits .

[ 14 ] The Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 reduced business and investment taxes.

[ 15 ] Tax policy varies from president to often propose tax changes, but Congress passes legislation that may or may not reflect those proposals.

John F. Kennedy [ edit ] John F. Kennedy's plan was to lower the top rate from 91% to 65%, [ 16 ] however, he was assassinated before implementing the change.

Lyndon B. Johnson [ edit ] Lyndon B. Johnson supported Kennedy's ideas and lowered the top income tax rate from 91% to 70%.

[ 17 ] He reduced the corporate tax rate from 52% to 48%. Federal tax revenue increased from $94 billion in 1961 to $153 billion in 1968.

Ronald Reagan [ edit ] Ronald Reagan 's policies included tax reforms. His administration implemented two significant tax acts. First, the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 (ERTA) was implemented to stimulate economic growth, incentivize investment, and reduce the tax burden on individuals and businesses. Key provisions included lowering the highest personal income tax rate from 70% to 50%, and lowering the capital gains tax rate from 28% to 20%. The ERTA decreased federal revenue initially.

[ 18 ] Following the ERTA was the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA). The TRA built upon the ERTA, further reshaping the tax code with tax cuts. The highest personal income tax rate was reduced to 38.5% initially and eventually to 28%.

[ citation needed ] The corporate tax rate also decreased [ by how much?

] , benefiting businesses. In 1988, Reagan cut the corporate tax rate from 48% to 34%.

[ citation needed ] The TRA simplified the tax structure by reducing the number of brackets.

[ 19 ] While the TRA aimed for efficiency and fairness, it did not fully offset the revenue losses from previous tax cuts.

The 1980s witnessed economic expansion, often referred to as the "Reagan boom".

[ citation needed ] In 1983, 1984, and 1985, the GDP grew by 4.6, 7.2, and 4.2% respectively.

While the tax cuts contributed to this growth, other factors, such as Federal Reserve actions, increased federal spending, and business investment, also played roles. The tax cuts worsened budget deficits in the short term, but the economic expansion eventually lead to lower deficits. After peaking in 1986, the federal deficit gradually declined by 1989.

George W. Bush [ edit ] George W. Bush's tax cuts were implemented to stop the 2001 recession . They reduced the top income tax rate from 39.6% to 35%, [ 20 ] the long-term capital gains tax rate from 20% to 15%, and the top dividend tax rate from 38.6% to 15%.

[ 21 ] Although these tax cuts boosted the economy, these tax cuts increased the U.S. debt by $1.35 trillion over a 10-year period. These tax cuts primarily targeted high-income individuals.

[ 22 ] Barack Obama [ edit ] Barack Obama arranged for several tax cuts to defeat the Great Recession .

The $787 billion American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 promised $288 billion in tax cuts and incentives.

[ 23 ] Its taxation aspects included a payroll tax cut of 2%, health care tax credits, a $400 reduction in income taxes for individuals and improvements to child tax credits and earned income tax credits.

To prevent the fiscal cliff in 2013, Obama extended the Bush tax cuts on incomes below $400,000 for individuals and $450,000 for married couples. Incomes exceeding the threshold were taxed at the rate of 39.6% (the Clinton-era tax rate), following the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 .

[ 24 ] Donald Trump [ edit ] Donald Trump signed the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in 2017, which reduced the corporate tax rate from 35% to 20%.

[ 25 ] Other changes included income tax rate cuts, doubling of the standard deduction , capping the state and local tax deduction and eliminating personal exemptions .

[ 26 ] GDP growth rate increased by 0.7% in 2018, however, in 2019 it fell below 2017. In 2020, GDP took a sharp downturn, likely due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

[ citation needed ] Joe Biden [ edit ] Joe Biden has proposed several tax policies during his tenure. His 2025 budget includes tax breaks for millions of families, low-income workers, and senior citizens. One significant proposal is the revival of the expanded Child Tax Credit (CTC), which helped lift millions of children out of poverty during the pandemic. Under Biden's plan, the expanded CTC would provide $3,000 per child six years and older and $3,600 for each child under six. Additionally, Biden supports continuing tax cuts for families making less than $400,000 but opposes extending tax cuts for higher earners. His goal is to pay for these tax breaks by raising taxes on corporations and the wealthy.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Margaret Thatcher [ edit ] Margaret Thatcher 's policies included several tax cuts. Thatcher's government significantly lowered income tax rates. The top rate reduced from 83% in 1979 to 40% by 1988. The basic rate also decreased from 33% to 25% during the same period. These cuts aimed to encourage work, entrepreneurship, and investment, ultimately stimulating economic growth.

[ 29 ] To offset the revenue loss from income tax cuts, Thatcher's administration raised the VAT rate from 8% to 15%. The increased VAT became a crucial source of government revenue. The trade-off between income tax reduction and higher VAT sparked debates.

[ 30 ] Thatcher's strategy also included tax cuts for corporations. By 1986, the rate had fallen to 35%, down from the 52% burden on businesses in the late 1970s. These cuts aimed to enhance the UK's competitiveness, attract investment, and foster business growth.

While the tax cuts spurred economic activity, critics [ 31 ] argued that they disproportionately benefited the wealthy. Poverty rates increased during Thatcher's tenure, with child poverty more than doubling.

[ 32 ] Germany [ edit ] Gerhard Schröder [ edit ] During his tenure as Chancellor of Germany from 1998 to 2005, Gerhard Schröder implemented significant tax cut policies aimed at stimulating economic growth and improving the country's competitiveness. One notable move was the acceleration of income tax reductions in 2004, which lowered income tax levels by 10%. This reduction left approximately €18 billion in federal, state, and local coffers. Schröder planned to pay for these tax cuts through a combination of measures: reducing subsidies, privatization revenues, and increasing state debt. His goal was to provide a signal of economic revival and boost consumer confidence.

[ 33 ] However, Schröder faced criticism and pressure to denounce his business and political ties to Russia, particularly in light of Moscow's war in Ukraine. Despite the controversies, Schröder's tax policies left a lasting impact on Germany's fiscal landscape.

[ 34 ] Argentina [ edit ] Javier Milei [ edit ] Javier Milei 's tax cut policies were aimed at transforming the country's financial landscape. Milei proposed a tax reform known as the Ómnibus Law. One of its central tenets was the elimination of the maximum marginal tax rate. Over time, this would gradually reduce the tax burden for high-net-worth individuals, from 1.75% to 0.5% by 2027.

[ 35 ] Multiplier Effect [ edit ] Main article: Multiplier effect With cuts in tax rates, households have higher disposable income. Some of this disposable income is spent or invested, stimulating the economy. This phenomenon is known as the multiplier effect. The effect represents the relation between the money spent on economic activity and the quantitative money reduction in taxes or an increase in government spending.

The Fiscal Multiplier and Economic Policy Analysis in the United States , a 2015 study by J. Whalen and F. Reichling, focused on the short-term effects of tax cuts and the potential of the economy. The results showed that the tax cuts or spending increases are dependent on the economic situation. If the economy is close to its potential and the Federal Reserves were not affected by the zero interest rates, tax cuts had small short-run economic effects mostly because the fiscal stimulus was outperformed by interest rate hikes. On the other hand, if the economy performs further from the economic potential and is bounded by zero interest rates the effect of fiscal stimuli is much higher. Congressional Budget Office estimated that the weak economy's multiplier effect potential is three times higher than the one of a strong economy. The study has mostly shown the uncertainty about fiscal policies. The study has shown the large differences between the low and high estimates of the multipliers effect of tax cuts. On the other hand, the study indicated that government spending is a more reliable form of fiscal policy than tax cuts.

[ 36 ] Tax Cuts and Productivity [ edit ] The relation between the tax rate and government revenue is often depicted by the Laffer curve . Experience has shown that with a continuous increase in the tax rate, at one point, the tax revenues start to decrease. This phenomenon can be explained by a decrease in the willingness of individuals to work as the government takes away their money. The apex point of the parabola represents the revenue-maximizing point for the government.

The Laffer curve is often criticized for its abstractness as it is in reality very difficult to find the revenue-maximizing point. It is hugely dependent on society and its tastes which is mostly fluid while the model simplifies the reality into general tax revenues and tax rates. It also considers the single tax rate and single labor supply. Furthermore, it does not take into account that tax revenues are not often a continuous function, although with higher tax rates people try to avoid taxes through tax avoidance and tax evasion. All these facts bring uncertainty into the position of the revenue-maximizing point. Nevertheless, the theoretical ground of the Laffer curve is often used as the justification for tax increases or decreases.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Reasons [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this section may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( May 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Governments may cite several reasons for cutting taxes.

Fairness [ edit ] To begin with, money belongs to the person who possesses it, particularly if they earned it. Reducing the amount of money that is taken by the government can be seen as increasing fairness. However, if tax cuts are financed by cutting government spending, it can be argued that this disproportionately disadvantages low-income earners, as cuts in spending will affect services used mostly by low-income earners, who pay proportionately less tax.

Tax Equity [ edit ] There are two main concepts focused on equity in taxation - horizontal equity and vertical equity. The former focuses on the belief, that all individuals should be affected by the same tax burden. The latter highlights the importance of the equal relative tax burden, the so-called ability-to-pay principle resulting in the belief that those with higher income should be taxed more heavily.

Efficiency [ edit ] Tax cuts can serve to increase efficiency in the market. Cutting taxes can lead to more efficient allocation of resources than would have been the case with higher taxes. Generally, private entities are more efficient with their spending than governments. Tax cuts allow private entities to use their money in a more efficient manner.

Incentives [ edit ] High taxes generally discourage work and investment. When taxes reduce the return from working, it is not surprising that workers are less interested in working.

[ citation needed ] Taxes on income create a wedge between what the employee keeps and what the employer pays. Higher taxes encourage employers to create fewer jobs than they would with lower taxes.

Tax burden [ edit ] Tax burden refers to the indirect responsibility of paying taxes irrespective of the legal taxpayer.

[ 39 ] In the US, the overall tax burden in 2020 was equal to 16% of the total gross domestic product .

[ 40 ] See also [ edit ] Laffer curve Rahn curve Reaganomics Starve the beast Trickle-down economics S corporation Tax reform References [ edit ] ^ Amadeo, Kimberly.

"Tax Cuts, Types, and How They Work" .

The Balance . Retrieved 25 April 2022 .

^ Thomas Sowell on the Relationship Between Tax Rates and Tax Revenues By Mark J. Perry ^ Michael A. Meeropol (1 May 2001).

"What recent history teaches about recessions and economic policy" . Economic Policy Institute . Retrieved 23 August 2021 .

^ "Tax cuts, types and how they work" .

The balance . Kimberly Amadeo . Retrieved 27 April 2021 .

^ Pettinger, Tejvan.

"The effect of tax cuts" .

Economics Help . Retrieved 25 April 2022 .

^ G. Gale, William; A. Samwick, Andrew (September 2014).

"Effects of Income Tax Changes on Economic Growth" (PDF) .

Economic Studies at Brookings : 16 . Retrieved 26 April 2022 .

^ a b "Short-Term Tax Cuts, Long-Term Stimulus" (PDF) .

^ "What is VAT? - European Commission" .

taxation-customs.ec.europa.eu . Retrieved 26 April 2024 .

^ Davies, Richard (24 July 2020).

"Cutting VAT to help consumers and firms" .

Richard Davies . Retrieved 26 April 2024 .

^ Staunton, Richard (4 July 2022).

"Why a cut in VAT would NOT solve the cost of living crisis" .

Evening Standard . London . Retrieved 26 April 2024 .

^ a b c "The Benefits and Costs of a U.S. Tax Cut" .

IMF . September 2017 . Retrieved 7 April 2023 .

^ Pettinger, Tejvan (21 September 2022).

"The effect of tax cuts on economic growth and revenue" .

Economics Help . Retrieved 7 April 2023 .

^ Lizarazo, Sandra; Peralta-Alva, Adrian; Puy, Damien (July 2017).

"Macroeconomic and Distributional Effects of Personal Income Tax reforms: A Heterogenous Agent Model Approach for the U.S." ^ Amadeo, Kimberly.

"Tax Cuts, Types, and How They Work" .

the balance . Retrieved 30 April 2021 .

^ David Cay Johnston .

"Tax cuts can do more harm than good" . Al Jazeera America . Retrieved 30 April 2021 .

^ "John F. Kennedy on the Economy and Taxes | JFK Library" . 10 September 2018.

^ "Happy Birthday to the Kennedy Tax Cuts" . 26 February 2013.

^ "Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 (ERTA): Overview" .

Investopedia . Retrieved 26 April 2024 .

^ "Tax Reform Act of 1986: Overview and History" .

Investopedia . Retrieved 26 April 2024 .

^ https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RL34498.pdf Federal Individual Income Tax Brackets, Standard Deduction, and Personal Exemption: 1988 to 2024 ^ Yagan, Danny (December 2015), "Capital Tax Reform and the Real Economy: The Effects of the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut" (PDF) , American Economic Review , 105 (12): 3531– 63, doi : 10.1257/aer.20130098 ^ Gale, William G.; Potter, Samara R. (March 2002), An Economic Evaluation of the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 (PDF) , Brookings Institution ^ "The Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act on New York City - Highlights from One Year of Implementation" (PDF) . NYC Mayor's Office of Operations.

^ "What did the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 do?" .

^ "What is the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act?" . 20 April 2023.

^ Glied, Sherry (June 2018).

"Implications of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act for Public Health" .

American Journal of Public Health .

108 (6): 734– 736.

doi : 10.2105/AJPH.2018.304388 .

PMC 5944881 .

PMID 29565668 .

^ "Biden budget would cut taxes for millions and restore breaks for families. Here's what to know. - CBS News" .

cbsnews.com . 12 March 2024 . Retrieved 26 April 2024 .

^ House, The White (7 March 2024).

"FACT SHEET: President Biden Is Fighting to Reduce the Deficit, Cut Taxes for Working Families, and Invest in America by Making Big Corporations and the Wealthy Pay Their Fair Share" .

The White House . Retrieved 26 April 2024 .

^ Elliott, Larry (8 April 2013).

"Did Margaret Thatcher transform Britain's economy for better or worse?" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 25 April 2024 .

^ "Thatcher's Economic Policies" .

Economics Help . Retrieved 25 April 2024 .

^ Archer, Josh (18 March 2018).

"10 Reasons why Margaret Thatcher is Britain's most hated politician" .

Josh Archer . Retrieved 26 April 2024 .

^ "Margaret Thatcher: How her changes affected your finances" . BBC News. 8 April 2013 . Retrieved 25 April 2024 .

^ "German Government Accelerates Tax Cuts to Boost Economy – DW – 06/29/2003" .

dw.com . Retrieved 26 April 2024 .

^ "German Finance Minister Lindner wants to cut state funds for Schröder" .

POLITICO . 30 April 2022 . Retrieved 26 April 2024 .

^ "El texto completo de la Ley Ómnibus de Javier Milei" .

LA NACION (in Spanish). 28 December 2023 . Retrieved 26 April 2024 .

^ Whalen, Charles J.; Reichling, Felix (February 2015).

"The Fiscal Multiplier and Economic Policy Analysis in the United States" (PDF) .

^ Gahvari, Firouz (1 November 1989).

"The nature of government expenditures and the shape of the laffer curve" .

Journal of Public Economics .

40 (2): 251– 260.

doi : 10.1016/0047-2727(89)90006-6 .

ISSN 0047-2727 .

^ Boyce, Paul (20 January 2021).

"Laffer Curve: Definition, Diagram & Criticisms" .

BoyceWire . Retrieved 7 April 2023 .

^ "Definition of TAX BURDEN" . Merriam-Webster. 25 April 2024 . Retrieved 26 April 2024 .

^ "Government Revenue | U.S. Treasury Data Lab" .

datalab.usaspending.gov .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tax_cut&oldid=1292045270 " Category : Tax policy Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing copy edit from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles needing copy edit Articles with limited geographic scope from January 2025 Articles needing additional references from August 2019 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from January 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2025 Articles with limited geographic scope from May 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 22:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tax cut 5 languages Add topic

