Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biblical narrative 2 Identity 3 Views Toggle Views subsection 3.1 Catholic church and Orthodox churches 3.2 Other views 3.3 Dispensationalist or Futurist view 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Man of sin 5 languages العربية Bahasa Indonesia Malagasy Português Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Figure referred to in the Christian Bible For the Varnaline album, see Man of Sin (album) .

Christian eschatology Contrasting beliefs Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Futurism Dispensationalism Preterism Idealism The Millennium Amillennialism Postmillennialism Premillennialism Prewrath rapture Posttribulation rapture Dispensationalism Biblical texts Daniel Seventy Weeks Synoptic Gospels Olivet Discourse Mark 13 Matthew 24 Sheep and Goats Pauline Epistles 2 Thessalonians Johannine literature Revelation (Events) Pseudepigrapha 1 Enoch 2 Esdras Key terms Abomination of desolation Antichrist Apocalypse Apocatastasis Armageddon The Beast False prophet Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Gog and Magog Great Apostasy Great Tribulation Katechon Kingdom of God Lake of fire Last Judgment Man of sin New Earth New Jerusalem Number of the Beast Rapture Resurrection of the dead Second Coming Seven bowls Seven seals Son of perdition Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Woman of the Apocalypse World to come Christianity portal v t e The man of sin ( Greek : ὁ ἄνθρωπος τῆς ἁμαρτίας , ho anthrōpos tēs hamartias ) or man of lawlessness ( ἀνομίας , anomias ), man of rebellion , man of insurrection , or man of apostasy is a figure referred to in the Christian Bible in the Second Epistle to the Thessalonians . He is usually equated with the Antichrist in Christian eschatology .

Biblical narrative [ edit ] See also: Katechon In 2 Thessalonians 2:3–10 , the "man of sin" is described as one who will be revealed before the Day of the Lord comes. The author, claiming to be Paul, is concerned that his audience has begun to behave as if the Day of the Lord has already happened, and he cautions them that it will not happen until the "man of lawlessness" or son of perdition is revealed, which will not happen until some restraining force or person (the Katechon ) is first removed.

Codex Sinaiticus and Codex Vaticanus have the reading "man of lawlessness" instead of "man of sin." Bruce M. Metzger argues that this is the original reading even though 94% of manuscripts have "man of sin"; [ 1 ] [ a ] The New American Standard Bible [ 3 ] and New International Version (NIV) [ 4 ] use "man of lawlessness," and the New Revised Standard Version uses "lawless one." [ 5 ] 3 Don’t let anyone deceive you in any way, for that day will not come until the rebellion occurs and the man of lawlessness is revealed, the man doomed to destruction. 4 He will oppose and will exalt himself over everything that is called God or is worshiped, so that he sets himself up in God’s temple, proclaiming himself to be God.
5 Don’t you remember that when I was with you I used to tell you these things? 6 And now you know what is holding him back, so that he may be revealed at the proper time. 7 For the secret power of lawlessness is already at work; but the one who now holds it back will continue to do so till he is taken out of the way. 8 And then the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus will overthrow with the breath of his mouth and destroy by the splendor of his coming. 9 The coming of the lawless one will be in accordance with how Satan works. He will use all sorts of displays of power through signs and wonders that serve the lie, 10 and all the ways that wickedness deceives those who are perishing. They perish because they refused to love the truth and so be saved.

[ 4 ] Identity [ edit ] Nearly all commentators, both ancient and modern, identify the man of sin in 2 Thessalonians chapter 2 as the Antichrist, even though they vary greatly in who they view the Antichrist to be.

[ 6 ] The man of sin is variously identified with Caligula , [ 7 ] Nero , [ 8 ] [ 9 ] the papacy [ 10 ] and the end times Antichrist . Some scholars believe that the passage contains no genuine prediction, but represents a speculation of the apostle's own, based on Daniel 8:23ff ; 11:36ff , and on contemporary ideas of Antichrist .

[ 7 ] [ 11 ] Views [ edit ] Catholic church and Orthodox churches [ edit ] The Catholic and Eastern Orthodox traditions consider the Man of Sin to come at the End of the World , when the katechon , the one who restrains, will be taken out. Katechon is also interpreted as the Grand Monarch or a new Orthodox Emperor, inaugurating a rebirth of the Holy Roman Empire .

[ citation needed ] Other views [ edit ] Main articles: Great Apostasy and Historicism (Christian eschatology) Various Protestant and anti-Catholic commentators have linked the term and identity to the Catholic Church and the Pope .

[ 12 ] The "temple of God" is here understood to be the church; the restraining power the Roman empire.

[ citation needed ] Dispensationalist or Futurist view [ edit ] Main article: Dispensationalism Dispensationalists view this as a reference to a coming world ruler (Antichrist) who will succeed in making a peace treaty with Israel for 7 years ( Daniel's 70th week ) guaranteeing some sort of Middle East peace settlement with the Arab nations.

[ citation needed ] This will occur after the rebuilding of the Third Temple in Jerusalem and the restoration of temple sacrifices. He will break his peace treaty with Israel 3 1 ⁄ 2 years into the plan, enter the "rebuilt Third Temple" and perform the abomination of desolation by setting up an idol of himself in the Temple and declare himself God.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] 2 Thessalonians 2 Abrogation of Old Covenant laws Dajjal Antichrist Notes [ edit ] ^ The Textus Receptus and texts edited by Scrivener and Tregelles have the reading ἁμαρτίας (sin); Westcott-Hort and the SBL Greek New Testament have ἀνομίας (lawlessness).

[ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ Bruce M. Metzger, A Textual Commentary on the Greek New Testament ( Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft : Stuttgart 1994).

^ BibleGateway.com , All Greek translations , accessed 7 May 2022 ^ 2 Thessalonians 2:3–10 ^ a b 2 Thessalonians 2:3–10 ^ 2 Thessalonians 2:3–10 ^ Schink, W.F., "The Scriptural Doctrine of the Antichrist." Our Great Heritage: Vol. 3 Ed. Lange, Lyle and Albrecht, Jerome G. Milwaukee: Northwestern Publishing house, 1991. p. 572.

^ a b "Net Bible: Man of sin" . Archived from the original on 2009-07-07 . Retrieved 2010-05-26 .

^ St. John Chrysostom , Homilies on II Thess., Nicene-Post Nicene Fathers ^ Man of Sin Archived 2009-07-05 at the Wayback Machine , Kurt Simmons ^ Albert Barnes , Notes on the New Testament , p. 1113 ^ (compare Bousset , Der Antichrist, 93 ff, etc.) ^ Matthew Henry’s Commentary on the Whole Bible 1706 v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐5777f5b8f9‐cntm5
Cached time: 20250814223622
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.478 seconds
Real time usage: 0.645 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1837/1000000
Revision size: 7148/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 68819/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4607/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 31363/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.314/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13633213/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  550.094      1 -total
 20.62%  113.444      1 Template:Langx
 18.06%   99.365      2 Template:Reflist
 15.22%   83.734      1 Template:Christian_Eschatology
 14.63%   80.496      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.26%   72.956      1 Template:Cite_web
 12.88%   70.859      1 Template:Short_description
 11.02%   60.618      4 Template:Citation_needed
 10.29%   56.616      1 Template:Doomsday
 10.14%   55.805      3 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3116117:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814223622 and revision id 1301682653. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Man_of_sin&oldid=1301682653 " Categories : Antichrist Christian eschatology Christian terminology New Testament words and phrases People in the Pauline epistles Unnamed people of the Bible Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2014 This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 04:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Man of sin 5 languages Add topic

