Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work Toggle Life and work subsection 1.1 On Ascensions 1.2 Euclid's Elements 2 Hypsicles letter 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Hypsicles 17 languages العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά فارسی Français Galego Italiano Nederlands Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek mathematician and astronomer (c. 190–120 BC) Hypsicles ( Ancient Greek : Ὑψικλῆς ; c. 190 – c. 120 BCE) was an ancient Greek mathematician and astronomer known for authoring On Ascensions (Ἀναφορικός) and possibly the Book XIV of Euclid's Elements . Hypsicles lived in Alexandria .

[ 1 ] Life and work [ edit ] Although little is known about the life of Hypsicles, it is believed that he authored the astronomical work On Ascensions . The mathematician Diophantus of Alexandria noted on a definition of polygonal numbers, due to Hypsicles: [ 2 ] If there are as many numbers as we please beginning from 1 and increasing by the same common difference, then, when the common difference is 1, the sum of all the numbers is a triangular number; when 2 a square; when 3, a pentagonal number [and so on]. And the number of angles is called after the number which exceeds the common difference by 2, and the side after the number of terms including 1.

On Ascensions [ edit ] In On Ascensions (Ἀναφορικός and sometimes translated On Rising Times ), Hypsicles proves a number of propositions on arithmetical progressions and uses the results to calculate approximate values for the times required for the signs of the zodiac to rise above the horizon .

[ 3 ] It is thought that this is the work from which the division of the circle into 360 parts may have been adopted [ 4 ] since it divides the day into 360 parts, a division possibly suggested by Babylonian astronomy, [ 5 ] although this is mere speculation and no actual evidence is found to support this.

Heath 1921 notes, "The earliest extant Greek book in which the division of the circle into 360 degrees appears".

[ 6 ] This work by Hypsicles is believed to represent the earliest extant Greek text to use the Babylonian division of the zodiac into 12 signs of 30 degrees each.

[ 7 ] Euclid's Elements [ edit ] Hypsicles is more famously known for possibly writing the Book XIV of Euclid's Elements . The book may have been composed on the basis of a treatise by Apollonius . The book continues Euclid's comparison of regular solids inscribed in spheres , with the chief result being that the ratio of the surfaces of the dodecahedron and icosahedron inscribed in the same sphere is the same as the ratio of their volumes , the ratio being 10 3 ( 5 − − 5 ) {\displaystyle {\sqrt {\tfrac {10}{3(5-{\sqrt {5}})}}}} .

[ 4 ] Heath further notes, "Hypsicles says also that Aristaeus, in a work entitled Comparison of the five figures , proved that the same circle circumscribes both the pentagon of the dodecahedron and the triangle of the icosahedron inscribed in the same sphere; whether this Aristaeus is the same as the Aristaeus of the Solid Loci, the elder ( Aristaeus the Elder ) contemporary of Euclid, we do not know." [ 6 ] Hypsicles letter [ edit ] Hypsicles letter was a preface of the supplement taken from Euclid's Book XIV, part of the thirteen books of Euclid's Elements , featuring a treatise.

[ 1 ] Basilides of Tyre , O Protarchus , when he came to Alexandria and met my father, spent the greater part of his sojourn with him on account of the bond between them due to their common interest in mathematics. And on one occasion, when looking into the tract written by Apollonius (Apollonius of Perga) about the comparison of the dodecahedron and icosahedron inscribed in one and the same sphere, that is to say, on the question what ratio they bear to one another, they came to the conclusion that Apollonius' treatment of it in this book was not correct; accordingly, as I understood from my father, they proceeded to amend and rewrite it. But I myself afterwards came across another book published by Apollonius, containing a demonstration of the matter in question, and I was greatly attracted by his investigation of the problem. Now the book published by Apollonius is accessible to all; for it has a large circulation in a form which seems to have been the result of later careful elaboration.
For my part, I determined to dedicate to you what I deem to be necessary by way of commentary, partly because you will be able, by reason of your proficiency in all mathematics and particularly in geometry, to pass an expert judgment upon what I am about to write, and partly because, on account of your intimacy with my father and your friendly feeling towards myself, you will lend a kindly ear to my disquisition. But it is time to have done with the preamble and to begin my treatise itself.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Thomas Little Heath (1908).

"The thirteen books of Euclid's Elements" . Cambridge, The University Press.

^ Thomas Bulmer (1990), Biography in Dictionary of Scientific Biography ^ Evans, J., (1998), The History and Practice of Ancient Astronomy , page 90. Oxford University Press.

^ a b Boyer (1991).

"Euclid of Alexandria" .

A History of Mathematics . pp.

130– 131.

In ancient times it was not uncommon to attribute to a celebrated author works that were not by him; thus, some versions of Euclid's Elements include a fourteenth and even a fifteenth book, both shown by later scholars to be apocryphal. The so-called Book XIV continues Euclid's comparison of the regular solids inscribed in a sphere, the chief results being that the ratio of the surfaces of the dodecahedron and icosahedron inscribed in the same sphere is the same as the ratio of their volumes, the ratio being that of the edge of the cube to the edge of the icosahedron, that is, 10 3 ( 5 − − 5 ) .

{\displaystyle {\scriptstyle {\sqrt {\frac {10}{3(5-{\sqrt {5}})}}}}.} It is thought that this book may have been composed by Hypsicles on the basis of a treatise (now lost) by Apollonius comparing the dodecahedron and icosahedron. (Hypsicles, who probably lived in the second half of the second century B.C., is thought to be the author of an astronomical work, De ascensionibus , from which the division of the circle into 360 parts may have been adopted.) ^ Boyer (1991). "Greek Trigonometry and Mensuration".

A History of Mathematics . p. 162.

It is possible that he took over from Hypsicles, who earlier had divided the day into 360 parts, a subdivision that may have been suggested by Babylonian astronomy ^ a b Thomas Little Heath (1921).

"A history of Greek mathematics" . Oxford, The Clarendon Press.

^ Montelle, Clemency (2016), "The Anaphoricus of Hypsicles of Alexandria", in Steele, John M., The Circulation of Astronomical Knowledge in the Ancient World, Time, Astronomy, and Calendars: Texts and Studies, 6, Leiden: Brill, pp. 287–315, ISBN 978-90-0431561-7 References [ edit ] Boyer, Carl B.

(1991).

A History of Mathematics (Second ed.).

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

ISBN 0-471-54397-7 .

Heath, Thomas Little (1981).

A History of Greek Mathematics, Volume I . Dover publications.

ISBN 0-486-24073-8 .

External links [ edit ] The mac-tutor biography of Hypsicles Hypsicles, from  Smith, Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology [ usurped ] Scan of Manitius' edition of On Ascensions at wilbourhall.org (German introduction, Greek text and Latin translation) v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics zbMATH People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐k7nwc
Cached time: 20250815001006
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.511 seconds
Real time usage: 0.697 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1742/1000000
Revision size: 8702/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 77503/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4886/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 48763/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.339/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15869166/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  562.741      1 -total
 22.65%  127.477      1 Template:Reflist
 20.92%  117.753      2 Template:Navbox
 19.72%  110.970      1 Template:Langx
 15.73%   88.528      2 Template:Cite_web
 15.64%   88.031      1 Template:Ancient_Greek_astronomy
 14.10%   79.368      1 Template:Short_description
  8.64%   48.606      1 Template:Authority_control
  8.08%   45.494      1 Template:Usurped
  7.77%   43.710      1 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12815034:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815001006 and revision id 1286430688. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hypsicles&oldid=1286430688 " Categories : Ancient Greek astronomers Ancient Greek geometers 190s BC births 120s BC deaths 2nd-century BC Greek mathematicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 19 April 2025, at 21:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hypsicles 17 languages Add topic

