Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Legacy 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Valerius Cordus 20 languages Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français Italiano Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Slovenščina ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German physician, botanist, and author (1515–1544) Valerius Cordus German physician and botanist Born 18 February 1515 Hesse or Erfurt , Holy Roman Empire Died 25 September 1544 (1544-09-25) (aged 29) Rome , Papal States Valerius Cordus (18 February 1515 – 25 September 1544) was a German physician , botanist and pharmacologist who authored the first pharmacopoeia North of the Alps and one of the most celebrated herbals in history. He is also widely credited with developing a method for synthesizing ether (which he called by the Latin name oleum dulci vitrioli , or "sweet oil of vitriol").

Cordus wrote prolifically, and identified and described several new plant species and varieties . The plant genus Cordia is named for him.

Life [ edit ] In 1515, Valerius Cordus was born either in the city of Erfurt in what is today Thuringia , or somewhere in the westwardly adjacent state of Hesse . His father, Euricius Cordus (born Heinrich Ritze, 1486–1535), was an educated physician and an ardent Lutheran convert .

Valerius began his higher education in 1527, at the young age of 12, when he enrolled at the University of Marburg , studying botany and pharmacy under the tutelage of his father, who had been appointed professor of medicine at the newly established university in the same year. He completed his bachelor's degree in 1531, whereupon he furthered his studies by enrolling at the University of Leipzig , and by working at an apothecary shop in Leipzig owned by his uncle (either Johannes or Joachim).

In 1539 he relocated to Wittenberg in order to lecture and study medicine at the University of Wittenberg . His lectures proved popular, and his students' lecture notes were published posthumously in 1549 as Annotations on Dioscorides . Among the research outlined in the lectures were the results of his own systematic observations of many of the same plants described by Pedanius Dioscorides in the 1st century CE. Direct observation of live specimens was one of Cordus' strengths.

In 1540 Cordus discovered and described a revolutionary technique for synthesizing ether, which involved adding sulfuric acid to ethyl alcohol .

In 1543, while on his way for a long trip in Italy , he presented his pharmacopoeia, Dispensatorium , to the Nuremberg city council. The council paid him 100 gold guilders following the acceptance of the work in October of the same year, and had the work published posthumously in 1546.

[ 1 ] In October 1543, Cordus left Nuremberg for Italy.

[ 2 ] He stayed in Padua and Venice during the winter and next spring. Shortly after Pentecost, he and two German naturalists started to traverse Italy, continuing in the height of summer. In the Maremma , on the Italian westcoast, they ventured into the marshes in search of novel plants. Soon after, Cordus exhibited what may have been the symptoms of malaria . He was also hit on the leg by a horse, causing great pain, and possibly an infection. The party brought the feverish Cordus to Rome , where they arrived on September 1 or 2. When Cordus showed signs of improvement, the rest embarked on a trip to Naples. Cordus, aged 29, died in their absence, on the evening of September 25. He was interred at Santa Maria dell'Anima , the German Catholic church in central Rome.

Legacy [ edit ] Throughout his short life, Cordus travelled extensively, visited many universities, and was widely acclaimed by his colleagues and other associates. He was an impressive linguist, and also spoke eloquently on philosophy. As a botanist, he observed with a breadth and depth that surpassed most of his contemporaries; as a scientist, his methodology was systematic and thorough.

After the death of Cordus, Conrad Gessner published a considerable amount of Cordus' remaining unpublished work, including De Extractione (which featured Cordus' ether synthesis method), Historia stirpium and Sylva in 1561.

The standard author abbreviation V.Cordus is used to indicate this person as the author when citing a botanical name .

[ 3 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Sprague, T.A. (1939). "The Herbal of Valerius Cordus".

The Journal of the Linnean Society of London .

LII (341). Linnean Society of London.

^ Robertson Arber, Agnes (1912).

"The Herbal in Germany" .

Herbals, Their Origin and Evolution: A chapter in the history of botany, 1470–1670 .

Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . p.

66 .

OCLC 45889011 . Retrieved 1 January 2013 .

^ International Plant Names Index .

V.Cordus .

References [ edit ] Theodor Husemann (1876). " Cordus, Valerius ".

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie (in German). Vol. 4. Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot. pp.

479– 480.

Valerius Cordus at the Galileo Project Valerius Cordus de Oberhessen Archived 2006-09-10 at the Wayback Machine at Só Biografias (in Portuguese) Groll, E. K. (Hrsg.): Biografien der Entomologen der Welt : Datenbank. Version 4.15 : Senckenberg Deutsches Entomologisches Institut, 2010 (in German) Isely, Duane (2002).

One Hundred and One Botanists .

West Lafayette, Indiana : Purdue University Press . pp.

29– 31.

ISBN 978-1-55753-283-1 .

OCLC 947193619 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Valerius Cordus at Wikimedia Commons v t e Natural history Pioneering naturalists Classical antiquity Aristotle ( History of Animals ) Theophrastus ( Historia Plantarum ) Aelian ( De Natura Animalium ) Pliny the Elder ( Natural History ) Dioscorides ( De Materia Medica ) Renaissance Ulisse Aldrovandi Gaspard Bauhin ( Pinax theatri botanici ) Otto Brunfels Hieronymus Bock Andrea Cesalpino Valerius Cordus Leonhart Fuchs Conrad Gessner ( Historia animalium ) Frederik Ruysch William Turner ( Avium Praecipuarum , New Herball ) John Gerard ( Herball, or Generall Historie of Plantes ) Enlightenment Robert Hooke ( Micrographia ) Marcello Malpighi Antonie van Leeuwenhoek William Derham Hans Sloane Jan Swammerdam Regnier de Graaf Carl Linnaeus ( Systema Naturae ) Georg Steller Joseph Banks Johan Christian Fabricius James Hutton John Ray ( Historia Plantarum ) Comte de Buffon ( Histoire Naturelle ) Bernard Germain de Lacépède Gilbert White ( The Natural History of Selborne ) Thomas Bewick ( A History of British Birds ) Jean-Baptiste Lamarck ( Philosophie zoologique ) 19th century George Montagu ( Ornithological Dictionary ) Georges Cuvier ( Le Règne Animal ) William Smith Charles Darwin ( On the Origin of Species ) Alfred Russel Wallace ( The Malay Archipelago ) Henry Walter Bates ( The Naturalist on the River Amazons ) Alexander von Humboldt John James Audubon ( The Birds of America ) William Buckland Charles Lyell Mary Anning Jean-Henri Fabre Louis Agassiz Philip Henry Gosse Asa Gray William Jackson Hooker Joseph Dalton Hooker William Jardine ( The Naturalist's Library ) Ernst Haeckel ( Kunstformen der Natur ) Richard Lydekker ( The Royal Natural History ) 20th century Martinus Beijerinck Abbott Thayer ( Concealing-Coloration in the Animal Kingdom ) Hugh B. Cott ( Adaptive Coloration in Animals ) Niko Tinbergen ( The Study of Instinct ) Konrad Lorenz ( On Aggression ) Karl von Frisch ( The Dancing Bees ) Ronald Lockley ( Shearwaters ) Topics Natural history museums ( List ) Parson-naturalists ( List ) Natural History Societies List of natural history dealers Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Academics International Plant Names Index People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Valerius_Cordus&oldid=1301568376 " Categories : 1515 births 1544 deaths 16th-century German botanists German entomologists 16th-century German physicians Deaths from malaria Academic staff of the University of Wittenberg 16th-century German writers 16th-century German male writers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Botanists with author abbreviations CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Portuguese-language sources (pt) Articles with German-language sources (de) Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 14:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Valerius Cordus 20 languages Add topic

