Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concepts Toggle Concepts subsection 1.1 Dictatorship of the proletariat 1.2 Anti-imperialism 1.3 Peaceful coexistence 1.4 Socialism in one country 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Bolshevism and private property 2.2 Bolsheviks and the Russian Revolution 3 Support for the Bolsheviks by the people Toggle Support for the Bolsheviks by the people subsection 3.1 Supporters and opponents 3.2 Social democratic views 3.3 Criticism and historical estimates 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Sources Toggle the table of contents Bolshevism 26 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Deutsch Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano Қазақша Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Polski Русский سنڌي Српски / srpski Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Revolutionary Marxist ideology Part of a series on Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related  topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Part of a series on Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type Collective farming Collective leadership Commanding heights of the economy Democratic centralism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Intensification of the class struggle under socialism Labor aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism New Soviet man One-party state Partiinost' Popular front Proletarian internationalism Protracted people's war Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Yugoslav State socialist Soviet republic Totalitarianism Theory of the productive forces Third Period Vanguardism Wars of national liberation Unified power Variants Browderism Camilism Fidelismo Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kádárism Kaysone Phomvihane Thought Khrushchevism Machelism Maoism Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Prachanda Path Sankarism Socialism with Chinese characteristics Stalinism Neo- Titoism Politicians Lenin Stalin Foster Dimitrov Thälmann Hồ Pollitt Browder Rákosi Nosaka Bierut Tito Togliatti Ulbricht Kaganovich Mao Khrushchev Choibalsan Díaz Ibárruri Gottwald Thorez Chervenkov Gheorghiu-Dej Zachariadis Deng Gomułka Brezhnev Hoxha Namboodiripad Hall Giáp Zhivkov Bakdash Kim Kádár Honecker Husák Koliševski Qasim Taraki Ceaușescu Barre Adhikari Kaysone Neto Jaruzelski Aidit Mugabe Chin Pot Habash Castro Jiang (Zemin) Guevara Lara Garang Gorbachev Kérékou Machel Mengistu Bains Brar Wijeweera Bishop Zyuganov Ortega Cano Kaypakkaya Sankara Xi Dahal Intellectuals Marx Engels Lukács Roy Bukharin Dutt Haywood Chen Trường Bettelheim Dutta Hinton Camilo Parenti Hirschman Guzmán Badiou Andreyeva Sison Losurdo Newton Avakian Davis Trọng Ghandy Dean Jiang (Shigong) Li Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism (1924) Dialectical and Historical Materialism (1938) The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) (1938) Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR (1951) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism (1960) Guerrilla Warfare (1961) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) President Ho Chi Minh's Testament (1969) The Governance of China (2014) History Soviet Union 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War World War II Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Revolution China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Korean War Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency Revolutions of 1989 Nepalese Civil War By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia 1975–79 1979–92 China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia Czechia Slovakia East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia South Yemen Soviet Union Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Vietnam Yugoslavia Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia Organizations Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam French Communist Party IMCWP Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Party of Labour of Albania Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Workers' Front (Spain) Workers' Party of Korea Related topics All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism Mass killings Bolshevism Crimes against humanity under communist regimes Mass killings Criticism of communist party rule Cult of personality Intercommunalism Leninism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism New class Post-communism Red fascism Red Scare Second Second World State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union State capitalism State socialism Tankie Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Trotskyism Communism portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Part of a series on Leninism Schools of thought Bolshevism Bordigism Marxism–Leninism Nkrumaism Right communism Trotskyism Workerism Concepts Anti-imperialism Collective leadership Democratic centralism Dialectical materialism Dual power Labor aristocracy Liquidationism National liberation Proletarian internationalism Revolutionary defeatism Revolutionary situation Self-determination Socialist state Soviet democracy Vanguardism World revolution People Lenin Trotsky Bukharin Kamenev Stalin Zinoviev Rykov Bubnov Sokolnikov Lukács Bordiga Hồ Gramsci Nkrumah Negri Theoretical works The Development of Capitalism in Russia (1899) What Is to Be Done?

(1902) Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1917) The State and Revolution (1917) The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky (1918) "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder (1920) Foundations of Leninism (1924) Leninism: Introduction to the Study of Leninism (1925) History Russian Social Democratic Labour Party 2nd Congress Prague Conference Bolsheviks RSDLP (Bolsheviks) Russian Revolution February Revolution October Revolution History of Soviet Russia RSFSR Collective leadership Civil War Red Army War communism Red Terror National delimitation Anti-religious campaign New Economic Policy Soviet Union Death and funeral of Lenin Comintern Joseph Stalin's rise to power Related topics 26 Baku Commissars Anti-Leninist left De-Leninization Jacobinism Marxism Libertarian Luxemburgism Left communism Mensheviks Orthodox Marxism Proletkult Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Bolshevism (derived from Bolshevik ) is a revolutionary socialist current of Soviet Leninist and later Marxist–Leninist political thought and political regime associated with the formation of a rigidly centralized, cohesive and disciplined party of social revolution, focused on overthrowing the existing capitalist state system, seizing power and establishing the " dictatorship of the proletariat ".

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Bolshevism originated at the beginning of the 20th century in Russia and was associated with the activities of the Bolshevik faction within the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party led by Vladimir Lenin , Bolshevism's main theorist. Other theoreticians included Joseph Stalin , Leon Trotsky , Nikolai Bukharin and Yevgeni Preobrazhensky .

[ 2 ] While Bolshevism was based on Marxist philosophy, it also absorbed elements of the ideology and practice of the socialist revolutionaries of the second half of the 19th century ( Sergey Nechaev , Pyotr Tkachev , Nikolay Chernyshevsky ) and was influenced by Russian agrarian socialist movements like the Narodniks .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In October 1917, the Bolshevik Party won a majority in the revolutionary workers' councils ( soviets ) which had been formed throughout Russia following the February Revolution . It subsequently organized the October Revolution , which overthrew the Provisional Government and replaced it with a state power under the control of the soviets , led by the Bolsheviks along with other left-wing socialists.

Some researchers [ 5 ] attribute to Bolshevik theory the program of Joseph Stalin, who headed the All–Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) and at the same time possessed full state power in the Soviet Union . However, others (both Stalin's contemporaries and later) do not confuse "Bolshevism" and " Stalinism " proper, considering them to be multidirectional (revolutionary and thermidorian ) phenomena.

[ 6 ] The expression "Bolshevism", and later "Communism", has become established in Western historiography in the sense of a certain set of features of Soviet power in a certain political period. At present, the name "Bolsheviks" is actively used by various groups of Marxist–Leninists and Trotskyists .

Concepts [ edit ] Dictatorship of the proletariat [ edit ] Main article: Dictatorship of the proletariat Either the dictatorship of the landowners and capitalists, or the dictatorship of the proletariat [...] There is no middle course [...] There is no middle course anywhere in the world, nor can there be.

—Lenin, claiming that people had only two choices; a choice between two different, but distinct class dictatorships.

[ 7 ] Lenin, according to his interpretation of Marx's theory of the state , believed democracy to be unattainable anywhere in the world before the proletariat seized power.

[ 7 ] According to Marxist theory, the state is a vehicle for oppression and is headed by a ruling class , [ 7 ] an "organ of class rule".

[ 8 ] He believed that during his lifetime, the only viable solution was dictatorship since the war was heading into a final conflict between the "progressive forces of socialism and the degenerate forces of capitalism".

[ 9 ] The Russian Revolution of 1917 was already a failure according to its original aim, which was to act as an inspiration for a world revolution.

[ 9 ] As a result, the initial anti-statist posture and the active campaigning for direct democracy was replaced with dictatorship.

[ 9 ] From the perspective of the Bolsheviks, the rationale for this change was Russia's lack of development, its status as the sole socialist state in the world, its encirclement by imperialist powers, and its internal encirclement by the peasantry.

[ 10 ] Marx, similar to Lenin, considered it fundamentally irrelevant whether a bourgeois state was ruled according to a republican , parliamentarian , or constitutionally monarchic political system because this did not change the mode of production itself.

[ 11 ] These systems, regardless of whether they are ruled by an oligarchy or by mass participation, were ultimately all a dictatorship of the bourgeoisie by definition because the bourgeoisie, by the very condition of their class and its interests, would promote and implement policies in their class interests and thus in defense of capitalism.

[ 12 ] There was a difference, though; Lenin, after the failures of the world revolutions , argued that this did not necessarily have to change under the dictatorship of the proletariat.

[ 13 ] The reasoning came from wholly practical considerations: the majority of the country's inhabitants were not communists and the party could not introduce parliamentary democracy since that was inconsistent with their ideology and would lead to the party losing power.

[ 13 ] He therefore concluded that "[t]he form of government has absolutely nothing to do with" the nature of the dictatorship of the proletariat.

[ 13 ] Bukharin and Trotsky agreed with Lenin, both claiming that the revolution had only destroyed the old, but failing completely in creating anything sort of new.

[ 14 ] Lenin had now concluded that the dictatorship of the proletariat would not alter the relationship of power between persons, but rather "transform their productive relations so that, in the long run, the realm of necessity could be overcome and, with that, genuine social freedom realised".

[ 15 ] It was in the period of 1920–1921 that Soviet leaders and ideologists began differentiating between socialism and communism; hitherto the two terms had been used to describe similar conditions.

[ 15 ] From then, the two terms developed separate meanings. According to Soviet ideology, Russia was in the transition from capitalism to socialism (referred to interchangeably under Lenin as the dictatorship of the proletariat), socialism being the intermediate stage to communism, with the latter being the final stage which follows after socialism.

[ 15 ] By now, the party leaders believed that universal mass participation and true democracy could only take form in the last stage, if only because of Russia's current conditions at the time.

[ 15 ] [Because] the proletariat is still so divided, so degraded, so corrupted in parts [...] that an organization taking in the whole proletariat cannot directly exercise proletarian dictatorship. It can be exercised only by a vanguard that has absorbed the revolutionary energy of the class.

— Lenin, explaining the increasingly dictatorial nature of the regime.

[ 16 ] In early Bolshevik discourse, the term "dictatorship of the proletariat" was of little significance; the few times it was mentioned, it was likened to the form of government which had existed in the Paris Commune .

[ 15 ] With the ensuing Russian Civil War and the social and material devastation that followed, however, its meaning was transformed from communal democracy to disciplined totalitarian rule.

[ 17 ] By now, Lenin had concluded that only a proletarian regime as oppressive as its opponents could survive in this world.

[ 18 ] The powers previously bestowed upon the soviets were now given to the Council of People's Commissars ; the central government was in turn to be governed by "an army of steeled revolutionary Communists [by Communists he referred to the Party]".

[ 16 ] In a letter to Gavril Myasnikov , Lenin in late 1920 explained his new reinterpretation of the term "dictatorship of the proletariat"; [ 19 ] Dictatorship means nothing more nor less than authority untrammelled by any laws, absolutely unrestricted by any rules whatever, and based directly on force. The term 'dictatorship' has no other meaning but this .

[ 19 ] Lenin justified these policies by claiming that all states were class states by nature, and that these states were maintained through class struggle .

[ 19 ] This meant that the dictatorship of the proletariat in the Soviet Union could only be "won and maintained by the use of violence against the bourgeoisie".

[ 19 ] The main problem with this analysis is that the Party came to view anyone opposing or holding alternate views of the party as bourgeoisie.

[ 19 ] The worst enemy remained the moderates, however, which were "objectively" considered to be "the real agents of the bourgeoisie in the working class movement, the labour lieutenants of the capitalist class".

[ 20 ] Consequently, "bourgeoisie" became synonymous with "opponent" and with people who disagreed with the party in general.

[ 21 ] These oppressive measures led to another reinterpretation of the dictatorship of the proletariat and socialism in general; it was now defined as a purely economic system.

[ 22 ] Slogans and theoretical works about democratic mass participation and collective decision-making were now replaced with texts which supported authoritarian management.

[ 22 ] Considering the situation, the party believed it had to use the same powers as the bourgeoisie to transform Russia, for there was no other alternative.

[ 23 ] Lenin began arguing that the proletariat, similar to the bourgeoisie, did not have a single preference for a form of government, and because of that dictatorship was acceptable to both the party and the proletariat.

[ 24 ] In a meeting with party officials, Lenin stated—in line with his economist view of socialism—that "[i]ndustry is indispensable, democracy is not", further arguing that "we do not promise any democracy or any freedom".

[ 24 ] Anti-imperialism [ edit ] Main article: Anti-imperialism Imperialism is capitalism at a stage of development at which the dominance of monopolies and finance-capital is established; in which the export of capital has acquired pronounced importance; in which the division of the world among the international trusts has begun; in which the divisions of all territories of the globe among the biggest capitalist powers has been completed.

—Lenin, citing the main features of capitalism in the age of imperialism in Imperialism: the Highest Stage of Capitalism .

[ 25 ] The Marxist theory on imperialism was conceived by Lenin in his book, Imperialism: the Highest Stage of Capitalism (published in 1917).

[ 26 ] It was written in response to the theoretical crisis within Marxist thought, which occurred due to capitalism's recovery in the 19th century.

[ 26 ] According to Lenin, imperialism was a specific stage of development of capitalism; a stage he referred to as state monopoly capitalism .

[ 26 ] The Marxist movement was split on how to solve capitalism's resurgence and revitalisation after the great depression of the late-19th century.

[ 27 ] Eduard Bernstein , from the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SDP), considered capitalism' revitalisation as proof that capitalism was evolving into a more humane system, further adding that the basic aims of socialists were not to overthrow the state, but rather to take power through elections.

[ 27 ] On the other hand, Karl Kautsky , from the SDP, held a highly dogmatic view, claiming that there was no crisis within Marxist theory.

[ 27 ] Both of them, however, denied or belittled the role of class contradictions in society after the crisis.

[ 27 ] In contrast, Lenin believed that capitalism' resurgence was the beginning of a new phase of capitalism; this stage being created because of a strengthening of class contradiction, not because of its reduction.

[ 27 ] Lenin did not know when the imperialist stage of capitalism began, and claimed it would be foolish to look for a specific year, however he did assert it began at the beginning of the 20th century (at least in Europe).

[ 25 ] Lenin believed that the economic crisis of 1900 accelerated and intensified the concentration of industry and banking, which led to the transformation of the finance capital connection to industry into the monopoly of large banks." [ 28 ] In Imperialism: the Highest Stage of Capitalism , Lenin wrote; "the twentieth century marks the turning-point from the old capitalism to the new, from the domination of capital in general to the domination of finance capital." [ 28 ] Lenin's defines imperialism as the monopoly stage of capitalism.

[ 29 ] Despite radical anti-imperialism being an original core value of Bolshevism, the Soviet Union from 1939 onward was widely viewed as a de facto imperial power whose ideology could not allow it to admit its own imperialism. Through the Soviet ideological viewpoint, pro-Soviet factions in each country were the only legitimate voice of "the people" regardless of whether they were minority factions. All other factions were simply class enemies of "the people", inherently illegitimate rulers regardless of whether they were majority factions. Thus, in this view, any country that became Soviet or a Soviet ally naturally did so via a legitimate voluntary desire, even if the requesters needed Soviet help to accomplish it. The principal examples were the Soviet invasion of Finland yielding the annexation of Finnish parts of Karelia , the Soviet invasion of Poland , the Soviet occupation of the Baltic states , and the postwar de facto dominance over the satellite states of the Eastern Bloc under a pretense of total independence. In the post-Soviet era even many Ukrainians, Georgians, and Armenians feel that their countries were forcibly annexed by the Bolsheviks, but this has been a problematic view because the pro-Soviet factions in these societies were once sizable as well. Each faction felt that the other did not represent the true national interest. This civil war –like paradox has been seen in the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation , as pro-Russian Crimeans have been viewed as illegitimate by pro-Ukrainian Crimeans, and vice versa.

Peaceful coexistence [ edit ] Main article: Peaceful coexistence The loss by imperialism of its dominating role in world affairs and the utmost expansion of the sphere in which the laws of socialist foreign policy operate are a distinctive feature of the present stage of social development. The main direction of this development is toward even greater changes in the correlation of forces in the world arena in favour of socialism." — Nikolay Inozemtsev , a Soviet foreign policy analyst, referring to series of events (which he believed) would lead to the ultimate victory of socialism.

[ 30 ] "Peaceful coexistence" was an ideological concept introduced under Khrushchev's rule.

[ 31 ] While the concept has been interpreted by fellow communists as proposing an end to the conflict between the systems of capitalism and socialism, Khrushchev saw it instead as a continuation of the conflict in every area with the exception in the military field.

[ 32 ] The concept claimed that the two systems were developed "by way of diametrically opposed laws", which led to "opposite principles in foreign policy." [ 30 ] The concept was steeped in Leninist and Stalinist thought.

[ 30 ] Lenin believed that international politics were dominated by class struggle , and Stalin stressed in the 1940s the growing polarization which was occurring in the capitalist and socialist systems.

[ 30 ] Khrushchev's peaceful coexistence was based on practical changes which had occurred; he accused the old "two camp" theory of neglecting the non-aligned movement and the national liberation movements .

[ 30 ] Khrushchev considered these "grey areas", in which the conflict between capitalism and socialism would be fought.

[ 30 ] He still stressed that the main contradiction in international relations were those of capitalism and socialism.

[ 30 ] The Soviet Government under Khrushchev stressed the importance of peaceful coexistence, claiming it had to form the basis of Soviet foreign policy.

[ 30 ] Failure to do, they believed, would lead to nuclear conflict .

[ 30 ] Despite this, Soviet theorists still considered peaceful coexistence as a continuation of the class struggle between the capitalist and socialist worlds, just not one based on armed conflict.

[ 30 ] Khrushchev believed that the conflict, in its current phase, was mainly economical.

[ 30 ] The emphasis on peaceful coexistence did not mean that the Soviet Union accepted a static world, with clear lines.

[ 30 ] They continued to uphold the creed that socialism was inevitable, and they sincerely believed that the world had reached a stage in which the "correlations of forces" were moving towards socialism.

[ 30 ] Also, with the establishment of socialist regimes in Eastern Europe and Asia, Soviet foreign policy-planners believed that capitalism had lost its dominance as an economic system.

[ 30 ] Socialism in one country [ edit ] Main article: Socialism in one country The concept of "socialism in one country" was conceived by Stalin in his struggle against Leon Trotsky and his concept of permanent revolution .

[ 33 ] In 1924, Trotsky published his pamphlet Lessons of October in which he stated that socialism in the Soviet Union would fail because of the backward state of economic development unless a world revolution began.

[ 33 ] Stalin responded to Trotsky's pamphlet with his article, " October and Comrade Trotsky's Theory of Permanent Revolution ".

[ 34 ] In it, Stalin stated, that he did not believe an inevitable conflict between the working class and the peasants would take place, further adding that "socialism in one country is completely possible and probable".

[ 34 ] Stalin held the view common amongst most Bolsheviks at the time; there was possibility of real success for socialism in the Soviet Union despite the country's backwardness and international isolation.

[ 34 ] While Grigoriy Zinoviev , Lev Kamenev and Nikolai Bukharin , together with Stalin, opposed Trotsky's theory of permanent revolution, they diverged on how socialism could be built.

[ 34 ] According to Bukharin, Zinoviev and Kamenev supported the resolution of the 14th Conference (held in 1925) which stated that "we cannot complete the building of socialism due to our technological backwardness." [ 34 ] Despite the rather cynical attitude, Zinoviev and Kamenev did believe that a defective form of socialism could be constructed.

[ 34 ] At the 14th Conference, Stalin reiterated his position, claiming that socialism in one country was feasible despite the capitalist blockade of the country.

[ 35 ] After the conference, Stalin wrote " Concerning the Results of the XIV Conference of the RCP(b) ", in which he stated that the peasantry would not turn against the socialist system because he believed they had a self-interest in preserving.

[ 35 ] The contradictions which would arise with the peasantry during the socialist transition, Stalin surmised, could "be overcome by our own efforts".

[ 35 ] He concluded that the only viable threat to socialism in the Soviet Union was a military intervention.

[ 36 ] In late 1925, Stalin received a letter from a party official which stated that his position of "Socialism in One Country" was in contradiction with Friedrich Engels own writings on the subject.

[ 36 ] Stalin countered, stating that Engels' writings 'reflected' "the era of pre-monopoly capitalism, the pre-imperialist era when there were not yet the conditions of an uneven, abrupt development of the capitalist countries." [ 36 ] From 1925 onwards, Bukharin began writing extensively on the subject, and in 1926, Stalin wrote On Questions of Leninism , which contained his best-known writings on the subject.

[ 36 ] Trotsky, with the publishing of Leninism , began countering Bukharin's and Stalin's arguments, claiming that socialism in one country was possible, but only in the short-run, and claimed that without a world revolution it would be impossible to safeguard the Soviet Union from the "restoration of bourgeoisie relations".

[ 36 ] Zinoviev on the other hand, disagreed with both Trotsky and Bukharin and Stalin, holding instead steadfast to Lenin's own position from 1917 to 1922, and continued to claim that only a defecting form of socialism could be constructed in the Soviet Union without a world revolution.

[ 37 ] Bukharin, by now, began arguing for the creation of an autarkic economic model, while Trotsky, in contrast, claimed that the Soviet Union had to participate in the international division of labour to develop.

[ 38 ] In contrast to Trotsky and Bukharin, Stalin did not believe a world revolution was possible, claiming in 1938 that a world revolution was in fact impossible, and claiming that Engels was wrong on the matter.

[ 39 ] At the 18th Congress , Stalin took the theory to its inevitable conclusion, claiming that the communist mode of production could be conceived in one country.

[ 39 ] He rationalised this by claiming that the state could exist in a communist society, as long as the Soviet Union was encircled by capitalism.

[ 39 ] However, surprisingly, with the establishment of satellite states in Eastern Europe , Stalin claimed that socialism in one country was only possible in a large country like the Soviet Union, and that the other states, in order to survive, had to follow the Soviet line.

[ 40 ] History [ edit ] Bolshevism has existed as a current of political thought and as a political party since 1903.

— Vladimir Lenin. "Childhood Disease of "Leftism" in Communism".

Full Composition of Writings .

41 (Vladimir Lenin ed.): 6.

[ 41 ] The concept of Bolshevism arose at the Second Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (1903) as a result of the split of the party into two factions: supporters of Lenin and the rest.

[ K 1 ] One of the main reasons for the split was the question of a party of a new type. In the course of work on the Charter of the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party, Vladimir Lenin and Yuliy Martov proposed two different wordings of the clause on party membership. According to Lenin's wording, a party member is a citizen who recognizes the program and charter, pays membership fees and works in one of the party organizations. Martov suggested limiting the charter to the first two requirements. During the elections to the central organs of the party, the majority was won by supporters of the Leninist formulation, after which Lenin began to call his faction "Bolsheviks", while Martov called his supporters "Mensheviks". Although in the subsequent history of the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party, Lenin's supporters often found themselves in the minority, they were assigned the politically advantageous name "Bolsheviks".

[ K 2 ] [ 42 ] As Lenin's biographer Robert Service points out, the division of the newly created party into two factions "plunged Russian Marxists into a state of shock". All but the extreme left Petersburg Marxists disagreed with Lenin's party policy.

[ 43 ] At the Fourth Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party in 1906, the organizational unity of the party was temporarily restored. At the Fifth Congress , the Central Committee was elected, which, due to disagreements between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks, turned out to be unworkable, and the Bolshevik Center , headed by Vladimir Lenin, which was created during the Congress by Bolshevik delegates at one of its factional meetings, arbitrarily took over the leadership of the Bolshevik organizations of the party.

At the Sixth (Prague) Conference of the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party , held on January 18–30, 1912, which constituted itself as the all–party conference of the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party and the supreme organ of the party, almost exclusively Lenin's supporters were represented. By this time, the central committee of the party had virtually ceased to exist (its last plenum was held in January 1910), and the party found itself without an official leading center. In this regard, a Bolshevik Central Committee was elected at the Prague Conference.

In 1916, Lenin wrote his work Imperialism as the Highest Stage of Capitalism , which was a major contribution to the development of classical Marxism in the new conditions. In this work the thesis about the unevenness of economic and political development of capitalism in the epoch of imperialism was expressed and theoretically grounded, which leads to the conclusion about the possibility of the victory of socialism initially in a few or in one single country, which is not yet economically developed enough – such as Russia – provided that the head of the revolutionary movement will be a disciplined avant–garde, ready to go all the way to the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat .

Immediately after the outbreak of the World War , Lenin and his supporters advanced the slogan of the defeat of tsarism in the war and the transformation of the imperialist war into a civil war. It was with this that Lenin's criticism of the so–called " social–chauvinists ", who supported their governments in the world war, was connected.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Lenin viewed the civil war as "an inevitable continuation, development and intensification of the class struggle".

[ 46 ] By the beginning of the February Revolution, the leading figures of the Bolshevik faction were mainly in exile or in emigration, and therefore the Bolsheviks did not take an organized part in it. The Bolshevik leaders who returned from exile, who, along with the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries, became members of the Petrograd Soviet, at first tended to cooperate with the Provisional Government. From the very beginning, while still abroad, Lenin insisted on the immediate break of the Petrograd Soviet with the Provisional Government in order to actively prepare for the transition from the bourgeois–democratic to the next, "proletarian" stage of the revolution, the seizure of power and the end of the war. Returning to Russia, he came up with a new program of action for the Bolshevik party – the April Theses – in which he put on the agenda the demand for the transfer of all power to the Soviets in the interests of the proletariat and the poorest peasantry. Faced with resistance even among the representatives of "theoretical", "scientific" Bolshevism, Lenin managed to overcome it, relying on the support of the lower classes – local party organizations, adherents of immediate practical action.

[ 47 ] In the course of the unfolding controversy about the possibility of socialism in Russia, Lenin rejected all the critical arguments of the Mensheviks, socialist revolutionaries and other political opponents about the country's unpreparedness for a socialist revolution due to its economic backwardness, weakness, lack of culture and organization of the working masses, including the proletariat, about the danger the split of the revolutionary democratic forces and the inevitability of a civil war.

In April 1917, the split of the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party was finalized. During a heated discussion at the 7th All–Russian (April) Conference of the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party (Bolsheviks) ( April 24–29), the April Theses received the support of the majority of delegates from the localities and formed the basis of the policy of the entire party. The Bolshevik faction became known as the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party (Bolsheviks).

The Russian Social Democratic Labour Party was renamed the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party (Bolsheviks) at the 7th (April) Conference in 1917. In March 1918, the party adopted the name of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) , [ K 3 ] and in December 1925, the All–Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) . At the 19th Congress in October 1952, the All–Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) was renamed the Communist Party of the Soviet Union .

In 1990, at the last, 28th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union , during the legalization of political platforms within the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the Bolshevik Platform was formed, giving rise to several modern political parties and social movements.

Bolshevism and private property [ edit ] Realizing the Leninist slogan "plunder the loot", the Bolsheviks en masse carried out a complete confiscation (expropriation) from the owners of private property, which they considered acquired through the exploitation of the working people, that is, the robbery of the workers. At the same time, the Bolsheviks never found out whether private property was obtained through their own labor, or through the exploitation of other people, whether the owners adequately paid for hired labor, what part of the confiscated private property the owner created with his own labor.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] Bolsheviks and the Russian Revolution [ edit ] There is an opinion that the Bolsheviks strove for revolution, regardless of the political situation and historical realities. This is how the famous Social Democrat Alexander Parvus wrote about the topic in 1918: [ 56 ] The essence of Bolshevism is simple – to ignite the revolution everywhere, not choosing the time, regardless of the political situation and other historical realities. Whoever is against is the enemy, and the conversation with the enemies is short – they are subject to urgent and unconditional destruction.

Bolshevik figures such as Anatoly Lunacharsky , Moisei Uritsky and Dmitry Manuilsky agreed that Lenin’s influence on the Bolshevik party was decisive but the October insurrection was carried out according to Trotsky’s, not to Lenin’s plan.

[ 57 ] Support for the Bolsheviks by the people [ edit ] Lenin at the Red Square, 1919 According to the British historian Orlando Figes , the opinion that the Bolsheviks were raised to the top of power by massive popular support for their party is not true and is a delusion. According to Figes, the October Uprising in Petrograd was a coup d'état supported by only a small part of the population. Figes explains the success of the Bolsheviks by the fact that the latter were the only political party that uncompromisingly advocated the slogan "all power to the Soviets", which gained great popularity in 1917 after the unsuccessful Revolt of General Kornilov . As Figes points out, in the fall of 1917, there was a stream of resolutions from factories, from villages, from army units, calling for the formation of a Soviet government. At the same time, the authors of the resolutions understood "the power of the Soviets" as the All–Russian Council with the participation of all socialist parties.

[ 58 ] Meanwhile, the commitment of the Bolsheviks to the principle of Soviet power was not at all so unconditional. In July 1917, when the Bolshevik Party was unable to obtain a majority in the Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies, it "temporarily removed" the slogan "all Power to the Soviets!". After the October coup, during the so–called " triumphal march of Soviet power " in those cases when individual Soviets did not agree to become the organs of the dictatorship of the Russian Social–Democratic Workers' Party (Bolsheviks), the Bolsheviks did not hesitate to disperse them and replace them by emergency bodies – revolutionary committees , military revolutionary committees, etc.

[ 59 ] Alexander Parvus wrote in 1918: [ 60 ] The present Soviets terrorize not only the reactionaries and capitalists, but also the democratically inclined bourgeoisie and even all socialist workers' organizations that disagree with their opinion. They dispersed the Constituent Assembly and are holding on, having lost their moral authority in the eyes of the masses, exclusively with bayonets.

Supporters and opponents [ edit ] Program of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks), 1919 The Bolsheviks were supported, although not without criticism of their political practice, [ 61 ] [ 62 ] by left–wing theorists in Europe, such as Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht .

At the same time, this political trend rejected the centrist social democrats , for example, Karl Kautsky [ 63 ] and the extreme left supporters of " workers' council communism ", for example, Otto Rühle [ 64 ] [ 65 ] and Antonie Pannekoek .

[ 66 ] The answer to the extreme leftist criticism was given by Lenin in the brochure "Childhood Illness of "Leftism" in Communism", in turn Antonie Pannekoek answered to Vladimir Lenin in the work "World Revolution and Communist Tactics".

In the 1920s and 1930s, the Left Opposition to Stalin adopted the self–designation " Bolshevik – Leninists ", thereby emphasizing its continuity with the revolutionary tradition as opposed to Thermidorian Stalinism . After the political trials of the 1930s , most of the "Leninist Guards" were repressed . Proceeding from this, there is an opinion that Bolshevism as a phenomenon has left the historical scene: [ 2 ] ...[Stalin] managed to destroy almost all of Lenin 's comrades–in–arms in Russia , becoming by 1928–1939 "the Russian Bonaparte– Robespierre " in the country, "especially double types of cultures of the pre–bourgeois order , that is, the cultures of the bureaucratic , serfdom " (and terrorist – we add), which Lenin feared so much, grew up in the country.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] But on the other hand, a number of scientists are of the opinion that Bolshevism has undergone changes over time, and as a phenomenon, it ended only in the early 1990s.

[ 69 ] Some modern scholars agree that Bolshevism: ...was a desperate attempt to escape from the world of the bourgeois and philistine . (This, incidentally, refutes the assertion that Bolshevism is equated with fascism . Fascism, unlike Bolshevism, was based on philistinism – its flesh and spirit).

[ 69 ] In Western political science, some authors analyze Bolshevism from the standpoint of similarities and differences with fascism and Nazism .

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] According to sociologist Boris Kagarlitsky, one of the central contradictions of the post–revolutionary policy of the Bolsheviks is defined as a consequence of the historically developed socio–political situation in Russia: But events did not develop at the will of one person or even one party. Both Lenin himself and his comrades were already hostages of the revolutionary process, which was moving forward according to its own logic. To win in the struggle that had begun, they had to do what they themselves did not expect of themselves, to build a state that only partially met their ideas about what to strive for, but which allowed the revolution to survive and win.

[ 72 ] In journalism, some authors also understand it as a synonym for extreme extremism, ideological fanaticism, intolerance, and a propensity for violence.

[ 73 ] Social democratic views [ edit ] Bolshevism was criticized by the Social Democrats . Thus, the famous Social Democrat Alexander Parvus wrote in 1918: [ 74 ] If Marxism is a reflection of the social history of Western Europe , refracted through the prism of German philosophy , then Bolshevism is Marxism, emasculated by amateurs and refracted through the prism of Russian ignorance.

Criticism and historical estimates [ edit ] According to the philosopher and linguist Nikolay Trubetskoy : The positive significance of Bolshevism may be that having removed the mask and showed everyone Satan in his undisguised form, he led many through confidence in the reality of Satan to faith in God.

— "We and Others", Eurasian Times , Berlin, 1925 The authors of The Black Book of Communism note: [ 47 ] From the moment of its organizational formation in 1903, this party differed from all other currents of both Russian and world social democracy primarily by its voluntarist strategy of overthrowing the existing order and its concept of party organization – a rigidly structured, disciplined one, consisting of selected professional revolutionaries, parties are the antipode of vague mass parties, widely open to sympathizers, to the struggle of opinions and discussions, that is, the way the Russian Mensheviks and almost all European Social Democrats were.

Russian President Vladimir Putin , answering questions in the Federation Council on June 27, 2012, accused the Bolshevik leadership of betraying national interests – "the Bolsheviks committed an act of national betrayal ..." as a result of which Russia lost the First World War – "...the result of the betrayal of the then government ".

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] See also [ edit ] Bolsheviks Left Socialist-Revolutionaries Russian Social Democratic Labour Party Russian Civil War Notes [ edit ] ^ Despite the ordinal number adopted in Soviet historiography, the London Congress was actually a constituent one, since the Minsk Congress had no practical significance ^ There is an opinion that the adoption of such an unprofitable name of the faction was a major blunder for Martov and, on the contrary: the consolidation of the momentary electoral success in the name of the faction was a strong political move of Lenin ^ The famous theorist of Marxism Karl Kautsky explained the change in the name of Lenin's party as follows: [The Bolsheviks] destroyed the democracy that the people had conquered in the March revolution. Accordingly, the Bolsheviks ceased to call themselves social democrats, and adopted the name of communists.

True, they do not want to completely abandon democracy. Lenin, in his speech on April 28, calls the Soviet organization "the highest type of democracy", "a complete break with its bourgeois caricature". For the proletarian and the poor peasant, complete freedom has now been restored.

But democracy is still understood as the equality of political rights for all citizens. The privileged layers have always enjoyed freedom. But this is not called democracy.

Quote by: Karl Kautsky. "Dictatorship of the Proletariat" References [ edit ] ^ Conference of the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party in 1912. Documents and Materials – Moscow: Russian Political Encyclopedia, 2008 – 1120 Pages – (Series "Political Parties of Russia. Late 19th – First Third of the 20th Century. Documentary Heritage") – ISBN 5-8243-0390-8 , ISBN 978-5-8243-0954-6 ^ a b c Alexander Tarasov .

The Sacred Function of the Revolutionary Subject ^ Osipov 2004–2017 .

^ Zevelev, Sviridenko & Shelokhaev 2000 .

^ Vladik Nersesyants. History of Political and Legal Doctrines ^ See various works by Trotsky , Martemyan Ryutin ( Stalin and the Crisis of the Proletarian Dictatorship ), Fyodor Raskolnikov ( An Open Letter to Stalin ), Boris Kagarlitsky , Alexander Tarasov ^ a b c Harding 1996 , pp. 154–155.

^ Lenin, Vladimir (1918).

"Class Society and the State" .

The State and Revolution . Vol. 25 (Collected Works).

Marxists Internet Archive (published 1999) . Retrieved February 10, 2018 .

^ a b c Harding 1996 , p. 155.

^ Harding 1996 , p. 156.

^ Harding 1996 , pp. 155–156.

^ Harding 1996 , pp. 157–158.

^ a b c Harding 1996 , p. 158.

^ Harding 1996 , pp. 158–159.

^ a b c d e Harding 1996 , p. 159.

^ a b Harding 1996 , p. 161.

^ Harding 1996 , p. 160.

^ Harding 1996 , pp. 160–161.

^ a b c d e Harding 1996 , p. 162.

^ Harding 1996 , pp. 162–163.

^ Harding 1996 , p. 163.

^ a b Harding 1996 , p. 165.

^ Harding 1996 , pp. 165–166.

^ a b Harding 1996 , p. 166.

^ a b McDonough 1995 , p. 352.

^ a b c McDonough 1995 , p. 339.

^ a b c d e McDonough 1995 , pp. 344–347.

^ a b McDonough 1995 , p. 353.

^ McDonough 1995 , p. 354.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Evans 1993 , p. 72.

^ Evans 1993 , p. 71.

^ Evans 1993 , pp. 71–72.

^ a b van Ree 2003 , p. 126.

^ a b c d e f van Ree 2003 , p. 127.

^ a b c van Ree 2003 , p. 128.

^ a b c d e van Ree 2003 , p. 129.

^ van Ree 2003 , pp. 129–130.

^ van Ree 2003 , p. 130.

^ a b c van Ree 2003 , p. 133.

^ van Ree 2003 , pp. 134–135.

^ Vladimir Lenin. "Childhood Disease of "Leftism" in Communism".

Full Composition of Writings .

41 (Vladimir Lenin ed.): 6.

Text ^ Service 2002 , p. 179.

^ Service 2002 , p. 187.

^ Vladimir Lenin. Full Composition of Writings – 5th Edition – Moscow: Publishing House of Political Literature, 1967. Volume 26. "On the Defeat of Your Government in the Imperialist War. 1915". Pages 286–291 ^ Vladimir Lenin. Full Composition of Writings – 5th Edition – Moscow: Publishing House of Political Literature, 1967. Volume 26. "Socialism and War (Attitude of the Russian Social–Democratic Labor Party to War). 1915". Pages 307–350 ^ Vladimir Lenin. Full Composition of Writings – 5th Edition – Moscow: Publishing House of Political Literature, 1967. Volume 30. "The Military Program of the Proletarian Revolution". September 1916. Pages 133 ^ a b "Stéphane Courtois, Nicolas Werth, Jean–Louis Pannet, Andrzej Paczkowski, Karel Bartoszek, Jean–Louis Margolen, With the Participation of Remy Coffer, Pierre Rigulo, Pascal Fontaine, Yves Santamaria, Sylvain Buluc, "The Black Book of Communism: Crime, Terror, Repression", Three Centuries of History, Moscow, 1999, Translated Under the Direction of Evgeny Khramov. Part 1. "The State Against Its People". Chapter 1. Paradoxes of October" . Archived from the original on August 8, 2021 . Retrieved August 23, 2020 .

^ Vladimir Lenin. Full Composition of Writings. Volume 36. Vladimir Lenin, Meeting of the All–Russian Central Executive Committee On April 29, 1918. Page 269 ^ Encyclopedic Dictionary of Winged Words and Expressions. Rob the Loot ^ "Confiscation of the Means of Production From the Capitalists in the First Months of the Socialist Revolution (November 1917 – June 1918)" . Archived from the original on October 4, 2013 . Retrieved August 23, 2020 .

^ Yuri Felshtinsky, Georgy Chernyavsky. Leon Trotsky. Book Two. Bolshevik. 1917–1923. Chapter 6. Bolshevik Dictator. 8. Confiscation of Church Property ^ "Theses of the Law on Confiscation of Homes with Rented Apartments. Vladimir Lenin. Full Composition of Writings. Volume 35. Page 108" .

^ "Decree on the Audit of Steel Boxes in Banks" . Archived from the original on October 5, 2013 . Retrieved August 23, 2020 .

^ Igor Bunich. Party Gold ^ "Note to Felix Dzerzhinsky with the Draft Decree on the Fight Against Counter–Revolutionaries and Saboteurs. Vladimir Lenin. Complete Works, Volume 35, Page 156" .

^ Parvus 2017 , p. 108.

^ Deutscher, Isaac (January 5, 2015).

The Prophet: The Life of Leon Trotsky . Verso Books. p. 1283.

ISBN 978-1-78168-721-5 .

^ Brenton 2017 , p. 160, Orlando Figes. Lenin And the Revolution.

^ Pavel Kostogryzov. Bolsheviks and Soviets: Dynamics of Relations During the Period of "Triumphal Procession" and "Strengthening of Soviet Power" (On the Materials of the Urals) // Problems of the History of Society, State and Law. Digest of Articles. 1st Edition. Yekaterinburg: Ural State Law Academy, 2013 – Pages 289–309 ^ Parvus 2017 , p. 107.

^ Plimak 2004 , p. 189–198.

^ Some of the mistakes of this criticism were examined by Georg Lukács in his work «Critical Notes on the Brochure of Rosa Luxemburg "Russian Revolution"» // Georg Lukacs. History and Class Consciousness. Moscow: Logos–Altera, 2003. Pages 346–365 ^ Karl Kautsky .

From Democracy to State Slavery ^ Otto Rühle .

The Fight Against Fascism Begins With the Fight Against Bolshevism ^ Otto Rühle .

The Main Questions of the Organization Archived May 24, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ Antonie Pannekoek .

"Party and Class" ^ Vladimir Lenin. Full Composition of Writings. Volume 45. Pages 389 ^ Plimak 2004 , p. 289.

^ a b Heinrich Ioffe.

The Rise and Fall of Bolshevism ^ Zwei Gesichter des Totalitarismus: Bolschewismus und Nationalsozialismus im Vergleich; 16 Skizzen / Leonid Luks. — Köln [u.a.]: Böhlau, 2007. — 306 S.; 23 cm. — ISBN 978-3-412-20007-7 ^ "Archived copy (I)" . Archived from the original on June 5, 2009 . Retrieved August 23, 2020 .

"Archived Copy (II)" . Archived from the original on June 5, 2009 . Retrieved August 23, 2020 .

Leonid Lux. Communist Theorists About Fascism: Insights And Miscalculations ^ Boris Kagarlitsky . Marxism: Not Recommended for Teaching. Moscow: Algorithm, Eksmo, 2005. Page 55 ^ The Latest Philosophical Dictionary / Compiled by Alexander Gritsanov – Minsk: V. M. Skakun Publishing House, 1999 – 896 Pages ^ Parvus 2017 , p. 109.

^ "Putin Accused the Bolsheviks of National Treason" .

News . June 27, 2012.

^ Boris Mezhuev (June 28, 2012).

"Honor the Losers" . News.

Sources [ edit ] Berdyaev, Nikolay .

The Origins and Meaning of Russian Communism. Moscow, 1990 Brenton, Anthony (2017).

Historical Inevitability? Key Events of the Russian Revolution (Collection of Articles) . Moscow: Alpina Non–Fiction.

ISBN 978-5-91671-757-0 .

Evans, Alfred (1993).

Soviet Marxism–Leninism: The Decline of an Ideology .

ABC-CLIO .

ISBN 978-0-275-94763-7 .

Felshtinsky, Yuri (2008).

Leaders In the Law . Moscow: Terra.

ISBN 978-5-275-01878-3 .

Harding, Neil (1996).

Leninism .

Macmillan Publishers .

ISBN 978-0-333-66482-7 .

McDonough, Terrence (1995). "Lenin, Imperialism, and the Stages of Capitalist Development".

Science & Society . Vol. 59, no. 3.

Guilford Press . pp.

339– 367.

JSTOR 40403507 .

Mises, Ludwig von . Socialism. Economic And Sociological Analysis – Moscow: "Catallaxy", 1994 – Page 416 – ISBN 5-86366-022-8 Nikolaevsky, Boris (1995).

Secret Pages of History . Humanitarian Literature Publishing House.

ISBN 5-87121-007-4 .

Osipov, Yury (2004–2017).

Bolsheviks .

Great Russian Encyclopedia : In 35 Volumes. Moscow: Great Russian Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021 . Retrieved August 23, 2020 .

Parvus, Alexander (2017).

In the Fight For the Truth . Moscow: Alpina Publisher.

ISBN 978-5-9614-6465-8 .

Plimak, Evgeny (2004).

Transitional Politics. Lenin's Experience . Moscow: The Whole World.

ISBN 5-7777-0298-8 .

Service, Robert (2002).

Lenin. Biography . Translated by G. I. Levitan. Moscow: Potpourri.

ISBN 985-438-591-4 .

Russell, Bertrand . The Practice and Theory of Bolshevism / [Author's Epilogue by V. S. Markov; Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union, Scientific Council "History of Revolutions and Social Movements"] – Moscow: Science , 1991 van Ree, Erik (2003).

The Political Thought of Joseph Stalin: A Study in Twentieth Century Revolutionary Patriotism .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-135-78604-5 .

Zevelev, Alexander; Sviridenko, Yuri; Shelokhaev, Valentin (2000). "Chapter 12. Bolsheviks".

Political Parties of Russia: History and Modernity . Moscow: Russian Political Encyclopedia .

ISBN 5-8243-0068-2 .

v t e Vladimir Lenin Vladimir Lenin bibliography List of speeches Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War The Development of Capitalism in Russia (1899) What Is To Be Done?

(1902) One Step Forward, Two Steps Back (1904) Two Tactics of Social Democracy in the Democratic Revolution (1905) Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) Philosophical Notebooks (1913) The Three Sources and Three Component Parts of Marxism (1913) The Right of Nations to Self-Determination (1914) Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1916) The State and Revolution (1917) The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky (1918) "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder (1920) Testament (1922–1923) v t e Joseph Stalin General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (1922–1952) Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union (1946–1953) Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War Bibliography of Stalinism and the Soviet Union History and politics Overviews Early life Russian Revolution, Russian Civil War, Polish–Soviet War Rise Rule as Soviet leader Political views Cult of personality Death and state funeral Death toll Chronology August Uprising Anti-religious campaign (1921–1928) / (1928–1941) Collectivization Kolkhoz Sovkhoz Chinese Civil War First five-year plan Sino-Soviet conflict (1929) 16th / 17th Congress of the Communist Party 1931 Menshevik Trial Spanish Civil War Soviet invasion of Xinjiang Soviet–Japanese border conflicts 1937 Islamic rebellion in Xinjiang 1937 legislative election 18th Congress of the Communist Party Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact World War II Invasion of Poland Winter War Moscow Peace Treaty Occupation of the Baltic states German–Soviet Axis talks Soviet–Japanese Neutrality Pact Great Patriotic War Tehran Conference Yalta Conference Potsdam Conference Soviet atomic bomb project Ili Rebellion Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance 1946 legislative election Cold War 1946 Iran crisis Turkish Straits crisis First Indochina War Eastern Bloc Comecon Cominform Greek Civil War 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état Berlin Blockade Korean War Sino-Soviet Treaty Tito–Stalin split 1950 legislative election 19th Congress of the Communist Party Concepts Stalinism Socialism in one country Neo-Stalinism Korenizatsiya Socialism in One Country Great Break Socialist realism Stalinist architecture Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Five-year plans Great Construction Projects of Communism Engineers of the human soul 1936 Soviet Constitution New Soviet man Stakhanovite Transformation of nature Backwardness brings on beatings by others Crimes, repressions, and controversies 1906 Bolshevik raid on the Tsarevich Giorgi 1907 Tiflis bank robbery National delimitation in the Soviet Union Georgian Affair Decossackization Dekulakization Wittorf affair Great Break Demolition of Cathedral of Christ the Saviour Soviet famine of 1932–33 Holodomor Gulag Murder of Sergey Kirov Great Purge Vasiliy Ulrikh NKVD prisoner massacres Berezhany Berezwecz Dubno Chortkiv Kurapaty Katyn Lutsk Lviv Medvedev Forest Sambir Valozhyn Vileyka Vinnytsia Zolochiv Moscow Trials Case of the Anti-Soviet "Bloc of Rightists and Trotskyites" Case of Trotskyist Anti-Soviet Military Organization Dewey Commission Hotel Lux Repressions in Azerbaijan Ideological repression in science Suppressed research Lysenkoism Japhetic theory , Slavists case 1937 Soviet Census 1941 Red Army purge Soviet offensive plans controversy Hitler Youth Conspiracy Soviet war crimes Allegations of antisemitism Population transfer ( German–Soviet ) Deportations Operation "Lentil" Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina Koreans Operation "North" Operation "Priboi" Nazino affair Forced settlement Tax on trees 1946–1947 Soviet famine Leningrad Affair Mingrelian Affair Rootless cosmopolitan Night of the Murdered Poets Doctors' plot Censorship of images Mass graves in the Soviet Union Kommunarka shooting ground Stalin's shooting lists Works " Anarchism or Socialism?

" " Marxism and the National Question " " Foundations of Leninism " " Dizzy with Success " " Declaration of the Rights of the Peoples of Russia " "Ten Blows" speech Alleged 19 August 1939 speech Falsifiers of History Stalin Note The History of the Communist Party 1936 Soviet Constitution Stalin's poetry Dialectical and Historical Materialism Order No. 227 Order No. 270 " Marxism and Problems of Linguistics " Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR De-Stalinization 20th Congress of the Communist Party Pospelov Commission Rehabilitation Khrushchev thaw On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences Gomulka thaw (Polish October) Soviet Nonconformist Art Shvernik Commission 22nd Congress of the Communist Party Era of Stagnation 1956 Georgian demonstrations Criticism and opposition Stalin Epigram Lenin's Testament Ryutin Affair Anti-Stalinist left Trotskyism Kremlin Plot True Communists Darkness at Noon Animal Farm Nineteen Eighty-Four Comparison of Nazism and Stalinism The Soviet Story Antisemitism Remembrance Iosif Stalin tank Iosif Stalin locomotive Generalissimo of the Soviet Union Stalin statues Pantheon, Moscow 1956 Georgian demonstrations List of awards and honours bestowed upon Joseph Stalin Statue of Joseph Stalin, Berlin Stalin Monument in Budapest Stalin Monument in Prague Joseph Stalin Museum, Gori Batumi Stalin Museum Places named after Stalin State Stalin Prize Stalin Peace Prize Stalin Society Stalin Bloc – For the USSR Cultural depictions Apocalypse: Stalin The Death of Stalin Mikheil Gelovani Family Besarion Jughashvili (father) Keke Geladze (mother) Kato Svanidze (first wife) Yakov Dzhugashvili (son) Konstantin Kuzakov (son) Artyom Sergeyev (adopted son) Nadezhda Alliluyeva (second wife) Vasily Stalin (son) Svetlana Alliluyeva (daughter) Yevgeny Dzhugashvili (grandson) Galina Dzhugashvili (granddaughter) Joseph Alliluyev (grandson) Sergei Alliluyev (second father-in-law) Alexander Svanidze (brother-in-law) Yuri Zhdanov (son-in-law) William Wesley Peters (son-in-law) Stalin's residences Stalin's house, Gori Tiflis Seminary Kureika Room at Kremlin Kuntsevo Stalin's bunker Category v t e Political ideologies The Establishment Anti Hardline Moderate Political spectrum Far-left Left-wing Centre-left Centrism Centre-right Right-wing Far-right Radical Reactionary Revolutionary Accelerationism Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Communalism Communism Bolshevism Marxism-Leninism National Bolshevism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Corporatism Distributism Social credit Environmentalism Familialism Fascism Nazism Third Position Feminism Fundamentalism Green Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Marxism Monarchism Royalism Nationalism Republicanism Classical Modern Social democracy Socialism Third Way Zionism See also Authoritarianism Anti Collectivism Colonialism Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Extremism Federalism Confederalism Confederatism Globalism Ideological repression Imperialism Individualism Internationalism Localism Masculism Militarism Nihilism Pacifism Pluralism Populism Progressivism Reformism Regionalism Separatism Statism Syncretism Totalitarianism NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wpmnt
Cached time: 20250817133604
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.994 seconds
Real time usage: 1.136 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11470/1000000
Revision size: 54048/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 262399/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 20162/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 195523/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.524/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10557526/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  861.918      1 -total
 25.53%  220.050     95 Template:Sfn
 17.58%  151.554      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.38%  123.923      2 Template:Reflist
 11.39%   98.191     10 Template:Quote
 11.12%   95.869      1 Template:Communism_sidebar
 10.98%   94.616      1 Template:Communism
  7.80%   67.251      2 Template:Cite_journal
  7.45%   64.222      1 Template:Short_description
  7.39%   63.664     13 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:167138:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817133604 and revision id 1293303403. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bolshevism&oldid=1293303403 " Categories : Vladimir Lenin Joseph Stalin Marxism–Leninism Stalinism Political history of Russia Bolsheviks Authoritarianism Totalitarianism Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2021 This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 23:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bolshevism 26 languages Add topic

