Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Philosophy 3 Commentary on Arcesilaus 4 Notes 5 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 5.1 Attribution 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Arcesilaus 41 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 3rd-century BC Greek Hellenistic philosopher This article is about Greek philosopher. For other uses, see Arcesilaus (disambiguation) .

Arcesilaus Arcesilaus and Carneades Born 316/5 BC Pitane , Aeolis (modern-day Çandarlı , Izmir , Turkey ) Died 241/0 BC Athens (modern-day Greece ) Philosophical work Era Hellenistic philosophy Region Western philosophy School Academic Skepticism Main interests Epistemology Notable ideas Founder of Academic Skepticism Arcesilaus ( / ˌ ɑːr s ɛ s ɪ ˈ l eɪ .

ə s / ; Ancient Greek : Ἀρκεσίλαος ; 316/5–241/0 BC) [ 1 ] was a Greek Hellenistic philosopher . He was the founder of Academic Skepticism and what is variously called the Second or Middle or New Academy – the phase of the Platonic Academy in which it embraced philosophical skepticism .

Arcesilaus succeeded Crates of Athens as the sixth scholarch of the academy around 264 BC.

[ 2 ] He did not preserve his thoughts in writing, so his opinions can only be gleaned second-hand from what is preserved by later writers.

In Athens Arcesilaus interacted with the Pyrrhonist philosopher, Timon of Phlius , [ 3 ] whose philosophy appears to have influenced Arcesilaus to become the first Academic to adopt a position of philosophical skepticism , that is, he doubted the ability of the senses to discover truth about the world, although he may have continued to believe in the existence of truth itself. This brought in the skeptical phase of the academy . His chief opponent was his contemporary, Zeno of Citium , the founder of Stoicism , whose dogma of katalepsis (i.e., that reality could be comprehended with certainty) Arcesilaus denied .

Life [ edit ] Arcesilaus was born in Pitane in Aeolis . His early education was provided by Autolycus the mathematician , with whom he migrated to Sardis . Afterwards, he studied rhetoric in Athens . He then studied philosophy, becoming a disciple first of Theophrastus and afterwards of Crantor .

[ 4 ] He also attended the school of Pyrrho , whose philosophy he maintained, except in name.

[ 5 ] He subsequently became intimate with Polemo and Crates of Athens , who made Arcesilaus his successor as scholarch (head) of the Platonic Academy .

[ 6 ] Diogenes Laërtius says that, like his successor Lacydes , Arcesilaus died of excessive drinking, but the testimony of others (e.g.

Cleanthes , who said that he lived a dutiful life) and his own precepts discredit the story.

[ 7 ] He is known to have been much respected by the Athenians.

[ 6 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Academic Skepticism Part of a series on Pyrrhonism Pyrrhonists Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus Concepts Ataraxia Acatalepsy Adiaphora Aporia Dogma Epoché Similar philosophies Academic skepticism Modern influence Münchhausen trilemma Benson Mates Robert Fogelin Philosophy portal v t e Arcesilaus committed nothing to writing. His opinions were imperfectly known to his contemporaries, and can now only be gathered from the statements of later writers. This makes his philosophy difficult to evaluate and partly inconsistent. This led scholars to see his skepticism in several ways. Some see his philosophy as completely negative or destructive of all philosophical views. Others regard him as taking the position that nothing can be known on the basis of his philosophical arguments. Others claimed he held no positive views on any philosophical topic, including the possibility of knowledge.

[ 8 ] Arcesilaus' contemporary, Aristo of Chios , described Arcesilaus as being: " Plato the head of him, Pyrrho the tail, midway Diodorus " [ 9 ] meaning that Arcesilaus presented himself as a Platonist , the substance of what he taught was the dialectics of Diodorus, but his actual philosophy was that of Pyrrhonism .

[ 10 ] Eusebius , probably quoting Aristocles of Messene , reported that Arcesilaus studied in Pyrrho's school and adhered, except in name, to Pyrrhonism.

[ 11 ] Numenius of Apamea said "Arcesilaus accompanied Pyrrho . He remained Pyrrhonist in his rejection of everything, except in name. At least the Pyrrhonists Mnaseas,  Philomelos and Timon call him a Pyrrhonist, just as they were themselves, because he too rejected the true, the false, and the persuasive." [ 12 ] Sextus Empiricus said that Arcesilaus' philosophy appeared essentially the same as Pyrrhonism, but granted that this might have been superficial.

[ 13 ] On the one hand, Arcesilaus professed to be no innovator, but a reviver of the dogma -free dialectic that had characterized the academy under Plato.

[ 14 ] Thus he is said to have restored the doctrines of Plato in an uncorrupted form. On the other hand, according to Cicero , [ 15 ] he summed up his opinions in the formula, "that he knew nothing, not even his own ignorance." There are two ways of reconciling the difficulty: either we may suppose him to have thrown out such aphorisms as an exercise for his pupils, as Sextus Empiricus , [ 16 ] who calls him a "skeptic", would have us believe; or he may have really doubted the esoteric meaning of Plato, and have supposed himself to have been stripping his works of the figments of the Dogmatists , while he was in fact taking from them all certain principles.

[ 17 ] Cicero attributes the following argument to Arcesilaus: (i) it is rash and shameful to assent to something false or unknown, but since
(ii) nothing can be known (and obviously we shouldn't do what is rash and shameful),
(iii) we should suspend judgment about everything [ 18 ] Zeno of Citium and the other Stoics were the chief opponents of Arcesilaus. He attacked their dogma of katalêptikê phantasia (i.e., a convincing conception) as understood to be a mean between episteme (knowledge) and doxa (opinion). He argued that this mean could not exist. It involved a contradiction in terms, as the very idea of phantasia implied the possibility of false as well as true conceptions of the same object. As such, it was merely the interpolation of a name.

[ 19 ] Commentary on Arcesilaus [ edit ] The Pyrrhonist philosopher and contemporary of Arcesilaus, Timon of Phlius ridiculed Arcesilaus in his Silloi , but also praised him in Funeral Banquet of Arcesilaus .

[ 3 ] Fragments from Timon about Arcesilaus include: "Having the lead of Menedemus at his heart, he will run either to that mass of flesh, Pyrrho , or to Diodorus ." "I shall swim to Pyrrho and to crooked Diodorus ." "And mixing sound sense with wily cavils." [ 20 ] Blaise Pascal wrote of Arcesilaus in his Pensées (1669, para. 375): I have seen changes in all nations and men, and thus after many changes of judgement regarding true justice, I have recognized that our nature was but in continual change, and I have not changed since; and if I changed, I would confirm my opinion. The skeptic Arcesilaus, who became a dogmatist.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Dorandi 1999 , p. 48.

^ "Arcesilaus | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" . Iep.utm.edu . Retrieved 31 March 2016 .

^ a b Diogenes Laërtius Lives of the Eminent Philosophers Book IX, Chapter 12, Section 114–115 [1] ^ Eusebius of Caesarea : Praeparatio Evangelica VI ^ Eusebius of Caesarea , Praeparatio Evangelica Chapter VI ^ a b Chisholm 1911 .

^ Holiday, Ryan ; Hanselman, Stephen (2020).

Lives of the Stoics: The Art of Living from Zeno to Marcus Aurelius . Profile. p. 21.

ISBN 978-1782835509 .

^ "Arcesilaus (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)" . Plato.stanford.edu. 2005-01-14 . Retrieved 31 March 2016 .

^ Laërtius, Diogenes .

"The Academics: Arcesilaus" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 1:4. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library. § 35.

; and Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Pyrrhonism .

^ "Arcesilaus ... does indeed seem to me to share the Pyrrhonean arguments, so that his Way is almost the same as ours.... he made use of the dialectic of Diodorus, but he was an outwardly Platonist." Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Pyrrhonism Book I, Chapter 33.

^ Eusebius , Praeparatio Evangelica Chapter VI ^ Numenius, fr. 25.64–71 ^ Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Pyrrhonism , Book 1, Chapter 33, Section 232 ^ David Sedley, in Doubt and Dogmatism Oxford University Press, 1980, p. 11 ^ Cicero, Academica , i. 12 ^ Sextus Empiricus, Pyrrh. Hypotyp.

i. 234 ^ Cicero, De Oratore , iii. 18.

^ Cicero Academica Varro , 44–45 ^ Cicero, Academica , ii. 24.

^ Diogenes Laërtius Lives of the Eminent Philosophers Book IV, Chapter 6, Section 33 [2] Sources [ edit ] Dorandi, Tiziano (1999). "Chapter 2: Chronology". In Algra, Keimpe; et al. (eds.).

The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p.

48 .

ISBN 978-0521250283 .

Simone Vezzoli, Arcesilao di Pitane. L'origine del platonismo neoaccademico ( Philosophie hellénistique et romaine , 1), Turnhout: Brepols Publishers, 2016, ISBN 978-2503550299 Attribution [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Arcesilaus ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 2 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870). "Arcesilaus".

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Arcesilaus .

Brittain, Charles.

"Arcesilaus" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Arcesilaus" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Platonists Ancient Academics Old Plato Aristotle Eudoxus Philip of Opus Aristonymus Coriscus and Erastus of Scepsis Demetrius of Amphipolis Euaeon of Lampsacus Heraclides and Python of Aenus Hestiaeus of Perinthus Lastheneia of Mantinea Timolaus of Cyzicus Speusippus Axiothea of Phlius Heraclides Ponticus Menedemus of Pyrrha Xenocrates Crantor Polemon Crates of Athens Skeptics Middle Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus New Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Dio of Alexandria Middle Platonists Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Anonymous Theaetetus Commentator Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Justin Martyr Gaius Albinus Alcinous Alexander Peloplaton Apuleius Atticus Maximus of Tyre Numenius of Apamea Ammonius Saccas Longinus Clement of Alexandria Origen Origen the Pagan Calcidius Neoplatonists Plotinus Students Amelius Porphyry of Tyre Iamblichus Sopater Eustathius of Cappadocia Sosipatra Aedesius Dexippus Chrysanthius Theodorus of Asine Julian Salutius Maximus of Ephesus Eusebius of Myndus Priscus of Epirus Antoninus Hypatia Gaius Marius Victorinus Augustine Macrobius Boethius Academy Plutarch of Athens Asclepigenia Hierocles Syrianus Hermias Aedesia Proclus Marinus Isidore Ammonius Hermiae Asclepiodotus Hegias Zenodotus Agapius Damascius Simplicius Priscian John Philoponus Olympiodorus David the Invincible Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Medieval John Scotus Eriugena Al-Farabi Anselm Peter Abelard Bernard Gilbert Thierry Henry of Ghent Bonaventure Theodoric of Freiberg Meister Eckhart Berthold of Moosburg Paul of Venice Modern Renaissance Florentine Academy Plethon Marsilio Ficino Cristoforo Landino Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Giordano Bruno Blaise Pascal Cambridge Ralph Cudworth Henry More Anne Conway Thomas Taylor Emanuel Swedenborg Josiah Royce Aleksei Losev Contemporary Analytic Gottlob Frege Bertrand Russell Kurt Gödel Roderick Chisholm W. V. O. Quine Jan Łukasiewicz Crispin Wright Edward N. Zalta Continental Edmund Husserl Leo Strauss v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 WorldCat 2 3 4 National Germany United States Spain Poland Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐scdbj
Cached time: 20250817073923
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.682 seconds
Real time usage: 0.868 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4101/1000000
Revision size: 10658/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 121517/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3396/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 80268/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.480/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20823320/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  749.601      1 -total
 16.39%  122.863      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 14.84%  111.248      1 Template:Reflist
 14.12%  105.854      1 Template:Langx
 13.35%  100.067      1 Template:Pyrrhonism_sidebar
 13.16%   98.649      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.31%   77.300      2 Template:Cite_web
  8.34%   62.533      1 Template:Short_description
  7.14%   53.547     10 Template:Navbox
  4.98%   37.304      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:171276:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817073923 and revision id 1290100401. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arcesilaus&oldid=1290100401 " Categories : 3rd-century BC Greek philosophers Ancient Greek epistemologists 310s BC births 240s BC deaths Academic skeptics Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 20:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Arcesilaus 41 languages Add topic

