Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Grammatical number and physical discreteness 2 Cumulativity and mass nouns 3 Multiple senses for one noun 4 Quantification 5 Conflation of collective noun and mass noun 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Mass noun 16 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Malagasy Nederlands Plattdüütsch Simple English Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Noun whose quantity is treated as an undifferentiated unit Not to be confused with Collective noun .

Grammatical features Related to nouns Animacy Case Dative construction Dative shift Quirky subject Nominative Comitative Instrumental Classifier Measure word Construct state Countability Count noun Mass noun Collective noun Definiteness Gender Genitive construction Possession Suffixaufnahme (case stacking) Noun class Number Singular Dual Plural Singulative-Collective-Plurative Specificity Universal grinder Related to verbs Associated motion Clusivity Conjugation Evidentiality Modality Person Telicity Mirativity Tense–aspect–mood Grammatical aspect Lexical aspect (Aktionsart) Mood Tense Voice General features Affect Boundedness Comparison (degree) Egophoricity Pluractionality (verbal number) Honorifics (politeness) Polarity Reciprocity Reflexive pronoun Reflexive verb Syntax relationships Argument Transitivity Valency Branching Serial verb construction Traditional grammar Predicate Subject Object Adjunct Predicative Semantics Contrast Mirativity Thematic relation Agent Patient Topic and Comment Focus Volition Veridicality Phenomena Agreement Polypersonal agreement Declension Empty category Incorporation Inflection Markedness v t e In linguistics , a mass noun , uncountable noun , non-count noun , uncount noun , or just uncountable , is a noun with the syntactic property that any quantity of it is treated as an undifferentiated unit, rather than as something with discrete elements. Uncountable nouns are distinguished from count nouns .

Given that different languages have different grammatical features , the actual test for which nouns are mass nouns may vary between languages. In English , mass nouns are characterized by the impossibility of being directly modified by a numeral without specifying a unit of measurement and by the impossibility of being combined with an indefinite article ( a or an ). Thus, the mass noun "water" is quantified as "20 litres of water" while the count noun "chair" is quantified as "20 chairs". However, both mass and count nouns can be quantified in relative terms without unit specification (e.g., "so much water", "so many chairs", though note the different quantifiers "much" and "many").

Mass nouns have no concept of singular and plural , although in English they take singular verb forms .  However, many mass nouns in English can be converted to count nouns, which can then be used in the plural to denote (for instance) more than one instance or variety of a certain sort of entity – for example, " Many cleaning agents today are technically not soaps [i.e. types of soap], but detergents, " or " I drank about three beers [i.e. bottles or glasses of beer] ".

Some nouns can be used indifferently as mass or count nouns, e.g.

, three cabbages or three heads of cabbage ; three ropes or three lengths of rope . Some have different senses as mass and count nouns: paper is a mass noun as a material ( three reams of paper , one sheet of paper ), but a count noun as a unit of writing ("the students passed in their papers").

Grammatical number and physical discreteness [ edit ] In English (and in many other languages), there is a tendency for nouns referring to liquids ( water , juice ), powders ( sugar , sand ), or substances ( metal , wood ) to be used in mass syntax, and for nouns referring to objects or people to be count nouns. But there are many exceptions: the mass/count distinction is a property of the terms , not their referents. For example, the same set of chairs can be referred to as "seven chairs" (count) and as "furniture" (mass); the Middle English mass noun pease has become the count noun pea by morphological reanalysis ; "vegetables" are a plural count form, while the British English slang synonym "veg" is a mass noun.

In languages that have a partitive case , the distinction is explicit and mandatory. For example, in Finnish , join vettä , "I drank (some) water", the word vesi , "water", is in the partitive case. The related sentence join veden , "I drank (the) water", using the accusative case instead, assumes that there was a specific countable portion of water that was completely drunk.

The work of logicians like Godehard Link and Manfred Krifka established that the mass/count distinction can be given a precise, mathematical definition in terms of quantization and cumulativity .

[ 1 ] Cumulativity and mass nouns [ edit ] An expression P has cumulative reference if and only if [ 2 ] [ 3 ] for any X and Y : If X can be described as P and Y can be described as P , as well, then the sum of X and Y can also be described as P .

In more formal terms (Krifka 1998): ∀ ∀ X ⊆ ⊆ U p [ C U M p ( X ) ⇔ ⇔ ∃ ∃ x , y [ X ( x ) ∧ ∧ X ( y ) ∧ ∧ ¬ ¬ ( x = y ) ] ∧ ∧ ∀ ∀ x , y [ X ( x ) ∧ ∧ X ( y ) ⇒ ⇒ X ( x ⊕ ⊕ y ) ] ] {\displaystyle \forall X\subseteq U_{p}[\mathrm {CUM} _{p}(X)\Leftrightarrow \exists x,y[X(x)\,\wedge \,X(y)\,\wedge \,\neg (x=y)]\;\wedge \;\forall x,y[X(x)\,\wedge \,X(y)\Rightarrow X(x\,\oplus \,y)]]} which may be read as: X is cumulative if there exists at least one pair x,y , where x and y are distinct, and both have the property X , and if for all possible pairs x and y fitting that description, X is a property of the sum of x and y .

[ 4 ] Consider, for example cutlery : If one collection of cutlery is combined with another, we still have "cutlery." Similarly, if water is added to water, we still have "water." But if a chair is added to another, we do not have "a chair", but rather two chairs. Thus the nouns "cutlery" and "water" have cumulative reference, while the expression "a chair" does not. The expression "chairs", however, does, suggesting that the generalization is not actually specific to the mass-count distinction. As many have noted, it is possible to provide an alternative analysis, by which mass nouns and plural count nouns are assigned a similar semantics, as distinct from that of singular count nouns.

[ 5 ] An expression P has quantized reference if and only if, for any X: If X can be described as P , then no proper part of X can be described as P .

This can be seen to hold in the case of the noun house : no proper part of a house , for example the bathroom, or the entrance door, is itself a house. Similarly, no proper part of a man , say his index finger, or his knee, can be described as a man . Hence, house and man have quantized reference.  However, collections of cutlery do have proper parts that can themselves be described as cutlery . Hence cutlery does not have quantized reference. Notice again that this is probably not a fact about mass-count syntax, but about prototypical examples, since many singular count nouns have referents whose proper parts can be described by the same term. Examples include divisible count nouns like "rope", "string", "stone", "tile", etc.

[ 5 ] Some expressions are neither quantized nor cumulative. Examples of this include collective nouns like committee . A committee may well contain a proper part which is itself a committee.  Hence this expression is not quantized.  It is not cumulative, either: the sum of two separate committees is not necessarily a committee .  In terms of the mass/count distinction, committee behaves like a count noun. By some accounts, these examples are taken to indicate that the best characterization of mass nouns is that they are cumulative nouns . On such accounts, count nouns should then be characterized as non-cumulative nouns: this characterization correctly groups committee together with the count nouns. If, instead, we had chosen to characterize count nouns as quantized nouns , and mass nouns as non-quantized ones, then we would (incorrectly) be led to expect committee to be a mass noun. However, as noted above, such a characterization fails to explain many central phenomena of the mass-count distinction.

Multiple senses for one noun [ edit ] Many English nouns can be used in either mass or count syntax, and in these cases, they take on cumulative reference when used as mass nouns. For example, one may say that "there's apple in this sauce", and then apple has cumulative reference, and, hence, is used as a mass noun. The names of animals, such as "chicken", "fox" or "lamb" are count when referring to the animals themselves, but are mass when referring to their meat, fur, or other substances produced by them. (e.g., "I'm cooking chicken tonight" or "This coat is made of fox.") Conversely, " fire " is frequently used as a  mass noun, but "a fire" refers to a discrete entity. Substance terms like "water" which are frequently used as mass nouns, can be used as count nouns to denote arbitrary units of a substance ("Two waters , please") or of several types/varieties (" waters of the world").

[ 6 ] "I'll have a cup of coffee ." (count noun with classifier) "I'll have two coffees ." (count noun without classifier) "I'll have coffee ." (plain mass noun) "I'll have some coffee ." (mass noun with determiner) "I'll have too much coffee ." (mass noun with modified determiner) One may say that mass nouns that are used as count nouns are " countified " and that count ones that are used as mass nouns are " massified ". However, this may confuse syntax and semantics, by presupposing that words which denote substances are mass nouns by default. It has been suggested nouns do not have a lexical specification for mass-count status, and instead are specified as such only when used in a sentence.

[ 7 ] Nouns differ in the extent to which they can be used flexibly, depending largely on their meanings and the context of use. For example, the count noun "house" is difficult to use as mass (though clearly possible), and the mass noun "cutlery" is most frequently used as mass, despite the fact that it denotes objects, and has count equivalents in other languages: Incorrect: *There is house on the road. (Incorrect even if a catastrophe is considered) Incorrect: *There is a cutlery on the table. (Incorrect even if just one fork is on the table) Correct: You got a lot of house for your money since the recession.

Correct: Spanish cutlery is my favorite. (type / kind reading) In some languages, such as Chinese and Japanese , it has been claimed by some that all nouns are effectively mass nouns, requiring a measure word to be quantified.

[ 8 ] Quantification [ edit ] Some quantifiers can be used with both mass nouns and count nouns, including all , no , and some . Others cannot: few , many , those , and numbers ( one ) are used with count nouns; little and much with mass nouns. This also applies to phrasal quantifiers. For example, an amount of is for mass nouns, a number of is for count nouns, and a lot of can be used with both types.

Occurrence of determiners Correct Incorrect How much damage? Very little .

How much damage? Very few .

How many votes? Very few .

How many votes? Very little .

Whereas more and most are uncontroversially the comparative and superlative of both much and many , a controversial prescription is for few and little to have differing comparative and superlative forms ( fewer , fewest and less , least ), but use of less and least with count nouns has always been common (see Fewer versus less ).

[ 9 ] This criticism only dates back to 1770, but the criticized usage dates back to Old English .

[ 9 ] Conflation of collective noun and mass noun [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( March 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) There is often confusion about the two different concepts of collective noun and mass noun . Generally, collective nouns such as group, family , and committee are not mass nouns but are rather a special subset of count nouns . However, the term "collective noun" is often used to mean "mass noun" (even in some dictionaries) because users conflate two different kinds of verb number invariability: (a) that seen with mass nouns such as "water" or "furniture", with which only singular verb forms are used because the constituent matter is grammatically indivisible (although it may ["water"] or may not ["furniture"] be etically indivisible); and (b) that seen with collective nouns, which is the result of the metonymical shift between the group and its (both grammatically and etically) discrete constituents.

Some words, including " mathematics " and " physics ", have developed true mass-noun senses despite having grown from count-noun roots.

See also [ edit ] Plurale tantum – Noun that appears only in the plural form References [ edit ] ^ Rothstein, Susan (27 August 2010).

"Counting and the Mass/Count Distinction" (PDF) .

Journal of Semantics .

27 (3): 349, 351.

doi : 10.1093/jos/ffq007 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-10-09 . Retrieved 27 September 2022 .

^ Krifka, Manfred 1989. Nominal reference, temporal constitution and quantification in event semantics. In Renate Bartsch , Johan van Benthem and Peter van Emde Boas (eds.), Semantics and Contextual Expressions 75-115. Dordrecht: Foris.

^ Nicolas, David (2008).

"Mass nouns and plural logic" (PDF) .

Linguistics and Philosophy .

31 (2): 211– 244.

doi : 10.1007/s10988-008-9033-2 .

S2CID 13755223 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-02-19 . Retrieved 2012-02-19 .

^ Borer, Hagit. (2005) Structuring Sense: In Name Only . Volume 1. Oxford: OUP. (p. 124) ^ a b Brendan S. Gillon (1992) Towards a common semantics for English count and mass nouns. Linguistics and Philosophy 15: 597–639 ^ Tsoulas, George (2006). Plurality of mass nouns and the grammar of number.

Generative Linguistics in the Old World .

^ Keith Allan. 1980. Nouns and Countability. Language, 56(3):41–67.

^ Chierchia, Gennaro (1998). "Reference to Kinds across Languages".

Natural Language Semantics .

6 (4): 339– 405.

doi : 10.1023/A:1008324218506 .

S2CID 116940629 .

^ a b "less, fewer" .

Merriam-Webster's dictionary of English usage (2nd ed.). Merriam-Webster. 1995. p. 592.

ISBN 0-87779-132-5 .

External links [ edit ] The Mavens Word of the Day: less/fewer Semantic Archives: Mass nouns, count nouns and non-count nouns F.J. Pelletier L.K. Schubert (2001) Mass Expressions in D. Gabbay & F. Guenthner (eds) Handbook of Philosophical Logic, Vol. 10 " Conceptual Categories and Linguistic Categories VIII: Nouns and Individuation ", summer 2011, by Beth Levin at web.stanford.edu v t e Lexical categories and their features Noun Abstract / Concrete Adjectival Agent Animacy Bare Collective Countable Initial-stress-derived Mass Noun adjunct Proper Relational Strong / Weak Verbal Verb Forms Attributive Converb Finite / Nonfinite Gerund Gerundive Infinitive Participle Supine Transgressive Verbal noun Types Ambitransitive Andative / Venitive Anticausative Autocausative Auxiliary Captative Catenative Compound Copular Defective Denominal Deponent Ditransitive Dynamic Exceptional case-marking Frequentative Germanic strong Germanic weak Impersonal Inchoative Intransitive Labile Lexical Light Modal Negative Performative Phrasal Predicative Preterite-present Pure Reflexive Regular / Irregular Separable Stative Stretched Transitive Unaccusative Unergative Adjective Anti-intersective Collateral Common Demonstrative Intersective Nominalized Non-intersective Possessive Postpositive Proper Pure intersective Relative subsective Subsective Adverb Conjunctive Flat Genitive Interrogative Locative Prepositional Pronominal Relative Pronoun Bound variable Demonstrative Disjunctive Distributive Donkey Dummy Formal / Informal Gender-neutral / Gender-specific Inclusive / Exclusive Indefinite Intensive Interrogative Personal Possessive Reciprocal Reflexive Relative Resumptive Strong / Weak Subject / Object / Prepositional Adposition Casally modulated Inflected Stranded Determiner Article Demonstrative Interrogative Possessive Quantifier Particle Discourse Interrogative Modal Noun Possessive Other Classifier Measure word Complementizer Conjunction Copula Coverb Interjection Ideophone Onomatopoeia Preverb Procedure word Pro-form Pro-verb / Pro-sentence Prop-word Syntax–semantics interface Yes and no v t e Formal semantics (natural language) Central concepts Compositionality Denotation Entailment Extension Generalized quantifier Intension Logical form Presupposition Proposition Reference Scope Speech act Syntax–semantics interface Truth conditions Topics Areas Anaphora Ambiguity Binding Conditionals Definiteness Disjunction Evidentiality Focus Indexicality Lexical semantics Modality Negation Propositional attitudes Tense–aspect–mood Quantification Vagueness Phenomena Antecedent-contained deletion Cataphora Coercion Conservativity Counterfactuals Crossover effects Cumulativity De dicto and de re De se Deontic modality Discourse relations Donkey anaphora Epistemic modality Exhaustivity Faultless disagreement Free choice inferences Givenness Homogeneity (linguistics) Hurford disjunction Inalienable possession Intersective modification Logophoricity Mirativity Modal subordination Opaque contexts Performatives Polarity items Privative adjectives Quantificational variability effect Responsive predicate Rising declaratives Scalar implicature Sloppy identity Subsective modification Subtrigging Telicity Temperature paradox Veridicality Formalism Formal systems Alternative semantics Categorial grammar Combinatory categorial grammar Discourse representation theory (DRT) Dynamic semantics Generative grammar Glue semantics Inquisitive semantics Intensional logic Lambda calculus Mereology Montague grammar Segmented discourse representation theory (SDRT) Situation semantics Supervaluationism Type theory TTR Concepts Autonomy of syntax Context set Continuation Conversational scoreboard Downward entailing Existential closure Function application Meaning postulate Monads Plural quantification Possible world Quantifier raising Quantization Question under discussion Semantic parsing Squiggle operator Strawson entailment Strict conditional Type shifter Universal grinder See also Cognitive semantics Computational semantics Distributional semantics Formal grammar Inferentialism Logic translation Linguistics wars Philosophy of language Pragmatics Semantics of logic Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mass_noun&oldid=1300310398 " Categories : Nouns by type Grammatical number Syntax–semantics interface Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2022 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 15:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mass noun 16 languages Add topic

