Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Methods of extraction Toggle Methods of extraction subsection 2.1 Surface mining 2.1.1 Strip mining 2.1.2 Contour mining 2.1.3 Mountaintop removal mining 2.2 Underground mining 3 Production Toggle Production subsection 3.1 Economic impact 3.2 Waste and refuse 3.2.1 Disasters 4 Modern mining 5 Safety Toggle Safety subsection 5.1 Dangers to miners 5.1.1 Damps 5.1.2 Noise 5.2 Safety improvements 6 Environmental impacts 7 Coal mining by country Toggle Coal mining by country subsection 7.1 Australia 7.2 Canada 7.3 Chile 7.4 China 7.5 Colombia 7.6 Germany 7.7 Greece 7.8 India 7.9 Japan 7.10 New Zealand 7.11 Poland 7.12 Russia 7.13 Spain 7.14 South Africa 7.15 Taiwan 7.16 Turkey 7.17 Ukraine 7.18 United Kingdom 7.19 United States 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Works cited 10 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 10.1 Child labour 10.2 Older textbooks 10.3 Fiction 10.4 Government documents and primary sources 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Coal mining 29 languages العربية বাংলা Български Català Čeština Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar မြန်မာဘာသာ 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Română Shqip Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski தமிழ் ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process of getting coal out of the ground "Coal miner" redirects here. For the John J. Szaton statue, see Coal Miner (statue) .

Surface coal mining in Wyoming , U.S.

A coal mine mantrip at Lackawanna Coal Mine in Scranton, Pennsylvania Coal miners exiting a winder cage at a mine near Richlands, Virginia in 1974 A coal mine in Frameries , Belgium Coal mining is the process of extracting coal from the ground or from a mine . Coal is valued for its energy content and since the 1880s has been widely used to generate electricity .

Steel and cement industries use coal as a fuel for extraction of iron from iron ore and for cement production. In the United Kingdom and South Africa , a coal mine and its structures are a colliery , a coal mine is called a "pit", and above-ground mining structures are referred to as a " pit head ". In Australia , "colliery" generally refers to an underground coal mine.

Coal mining has had many developments in recent years, from the early days of tunneling, digging, and manually extracting the coal on carts to large open-cut and longwall mines. Mining at this scale requires the use of draglines , trucks, conveyors , hydraulic jacks , and shearers.

The coal mining industry has a long history of significant negative environmental impacts on local ecosystems, health impacts on local communities and workers, and contributes heavily to the global environmental crises, such as poor air quality and climate change . For these reasons, coal has been one of the first fossil fuels to be phased out of various parts of the global energy economy . The major coal producing countries, though, such as China , Indonesia, India and Australia , have not reached peak production, with production increases replacing falls in Europe and the United States [ 1 ] and proposed mines under development.

[ 2 ] As of 2023 [update] the coal mining industry employed over 2.7 million workers, 2.2 million of them in Asia, [ 3 ] but declines in global coal production were predicted to greatly decrease the number of coal jobs in coming decades.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Ships have been used to haul coal since the Roman Empire Part of a series on Coal Economic use Ammonia Anthracite Bituminous coal Charcoal Coal combustion products Coal-fired power station Coal gas Coal in Australia Canada Europe India Poland Russia South Africa Turkey Ukraine Coal mining in Chile in the UK in the USA Coal-mining region Coal power in China in the USA Coal preparation plant Coal tar Coke (fuel) Coking Metallurgical coal Externalities Ash pond Asian brown cloud Asthma Blackdamp Black lung disease Coal dust Coal mining disasters in the United States Coal refuse Coal slurry Environmental problems involving Appalachia coal ash coal mining in Appalachia Greenhouse gas emissions human health NOx smog smoke sulfur dioxide the petroleum industry toxic heavy metals Firedamp Hydrosulfuric acid Outbursts Problems in coal mining Whitedamp Related articles Carbon bubble Carboniferous Coal baron Coal oil Coal phase-out Coal pollution mitigation Coal-seam fire Energy lobby Fossil fuel Fossil fuel phase-out Fossil fuels lobby Great Smog of London History of coal mining Peak coal War on coal v t e This section is an excerpt from History of coal mining .

[ edit ] The history of coal mining goes back thousands of years, with early mines documented in ancient China, the Roman Empire and other early historical economies. It became important in the Industrial Revolution of the 19th and 20th centuries, when it was primarily used to power steam engines, heat buildings and generate electricity. Coal mining continues as an important economic activity today, but has begun to decline due to coal's strong contribution to global warming and environmental issues, which result in decreasing demand and in some geographies, peak coal .

Compared to wood fuels , coal yields a higher amount of energy per unit mass, specific energy or massic energy, and can often be obtained in areas where wood is not readily available. Though it was used historically as a domestic fuel, coal is now used mostly in industry, especially in smelting and alloy production, as well as electricity generation . Large-scale coal mining developed during the Industrial Revolution , and coal provided the main source of primary energy for industry and transportation in industrial areas from the 18th century to the 1950s. Coal remains an important energy source.

[ 5 ] Coal is also mined today on a large scale by open pit methods wherever the coal strata strike the surface or are relatively shallow. Britain developed the main techniques of underground coal mining from the late 18th century onward, with further progress being driven by 19th-century and early 20th-century progress.

[ 5 ] However, oil and gas were increasingly used as alternatives from the 1860s onward.

By the late 20th century, coal was, for the most part, replaced in domestic as well as industrial and transportation usage by oil , natural gas or electricity produced from oil, gas, nuclear power or renewable energy sources. By 2010, coal produced over a fourth of the world's energy.

[ 6 ] Since 1890, coal mining has also been a political and social issue. Coal miners' labour and trade unions became powerful in many countries in the 20th century, and often, the miners were leaders of the Left or Socialist movements (as in Britain, Germany, Poland, Japan, Chile, Canada and the U.S.) [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Since 1970, environmental issues have been increasingly important, including the health of miners, destruction of the landscape from strip mines and mountaintop removal , air pollution, and coal combustion's contribution to global warming .

Methods of extraction [ edit ] Technical and economic feasibility are evaluated based on the following: regional geological conditions; overburden characteristics; coal seam continuity, thickness, structure, quality, and depth; strength of materials above and below the seam for roof and floor conditions; topography, especially altitude and slope; climate; land ownership as it affects the availability of land for mining and access; surface drainage patterns; groundwater conditions; availability of labor and materials; coal purchaser requirements in terms of tonnage, quality, and destination; and capital investment requirements.

[ 9 ] Surface mining and deep underground mining are the two basic methods of mining. The choice of mining method depends primarily on depth, density, overburden, and thickness of the coal seam; seams relatively close to the surface, at depths less than approximately 55 m (180 ft), are usually surface mined.

[ citation needed ] Coal that occurs at depths of 55 to 90 m (180 to 300 ft) are usually deep mined, but in some cases surface mining techniques can be used. For example, some western U.S. coal that occur at depths in excess of 60 m (200 ft) are mined by the open pit methods, due to thickness of the seam 20–25 metres (60–90 feet). Coals occurring below 90 m (300 ft) are usually deep mined.

[ 10 ] However, there are open pit mining operations working on coal seams up to 300–460 metres (1,000–1,500 feet) below ground level, for instance Tagebau Hambach in Germany.

Coal extraction methods vary depending on whether the mine is an underground mine or a surface (also called an open cast) mine. The most economical method of coal extraction for surface mines is the electric shovel or drag line. The most economical form of underground mining is the long wall, which involves using two spinning drums with carbide bits that run along sections of the coal seam.

Many coals extracted from both surface and underground mines require washing in a coal preparation plant .

Surface mining [ edit ] Trucks loaded with coal at the Cerrejón coal mine in Colombia When coal seams are near the surface, it may be economical to extract the coal using open-cut , also referred to as open-cast, open-pit, mountaintop removal, or strip mining methods. Opencast coal mining recovers a greater proportion of the coal deposit than underground methods, as more of the coal seams in the strata may be exploited. Equipment can include the following: Draglines which operate by removing the overburden, power shovels, large trucks to transport overburden and coal, bucket wheel excavators, and conveyors. In this mining method, explosives are first used in order to break through the surface, or overburden, of the mining area. The overburden is then removed by draglines or by shovel and truck. Once the coal seam is exposed, it is drilled, fractured and thoroughly mined in strips. The coal is then loaded onto large trucks or conveyors for transport to either the coal preparation plant or directly to where it will be used.

[ 11 ] Most open cast mines in the United States extract bituminous coal . In Canada, Australia, and South Africa, open cast mining is used for both thermal and metallurgical coals . In New South Wales open casting for steam coal and anthracite is practiced. Surface mining accounts for around 80 percent of production in Australia, while in the US it is used for about 67 percent of production. Globally, about 40 percent of coal production involves surface mining.

[ 11 ] Strip mining [ edit ] Strip mining exposes coal by removing earth above each coal seam. This earth to be removed is referred to as 'overburden' and is removed in long strips.

[ 12 ] The overburden from the first strip is deposited in an area outside the planned mining area and referred to as out-of-pit dumping. Overburden from subsequent strips is deposited in the void left from mining the coal and overburden from the previous strip. This is referred to as in-pit dumping.

[ citation needed ] It is often necessary to fragment the overburden by use of explosives. This is accomplished by drilling holes into the overburden, filling the holes with explosives, and detonating the explosive. The overburden is then removed, using large earth-moving equipment, such as draglines , shovel and trucks, excavator and trucks, or bucket-wheels and conveyors. Equipment depends on geological conditions; for example, to remove overburden that is loose or unconsolidated, a bucket wheel excavator might be the most productive. When all the overburden is removed, the underlying coal seam will be exposed (a 'block' of coal). This block of coal may be drilled and blasted (if hard) or otherwise loaded onto trucks or conveyors for transport to the coal preparation (or wash) plant. Once this strip is empty of coal, the process is repeated with a new strip being created next to it. This method is most suitable for areas with flat terrain.

[ citation needed ] The life of some area mines may be more than 50 years.

[ 13 ] Contour mining [ edit ] The contour mining method consists of removing overburden from the seam in a pattern following the contours along a ridge or around the hillside. This method is most commonly used in areas with rolling to steep terrain. It was once common to deposit the spoil on the downslope side of the bench thus created, but this method of spoil disposal consumed much additional land and created severe landslide and erosion problems. To alleviate these problems, a variety of methods were devised to use freshly cut overburden to refill mined-out areas. These haul-back or lateral movement methods generally consist of an initial cut with the spoil deposited downslope or at some other site, and spoil from the second cut refilling the first. A ridge of undisturbed natural material 15 to 20 ft (5 to 6 m) wide is often intentionally left at the outer edge of the mined area. This barrier adds stability to the reclaimed slope by preventing spoil from slumping or sliding downhill.

[ citation needed ] The limitations of contour strip mining are both economic and technical. When the operation reaches a predetermined stripping ratio (tons of overburden/tons of coal), it is not profitable to continue. Depending on the equipment available, it may not be technically feasible to exceed a certain height of highwall. At this point, it is possible to produce more coal with the augering method in which spiral drills bore tunnels into a highwall laterally from the bench to extract coal without removing the overburden.

[ citation needed ] Mountaintop removal mining [ edit ] Main article: Mountaintop removal mining Mountaintop coal mining is a surface mining practice involving removal of mountaintops to expose coal seams, and disposing of associated mining overburden in adjacent "valley fills". Valley fills occur in steep terrain where there are limited disposal alternatives.

[ 14 ] Mountaintop removal mining combines area and contour strip mining methods. In areas with rolling or steep terrain with a coal seam occurring near the top of a ridge or hill, the entire top is removed in a series of parallel cuts. Overburden is deposited in nearby valleys and hollows. This method usually leaves the ridge and hilltops as flattened plateaus.

[ 10 ] The process is highly controversial for the drastic changes in topography, the practice of creating head-of-hollow-fills , or filling in valleys with mining debris, and for covering streams and disrupting ecosystems.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Spoil is placed at the head of a narrow, steep-sided valley or hollow. In preparation for filling this area, vegetation and soil are removed and a rock drain constructed down the middle of the area to be filled, where a natural drainage course previously existed. When the fill is completed, this underdrain will form a continuous water runoff system from the upper end of the valley to the lower end of the fill. Typical head-of-hollow fills are graded and terraced to create permanently stable slopes.

[ 13 ] Underground mining [ edit ] Main article: Underground soft-rock mining A coal wash plant in Clay County, Kentucky A remote Joy HM21 continuous miner used underground Most coal seams are too deep underground for opencast mining and require underground mining, a method that currently accounts for about 60 percent of world coal production.

[ 11 ] In deep mining, the room and pillar or bord and pillar method progresses along the seam, while pillars and timber are left standing to support the mine roof. A work area involved in pillar extraction is called a pillar section. Once room and pillar mines have been developed to a stopping point limited by geology, ventilation, or economics, a supplementary version of room and pillar mining, termed second mining or retreat mining , is commonly started. Miners remove the coal in the pillars, thereby recovering as much coal from the coal seam as possible.

Modern pillar sections use remote-controlled equipment, including large hydraulic mobile roof-supports, which can prevent cave-ins until the miners and their equipment have left a work area. The mobile roof supports are similar to a large dining-room table, but with hydraulic jacks for legs. After the large pillars of coal have been mined away, the mobile roof support's legs shorten and it is withdrawn to a safe area. The mine roof typically collapses once the mobile roof supports leave an area.

[ citation needed ] There are six principal methods of underground mining: Longwall mining accounts for about 50 percent of underground production. The longwall shearer has a face of 1,000 feet (300 m) or more. It is a sophisticated machine with a rotating drum that moves mechanically back and forth across a wide coal seam. The loosened coal falls onto an armored chain conveyor or pan line that takes the coal to the conveyor belt for removal from the work area. Longwall systems have their own hydraulic roof supports which advance with the machine as mining progresses. As the longwall mining equipment moves forward, overlying rock that is no longer supported by coal is allowed to fall behind the operation in a controlled manner. The supports make possible high levels of production and safety. Sensors detect how much coal remains in the seam while robotic controls enhance efficiency. Longwall systems allow a 60-to-100 percent coal recovery rate when surrounding geology allows their use. Once the coal is removed, usually 75 percent of the section, the roof is allowed to collapse in a safe manner.

[ 11 ] Continuous mining utilizes a continuous miner machine with a large rotating steel drum equipped with tungsten carbide picks that scrape coal from the seam. Operating in a "room and pillar", also known as "bord and pillar" system, where the mine is divided into a series of 20-to-30-foot (5–10 m) "rooms" or work areas cut into the coalbed—it can mine as much as 14 tons of coal a minute, more than a non-mechanised mine of the 1920s would produce in an entire day. Continuous miners account for about 45 percent of underground coal production.

Conveyors transport the removed coal from the seam. Remote-controlled continuous miners are used to work in a variety of difficult seams and conditions, and robotic versions controlled by computers are becoming increasingly common. Continuous mining is a misnomer, as room and pillar coal mining is very cyclical. In the US, one can generally cut up to around 20 feet (6 meters). This may be increased with MSHA permission.  In South Africa, the limit may be as high as 12 metres (39 ft). After the cutting limit is reached, the continuous miner assembly is removed and the roof is supported by the use of a roof bolter, after which the face has to be serviced before it can be advanced again. During servicing, the "continuous" miner moves to another face. Some continuous miners can bolt and rock dust the face, two major components of servicing, while cutting coal, while a trained crew may be able to advance ventilation, to truly earn the "continuous" label. However, very few mines are able to achieve it. Most continuous mining machines in use in the US lack the ability to bolt and dust. This may partly be because the incorporation of bolting makes the machines wider, and therefore, less maneuverable.

[ 17 ] Room and pillar mining consists of coal deposits that are mined by cutting a network of rooms into the coal seam. Pillars of coal are left behind in order to keep up the roof. The pillars can make up to forty percent of the total coal in the seam, however, where there was space to leave the head and floor coal there is evidence from recent open cast excavations that 18th-century operators used a variety of room and pillar techniques to remove 92 percent of the in situ coal. However, this can be extracted at a later stage ( see retreat mining ).

[ 11 ] Blast mining or conventional mining, is an older practice that uses explosives such as dynamite to break up the coal seam, after which the coal is gathered and loaded onto shuttle cars or conveyors for removal to a central loading area. This process consists of a series of operations that begins with "cutting" the coalbed so it will break easily when blasted with explosives. This type of mining accounts for less than 5 percent of total underground production in the US today.

[ citation needed ] Retreat mining is a method in which the pillars or coal ribs used to hold up the mine roof are extracted; allowing the mine roof to collapse as the mining works back towards the entrance. This is one of the most dangerous forms of mining, owing to imperfect predictability of when the roof will collapse and possibly crush or trap workers in the mine.

[ citation needed ] Production [ edit ] Main article: Major coal producing regions A lignite brown coal mine in Inner Mongolia , China A lignite mine in Victoria , Australia The historical coal production of various countries Coal is mined commercially in over 50 countries. 7,921 million metric tons (Mt) of coal were produced in 2019, a 70% increase over the 20 years since 1999. In 2018, the world production of brown coal (lignite) was 803.2 Mt, with Germany the world's largest producer at 166.3 Mt. China is most likely the second largest producer and consumer of lignite globally although specific lignite production data is not made available.

[ 1 ] [ 18 ] Coal production has grown fastest in Asia, while Europe has declined. Since 2011, world coal production has been stable, with decreases in Europe and US offset by increases from China, Indonesia and Australia.

[ 19 ] The top coal mining nations are: 2019 estimate of total coal production Country Production [ 20 ] China 3,692 Mt India 745 Mt United States 640 Mt Indonesia 585 Mt Australia 500 Mt Russia 425 Mt South Africa 264 Mt Germany 132 Mt Kazakhstan 117 Mt Poland 112 Mt Economic impact [ edit ] Energy production from coal mining is highly concentrated in certain jurisdictions, which also concentrates much of the social and economic impacts of the industry to these regions.

[ 21 ] The industry directly employs over seven million workers worldwide, which, in turn, creates millions of indirect jobs.

[ 21 ] In several parts of the world, producers have reached peak coal as some economies shift away from fossil fuels to address climate change. A 2020 study found that renewables jobs could feasibly be created in these geographies to replace many of the coal mining jobs as part of a just transition ; however, renewable energy was not suitable in some of the geographies with high concentrations of miners, such as in China, which is far and away the leading coal-mining nation.

[ 21 ] 2018 coal production, reserves, miners, and major coal-producing regions for China , India , the United States , and Australia , which account for approximately 70% of global annual coal production. The following table includes jurisdictions which are the top coal-producing provinces and states, responsible for over 85% of each country's coal production.

[ 22 ] Country Coal production (million tonnes) Coal reserves (million tonnes) Coal miners (thousands) Top producing provinces or states % of national production covered China 3349 138,819 6110 Shanxi , Shaanxi , Anhui , Heilongjiang , Xinjiang , Shandong , Henan , Guizhou 90% India 717 97,728 485 Chhattisgarh , Jharkhand , Orissa , Madhya Pradesh , Telangana 85% United States 701 250,916 52 Illinois , Indiana , Kentucky , Montana , North Dakota , Pennsylvania , Texas , West Virginia , and Wyoming 90% Australia 478 144,818 50 New South Wales , Queensland , Victoria, Australia 99% Waste and refuse [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Coal refuse .

[ edit ] Coal waste in Pennsylvania Coal refuse , also known as coal waste, rock, slag, coal tailings, waste material, rock bank, culm, boney, or gob, is the material left over from coal mining, usually as tailings piles or spoil tips . For every tonne of hard coal generated by mining, 400 kg (880 lb) of waste material remains, which includes some lost coal that is partially economically recoverable.

[ 23 ] Coal refuse is distinct from the byproducts of burning coal, such as fly ash .

Coal spoil stones Piles of coal refuse can have significant negative environmental consequences, including the leaching of iron , manganese , and aluminum residues into waterways and acid mine drainage .

[ 24 ] The runoff can create both surface and groundwater contamination.

[ 25 ] The piles also create a fire hazard, with the potential to spontaneously ignite . Because most coal refuse harbors toxic components, it is not easily reclaimed by replanting with plants like beach grasses.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Gob has about four times as much toxic mercury and more sulfur than typical coal.

[ 24 ] Culm is the term for waste anthracite coal.

[ 24 ] Disasters [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Coal refuse § Disasters .

[ edit ] In the 1966 Aberfan disaster in Wales, a colliery spoil tip collapsed, engulfing a school and killing 116 children and 28 adults.  Other accidents involving coal waste include the Martin County coal slurry spill (US, 2000), the Kingston Fossil Plant coal fly ash slurry spill (US, 2008), and the Obed Mountain coal mine spill (Canada, 2013).

Modern mining [ edit ] Laser profiling of a mine site by a coal miner using a Maptek I-site laser scanner in 2014 The use of sophisticated sensing equipment to monitor air quality is common and has replaced the use of small animals such as canaries, often referred to as " miner's canaries ".

[ 28 ] In the United States, the increase in technology has significantly decreased the mining workforce. in 2015 US coal mines had 65,971 employees, the lowest figure since EIA began collecting data in 1978.

[ 29 ] However, a 2016 study reported that a relatively minor investment would allow most coal workers to retrain for the solar energy industry.

[ 30 ] Safety [ edit ] See also: Mine safety and Mining accident Dangers to miners [ edit ] The Farmington Mine disaster , which killed 78 people in West Virginia in 1968 Miners can be regularly monitored for reduced lung function due to coal dust exposure using spirometry .

Coal mining has been a very dangerous activity and the list of historical coal mining disasters is long. In the U.S., 104,895 coal miners were killed in mine accidents since 1900, [ 31 ] 90 percent of the fatalities occurring in the first half of the 20th century. 3,242 died in 1907, the worst year ever; in 2020 there were five.

[ 32 ] Open cut hazards are principally mine wall failures and vehicle collisions; underground mining hazards include suffocation, gas poisoning, roof collapse, rock burst , outbursts , and gas explosions.

[ citation needed ] Firedamp explosions can trigger the far more dangerous coal dust explosions, which can engulf an entire mine. Most of these risks are greatly reduced in modern mines, and multiple fatality incidents are now rare in most parts of the developed world. Modern coal mining in the US has an average 23 deaths per year due to mine accidents (2001–2020).

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] However, in lesser developed countries and some developing countries, many miners continue to die annually, either through direct accidents in coal mines or through adverse health consequences from working under poor conditions.

China , in particular, has the highest number of coal mining related deaths in the world, with official statistics claiming that 6,027 deaths occurred in 2004.

[ 34 ] To compare, 28 deaths were reported in the U.S. in the same year.

[ 35 ] Coal production in China is twice that in the US, [ 36 ] while the number of coal miners is around 50 times that of the US, making deaths in coal mines in China 4 times as common per worker (108 times as common per unit output) as in the US.

[ citation needed ] Mine disasters have still occurred in recent years in the U.S., [ 37 ] Examples include the Sago Mine disaster of 2006, and the 2007 mine accident in Utah 's Crandall Canyon Mine , where nine miners were killed and six entombed.

[ 38 ] In the decade 2005–2014, US coal mining fatalities averaged 28 per year.

[ 39 ] The most fatalities during the 2005–2014 decade were 48 in 2010, the year of the Upper Big Branch Mine disaster in West Virginia, which killed 29 miners.

[ 40 ] Chronic lung diseases, such as pneumoconiosis (black lung) were once common in miners, leading to reduced life expectancy . In some mining countries black lung is still common, with 4,000 new cases of black lung every year in the US (4 percent of workers annually) and 10,000 new cases every year in China (0.2 percent of workers).

[ 41 ] The use of water sprays in mining equipment reduces the risk to miners' lungs.

[ 42 ] Damps [ edit ] Build-ups of a hazardous gas are known as damps, possibly from the German word Dampf which means steam or vapor: Black damp : a mixture of carbon dioxide and nitrogen in a mine can cause suffocation, and is formed as a result of corrosion in enclosed spaces that remove oxygen from the atmosphere.

[ 43 ] After damp : similar to black damp, after damp consists of carbon monoxide , carbon dioxide and nitrogen and forms after a mine explosion.

Fire damp : consists of mostly methane , a highly flammable gas that explodes when its concentrations reach 5% to 15% – at 25% it causes asphyxiation .

Stink damp : so named for the rotten egg smell of the hydrogen sulfide gas, stink damp can explode and is also very toxic.

White damp : air containing carbon monoxide, which is toxic even at low concentrations.

A heavy curtain used to direct air currents in mines and prevent the buildup of dangerous gases is known as a damp sheet .

Noise [ edit ] Noise is also a contributing factor to potential adverse effects on coal miners' health. Exposure to excessive noise can lead to noise-induced hearing loss . Hearing loss developed as a result of occupational exposures is coined occupational hearing loss . To protect miners' hearing, the US Mine Safety and Health Administration 's (MSHA) guidelines for noise place a Permissible Exposure Limit (PEL) for noise at 90 dBA time-weighted over 8 hours. A lower cutoff, 85 dBA, is set for a worker to fall into the MSHA Action Level which dictates that workers be placed into hearing conservation programs.

[ citation needed ] Noise exposures vary depending on the method of extraction. For example, a study has found that among surface coal mine operations, dragline equipment produced the loudest sound at a range of 88–112 dBA.

[ 44 ] Within longwall sections, stageloaders used to transport coal from the mining face and shearers used for extraction represent some of the highest noise exposures.  Auxiliary fans (up to 120 dBA), continuous mining machines (up to 109 dBA), and roof bolters (up to 103 dBA) represent some of the noisiest equipment within continuous mining sections.

[ 45 ] Exposures to noise exceeding 90 dBA can lead to adverse effects on workers' hearing. The use of administrative controls and engineering controls can be used to reduce noise exposures.

[ citation needed ] Safety improvements [ edit ] A video on the use of rock bolts and roof screens in underground mines Improvements in mining methods (e.g. longwall mining), hazardous gas monitoring (such as safety-lamps or more modern electronic gas monitors), gas drainage, electrical equipment , and ventilation have reduced many of the risks of rock falls, explosions, and unhealthy air quality. Gases released during the mining process can be recovered to generate electricity and improve worker safety with gas engines .

[ 46 ] Another innovation in recent years is the use of closed circuit escape respirators , respirators that contain oxygen for situations where mine ventilation is compromised.

[ 47 ] Statistical analyses performed by the US Department of Labor's Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) show that between 1990 and 2004, the industry cut the rate of injuries by more than half and fatalities by two-thirds. But according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics , even in 2006, mining remained the second most dangerous occupation in America, when measured by fatality rate .

[ 48 ] [ verification needed ] These numbers, however, include all mining activities, and oil and gas mining contribute to the majority of fatalities. Coal mining resulted in 47 fatalities that year.

[ 48 ] One study, though, has suggested that hazards of modern mining are now more accretive with workers facing long-term health impacts, such as sleep deprivation, that build up over time.

[ 49 ] Environmental impacts [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Health and environmental impact of the coal industry § Impact to land and surroundings .

[ edit ] Strip mining severely alters the landscape, which reduces the value of the natural environment in the surrounding land.

[ 50 ] The land surface is dedicated to mining activities until it can be reshaped and reclaimed. If mining is allowed, resident human populations must be resettled off the mine site; economic activities, such as agriculture or hunting and gathering food and medicinal plants are interrupted. What becomes of the land surface after mining is determined by the manner in which the mining is conducted. Usually reclamation of disturbed lands to a land use condition is not equal to the original use. Existing land uses (such as livestock grazing, crop and timber production) are temporarily eliminated in mining areas. High-value, intensive-land-use areas like urban and transportation systems are not usually affected by mining operations. If mineral values are sufficient, these improvements may be removed to an adjacent area.

Strip mining eliminates existing vegetation, destroys the genetic soil profile, displaces or destroys wildlife and habitat, alters current land uses, and to some extent permanently changes the general topography of the area mined.

[ 51 ] Adverse impacts on geological features of human interest may occur in a coal strip mine. Geomorphic and geophysical features and outstanding scenic resources may be sacrificed by indiscriminate mining. Paleontological, cultural, and other historic values may be endangered due to the disruptive activities of blasting, ripping, and excavating coal. Stripping of overburden eliminates and destroys archeological and historic features, unless they are removed beforehand.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] The removal of vegetative cover and activities associated with the construction of haul roads, stockpiling of topsoil, displacement of overburden and hauling of soil and coal increase the quantity of dust around mining operations. Dust degrades air quality in the immediate area, has an adverse impact on vegetative life, and constitutes health and safety hazards for mine workers and nearby residents.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] Surface mining disrupts virtually all aesthetic elements of the landscape. Alteration of land forms often imposes unfamiliar and discontinuous configurations. New linear patterns appear as material is extracted and waste piles are developed. Different colors and textures are exposed as vegetative cover is removed and overburden dumped to the side. Dust, vibration, and diesel exhaust odors are created (affecting sight, sound, and smell). Residents of local communities often find such impacts disturbing or unpleasant.  In case of mountaintop removal , tops are removed from mountains or hills to expose thick coal seams underneath. The soil and rock removed is deposited in nearby valleys, hollows and depressions, resulting in blocked (and contaminated) waterways.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] Removal of soil and rock overburden covering the coal resource may cause burial and loss of topsoil, exposes parent material, and creates large infertile wastelands. Soil disturbance and associated compaction result in conditions conducive to erosion. Soil removal from the area to be surface-mined alters or destroys many natural soil characteristics, and reduces its biodiversity and productivity for agriculture. Soil structure may be disturbed by pulverization or aggregate breakdown.

[ 52 ] In response to negative land effects of coal mining and the abundance of abandoned mines in the US the federal government enacted the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 , which requires reclamation plans for future coal mining sites. These plans must be approved by federal or state authorities before mining begins.

[ 51 ] Coal mining by country [ edit ] See also: Coal in Europe The six largest coal producing nations as of 2015, according to the U.S. Energy Information Agency Top 10 hard and brown coal producers in 2012 were (in million metric tons): China 3,621, United States 922, India 629, Australia 432, Indonesia 410, Russia 351, South Africa 261, Germany 196, Poland 144, and Kazakhstan 122.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Australia [ edit ] A balmain coal mine in Sydney , Australia, in 1950 Main article: Coal mining in Australia Coal has been mined in every state of Australia, but mainly in Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria. It is mostly used to generate electricity, and 75% of annual coal production is exported, mostly to eastern Asia.

In 2007, 428 million tonnes of coal was mined in Australia.

[ 56 ] In 2007, coal provided about 85% of Australia's electricity production.

[ 57 ] In the fiscal year 2008/09, 487 million tonnes of coal was mined, and 261 million tonnes was exported.

[ 58 ] In the fiscal year 2013/14, 430.9 million tonnes of coal was mined, and 375.1 million tonnes was exported.

[ 59 ] In 2013/14, coal provided about 69% of Australia's electricity production.

[ 60 ] In 2013, Australia was the world's fifth-largest coal producer, after China, the United States, India, and Indonesia. However, in terms of proportion of production exported, Australia is the world's second largest coal exporter, as it exports roughly 73% of its coal production. Indonesia exports about 87% of its coal production.

[ 60 ] A court in Australia has cited climate change in ruling against a new coal mine.

[ 61 ] Canada [ edit ] Main article: Coal in Canada Canada was ranked as the 15th coal producing country in the world in 2010, with a total production of 67.9 million tonnes. Canada's coal reserves , the 12th largest in the world, are located largely in the province of Alberta .

[ 62 ] The first coal mines in North America were located in Joggins and Port Morien , Nova Scotia , mined by French settlers beginning in the late 1600s. The coal was used for the British garrison at Annapolis Royal , and in the construction of the Fortress of Louisbourg .

[ citation needed ] Chile [ edit ] Main article: Coal mining in Chile Compared to other South American countries Chile has limited coal resources. Only Argentina is similarly poor.

[ 63 ] Coal in Chile is mostly sub-bituminous with the exception of the bituminous coals of the Arauco Basin in central Chile.

[ 64 ] China [ edit ] Main article: Coal power in China China is by far the largest producer of coal in the world, producing over 2.8 billion tons of coal in 2007, or approximately 39.8 percent of all coal produced in the world during that year.

[ 56 ] For comparison, the second largest producer, the United States, produced more than 1.1 billion tons in 2007. An estimated 5 million people work in China's coal-mining industry. As many as 20,000 miners die in accidents each year.

[ 65 ] Most Chinese mines are deep underground and do not produce the surface disruption typical of strip mines. Although there is some evidence of reclamation of mined land for use as parks, China does not require extensive reclamation and is creating significant acreages of abandoned mined land , which is unsuitable for agriculture or other human uses, and inhospitable to indigenous wildlife. Chinese underground mines often experience severe surface subsidence (6–12 meters), negatively impacting farmland because it no longer drains well. China uses some subsidence areas for aquaculture ponds but has more than they need for that purpose. Reclamation of subsided ground is a significant problem in China. Because most Chinese coal is for domestic consumption, and is burned with little or no air pollution control equipment, it contributes greatly to visible smoke and severe air pollution in industrial areas using coal for fuel. China's total energy uses 67% from coal mines.

[ citation needed ] Colombia [ edit ] Some of the world's largest coal reserves are located in South America, and an opencast mine at Cerrejón in Colombia is one of the world's largest open pit mines. The output of the mine in 2004 was 24.9 million tons compared to total global hard coal production of 4,600 million tons. Cerrejón contributed about half of Colombia's coal exports of 52 million tons that year, with Colombia ranked sixth among major coal exporting nations. The company planned to expand production to 32 million tons by 2008. The company has its own 150 km standard-gauge railroad, connecting the mine to its coal-loading terminal at Puerto Bolívar on the Caribbean coast. There are two 120-car unit trains, each carrying 12,000 tons of coal per trip. The round-trip time for each train, including loading and unloading, is about 12 hours. The coal facilities at the port are capable of loading 4,800 tons per hour onto vessels of up to 175,000 tons of dead weight. The mine, railroad and port operate 24 hours per day. Cerrejón directly employs 4,600 workers, with a further 3,800 employed by contractors. The reserves at Cerrejón are low-sulfur, low-ash, bituminous coal. The coal is mostly used for electric power generation, with some also used in steel manufacture. The surface mineable reserves for the current contract are 330 million tons. However, total proven reserves to a depth of 300 metres are 3,000 million tons.

[ citation needed ] The expansion of the Cerrejón mine has been blamed for the forced displacement of local communities.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Germany [ edit ] An open-pit coal mine in the Rhineland lignite mining area in Germany.

Germany has a long history of coal mining, going back to the Middle Ages . Coal mining greatly increased during the Industrial Revolution and the following decades. The main mining areas were around Aachen and the Ruhr area, along with many smaller areas in other parts of Germany, and until 1945 also in Upper Silesia , while the Saarland was repeatedly under French control. These areas grew and were shaped by coal mining and coal processing, and this is still visible even after the end of the coal mining.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] An excavator in the Welzow South open pit coal mine in Germany.

Coal mining reached its peak in the first half of the 20th century. After 1950, the coal producers started to struggle financially. In 1975, a subsidy was introduced ( Kohlepfennig , coal penny as part of the electricity bill), which was discontinued in the 1990s. In 2007, due to EU regulations, the Bundestag decided to end subsidies by 2018. As a consequence, RAG AG , the owner of the two remaining coal mines in Germany, Prosper Haniel and Ibbenbüren, announced it would close all mines by 2018, thus ended underground coal mining in Germany.

Open pit lignite mining for electricity continues in Nordrhein-Westfalen, and in the eastern states of Brandenburg, Saxony and Saxony-Anhalt.

Greece [ edit ] Lignite has been mined in Greece since 1873, and today supplies approximately 75% of the country's energy. The main mining areas are located in Western Macedonia ( Ptolemaida ) and the Peloponnese ( Megalopolis ).

[ 70 ] India [ edit ] Main article: Coal mining in India A coal mine in Jharia , India Coal mining in India has a long history of commercial exploitation starting in 1774 with John Sumner and Suetonius Grant Heatly of the East India Company in the Raniganj Coalfield along the Western bank of Damodar River . Demand for coal remained low until the introduction of steam locomotives in 1853. After this, production rose to an annual average of 1 Mt and India produced 6.12 Mt per year by 1900 and 18 Mt per year by 1920, following increased demand in the First World War, but went through a slump in the early thirties. The production reached a level of 29 Mt by 1942 and 30 Mt by 1946. After independence, the country embarked upon five-year development plans. At the beginning of the 1st Plan, annual production went up to 33 Mt. During the 1st Plan period, the need for increasing coal production efficiently by systematic and scientific development of the coal industry was being felt. Setting up the National Coal Development Corporation (NCDC), a Government of India undertaking, in 1956 with the collieries owned by the railways as its nucleus was the first major step towards planned development of Indian Coal Industry. Along with the Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL) which was already in operation since 1945 and which became a government company under the control of Government of Andhra Pradesh in 1956, India thus had two Government coal companies in the fifties. SCCL is now a joint undertaking of Government of Telangana and Government of India.

[ citation needed ] Japan [ edit ] Main article: List of coal mines in Japan Daikōdō, the first adit of the Horonai mine , dug in 1879 The richest Japanese coal deposits have been found on Hokkaido and Kyushu .

Japan has a long history of coal mining dating back into the Japanese Middle Ages . It is said that coal was first discovered in 1469 by a farming couple near Ōmuta , central Kyushu.

[ 71 ] In 1478, farmers discovered burning stones in the north of the island, which led to the exploitation of the Chikuhõ coalfield.

[ 72 ] Following Japanese industrialization, additional coalfields were discovered in northern Japan. One of the first mines in Hokkaido was the Hokutan Horonai coal mine .

[ 73 ] New Zealand [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Mining in New Zealand § Coal .

[ edit ] New Zealand Coal Production, 1878 – 2014 [ 74 ] Coal mining produced almost 4 million tonnes of coal in 2014, of which 44% was exported.

[ 74 ] In 2016 it was down to 2,834,956 tonnes, [ 75 ] very similar to production in 2020.

[ 76 ] New Zealand coal reserves are in excess of 15 billion tonnes, mainly in Waikato , Taranaki , West Coast , Otago and Southland .

[ 74 ] Over 80% of the reserves are in Southland lignite deposits worth $100 billion.

[ 77 ] In 2008 coal was produced from four underground and 21 opencast mines.

[ 78 ] By the end of 2021 production was from 15 opencast mines, [ 79 ] the largest being Stockton (see Environmental issues below), which produced 984,951 tonnes that year. The largest coal mining company was Solid Energy , a state-owned enterprise , until its collapse in 2015, but is now Bathurst Resources .

[ 80 ] Poland [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Coal in Poland .

[ edit ] Coal production in Poland (1940–2012) Coal in Poland is partly mined and partly imported. 144 million metric tons of coal was mined in 2012, providing 55 percent of that country's primary energy consumption. Poland is the second-largest coal-mining country in Europe, after Germany , and the ninth-largest coal producer in the world. The country consumes nearly all the coal it mines, and is no longer a major coal exporter.

[ 81 ] Coal mines are concentrated mainly in Upper Silesia . The most profitable mines were Marcel Coal Mine and Zofiówka Coal Mine . In communist times (1945–1989) one of the most important and largest mines was 1 Maja Coal Mine .

In 2020, coal played a significant role in Poland's energy mix , making up to 69.5% of the nation's energy production and 68.5% of its electricity generation . It accounted for 40.2% of the Total Energy Supply (TES). The largest portion of coal consumption was in electricity and heat generation, representing 75.6% of the total demand. The industrial sector followed, utilizing 14.5%, and buildings were responsible for 9.9% of coal usage.

[ 82 ] Poland electricity generation by source. Key to colors (from the top): other fuels, solar, wind, hydro, biomass and biogas, pumped storage, gas-fired, bituminous coal, lignite.

In 2023 over 60% of Poland's electricity was generated from coal.

[ 83 ] However extraction is becoming increasingly difficult and expensive, and has become uncompetitive against Russian imports , which are cheaper and of higher quality.

[ 84 ] The industry now relies on government subsidies, taking nearly all of the annual €1.6 billion government energy sector support. In September 2020, the government and mining union agreed a plan to phase out coal by 2049, [ 85 ] but this has been criticised by environmentalists as too late to be compatible with the Paris Agreement to limit climate change .

[ 86 ] As of early 2022, Poland imported roughly a fifth of its coal, with 75% of these imports coming from Russia.

[ 87 ] In late March 2022, Poland's government announced that it would ban Russian coal imports due to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine , with imports from Russia to cease entirely by April or May 2022.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] The effectiveness of this decision has been questioned as any trade ban would be likely to contravene European Union ( EU ) rules because the vast majority of Russian coal is imported by private companies.

[ 90 ] The Polish government has not outlined plans on how it will replace Russian imports (which stood at 8.3 mln tons or around 66% of all coal imported to Poland in 2021 [ 90 ] ) or deal with reduced coal supply. Russia's Ministry of Energy expressed doubt that Poland would be able to rapidly replace Russian coal.

[ 91 ] Russia [ edit ] Russia ranked as the fifth largest coal producing country in 2010, with a total production of 316.9 Mt. Russia has the world's second largest coal reserves.

[ 92 ] Although Russian oil and gas exports get a lot more attention, Russia is the world's third largest coal exporter and these exports are an important source of foreign revenue and are important for the coal mining communities.

[ 93 ] Russia and Norway share the coal resources of the Arctic archipelago of Svalbard , under the Svalbard Treaty .

[ citation needed ] Spain [ edit ] See also: Mining Basins (Asturias) Spain was ranked as the 30th coal producing country in the world in 2010. The coal miners of Spain were active in the Spanish Civil War on the Republican side . In October 1934, in Asturias , union miners and others suffered a fifteen-day siege in Oviedo and Gijon. There is a museum dedicated to coal mining in the region of Catalonia , called Cercs Mine Museum .

[ citation needed ] In October 2018, the Sánchez government and Spanish Labour unions settled an agreement to close ten Spanish coal mines at the end of 2018. The government pre-engaged to spend 250 million Euro to pay for early retirements, occupational retraining and structural change. In 2018, about 2,3 per cent of the electric energy produced in Spain was produced in coal-burning power plants .

[ 94 ] South Africa [ edit ] Main article: Coal in South Africa § Mining South Africa is one of the ten largest coal producing countries [ 95 ] [ 96 ] and the fourth largest coal exporting country [ 97 ] in the world.

Taiwan [ edit ] An abandoned coal mine in the Pingxi District of New Taipei , Taiwan In Taiwan , coal is distributed mainly in the northern area. All of the commercial coal deposits occurred in three Miocene coal-bearing formations, which are the Upper, the Middle, and the Lower Coal Measures. The Middle Coal Measures was the most important with its wide distribution, great number of coal beds and extensive potential reserves. Taiwan has coal reserves estimated to be 100–180 Mt. However, coal output had been small, amounting to 6,948 metric tonnes per month from 4 pits before it ceased production effectively in 2000.

[ 98 ] The abandoned coal mine in Pingxi District , New Taipei , has now turned into the Taiwan Coal Mine Museum .

[ 99 ] Turkey [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Coal in Turkey § Coalfields and mines .

[ edit ] Map of coal deposits in Turkey, 1940 As of 2017 [update] Turkey was 11th in the list of countries by coal production , and mined 1.3% of the world's coal, with lignite and sub-bituminous deposits widespread throughout the country.

[ 100 ] Due to the country's geology , there is no hard coal, which has a higher energy density (over 7,250 kcal/kg), within 1000 m of the surface.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] All coal deposits are owned by the state but over half of mining is done by the private sector.

[ 100 ] In 2017 almost half of Turkey's coal production was mined by the state-owned mines, but the government is seeking an expansion of privatization.

[ 103 ] As of 2019, there are 436 coal mining companies such as Akçelik , [ 104 ] 740 coal mines, [ 105 ] and more mining and exploration licences are being tendered.

[ 106 ] However, some drilling companies are not bidding for licences because mineral exploration is more profitable and in 2018 many mining licences were combined with coal licenses.

[ 107 ] Mining is documented in the "e-maden" computer system ("maden" means "mine" in Turkish).

[ 108 ] Coal miners do not have the right to strike .

[ 109 ] A company called Tarhan Maden has proposed a mine in the district of Tavşanlı in Kütahya Province.

[ 110 ] Unions have complained of mines they say are unsafe, such as Kınık coal mine .

[ 111 ] In July 2025 the government proposed that mining companies would not have to wait for EIA approval from the ministry.

[ 112 ] Ukraine [ edit ] Main article: Coal in Ukraine In 2012 coal production in Ukraine amounted to 85.946 million tonnes, up 4.8% from 2011.

[ 113 ] Coal consumption that same year grew to 61.207 million tonnes, up 6.2% compared with 2011.

[ 113 ] More than 90 percent of Ukraine's coal production comes from the Donets Basin .

[ 114 ] The country's coal industry employs about 500,000 people.

[ 115 ] Ukrainian coal mines are among the most dangerous in the world, and accidents are common.

[ 116 ] Furthermore, the country is plagued with extremely dangerous illegal mines .

[ 117 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Coal mining in the United Kingdom .

[ edit ] Coalfields of the United Kingdom in the 19th century Coal mining in the United Kingdom dates back to Roman times and occurred in many different parts of the country.

Britain's coalfields are associated with Northumberland and Durham , North and South Wales , Yorkshire , the Scottish Central Belt , Lancashire , Cumbria , the East and West Midlands and Kent . After 1972, coal mining quickly collapsed and had practically disappeared by the 21st century.

[ 118 ] Production fell from 228 million tonnes in 1957 to just 107 thousand tonnes in 2024, while coal consumption fell from 216 million to 2 million tonnes in the same time period.

[ 119 ] Employment in coal mines fell from a peak of 1,191,000 in 1920 to 695,000 in 1956, 247,000 in 1976, 44,000 in 1993, 2,000 in 2015, and to 360 in 2022.

[ 120 ] Almost all onshore coal resources in the UK occur in rocks of the Carboniferous period, some of which extend under the North Sea.

Bituminous coal is present in most of Britain's coalfields and is 86% to 88% carbon. In Northern Ireland , there are extensive deposits of lignite which is less energy-dense based on oxidation (combustion) at ordinary combustion temperatures.

[ 121 ] In 2015, EURACOAL estimated that the UK has 3.56 billion tonnes of hard coal resources.

[ 122 ] In 2020, the proposed Woodhouse Colliery gained planning permission but no works have begun, with legal challenges ongoing and no licence in place for seabed mining from the Marine Management Organisation . The planning permission for the mine was later quashed by the High Court.

[ 123 ] Murton colliery near Seaham , United Kingdom, in 1843 United States [ edit ] Main article: Coal mining in the United States Further information: List of coal mines in the United States Miners at the Virginia-Pocahontas Coal Company Mine in 1974 waiting to go to work on the 4 pm to midnight shift Coal began being mined in the United States in the early 18th century, and commercial mining started around 1730 in Midlothian, Virginia .

[ 124 ] The U.S. share of world coal production remained steady at about 20 percent from 1980 to 2005, at about 1 billion short tons per year. The United States was ranked as the second highest coal producing country in the world in 2010, and possesses the largest coal reserves in the world. In 2008 then- President George W. Bush stated that coal was the most reliable source of electricity.

[ 125 ] In 2011, former U.S. president Barack Obama said that the U.S. should rely more on cleaner sources of energy that emit lower or no carbon dioxide pollution .

[ 126 ] For a time, while domestic coal consumption for electric power was being displaced by natural gas, exports grew.

[ 127 ] U.S. net coal exports increased ninefold from 2006 to 2012, peaked at 117 million short tons in 2012, then declined to 63 million tons in 2015. In 2015, 60% of net US exports went to Europe, 27% to Asia.  US coal production increasingly comes from strip mines in the western United States, such as from the Powder River Basin in Wyoming and Montana .

[ 12 ] [ 128 ] Coal has come under continued price pressure from natural gas and renewable energy , which has resulted in a rapid decline of coal in the U.S. and several notable bankruptcies including Peabody Energy . On 13 April 2016 the company reported that its revenue had reduced by 17 percent as coal prices fell and that it had lost two billion dollars the previous year.

[ 129 ] It then filed Chapter 11 bankruptcy on 13 April 2016.

[ 129 ] Harvard Business Review addressed retraining coal workers for solar photovoltaic employment because of the rapid rise in U.S. solar jobs.

[ 130 ] A 2016 study indicated that this was technically possible and would account for only 5% of the industrial revenue from a single year to provide coal workers with job security in the energy industry as a whole.

[ 30 ] Donald Trump pledged to bring back coal jobs during the 2016 US presidential election , and as president he announced plans to reduce environmental protection, particularly by repealing the Clean Power Plan (CPP). However, industry observers have warned that this might not lead to a boom in mining jobs.

[ 131 ] A 2019 projection by the Energy Information Administration estimated that coal production without CPP would decline over coming decades at a faster rate than indicated in the agency's 2017 projection, which had assumed the CPP was in effect.

[ 132 ] See also [ edit ] Black lung disease – Human disease caused by long-term exposure to coal dust George Bretz (photographer) – American photographer Child labour – Exploitation of children through work Coal Measures Coal mining in Plymouth, Pennsylvania Coal slurry impoundment – Product of coal preparation Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Coal train – Practice of transporting cargo by rail Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Coal-mining region – Basin with coal deposits Glossary of coal mining terminology Environmental impact of the coal industry Environmental justice and coal mining in Appalachia – Environmental protection and equity Hurrying – Hauling coal from a mine to the surface List of books about coal mining Mine fire – Underground smouldering of a coal deposit Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Mining accident – Accident occurring during the process of mining minerals Problems in coal mining Recovering of heat from old coal mines – Part of environmental remediation References [ edit ] ^ a b "Coal Information: Overview" . Paris: International Energy Agency. July 2020 . Retrieved 4 November 2020 .

^ Ryan Driskell Tate, Christine Shearer, and Andiswa Matiknca, "Deep Trouble: Tracking Global Coal Mine Proposals," Global Energy Monitor, June 2021 ^ Ryan Driskell Tate, Dorothy Lan Mei, Tiffany Means, "Scraping By: Global Coal Miners and the Urgency of a Just Transition," Global Energy Monitor, October 2023 ^ "Coal industry faces 1 million job losses from global energy transition - research" .

Reuters . 10 October 2023.

^ a b Barbara Freese (2004).

Coal: A Human History . Penguin Books. pp.

137 .

ISBN 9780142000984 .

(stating that, "[c]oal consumption doubled every decade between 1850 and 1890" and that by turn of the century, "coal was the unrivaled foundation of U.S. Power," providing "71 percent of the nation's energy." ^ James G. Speight (2011).

An Introduction to Petroleum Technology, Economics, and Politics . John Wiley & Sons. pp.

260– 261.

ISBN 9781118192542 .

^ Geoff Eley, Forging Democracy: The History of the Left in Europe, 1850–2000 (2002); Frederic Meyers, European Coal Mining Unions: structure and function (1961) p. 86; Kazuo and Gordon (1997) p 48; Hajo Holborn , History of Modern Germany (1959) p. 521; David Frank, J. B. McLachlan: A Biography: The Story of a Legendary Labour Leader and the Cape Breton Coal Miners, (1999) p, 69; David Montgomery, The fall of the house of labor: the workplace, the state, and American labor activism, 1865–1925 (1991) p. 343.

^ Reyes Herrera, Sonia E.; Rodríguez Torrent, Juan Carlos; Medina Hernández, Patricio (2014).

"El sufrimiento colectivo de una ciudad minera en declinación. El caso de Lota, Chile" .

Horizontes Antropológicos (in Spanish).

20 (42).

^ "Methods of Coal Mining" Archived 18 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine Great Mining (2003) accessed 19 December 2011 ^ a b Christman, R.C., J. Haslbeck, B. Sedlik, W. Murray, and W. Wilson. 1980.

Activities, effects and impacts of the coal fuel cycle for a 1,000-MWe electric power generating plant . Washington, DC: U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission.

^ a b c d e "Coal Mining. World Coal" .

World Coal Institute . 10 March 2009. Archived from > the original on 28 April 2009.

^ a b Ryan Driskell Tate, "Places of Overburden: Strip Mining and Reclamation on the Northern Great Plains," The Greater Plains: Rethinking a Region's Environmental Histories (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2021).

^ a b U.S. Department of the Interior, Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (1987).

Surface coal mining reclamation: 10 years of progress, 1977–1987 . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

^ "Valley fills" .

Kentuckians For The Commonwealth . Retrieved 23 April 2024 .

^ "Mountain Justice Summer – What is Mountain Top Removal Mining?" . 29 October 2005. Archived from the original on 29 October 2005.

^ U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Philadelphia, PA (2005).

"Mountaintop mining/valley fills in Appalachia: Final programmatic environmental impact statement." ^ "Rock bolt | Reinforcement, Anchoring & Stability | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 23 April 2024 .

^ "Coal Information: Overview" (PDF) . Paris: International Energy Agency. 2019 . Retrieved 4 November 2020 .

^ "Coal production | Coal | Statistical Review of World Energy | Energy economics | BP" .

bp.com . Retrieved 10 November 2017 .

^ "Coal and lignite production" .

Global Energy Statistical Yearbook . Grenoble, France: Enerdata. 2020 . Retrieved 4 November 2020 .

^ a b c Table is extracted from Pai, Sandeep; Zerriffi, Hisham; Jewell, Jessica; Pathak, Jaivik (6 March 2020).

"Solar has greater techno-economic resource suitability than wind for replacing coal mining jobs" .

Environmental Research Letters .

15 (3): 034065.

Bibcode : 2020ERL....15c4065P .

doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/ab6c6d .

hdl : 11250/2765429 .

ISSN 1748-9326 .

^ Ivanova, Diana; Barrett, John; Wiedenhofer, Dominik; Macura, Biljana; Callaghan, Max W; Creutzig, Felix (1 April 2020).

"Quantifying the potential for climate change mitigation of consumption options" .

Environmental Research Letters .

15 (9): 093001.

Bibcode : 2020ERL....15i3001I .

doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/ab8589 .

ISSN 1748-9326 .

^ Fecko, P.; Tora, B.; Tod, M. (31 October 2013). "Coal waste: Handling, pollution impacts and utilization". In Osborne, Dave (ed.).

The coal handbook: Towards cleaner production . Vol. 2. Oxford, UK: Woodhead Publishing. pp.

63– 84.

doi : 10.1533/9781782421177.1.63 .

ISBN 978-1-78242-116-0 .

^ a b c "Waste Coal | Energy Justice Network" .

www.energyjustice.net . Retrieved 2 August 2020 .

^ Kowalska, Arlena; Kondracka, Marta; Mendecki, Maciej Jan (2012).

"VLF mapping and resistivity imaging of contaminated quaternary formations near 'Panewniki' coal waste disposal (Southern Poland)" (PDF) .

Acta Geodynamica et Geromaterialia .

9 (4).

Czech Academy of Sciences , Institute of Rock Structure and Mechanics: 473– 480.

ResearchGate : 259218387 .

^ Patel, Sonal (1 July 2016).

"The Coal Refuse Dilemma: Burning Coal for Environmental Benefits" .

Power Magazine . Retrieved 2 August 2020 .

^ Dove, D.; Daniels, W.; Parrish, D. (1990).

"Importance of Indigenous VAM Fungi for the Reclamation of Coal Refuse Piles" (PDF) .

Journal American Society of Mining and Reclamation .

1990 (1): 463– 468.

doi : 10.21000/jasmr90010463 .

ISSN 2328-8744 .

^ Engelbert, Phillis.

"Energy – What Is A "Miner's Canary"?" . enotes. Archived from the original on 1 October 2011 . Retrieved 18 August 2010 .

^ "Annual Coal Report – Energy Information Administration" .

www.eia.gov .

^ a b Louie, Edward P.; Pearce, Joshua M. (June 2016).

"Retraining investment for U.S. transition from coal to solar photovoltaic employment" (PDF) .

Energy Economics .

57 : 295– 302.

Bibcode : 2016EneEc..57..295L .

doi : 10.1016/j.eneco.2016.05.016 .

S2CID 156845876 .

^ "Former Miner Explains Culture Of Mining" .

NPR . 7 April 2010.

^ a b "Coal Fatalities for 1900 Through 2020" . Arlington, Virginia: U.S. Department of Labor, Mine Safety and Health Administration . Retrieved 11 November 2021 .

^ OccupationalHazards.com.

"Respiratory Protection in Coal Mines." Archived 23 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ "CLB :: Deconstructing deadly details from China's coal mine safety statistics" . 30 September 2007. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007.

^ US Mine Safety and Health Administration.

"Statistics – Coal Mining Fatalities by State – Calendar Year." Archived 23 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Home" .

World Coal Association . Archived from the original on 30 April 2008 . Retrieved 24 October 2006 .

^ "Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries Summary" . Washington D.C.: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2006.

^ "Panel to Explore Deadly Mine Accident" .

The New York Times . Associated Press. 4 September 2007.

^ Coal mining fatalities Archived 19 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine , US Mine Safety and Health Administration, accessed 27 June 2016.

^ Urbina, Ian (9 April 2010).

"No Survivors Found After West Virginia Mine Disaster" .

The New York Times .

^ Abelard.org , "Fossil fuel disasters".

^ Jacquelyn L. Banasik (2018).

Pathophysiology . Elsevier Health Sciences. p. 504.

ISBN 9780323510424 .

^ Haldane, John (1894).

"Notes of an Enquiry into the Nature and Physiological Action of Black-Damp, as Met with in Podmore Colliery, Staffordshire, and Lilleshall Colliery, Shropshire" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society of London .

57 : 249– 257.

Bibcode : 1894RSPS...57..249H .

JSTOR 115391 .

^ Bauer, ER (April 2004). "Worker exposure and equipment noise in large surface coal mines".

Min Eng .

56 : 49– 54.

^ "Summary of Longwall and Continuous Miner Section Noise Studies in Underground Coal Mines" .

www.cdc.gov . 25 October 2016 . Retrieved 15 August 2018 .

^ Coal Gas Utilisation , www.clarke-energy.com ^ Krah, Jaclyn; Unger, Richard L. (7 August 2013).

"The Importance of Occupational Safety and Health: Making for a "Super" Workplace" . National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health . Retrieved 15 January 2015 .

^ a b U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Stats.bls.gov ^ Ryan Driskell Tate, "Slow Violence and Hidden Injuries: The Work of Stripmining in the American West," Violence of Work: New Essays in Canadian and US Labour History (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2020).

^ Hamilton, Michael S. (2005).

Mining environmental policy: Comparing Indonesia and the USA . Ashgate studies in environmental policy and practice. Burlington, VT: Ashgate Publishing .

ISBN 978-0-7546-4493-4 .

^ a b U.S. Department of the Interior. 1979.

Permanent Regulatory Program Implementing Section 01(b) of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977: Environmental Impact Statement . Washington, D.C.

^ a b c d Squillace, Mark.

The Strip Mining Handbook: A Coalfield Citizens' Guide To Using The Law To Fight Back Against The Ravages Of Strip Mining And Underground Mining Archived 4 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Washington, D.C.: Environmental Policy Institute, Friends of the Earth, 1990.

^ a b c United States Department of the Interior .

Coal: Construction and Mining Impacts Archived 1 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Washington, D.C.: Office of Indian Energy and Economic Development, Tribal Energy and Environmental Information Clearinghouse (TEEIC). Retrieved 9 March 2012.

^ IEA Key energy statistics 2010 Archived 11 October 2010 at the Wayback Machine pages 11, 21 ^ US Energy Information Administration, International energy statistics , accessed 29 December 2013.

^ a b "World Coal Production, Most Recent Estimates 1980–2007 (October 2008)" . U.S. Energy Information Administration. 2008.

^ "The Importance of Coal in the Modern World – Australia" . Gladstone Centre for Clean Coal. Archived from the original on 8 February 2007 . Retrieved 17 March 2007 .

^ "Australia Mineral Statistics 2009 – June Quarter" (PDF) . Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 July 2011 . Retrieved 3 October 2009 .

^ "September 2015 – Resources and Energy Quarterly" (PDF) . Australia Office of the Chief Economist. September 2015. pp. 44, 56. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 November 2015 . Retrieved 3 October 2015 .

^ a b WCA (September 2014).

"Coal Statistics" .

Today in Energy . World Coal Association. Archived from the original on 14 February 2012 . Retrieved 3 May 2015 .

^ "Court rules out Hunter Valley coalmine on climate change grounds" .

The Guardian . 7 February 2019.

^ "Overview of Canada's Coal Sector" (PDF) .

Natural Resources Canada . Archived from the original on 25 May 2013 . Retrieved 6 March 2012 .

^ Hernán Scandizzo (31 December 2016).

"Carbón 2.0, otro capítulo de la saga no convencional" [Coal 2.0, another chapter of the non-conventional energy saga] (in Spanish).

Rebelion.org . Retrieved 16 January 2017 .

^ Davis, Eliodoro Martín (1990). "Breves recuerdos de algunas actividades mineras del carbón".

Actas . Segundo Simposio sobre el Terciario de Chile (in Spanish). Santiago, Chile: Departamento de Geociencias, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Concepción . pp.

189– 203.

^ "Where The Coal Is Stained With Blood." Time , 2 March 2007.

^ "DIGGING DEEPER: THE HUMAN RIGHTS IMPACTS OF COAL IN THE GLOBAL SOUTH" (PDF) .

^ "Carbones del Cerrejón y Responsabilidad Social: Una revisión independiente de los impactos y del objetivo" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 March 2017.

^ Czierpka, Juliane (4 January 2019).

"Der Ruhrbergbau. Von der Industrialisierung bis zur Kohlenkrise" .

bpb.de (in German) . Retrieved 12 January 2022 .

^ "Die Route der Industriekultur" .

www.ruhr-tourismus.de (in German). Archived from the original on 25 December 2021 . Retrieved 12 January 2022 .

^ "Mining Greece Coal" .

^ Kodama Kiyoomi, Sekitan no gijutsushi, p. 19 ^ Honda Tatsumi, Honda Tatsumi shashinshũ tankō ōsai, p. 165 ^ Kasuga Yutaka, Transfer and Development of Coal-Mine Technology in Hokkaido , pp. 11–20.

^ a b c "Energy in New Zealand" .

MBIE . August 2015. Archived from the original on 15 February 2016 . Retrieved 23 August 2015 .

^ "Operating coal mine production figures" .

New Zealand Petroleum and Minerals . Retrieved 5 February 2018 .

^ "New Zealand's Greenhouse Gas Inventory 1990–2020" (PDF) .

MfE .

^ Cumming, Geoff (6 March 2010).

"Miners press to enter the green zone" .

The New Zealand Herald .

[ page needed ] ^ "Coal Overview" . Crown Minerals, Ministry of Economic Development. 17 December 2008.

^ "Coal" .

New Zealand Petroleum and Minerals . Retrieved 15 December 2022 .

^ "Operating coal mine production figures" .

New Zealand Petroleum and Minerals . Retrieved 15 December 2022 .

^ US Energy Information Administration Poland overview , Sept 2013 ^ "Poland 2022 - Energy Policy Review" (PDF) .

International Energy Agency .

^ Ptak, Alicja (3 January 2024).

"Poland produced record 26% of electricity from renewables in 2023" .

Notes From Poland . Retrieved 4 January 2024 .

^ "As Pressures Mount, Poland's Once-Mighty Coal Industry Is in Retreat" .

Yale E360 . Retrieved 30 March 2022 .

^ Gatten, Emma; Suszko, Agnieszka (22 October 2020).

"Can Poland, the dirty man of Europe, end its love affair with coal?" .

The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 23 October 2020 .

^ "Remaining EU Coal Power Polluters" .

Ember . Retrieved 20 December 2021 .

^ "Poland to ban Russian coal imports" .

POLITICO . 29 March 2022 . Retrieved 30 March 2022 .

^ "Премьер Польши назвал сроки полного отказа от угля из России" .

РБК (in Russian). 30 March 2022 . Retrieved 30 March 2022 .

^ "Poland moves to block coal imports from Russia" .

AP NEWS . 29 March 2022 . Retrieved 30 March 2022 .

^ a b Tilles, Daniel (29 March 2022).

"Poland to ban Russian coal imports, saying it "can't wait any longer for EU to act" " .

Notes From Poland . Retrieved 30 March 2022 .

^ "Минэнерго сочло маловероятным, что Польша быстро заменит уголь из России" .

РБК (in Russian). 29 March 2022 . Retrieved 30 March 2022 .

^ "BP Statistical review of world energy June 2007" . BP. June 2007. Archived from the original (XLS) on 6 February 2009 . Retrieved 22 October 2007 .

^ Overland, Indra; Loginova, Julia (1 August 2023).

"The Russian coal industry in an uncertain world: Finally pivoting to Asia?" .

Energy Research & Social Science .

102 : 103150.

Bibcode : 2023ERSS..10203150O .

doi : 10.1016/j.erss.2023.103150 .

ISSN 2214-6296 .

^ theguardian.com 26. October 2018: Spain to close most coal mines after striking €250m deal ^ Schmidt, Stephan.

"Coal deposits of South Africa – the future of coal mining in South Africa" (PDF) . Institute for Geology, Technische Universität Bergakademie Freiberg . Retrieved 14 January 2010 .

^ "Coal Mining" .

World Coal Institute . Retrieved 14 January 2010 .

^ "Coal" . Department of Minerals and Energy (South Africa). Archived from the original on 2 December 2009 . Retrieved 14 January 2010 .

^ "Bureau of Energy, Ministry of Economic Affairs, R.O.C. – Energy Statistical annual Reports" . Web3.moeaboe.gov.tw. Archived from the original on 19 November 2017 . Retrieved 21 September 2018 .

^ "Coal Mining in Taiwan (ROC) – Overview" . Mbendi.com. Archived from the original on 17 October 2015 . Retrieved 26 May 2014 .

^ a b "Coal overview: Turkey" (PDF) .

Global Methane Project . 2020.

^ Collings, Ronald.

"Pre-feasibility Study for Coal Mine Methane Drainage and Utilization at the Kozlu Coal Mine in Zonguldak, Turkey" (PDF) .

^ "Turkey's 21st Century Coal Rush" . Global Business Reports.

Archived from the original on 17 May 2019 . Retrieved 17 May 2019 .

^ Ersoy (2019) , p. 8.

^ Ersoy (2019) , p. 3.

^ "Coal mine collapses in Turkey" . Trend. 18 February 2019.

Archived from the original on 1 March 2019 . Retrieved 28 February 2019 .

^ "Tender announcements" . MAPEG.

Archived from the original on 25 February 2019 . Retrieved 24 February 2019 .

^ Global Business Reports (2018) , p. 37,38.

^ "30 bin kişi madencilik işlemlerini e-maden üzerinden sonuçlandırdı" [30 thousand people served by e-maden for mining procedures].

Hürriyet (in Turkish). 16 April 2021.

Archived from the original on 17 April 2021.

^ "2019 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Turkey" .

U.S. Embassy & Consulates in Turkey . 12 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 12 April 2020 . Retrieved 30 March 2020 .

^ "Tavşanlı'da açık kömür ocağı işletilecek" .

Enerji Günlüğü (in Turkish). 8 June 2023 . Retrieved 9 September 2023 .

^ "Polyak Madencilik'te direniş sürüyor: Devlet bir gün de işçinin yanında olsun" .

Gazete Duvar (in Turkish). 29 December 2022 . Retrieved 9 September 2023 .

^ "Turkey prepares to open olive groves for mining to 'feed power plants' " .

Bianet . Retrieved 20 July 2025 .

^ a b Ukraine plans to reach extraction of 105 m t of coal a year, says president , Interfax-Ukraine (30 August 2013) "Interfax" . Archived from the original on 4 April 2020 . Retrieved 24 July 2020 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Ukraine – Mining: Coal Mining Archived 17 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine ^ Ukraine – Coal Archived 23 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine , eia.doe.gov ^ Ukraine mine blast leaves 16 dead , BBC News (29 July 2011) ^ Illegal mines profitable, but at massive cost to nation , Kyiv Post (8 July 2011) ^ Seddon, Mark (10 April 2013).

"The long, slow death of the UK coal industry" (The Northerner blog) .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 17 April 2013 .

Earlier this month Maltby colliery in South Yorkshire closed down for good. At the end of a winter that saw 40% of our energy needs met by coal – most of it imported – we witnessed the poignant closing ceremony ^ "Energy Trends" .

www.gov.uk . 2025 . Retrieved 7 March 2025 .

^ Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, "Historical coal data: coal production, availability and consumption 1853 to 2022" ^ "Mineral Profile – Coal" .

bgs.ac.uk . British Geological Society. March 2010 . Retrieved 7 July 2015 .

^ "United Kingdom (6th ed.)" .

the voice of coal in Europe . 13 September 2014 . Retrieved 4 June 2024 .

^ Seabrook, Victoria (13 September 2024).

"Cumbria coal mine plan thrown out by High Court judge" .

Sky News . Retrieved 5 December 2024 .

^ MCCartney, Martha W. (1989).

"Historical Overview Of The Midlothian Coal Mining Company Tract, Chesterfield County, Virginia." Archived 19 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine December 1989.

^ The White House, Washington, DC (2008).

"President Bush Attends 2008 Annual Meeting of the West Virginia Coal Association." President George W. Bush Archives. Press release, 31 July 2008.

^ Lomax, Simon (9 February 2011).

" 'Massive' Closures of U.S. Coal Plants Loom, Chu Says" .

Bloomberg Business Week . Archived from the original on 13 February 2011.

^ "Quarterly Coal Report – Energy Information Administration" .

www.eia.gov .

^ Matthew Brown (17 March 2013).

"Company eyes coal on Montana's Crow reservation" .

The San Francisco Chronicle . Associated Press . Retrieved 18 March 2013 .

^ a b Riley, Charles; Isidore, Chris (13 April 2016).

"Top U.S. coal company Peabody Energy files for bankruptcy" .

CNNMoney . Retrieved 13 April 2016 .

^ What If All U.S. Coal Workers Were Retrained to Work in Solar?

– Harvard Business Review. August. 2016 ^ Rushe, Dominic (27 March 2017).

"Top US coal boss Robert Murray: Trump 'can't bring mining jobs back' " .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 29 March 2017 .

^ Crooks, Ed [@Ed_Crooks] (26 January 2019).

"President Obama's Clean Power Plan was expected to lead to a steep fall in US coal production. Now the plan has been blocked, and coal production is expected to fall even faster than if it had come into effect: https://t.co/HmhRutJnc2 https://t.co/qfF7LhefOY" ( Tweet ).

Archived from the original on 22 June 2021 . Retrieved 30 August 2021 – via Twitter .

Works cited [ edit ] Ersoy, Mücella (2019).

Turkish coal mining sector: Current State, Strategy for the Future (PDF) (Report).

Turkish Coal Operations Authority .

Global Business Reports (2018).

Turkey Mining (PDF) (Report).

{{ cite report }} : |author= has generic name ( help ) Further reading [ edit ] Main article: History of coal mining § Bibliography Baylies, Carolyn.

History of the Yorkshire Miners 1881–1918 (Routledge, 2003) in England online .

Chirons, Nicholas P.

Coal Age Handbook of Coal Surface Mining ( ISBN 0-07-011458-7 ) Department of Trade and Industry, UK.

"The Coal Authority" . Archived from the original on 13 October 2008 . Retrieved 16 October 2007 .

Faull, Margaret L. "Coal mining and the landscape of England, 1700 to the present day." Landscape History 30.1 (2008): 59–74.

Gardner, A. Dudley.

Forgotten frontier: A history of Wyoming coal mining (Routledge, 2019) online .

Goin, Peter, and Elizabeth Raymond. "Living in anthracite: Mining landscape and sense of place in Wyoming Valley, Pennsylvania." Public Historian 23.2 (2001): 29–45.

online Hamilton, Michael S.

Mining Environmental Policy: Comparing Indonesia and the USA (Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2005). ( ISBN 0-7546-4493-6 ).

Hinde, John Roderick.

When coal was king: Ladysmith and the coal-mining industry on Vancouver Island (2003), in Canada online Kuenzer, Claudia.

Coal Mining in China (In: Schumacher-Voelker, E., and Mueller, B., (Eds.), BusinessFocus China, Energy: A Comprehensive Overview of the Chinese Energy Sector ( Deutschland Verlag, 2007); 281 pp., ISBN 978-3-940114-00-6 pp. 62–68) Latzko, David A. "Coal mining and regional economic development in Pennsylvania, 1810–1980." Economies et Sociétés 44 (2011): 1627–1649.

online Archived 28 May 2023 at the Wayback Machine Lovejoy, Owen R. "The coal mines of Pennsylvania." The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 38.1_suppl (1911): 133–138.

online Madsen, Peter M. "These lives will not be lost in vain: Organizational learning from disaster in US coal mining." Organization Science 20.5 (2009): 861–875.

Merrill, Travers, and Lucy Kitson.

End of Coal Mining in South Wales: Lessons learned from industrial transformation.

(International Institute for Sustainable Development, 2017) online Metheny, Karen Bescherer.

From the miners' doublehouse: archaeology and landscape in a Pennsylvania coal company town (Univ. of Tennessee Press, 2007) online .

Mitchell, Brian R.

Economic development of the British coal industry 1800–1914 (Cambridge UP, 1984).

online Nielsen, Charles V., and George F. Richardson.

1982 Keystone Coal Industry Manual (1982) Oei, Pao-Yu, Hanna Brauers, and Philipp Herpich. "Lessons from Germany's hard coal mining phase-out: policies and transition from 1950 to 2018." Climate Policy 20.8 (2020): 963–979.

online Srivastava, A.K.

Coal Mining Industry in India (1998) ( ISBN 81-7100-076-2 ) Stern, Gerald M.

The Buffalo Creek Disaster: How the survivors of one of the worst disasters in coal-mining history brought suit against the coal company – and won (Vintage, 2008) online .

Woytinsky, W. S., and E. S. Woytinsky.

World Population and Production Trends and Outlooks (1953) pp. 840–881; with many tables and maps on the worldwide coal industry in 1950 Child labour [ edit ] Kirby, Peter Thomas. "Aspects of the employment of children in the British coal-mining industry, 1800–1872" (PhD. Diss. University of Sheffield, 1995) online .

Lovejoy, Owen R. "Child labor in the coal mines." The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 27.2 (1906): 35–41.

online McGill, Nettie Pauline.

The welfare of children in bituminous coal mining communities in West Virginia (US Government Printing Office, 1923) online .

McIntosh, Robert.

Boys in the pits: child labour in coal mines (McGill-Queen's Press-MQUP, 2000) in Canada; online .

Older textbooks [ edit ] Burns, Daniel.

The modern practice of coal mining (1907) Hughes. Herbert W, A Text-Book of Mining: For the use of colliery managers and others (London, many editions 1892–1917), the standard British textbook for its era.

Tonge, James.

The principles and practice of coal mining (1906) Fiction [ edit ] Grisham, John.

"Gray Mountain" (2014) , novel set in Appalachia about a fictional legal clinic intern in Virginia coal mining Zola, Émile , Germinal (novel, 1885); realistic story of a coalminers' strike in northern France in the 1860s Government documents and primary sources [ edit ] Illinois  Dept. of Commerce and Economic Opportunity. "Coal mining in Illinois" (2010) online Kowalski-Trakofler, K. M., et al. "Underground coal mining disasters and fatalities – United States, 1900–2006." (2009).

online National Energy Information Center.

"Greenhouse Gases, Climate Change, Energy" . Retrieved 16 October 2007 .

U.S. House of Representatives  Committee on Natural Resources. "Mining in America: Powder River Basin Coal Mining, The Benefits and Challenges". (2013) online Portals : Earth sciences Energy Global warming External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Coal mining .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Coal mining .

Look up colliery in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Glossary of Mining Terms Global Coal Mine Tracker , Global Energy Monitor Coal Mine exploration and preservation Abandoned Mine Research Methods of mining – overview and graphic of coal mining methods Coal Mining in the British Isles (Northern Mine Research Society) National Coal Mining Museum for England NIOSH Coal Workers' Health Surveillance Program Purdue University – Petroleum and Coal University of Wollongong – educational resource on longwall mining Virtual coalmine Archived 27 September 2019 at the Wayback Machine – visual e-learning source with comprehensive display of long-wall face World Coal Institute – Coal Mining Archived 7 October 2006 at the Wayback Machine v t e Coal Coal types by grade (lowest to highest) Xylit Peat 1 Lignite Sub-bituminous coal Bituminous coal Anthracite Graphite 2 Coal combustion Ash pond Asian brown cloud Asthma Black coal equivalent Char Charcoal Coal combustion products fired power station gas phase-out pollution mitigation power in China power in the United States preparation plant seam fire tar Coke Coking Energy value Flue gas Fly ash Fossil fuel Fossil fuel phase-out Great Smog of London Greenhouse gas emissions Metallurgical coal NOx Smog Sulfur dioxide Toxic heavy metals Coal mining Blackdamp Black lung disease Coal dust Coalfields Coal gas homogenization liquefaction mining disasters in the United States mining region refuse slurry town Environmental issues in Appalachia Environmental justice and coal mining in Appalachia Firedamp Health and environmental impact of the coal industry Health effects of coal ash History of coal mining Hydrogen sulfide Mining regions Outbursts Peak coal Problems in coal mining Refined coal Whitedamp Notes: [1] Peat is considered a precursor to coal. [2] Graphite is only technically considered a coal type.

v t e Pollution History Air Acid rain Air quality index Air pollution measurement Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Biofuel Biomass Coal Joss paper Open burning of waste Construction Renovation Demolition Exhaust gas Diesel exhaust Haze Smoke Indoor air quality Internal combustion engine Global dimming Global distillation Mining Ozone depletion Particulates Asbestos Oil refining Polluting cooking fuels Persistent organic pollutant Smelting Smog Soot Black carbon Volatile organic compound Waste Biological Biological hazard Genetic pollution Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information pollution Electromagnetic Light Ecological light pollution Overillumination Radio spectrum pollution Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Land Water Air Rail Sustainable transport Urban Sonar Marine mammals and sonar Industrial Military Abstract Noise control Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Electromagnetic radiation and health Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural pollution Herbicides Manure waste Pesticides Land degradation Bioremediation Open defecation Electrical resistance heating Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Battery recycling Foam food container Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Biomedical waste Chemical waste Construction waste Lead poisoning Mercury poisoning Toxic waste Industrial waste Lead smelting Litter Mining Coal mining Gold mining Surface mining Deep sea mining Mining waste Uranium mining Municipal solid waste Garbage Nanomaterials Plastic pollution Microplastics Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Landfill Thermal treatment Space Satellite Visual Air travel Clutter (advertising) Traffic signs Overhead power lines Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare ( Agent Orange ) Nuclear holocaust ( Nuclear fallout - nuclear famine - nuclear winter ) Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biological pollution Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine debris Monitoring Nonpoint source pollution Nutrient pollution Ocean acidification Oil exploitation Oil exploration Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Sewage Septic tanks Pit latrine Shipping Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Thermal Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Topics Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Brain health and pollution Misc Area source Debris Dust Garbology Legacy pollution Midden Point source Waste Responses Cleaner production Industrial ecology Pollution haven hypothesis Pollutant release and transfer register Polluter pays principle Pollution control Waste minimisation Zero waste Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM 2.5 Most polluted countries Most polluted rivers Treaties Categories ( by country ) Commons WikiProject Environment WikiProject Ecology Environment portal Ecology portal Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐8mwk7
Cached time: 20250818082748
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.007 seconds
Real time usage: 2.336 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14365/1000000
Revision size: 80190/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 375298/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 22295/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 41/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 432072/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.422/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27931696/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1967.475      1 -total
 31.18%  613.496      1 Template:Reflist
 25.12%  494.272      8 Template:Excerpt
 18.23%  358.695     68 Template:Cite_web
  8.03%  157.980      1 Template:Columns-list
  7.42%  145.927     17 Template:Annotated_link
  7.28%  143.181     18 Template:Citation_needed
  6.66%  131.068     20 Template:Fix
  4.27%   84.018      1 Template:Lang
  3.86%   75.977      1 Template:Coal_sidebar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:208413:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818082748 and revision id 1302981796. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Coal_mining&oldid=1302981796 " Categories : Coal mining Fuel production Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL CS1 German-language sources (de) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2024 CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2021 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2023 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2014 Articles containing German-language text All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from May 2015 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link CS1 errors: generic name Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 13:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Coal mining 29 languages Add topic

