Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Founding 1.2 Early years 1.3 Historic speeches at the Council of Europe 2 Aims and achievement 3 Institutions Toggle Institutions subsection 3.1 Partial Agreements 3.2 Summits 3.3 Headquarters and buildings 4 Member states, observers, partners Toggle Member states, observers, partners subsection 4.1 Eligibility 4.2 Member states and observers 4.3 Withdrawal, suspension, and expulsion 4.3.1 Suspension and exclusion of Russia 5 Co-operation Toggle Co-operation subsection 5.1 Conventions: European Treaty Series 5.2 Non-member states 5.3 European Union 5.4 Schools of Political Studies 5.5 United Nations 5.6 Non-governmental organisations 5.7 Others 6 Role of CSOs within the Council of Europe Toggle Role of CSOs within the Council of Europe subsection 6.1 Participatory status for international NGOs 6.2 The Conference of INGOs 7 Characteristics Toggle Characteristics subsection 7.1 Privileges and immunities 7.2 Symbol and anthem 8 Criticism and controversies Toggle Criticism and controversies subsection 8.1 "Caviar diplomacy" scandal 9 See also 10 Notes Toggle Notes subsection 10.1 Footnotes 10.2 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Council of Europe 114 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Arpetan Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Davvisámegiella Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Кырык мары Ladin Ladino Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Монгол Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Qırımtatarca Română Rumantsch Русский Sardu Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Võro 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia International organisation Not to be confused with European Council , the Council of the European Union or the European Political Community .

Council of Europe Conseil de l'Europe Flag Logo Headquarters Palace of Europe , Strasbourg, France Official languages English , French [ 1 ] Type Regional intergovernmental organisation Membership 46 member states [ 2 ] 5 Council observers [ 2 ] 3 Assembly observers Leaders • Secretary General Alain Berset • Deputy Secretary General Bjørn Berge • President of the Parliamentary Assembly Theodoros Roussopoulos • President of the Committee of Ministers Ian Borg • President of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities Marc Cools [ fr ] Legislature Parliamentary Assembly Establishment • Treaty of London 5 May 1949 ( 1949-05-05 ) Website coe.int The Council of Europe ( CoE ; French : Conseil de l'Europe , CdE ) is an international organisation with the goal of upholding human rights , democracy and the rule of law in Europe .

[ 3 ] Founded in 1949, it is Europe's oldest intergovernmental organisation, representing 46 member states [ 2 ] from Europe, [ b ] with a population of approximately 675 million as of 2023 [update] ; it operates with an annual ordinary budget of approximately 500 million euros .

[ 4 ] The organisation is distinct from the European Union (EU), although people sometimes confuse the two organisations – partly because the EU has adopted the original European flag , designed for the Council of Europe in 1955, [ 5 ] as well as the European anthem .

[ 6 ] No country has ever joined the EU without first belonging to the Council of Europe.

[ 7 ] The Council of Europe is an official United Nations observer .

[ 8 ] Unlike the EU, the Council of Europe cannot make binding laws; however, the council has produced a number of international treaties, including the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (European Convention on Human Rights, ECHR) of 1953.

Provisions from the convention are incorporated in domestic law in many participating countries.

[ 9 ] The best-known body of the Council of Europe is the European Court of Human Rights , which rules on alleged violations of the ECHR.

[ 10 ] The council's two statutory bodies are the Committee of Ministers , which comprises the foreign ministers of each member state, and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE), which is composed of members of the national parliaments of each member state.

[ 11 ] The Commissioner for Human Rights is an institution within the Council of Europe, mandated to promote awareness of and respect for human rights within the member states. The secretary general presides over the secretariat of the organisation. Other major CoE bodies include the European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines & HealthCare (EDQM) [ 12 ] and the European Audiovisual Observatory .

The headquarters of the Council of Europe, as well as its Court of Human Rights, are situated in Strasbourg , France. The Council uses English and French as its two official languages . The Committee of Ministers, the PACE, and the Congress of the Council of Europe also use German and Italian for some of their work.

[ 13 ] Member states of the Council of Europe . In addition, the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) applies in Kosovo as a result of domestic incorporation of the ECHR.

[ 14 ] History [ edit ] Plaque commemorating the first session of the Council of Europe Assembly at Strasbourg University Founding [ edit ] In a speech in 1929, French Foreign Minister Aristide Briand floated the idea of an organisation which would gather European nations together in a "federal union" to resolve common problems.

[ 15 ] The United Kingdom's wartime Prime Minister Winston Churchill first publicly suggested the creation of a "Council of Europe" in a BBC radio broadcast on 21 March 1943, [ 16 ] while the Second World War was still raging. In his own words, [ 17 ] he tried to "peer through the mists of the future to the end of the war", and think about how to rebuild and maintain peace on a shattered continent. Given that Europe had been at the origin of two world wars, the creation of such a body would be, he suggested, "a stupendous business". He returned to the idea during a well-known speech at the University of Zurich on 19 September 1946, [ 18 ] [ 19 ] throwing the full weight of his considerable post-war prestige behind it.

Additionally, there were also many other statesmen and politicians across the continent, many of them members of the European Movement , who were quietly working towards the creation of the council. Some regarded it as a guarantee that the horrors of war – or the human rights violations of the Nazi regime – could never again be visited on the continent, others came to see it as a "club of democracies", built around a set of common values that could stand as a bulwark against totalitarian states belonging to the Eastern Bloc . Others again saw it as a nascent "United States of Europe", the resonant phrase that Churchill had reached for at Zurich in 1946.

Session of the Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly in the former House of Europe in Strasbourg in 1967.

Willy Brandt , German Minister for Foreign Affairs , is speaking.

The future structure of the Council of Europe was discussed at the Congress of Europe , which brought together several hundred leading politicians, government representatives and members of civil society in The Hague , Netherlands, in 1948.

[ 20 ] Responding to the conclusions of the Congress of Europe, the Consultative Council of the Treaty of Brussels convened a Committee for the Study of European Unity, which met eight times from November 1948 to January 1949 to draw up the blueprint of a new broad-based European organisation.

[ 21 ] There were two competing schools of thought: some favoured a classical international organisation with representatives of governments, while others preferred a political forum with parliamentarians. Both approaches were finally combined through the creation of a Committee of Ministers (in which governments were represented) and a Consultative Assembly (in which parliaments were represented), the two main bodies mentioned in the Statute of the Council of Europe. This dual intergovernmental and inter-parliamentary structure was later copied for the European Communities , NATO and OSCE .

[ 22 ] The Council of Europe was signed into existence on 5 May 1949 by the Treaty of London , the organisation's founding Statute which set out the three basic values that should guide its work: democracy, human rights and the rule of law.

[ 23 ] It was signed in London on that day by ten states: Belgium , Denmark , France , Ireland , Italy , Luxembourg , the Netherlands , Norway , Sweden and the United Kingdom , though Turkey and Greece joined three months later. On 10 August 1949, 100 members of the council's Consultative Assembly, parliamentarians drawn from the twelve member nations, met in Strasbourg for its first plenary session, held over 18 sittings and lasting nearly a month. They debated how to reconcile and reconstruct a continent still reeling from war, yet already facing a new East–West divide, launched the radical concept of a trans-national court to protect the basic human rights of every citizen, and took the first steps in a process that would eventually lead to the creation of an offshoot organisation, the European Union .

[ 24 ] In August 1949, Paul-Henri Spaak resigned as Belgium's foreign minister in order to be elected as the first president of the assembly. Behind the scenes, he too had been quietly working towards the creation of the council, and played a key role in steering its early work. However, in December 1951, after nearly three years in the role, Spaak resigned in disappointment after the Assembly rejected proposals for a "European political authority".

[ 25 ] Convinced that the Council of Europe was never going to be in a position to achieve his long-term goal of a unified Europe, [ 26 ] he soon tried again in a new and more promising format, based this time on economic integration, becoming one of the founders of the European Union .

[ 27 ] Early years [ edit ] There was huge enthusiasm for the Council of Europe in its early years, as its pioneers set about drafting what was to become the European Convention on Human Rights , a charter of individual rights which – it was hoped – no member government could ever again violate. They drew, in part, on the tenets of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , signed only a few months earlier in Paris. But crucially, where the Universal Declaration was essentially aspirational, the European Convention from the beginning featured an enforcement mechanism – an international Court – which was to adjudicate on alleged violations of its articles and to hold governments to account, a dramatic leap forward for international justice. Today, this is the European Court of Human Rights , whose rulings are binding on 46 European nations, the most far-reaching system of international justice anywhere in the world.

One of the council's first acts was to welcome West Germany into its fold on 2 May 1951, [ 28 ] setting a pattern of post-war reconciliation that was to become a hallmark of the council, and beginning a long process of "enlargement" which was to see the organisation grow from its original ten founding member states to the 46 nations that make up the Council of Europe today.

[ 29 ] Iceland had already joined in 1950, followed in 1956 by Austria, Cyprus in 1961, Switzerland in 1963 and Malta in 1965.

Historic speeches at the Council of Europe [ edit ] Winston Churchill 's inaugural speech of the Council of Europe in The Hague In 2018, an archive of all speeches made to the PACE by heads of state or government since the Council of Europe's creation in 1949 appeared online, the fruit of a two-year project entitled "Voices of Europe".

[ 30 ] At the time of its launch, [ 31 ] the archive comprised 263 speeches delivered over a 70-year period by some 216 presidents, prime ministers, monarchs and religious leaders from 45 countries – though it continues to expand, as new speeches are added every few months.

Some very early speeches by individuals considered to be "founding figures" of the European institutions, even if they were not heads of state or government at the time, are also included (such as Sir Winston Churchill or Robert Schuman ). Addresses by eight monarchs appear in the list (such as King Juan Carlos I of Spain , King Albert II of Belgium and Grand Duke Henri of Luxembourg ) as well as the speeches given by religious figures (such as Pope John Paul II , and Pope Francis ) and several leaders from countries in the Middle East and North Africa (such as Shimon Peres , Yasser Arafat , Hosni Mubarak , Léopold Sédar Senghor or King Hussein of Jordan ).

The full text of the speeches is given in both English and French, regardless of the original language used. The archive is searchable by country, by name, and chronologically.

[ 32 ] Aims and achievement [ edit ] Article 1(a) of the Statute states that "The aim of the Council of Europe is to achieve a greater unity between its members for the purpose of safeguarding and realising the ideals and principles which are their common heritage and facilitating their economic and social progress." [ 33 ] Membership is open to all European states who seek harmony, cooperation, good governance and human rights, accepting the principle of the rule of law and are able and willing to guarantee democracy, fundamental human rights and freedoms.

Whereas the member states of the European Union transfer part of their national legislative and executive powers to the European Commission and the European Parliament , Council of Europe member states maintain their sovereignty but commit themselves through conventions/treaties ( international law ) and co-operate on the basis of common values and common political decisions. Those conventions and decisions are developed by the member states working together at the Council of Europe. Both organisations function as concentric circles around the common foundations for European cooperation and harmony, with the Council of Europe being the geographically wider circle. The European Union could be seen as the smaller circle with a much higher level of integration through the transfer of powers from the national to the EU level. "The Council of Europe and the European Union: different roles, shared values." [ 34 ] Council of Europe conventions/treaties are also open for signature to non-member states, thus facilitating equal co-operation with countries outside Europe.

The Council of Europe's most famous achievement is the European Convention on Human Rights , which was adopted in 1950 following a report by the PACE, and followed on from the United Nations ' Universal Declaration of Human Rights ' (UDHR).

[ 35 ] The Convention created the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg. The Court supervises compliance with the European Convention on Human Rights and thus functions as the highest European court. It is to this court that Europeans can bring cases if they believe that a member country has violated their fundamental rights and freedoms.

The various activities and achievements of the Council of Europe can be found in detail on its official website. The Council of Europe works in the following areas: Protection of the rule of law and fostering legal co-operation through some 200 conventions and other treaties, [ 36 ] including such leading instruments as the Budapest Convention on Cybercrime , the Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism , Conventions against Corruption and Organised Crime, [ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] the Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings , and the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine .

[ 36 ] CODEXTER , designed to co-ordinate counter-terrorism measures The European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ) Protection of human rights , notably through: the European Convention on Human Rights the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance the Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings [ 40 ] the Convention for the protection of individuals with regard to automatic processing of personal data the Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse [ 36 ] This has also included work in the sport area advocating for safe sport [ 41 ] and developing safe sport policy self-assessment tools for national sport organisations [ 42 ] [ 43 ] The Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence .

[ 44 ] social rights under the European Social Charter European Charter of Local Self-Government guaranteeing the political, administrative and financial independence of local authorities .

linguistic rights under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages minority rights under the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities Media freedom under Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights and the European Convention on Transfrontier Television Protection of democracy through parliamentary scrutiny and election monitoring by its Parliamentary Assembly as well as assistance in democratic reforms, in particular by the Venice Commission .

Promotion of cultural cooperation and diversity under the Council of Europe's Cultural Convention of 1954 and several conventions on the protection of cultural heritage as well as through its Centre for Modern Languages in Graz , Austria, and its North-South Centre in Lisbon , Portugal.

Promotion of the right to education under Article 2 of the first Protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights and several conventions on the recognition of university studies and diplomas (see also Bologna Process and Lisbon Recognition Convention ).

Promotion of fair sport through the Anti-Doping Convention [ 45 ] Promotion of European youth exchanges and cooperation through European Youth Centres in Strasbourg and Budapest , Hungary.

Promotion of the quality of medicines throughout Europe by the European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines and its European Pharmacopoeia .

Support for intercultural integration through the Intercultural Cities (ICC) programme. This programme offers information and advice for local authorities on the integration of minorities and the prevention of discrimination.

[ 46 ] Institutions [ edit ] Politics of the Council of Europe Executive Secretary General Alain Berset Committee of Ministers President: Ian Borg Legislature Parliamentary Assembly President: Theodoros Roussopoulos European Congress President: Leendert Verbeek Judiciary European Court of Human Rights President: Robert Spano Commissioner for Human Rights Dunja Mijatović European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice European Commission against Racism and Intolerance Law Convention on Human Rights Convention on Cybercrime Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings Oviedo Convention Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse Istanbul Convention Members Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia (country) Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Europe portal Other countries v t e The institutions of the Council of Europe are: The Secretary General , who is elected for a term of five years by the PACE and heads the Secretariat of the Council of Europe. Thorbjørn Jagland, the former Prime Minister of Norway, was elected Secretary General of the Council of Europe on 29 September 2009.

[ 47 ] In June 2014, he became the first Secretary General to be re-elected, commencing his second term in office on 1 October 2014.

[ 48 ] The Committee of Ministers , comprising the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of all 46 member states who are represented by their Permanent Representatives and Ambassadors accredited to the Council of Europe.

[ 49 ] Committee of Ministers' presidencies are held in alphabetical order for six months following the English alphabet: Turkey 11/2010-05/2011, Ukraine 05/2011-11/2011, the United Kingdom 11/2011-05/2012, Albania 05/2012-11/2012, Andorra 11/2012-05/2013, Armenia 05/2013-11/2013, Austria 11/2013-05/2014, and so on.

[ 50 ] Council's Parliamentary Assembly hemicycle The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE), which comprises national parliamentarians from all member states.

[ 51 ] Adopting resolutions and recommendations to governments, the Assembly holds a dialogue with its governmental counterpart, the Committee of Ministers , and is often regarded as the "motor" of the organisation. The national parliamentary delegations to the Assembly must reflect the political spectrum of their national parliament, i.e. comprise government and opposition parties. The Assembly appoints members as rapporteurs with the mandate to prepare parliamentary reports on specific subjects. The British MP Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe was rapporteur for the drafting of the European Convention on Human Rights .

[ 52 ] Dick Marty 's reports on secret CIA detentions and rendition flights in Europe became quite famous in 2006 and 2007. Other Assembly reports were instrumental in, for example, the abolition of the death penalty in Europe, highlighting the political and human rights situation in Chechnya , identifying who was responsible for disappeared persons in Belarus , chronicling threats to freedom of expression in the media and many other subjects.

[ 53 ] The Congress of Local and Regional Authorities , which was created in 1994 and comprises political representatives from local and regional authorities in all member states. The most influential instruments of the Council of Europe in this field are the European Charter of Local Self-Government of 1985 and the European Outline Convention on Transfrontier Co-operation between Territorial Communities or Authorities of 1980.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] The European Court of Human Rights , created under the European Convention on Human Rights of 1950, is composed of a judge from each member state elected for a single, non-renewable term of nine years by the PACE and is headed by the elected president of the court.

[ 56 ] The current president of the court is Guido Raimondi from Italy. Under the recent Protocol No. 14 to the European Convention on Human Rights , the Court's case processing was reformed and streamlined. Ratification of Protocol No. 14 was delayed by Russia for a number of years, but won support to be passed in January 2010.

[ 57 ] The Commissioner for Human Rights is elected by the PACE for a non-renewable term of six years since the creation of this position in 1999. Since April 2024, this position has been held by Michael O'Flaherty from Ireland.

[ 58 ] The Conference of INGOs.

[ 59 ] NGOs can participate in the INGOs Conference of the Council of Europe . Since the [Resolution (2003)8] adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 19 November 2003, they are given a "participatory status".

[ 60 ] The Joint Council on Youth of the Council of Europe.

[ 61 ] The European Steering Committee (CDEJ) on Youth and the Advisory Council on Youth (CCJ) of the Council of Europe form together the Joint Council on Youth (CMJ). The CDEJ brings together representatives of ministries or bodies responsible for youth matters from the 50 States Parties to the European Cultural Convention. The CDEJ fosters cooperation between governments in the youth sector and provides a framework for comparing national youth policies, exchanging best practices and drafting standard-setting texts.

[ 62 ] The Advisory Council on Youth comprises 30 representatives of non-governmental youth organisations and networks. It provides opinions and input from youth NGOs on all youth sector activities and ensures that young people are involved in the council's other activities.

[ 63 ] Information Offices of the Council of Europe in many member states.

European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines Partial Agreements [ edit ] The CoE system also includes a number of semi-autonomous structures known as " Partial Agreements ", some of which are also open to non-member states: The Council of Europe Development Bank in Paris The European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines with its European Pharmacopoeia The European Audiovisual Observatory The European Support Fund Eurimages for the co-production and distribution of films.

[ 64 ] The Enlarged Partial Agreement on Cultural Routes, which awards the certification " Cultural Route of the Council of Europe " to transnational networks promoting European heritage and intercultural dialogue (Luxembourg) The Pompidou Group – Cooperation Group to Combat Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking in Drugs.

[ 65 ] The European Commission for Democracy through Law, better known as the Venice Commission The Group of States Against Corruption (GRECO) The European and Mediterranean Major Hazards Agreement (EUR-OPA) which is a platform for cooperation between European and Southern Mediterranean countries in the field of major natural and technological disasters.

[ 66 ] The Enlarged Partial Agreement on Sport, which is open to accession by states and sports associations.

[ 67 ] The North-South Centre of the Council of Europe in Lisbon (Portugal) The European Centre for Modern Languages is in Graz (Austria) The Register of Damage for Ukraine , a register for Ukrainians to seek compensation for damages from the Russian invasion of Ukraine .

Summits [ edit ] Occasionally the Council of Europe organises summits of the heads of state and government of its member states. Four summits have been held to date with the fourth concluding on 17 May 2023.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] Overview of Council of Europe summits Date Host country Host city 8–9 October 1993 Austria Vienna 10–11 October 1997 France Strasbourg 16–17 May 2005 Poland Warsaw 16–17 May 2023 Iceland Reykjavík Headquarters and buildings [ edit ] See also: European Institutions in Strasbourg Aerial shot of the Palace of Europe in Strasbourg Council of Europe's Agora building The seat of the Council of Europe is in Strasbourg , France. First meetings were held in Strasbourg's University Palace in 1949, [ 71 ] but the Council of Europe soon moved into its own buildings. The Council of Europe's eight main buildings are situated in the Quartier européen , an area in the northeast of Strasbourg spread over the three districts of Le Wacken, La Robertsau and Quartier de l'Orangerie, where are also located the four buildings of the seat of the European Parliament in Strasbourg , the Arte headquarters and the seat of the International Institute of Human Rights .

[ 72 ] Building in the area started in 1949 with the predecessor of the Palais de l'Europe , the House of Europe (demolished in 1977), and came to a provisional end in 2007 with the opening of the New General Office Building, later named "Agora", in 2008.

[ 73 ] The Palais de l'Europe ( Palace of Europe ) and the Art Nouveau Villa Schutzenberger (seat of the European Audiovisual Observatory ) are in the Orangerie district, and the European Court of Human Rights , the EDQM and the Agora Building are in the Robertsau district. The Agora building has been voted "best international business centre real estate project of 2007" on 13 March 2008, at the MIPIM 2008.

[ 74 ] The European Youth Centre is located in the Wacken district.

Besides its headquarters in Strasbourg, the Council of Europe is also present in other cities and countries. The Council of Europe Development Bank has its seat in Paris, the North-South Centre of the Council of Europe is established in Lisbon , Portugal, and the Centre for Modern Languages is in Graz , Austria. There are European Youth Centres in Budapest , Hungary, and in Strasbourg. The European Wergeland Centre, a new Resource Centre on education for intercultural dialogue, human rights and democratic citizenship, operated in cooperation with the Norwegian Government, opened in Oslo , Norway, in February 2009.

[ 75 ] The Council of Europe has external offices all over the European continent and beyond. There are four 'Programme Offices', namely in Ankara, Podgorica, Skopje, and Venice. There are also 'Council of Europe Offices' in Baku, Belgrade, Chisinau, Kyiv, Paris, Pristina, Sarajevo, Tbilisi, Tirana, and Yerevan . Bucharest has a Council of Europe Office on Cybercrime. There are also Council of Europe Offices in non-European capital cities like Rabat and Tunis.

[ 76 ] Additionally, there are 4 "Council of Europe Liaison Offices", this includes: Council of Europe Liaison Office in Brussels: The office is in charge of liaison with the European Union Council of Europe Office in Geneva:  Permanent Delegation of the Council of Europe to the United Nations Office and other international organisations in Geneva Council of Europe Office in Vienna: The office is in charge of liaison with the OSCE , United Nations Office, and other international organisations in Vienna Council of Europe Office in Warsaw: The office is in charge of liaison with other international organisations and institutions in Warsaw, in particular, the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) [ 76 ] Member states, observers, partners [ edit ] Main article: Member states of the Council of Europe Eligibility [ edit ] There are two main criteria for membership: geographic (Article 4 of the Council of Europe Statute specifies that membership is open to any "European" State) and political (Article 3 of the Statute states applying for membership must accept democratic values—"Every member of the Council of Europe must accept the principles of the rule of law and the enjoyment by all persons within its jurisdiction of human rights and fundamental freedoms, and collaborate sincerely and effectively in the realisation of the aim of the Council as specified in Chapter I").

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] Since "Europe" is not defined in international law, the definition of "Europe" has been a question that has recurred during the CoE's history.

Turkey was admitted in 1950, although it is a transcontinental state that lies mostly in Asia, with a smaller portion in Europe.

[ 78 ] In 1994, the PACE adopted Recommendation 1247, which said that admission to the CoE should be "in principle open only to states whose national territory lies wholly or partly in Europe"; later, however, the Assembly extended eligibility to apply and be admitted to Armenia , Azerbaijan , and Georgia .

[ 78 ] Member states and observers [ edit ] Postage stamp marks Albania as a member of the Council of Europe 1995 The Council of Europe was founded on 5 May 1949 by Belgium , Denmark , France , Ireland , Italy , Luxembourg , Netherlands , Norway , Sweden and the United Kingdom .

[ 79 ] Greece and Turkey joined three months later.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] Iceland , [ 84 ] [ 85 ] West Germany and Saar Protectorate joined the Council of Europe as associate members in 1950. West Germany became a full member in 1951, and the Saar withdrew its application after it joined West Germany following the 1955 Saar Statute referendum .

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] Joining later were Austria (1956), Cyprus (1961), Switzerland (1963), Malta (1965), and Portugal (1976).

[ 78 ] Spain joined in 1977, two years after the death of its dictator Francisco Franco and the Spanish transition to democracy .

[ 88 ] Next to join were Liechtenstein (1978), San Marino (1988) and Finland (1989).

[ 78 ] After the fall of Communism with the Revolutions of 1989 and the collapse of the Soviet Union , the following countries in Europe joined: Hungary (1990), Poland (1991), Bulgaria (1992), Estonia (1993), Lithuania (1993), Slovenia (1993), the Czech Republic (1993), Slovakia (1993), Romania (1993), Andorra (1994), Latvia (1995), Moldova (1995), Albania (1995), Ukraine (1995), the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (1995) (later renamed North Macedonia ), Russia (1996, expelled 2022), Croatia (1996), Georgia (1999), Armenia (2001), Azerbaijan (2001), Bosnia and Herzegovina (2002), Serbia and Montenegro (later Serbia ) (2003), Monaco (2004) and Montenegro (2007).

[ 78 ] After Russia being expelled in 2022, the council has 46 member states.

[ 2 ] Although most Council members are predominantly Christian in heritage, there are four Muslim-majority member states: Bosnia and Herzegovina, [ 89 ] Turkey, Albania, and Azerbaijan.

[ 78 ] The CoE has granted some countries a status that allows them to participate in CoE activities without being full members. There are three types of nonmember status: associate member , special guest and observer .

[ 78 ] Associate member status was created for former Axis states which had not yet regained their sovereignty since their defeat in the Second World War; as such, it is no longer used, although there have been proposals to reactivate it to permit enhanced participation by the current observer states.

[ 78 ] "Special guest" status was used as a transitional status for post-Soviet countries that wished to join the council after the fall of the Berlin Wall and is no longer commonly used.

[ 78 ] "Observer" status is for non-European nations who accept democracy, rule of law, and human rights, and wish to participate in Council initiatives.

[ 78 ] The United States became an observer state in 1995.

[ 90 ] Currently, Canada , the Holy See , Japan , Mexico , and the United States are observer states, while Israel is an observer to the PACE.

[ 2 ] Additionally Kosovo is a member of the Council of Europe Development Bank and a member of the Council of Europe's Venice Commission .

[ 91 ] The Assembly of Kosovo was invited to take part in the work of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe and its committees as an observer in 2016.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Two representatives of local government in Kosovo participate in the work of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities as observers.

[ 94 ] Withdrawal, suspension, and expulsion [ edit ] Further information: Withdrawal from the Council of Europe The Statute of the Council of Europe provides for the voluntary suspension, involuntary suspension, and exclusion of members.

[ 95 ] Article 8 of the Statute provides that any member who has "seriously violated" Article 3 may be suspended from its rights of representation, and that the Committee of Ministers may request that such a member withdraws from the Council under Article 7. (The Statute does not define the "serious violation" phrase.

[ 95 ] Under Article 8 of the Statute, if a member state fails to withdraw upon request, the Committee may terminate its membership, in consultation with the PACE.

[ 95 ] The Council suspended Greece in 1967, after a military coup d'état , and the Greek junta withdrew from the CoE.

[ 95 ] Greece was readmitted to the council in 1974.

[ 96 ] Suspension and exclusion of Russia [ edit ] Main article: Russia in the Council of Europe Russia became a member of the Council of Europe in 1996. In 2014, after Russia annexed Crimea from Ukraine and supported separatists in eastern Ukraine , the Council stripped Russia of its voting rights in the PACE.

[ 97 ] In response, Russia began to boycott the Assembly in 2016, and beginning from 2017 ceased paying its annual membership dues of 32.6 million euros (US$37.1 million) to the Council [ 97 ] [ 98 ] placing the institution under financial strain.

[ 99 ] Russia stated that its suspension by the council was unfair, and demanded the restoration of its voting rights.

[ 100 ] Russia had threatened to withdraw from the Council unless its voting rights were restored in time for the election of a new secretary general.

[ 97 ] European Council secretary-general Thorbjørn Jagland organised a special committee to find a compromise with Russia in early 2018, a move that was criticised by some as giving in to alleged Russian pressure by Council members and academic observers, especially if voting sanctions were lifted.

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] In June 2019, an approximately two-thirds majority of the Council voted (on a 118–62 vote, with 10 abstentions) to restore Russia's voting rights in the council.

[ 97 ] [ 102 ] Opponents of lifting the suspension included Ukraine and other post-Soviet countries , such as the Baltic states , who argued that readmission amounted to normalising Russia's malign activity.

[ 97 ] Supporters of restoring Russia's council rights included France and Germany, [ 103 ] which argued that a Russian withdrawal from the council would be harmful because it would deprive Russian citizens of their ability to initiate cases in the European Court of Human Rights .

[ 97 ] On 3 March 2022, after Russia launched a full-scale military invasion of Ukraine , the council suspended Russia for violations of the council's statute and the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). The suspension blocked Russia from participation in the council's ministerial council, the PACE, and the Council of the Baltic Sea States , but still left Russia obligated to follow the ECHR.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] On 15 March 2022, hours before the vote to expel the country, Russia initiated a voluntary withdrawal procedure from the council. The Russian delegation planned to deliver its formal withdrawal on 31 December 2022, and announced its intent to denounce the ECHR. However, on the same day, the council's Committee of Ministers decided Russia's membership in the council would be terminated immediately, and determined that Russia had been excluded from the Council instead under its exclusion mechanism rather than the withdrawal mechanism.

[ 106 ] After being excluded from the Council of Europe, Russia's former president and prime minister Dmitry Medvedev endorsed restoring the death penalty in Russia .

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] Co-operation [ edit ] Conventions: European Treaty Series [ edit ] Main article: List of Council of Europe treaties The Council of Europe works mainly through international treaties, usually called conventions in its system. By drafting conventions or international treaties, common legal standards are set for its member states. The conventions are collected in the European Treaty Series .

Non-member states [ edit ] Several conventions have also been opened for signature to non-member states. Important examples are the Budapest Convention on Cybercrime (signed for example, by Canada, Japan, South Africa and the United States), the Lisbon Recognition Convention on the recognition of study periods and degrees (signed for example, by Australia, Belarus, Canada, the Holy See , Israel, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, New Zealand and the United States), the Anti- doping Convention (signed, for example, by Australia, Belarus, Canada and Tunisia) and the Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats (signed for example, by Burkina Faso, Morocco, Tunisia and Senegal as well as the European Community ). Non-member states also participate in several partial agreements, such as the Venice Commission , the Group of States Against Corruption (GRECO), the European Pharmacopoeia Commission and the North-South Centre .

[ 109 ] Invitations to sign and ratify relevant conventions of the Council of Europe on a case-by-case basis are sent to three groups of non-member entities: [ 110 ] Non-European states: Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Bahamas, Bolivia, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritius, Morocco, New Zealand, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Senegal, South Africa, South Korea, Syria, Tajikistan, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uruguay, Venezuela and the observers Canada, Israel, Japan, Mexico, United States.

European states: Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Russia and the observer Holy See.

The European Community and later the European Union after its legal personality was established by the ratification of the EU's Lisbon Treaty .

European Union [ edit ] Main article: Council of Europe–European Union relations An Euler diagram showing the relationships between various multinational European organisations and agreements v t e The Council of Europe is not to be confused with the Council of the European Union (the "Council of Ministers") or the European Council , which belong to the European Union , an entirely separate body from the Council of Europe, [ 111 ] although they have shared the same European flag and anthem since the 1980s since they both work for European integration .

[ 112 ] Cooperation between the European Union and the Council of Europe was reinforced in the mid-2000s, notably on culture and education as well as on the international enforcement of justice and Human Rights.

[ 113 ] The European Union is expected to accede to the European Convention on Human Rights (the convention). There are also concerns about consistency in case law – the European Court of Justice (the EU's court in Luxembourg ) is treating the convention as part of the legal system of all EU member states in order to prevent conflict between its judgements and those of the European Court of Human Rights (the court in Strasbourg interpreting the convention). Protocol No. 14 of the convention is designed to allow the EU to accede to it and the EU Treaty of Lisbon contains a protocol binding the EU to join. The EU would thus be subject to its human rights law and external monitoring as its member states currently are.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] Schools of Political Studies [ edit ] The Council of Europe Schools of Political Studies were established to train future generations of political, economic, social and cultural leaders in countries in transition. With the participation of national and international experts, they run annual series of seminars and conferences on topics such as European integration, democracy, human rights, the rule of law and globalisation. The first School of Political Studies was created in Moscow in 1992. By 2020, 20 other schools had been set up along the same lines, forming an association; [ 116 ] a network covering the whole of Eastern and South-Eastern Europe and the Caucasus, as well as some countries in the Southern Mediterranean region. The schools are part of the Education Department, which is part of the Directorate of Democratic Participation within the Directorate General of Democracy ("DGII") of the Council of Europe.

[ 117 ] United Nations [ edit ] Cooperation between the CoE and the UN started with the agreement signed by the Secretariats of these institutions on 15 December 1951. On 17 October 1989, the General Assembly of the United Nations approved a resolution on granting observer status to the Council of Europe which was proposed by several member states of the CoE.

[ 118 ] Currently, the Council of Europe holds observer status with the United Nations and is regularly represented in the UN General Assembly . It has organised the regional UN conferences against racism and on women. It co-operates with the United Nations at many levels, in particular in the areas of human rights, minorities, migration and counter-terrorism. In November 2016, the UN General Assembly adopted by consensus Resolution (A/Res/71/17) on Cooperation between the United Nations and the Council of Europe whereby it acknowledged the contribution of the Council of Europe to the protection and strengthening of human rights and fundamental freedoms, democracy and the rule of law, welcomed the ongoing co-operation in a variety of fields.

Non-governmental organisations [ edit ] Non-governmental organisations (NGOs) can participate in the INGOs Conference of the Council of Europe and become observers to inter-governmental committees of experts. The Council of Europe drafted the European Convention on the Recognition of the Legal Personality of International Non-Governmental Organisations in 1986, which sets the legal basis for the existence and work of NGOs in Europe. Article 11 of the European Convention on Human Rights protects the right to freedom of association, which is also a fundamental norm for NGOs. The rules for consultative status for INGOs appended to the resolution (93)38 "On relation between the Council of Europe and non-governmental organisations ", adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 18 October 1993 at the 500th meeting of the Ministers' Deputies. On 19 November 2003, the Committee of Ministers changed the consultative status into a participatory status, "considering that it is indispensable that the rules governing the relations between the Council of Europe and NGOs evolve to reflect the active participation of international non-governmental organisations (INGOs) in the Organisation's policy and work programme".

[ 119 ] Others [ edit ] On 30 May 2018, the Council of Europe signed a memorandum of understanding with the European football confederation UEFA .

[ 120 ] The Council of Europe also signed an agreement with FIFA in which the two agreed to strengthen future cooperation in areas of common interests. The deal which included cooperation between member states in the sport of football and safety and security at football matches was finalised in October 2018.

[ 121 ] Role of CSOs within the Council of Europe [ edit ] The Council of Europe is one of the leading international organisations dedicated to the promotion of human rights, democracy, and the rule of law across the European continent. Civil society organisations (CSOs) are integral to the Council's work, functioning as partners and expert contributors in shaping policies and supporting the protection of fundamental rights.

The Council of Europe actively encourages civil society engagement, particularly through the participation of international non-governmental organisations (INGOs) in its various platforms and bodies.

CSOs contribute to a broad range of Council initiatives related to human rights protection, democratic consolidation, and legal reforms. Their expertise and field-level knowledge enrich the policy-making process and help ensure that rights-based approaches are grounded in practical realities.

CSOs may take part in conferences, sessions, and working groups organised by the Council. They are often invited to submit reports, policy proposals, and findings from their own research. The Council places particular emphasis on involving CSOs in thematic dialogues that advance democratic institutions and safeguard civil liberties.

[ 122 ] Participatory status for international NGOs [ edit ] International CSOs (INGOs) may apply for participatory status , a designation that allows them to engage more actively in the Council’s policy work. With this status, INGOs can present professional positions, contribute to working documents, and operate as partners in decision-making processes.

To qualify for participatory status, organisations must meet specific criteria established by the Council, including demonstrable international scope and proven experience in areas such as human rights or democratic governance. Once granted, participatory status enables CSOs to attend various Council meetings and express their views on relevant issues.

Further information on the criteria and application procedure is available at: https://www.coe.int/en/web/ingo/participatory-status The Conference of INGOs [ edit ] CSOs may also engage through the Conference of International Non-Governmental organisations ( INGOs ) of the Council of Europe, which serves as the primary platform for civil society participation in CoE initiatives. The Conference allows organisations to voice their positions, build coalitions, and influence decision-making processes.

Through thematic discussions, the Conference addresses critical issues such as human rights, social justice, democratic governance, and institutional transparency. It provides an avenue for INGOs to collaborate and contribute meaningfully to the Council’s agenda.

For participation guidelines and detailed information, see: https://www.coe.int/en/web/ingo Characteristics [ edit ] Privileges and immunities [ edit ] The General Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Council of Europe grants the organisation certain privileges and immunities.

[ 123 ] The working conditions of staff are governed by the council's staff regulations, which are public.

[ 124 ] Salaries and emoluments paid by the Council of Europe to its officials are tax-exempt on the basis of Article 18 of the General Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Council of Europe.

[ 123 ] Symbol and anthem [ edit ] Main articles: Symbols of Europe and Flag of Europe The Council of Europe created, and has since 1955 used as its official symbol, the European Flag with 12 golden stars arranged in a circle on a blue background.

Its musical anthem since 1972, the " European anthem ", is based on the " Ode to Joy " theme from Ludwig van Beethoven 's ninth symphony .

On 5 May 1964, the 15th anniversary of its founding, the Council of Europe established 5 May as Europe Day .

[ 125 ] The wide private and public use of the European Flag is encouraged to symbolise a European dimension. To avoid confusion with the European Union which subsequently adopted the same flag in the 1980s, as well as other European institutions, the Council of Europe often uses a modified version with a lower-case "e" surrounding the stars which are referred to as the "Council of Europe Logo".

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] Criticism and controversies [ edit ] Both Human Rights Watch and the European Stability Initiative have called on the Council of Europe to undertake concrete actions to show that it is willing and able to return to its "original mission to protect and ensure human rights", [ 127 ] despite launching political and economic activities that could generate redundancies with other international organisations (including the European Union and OCSE ).

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] [ 130 ] In October 2022, a new and different Pan-European meeting of 44 states was held, as the "inaugural summit of the European Political Community ", a new forum largely organised by French President Emmanuel Macron . The Council of Europe, sidelined, reportedly was "perplexed" with this development, with a spokesperson stating "In the field of human rights, democracy and the rule of law, such a pan-European community already exists: it is the Council of Europe." [ 131 ] A feature of the new forum is that Russia and Belarus are deliberately excluded, [ 131 ] which was not seen as explaining the need for a different entity, given that at the time, Russia was no longer a member of the Council of Europe and Belarus only participated partially, as a non-member.

[ citation needed ] "Caviar diplomacy" scandal [ edit ] See also: Azerbaijani laundromat After Azerbaijan joined the CoE in 2001, both the Council and its Parliamentary Assembly were criticised for having a weak response to election rigging and human rights violations in Azerbaijan .

[ 132 ] The Human Rights Watch criticised the Council of Europe in 2014 for allowing Azerbaijan to assume the six-month rotating chairmanship of the council's Committee of Ministers, writing that the Azeri government's repression of human rights defenders, dissidents, and journalists "shows sheer contempt for its commitments to the Council of Europe".

[ 133 ] An internal inquiry was set up in 2017 amid allegations of bribery by Azerbaijan government officials and criticism of " caviar diplomacy " at the council.

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] A 219-page report was issued in 2018 after a ten-month investigation.

[ 132 ] It concluded that several members of the Parliamentary Assembly broke CoE ethical rules and were "strongly suspected" of corruption; it strongly criticised former Parliamentary Assembly president Pedro Agramunt and suggested that he had engaged in "corruptive activities" before his resignation under pressure in 2017.

[ 132 ] The inquiry also named Italian member Luca Volontè as a suspect in "activities of a corruptive nature".

[ 132 ] Volontè was investigated by Italian police and accused by Italian prosecutors in 2017 of receiving over 2.39 million euros in bribes in exchange for working for Azerbaijan in the parliamentary assembly, and that in 2013 he played a key role in orchestrating the defeat of a highly critical report on the abuse of political prisoners in Azerbaijan.

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] [ 136 ] In 2021, Volontè was convicted of accepting bribes from Azerbaijani officials to water down critiques of the nation's human rights record, and he was sentenced by a court in Milan to four years in prison.

[ 137 ] See also [ edit ] Europe portal Politics portal CAHDI Council of Europe–European Union relations Common European Framework of Reference for Languages Conference of Specialised Ministers Council of Europe Archives The Europe Prize European Anti-fraud Office European Political Community Film Award of the Council of Europe Moneyval International organisations in Europe , and co-ordinated organisations List of Council of Europe treaties List of linguistic rights in European constitutions North–South Centre of the Council of Europe Notes [ edit ] Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b c Transcontinental country straddling both Europe and Asia.

^ Depending on varying geographic definitions, some member states or portions thereof may be considered transcontinental or Eurasian ( Armenia , Azerbaijan , [ a ] Cyprus , Georgia [ a ] and Turkey [ a ] ), or belonging to the Americas ( Dutch Caribbean , French Guiana , and Greenland ), Oceania ( French Polynesia ), and Africa ( Canary Islands , Ceuta , Mayotte , Melilla , and Réunion ) References [ edit ] ^ "Did you know?" . Retrieved 1 November 2022 .

English and French are the official languages of the Council of Europe.

^ a b c d e 46 "Member States" , Council of Europe.

^ "Profile: The Council of Europe" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 27 October 2022.

^ Council of Europe, Budget , Retrieved: 21 April 2016 ^ "The European flag – The Council of Europe in brief" .

The Council of Europe .

Archived from the original on 20 December 2022 . Retrieved 30 December 2022 .

^ "The European anthem – The Council of Europe in brief" .

The Council of Europe .

Archived from the original on 4 November 2022 . Retrieved 30 December 2022 .

^ "Do not get confused – The Council of Europe in brief" .

The Council of Europe . Retrieved 30 December 2022 .

^ "Intergovernmental Organizations" .

United Nations . Archived from the original on 2 December 2018.

^ Spano, Robert (19 May 2018).

"The Future of the European Court of Human Rights—Subsidiarity, Process-Based Review and the Rule of Law" .

Human Rights Law Review .

18 (3). Oxford University Press: 473– 494.

doi : 10.1093/hrlr/ngy015 .

^ "The European Court of Human Rights – Council of Europe Office in Georgia – publi.coe.int" .

Council of Europe Office in Georgia . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ "Structure – The Council of Europe in brief – publi.coe.int" .

The Council of Europe in brief . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ "European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines and Healthcare – European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines & HealthCare – EDQM" .

European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines & HealthCare . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ "Headquarters and offices – The Council of Europe in brief – publi.coe.int" .

The Council of Europe in brief . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ Istrefi, Kushtrim (2018).

"Kosovo's Quest for Council of Europe Membership" .

Review of Central and East European Law .

43 (3): 255– 273.

doi : 10.1163/15730352-04303002 .

ISSN 1573-0352 .

^ "Lumni | Enseignement – Discours d'Aristide Briand devant la SDN du 7 septembre 1929" [Lumni | Teaching – Speech by Aristide Briand to the SDN on September 7, 1929]. Fresques.ina.fr . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ Pixelstorm (21 March 1943).

"National Address" .

International Churchill Society .

^ "Post-War Councils on World Problems: A FOUR YEAR PLAN FOR ENGLAND by WINSTON CHURCHILL, Prime Minister of Great Britain, broadcast from London over BBC, March 21, 1943" .

^ "Winston Churchill and the Council of Europe" .

Council of Europe: Archiving and Documentary Resources . Council of Europe. 6 April 2009 . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

, including audio extracts ^ "European Navigator (ENA)" . Archived from the original on 7 June 2011 . Retrieved 4 April 2011 .

Including full transcript ^ "History – Language policy – publi.coe.int" .

Language policy . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ Robertson, A. H. (1954).

"The Council of Europe, 1949–1953: II" .

The International and Comparative Law Quarterly .

3 (3): 404– 420.

doi : 10.1093/iclqaj/3.3.404 .

ISSN 0020-5893 .

JSTOR 755483 .

^ NATO.

"Relations with the OSCE" .

NATO . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ "About the Council of Europe" .

training.itcilo.org . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ "Parliamentary Assembly – No Hate Speech Youth Campaign – publi.coe.int" .

No Hate Speech Youth Campaign . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ Spaak (11 December 1951).

"Speeches made to the Parliamentary Assembly (1949–2018)" . Assembly.coe.int . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ Sandro Guerrieri, "From the Hague Congress to the Council of Europe: hopes, achievements and disappointments in the parliamentary way to European integration (1948–51)." Parliaments, Estates and Representation 34#2 (2014): 216–227.

^ "European Commission: Paul–Henri Spaak: a European visionary and talented persuader" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 September 2016.

^ "Accession of Germany to the Council of Europe (Strasbourg, 2 May 1951) – CVCE Website" . Cvce.eu. 2 May 1951 . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ The Council of Europe in brief (5 May 1949).

"Our member States" . Coe.int . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ "Speeches made to the Parliamentary Assembly (by Country)" . Assembly.coe.int . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ "All speeches by heads of state and government to PACE since 1949 online" . Assembly.coe.int . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ "Discours prononcés devant l'Assemblée parlementaire (1949–2018) – par pays" [Speeches delivered to the Parliamentary Assembly (1949–2018) – by country]. Assembly.coe.int . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ "Statute of the Council of Europe" .

conventions.coe.int . Archived from the original on 7 January 2019 . Retrieved 19 December 2014 .

^ "The Council of Europe and the European Union" .

The Council of Europe .

Archived from the original on 19 January 2024.

^ "Universal Declaration of Human Rights" .

United Nations .

Archived from the original on 30 December 2020.

^ a b c "Full list" .

The Council of Europe Treaty Office . Retrieved 22 June 2022 .

^ "Full list (Details of Treaty No.173)" .

The Council of Europe Treaty Office . Retrieved 22 June 2022 .

^ "Details of Treaty No.198: Council of Europe Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime and on the Financing of Terrorism" .

Treaty Office . Council of Europe.

Archived from the original on 27 December 2020.

^ "Details of Treaty No.174: Civil Law Convention on Corruption" .

Treaty Office . Council of Europe. Archived from the original on 5 January 2021.

^ "Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings and its Explanatory Report" (PDF) . Council of Europe. 16 May 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 May 2008.

^ Moustakas, Louis; and Petry, Karen (3 July 2023).

"Safeguarding in sport and policy advocacy: the role of the council of Europe" .

International Journal of Sport Policy and Politics .

15 (3): 457– 472.

doi : 10.1080/19406940.2023.2201300 .

ISSN 1940-6940 .

^ Moustakas, Louis; Kalina, Lisa; Petry, Karen (1 March 2023).

"The Development and Validation of a Child Safeguarding in Sport Self-assessment Tool for the Council of Europe" .

International Journal on Child Maltreatment: Research, Policy and Practice .

6 (1): 109– 118.

doi : 10.1007/s42448-022-00131-y .

ISSN 2524-5244 .

^ "Self-assessment tool" .

Council of Europe .

^ "Details of Treaty No.210: Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence" .

Treaty Office . Council of Europe.

^ "Details of Treaty No.135: Anti-Doping Convention" .

Treaty Office . Council of Europe. Archived from the original on 3 April 2015 . Retrieved 21 May 2008 .

^ "2019 ICC Brochure" .

Council of Europe . 2019 . Retrieved 25 March 2021 .

^ regjeringen.no (25 June 2014).

"Thorbjørn Jagland" .

Government.no . Retrieved 19 September 2018 .

^ Gardner, Andrew (25 June 2014).

"Jagland re-elected head of Council of Europe" .

POLITICO . Retrieved 19 September 2018 .

^ Lobey, Sophie (April 2005).

"History, Role, and Activities of the Council of Europe: Facts, Figures and Information Sources" .

GlobaLex . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ "Chairmanship" .

Committee of Ministers .

Archived from the original on 13 December 2017 . Retrieved 13 December 2017 .

^ "How it works" .

PACE . Archived from the original on 19 September 2018 . Retrieved 19 September 2018 .

^ "The establishment of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights – The first organisations and cooperative ventures in post-war Europe" .

CVCE . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ "Alleged secret detentions and unlawful inter-state transfers of detainees involving Council of Europe member states" .

PACE . 12 June 2006 . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ "A European Assembly of local and regional elected representatives" .

Congress of Local and Regional Authorities . Council of Europe . Retrieved 13 December 2017 .

^ "Origins and history" .

Congress of Local and Regional Authorities . Council of Europe . Retrieved 13 December 2017 .

^ "European Court of Human Rights" .

International Justice Resource Center . 10 July 2014 . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ "Full list (Chart of signatures and ratifications of Treaty 194)" .

Treaty Office . Retrieved 19 September 2018 .

^ "Commissioner for Human Rights – Biography" .

Council of Europe . Strasbourg, France . Retrieved 6 April 2019 .

^ "Home" . Coe.int . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ "A word from the President on the occasion of the 40th anniversary of the Conference of INGOs of the Council of Europe" .

rm.coe.int . Archived from the original on 13 December 2017.

^ "About us" . Coe.int. 14 February 2011 . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ "European Steering Committee for Youth – Youth – publi.coe.int" .

Youth . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ "About us – Youth – publi.coe.int" .

Youth . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ s.r.o, Appio Digital.

"Eurimages – co-production, distribution and exhibition support | DOKweb" .

dokweb.net . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ "Home – Pompidou Group – publi.coe.int" .

Pompidou Group . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ "European and Mediterranean Major Hazards Agreement – European and Mediterranean Major Hazards Agreement – publi.coe.int" .

European and Mediterranean Major Hazards Agreement . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ "Enlarged Partial Agreement on Sport" . Council of Europe.

^ "Council of Europe summit in Iceland seeks to hold Russia to account for waging war in Ukraine" .

ABC News . 16 May 2023 . Retrieved 17 May 2023 .

^ "Summits of Heads of State and Government of the Council of Europe – Committee of Ministers – www.coe.int" .

^ "Fourth Council of Europe summit – Portal – www.coe.int" .

^ Robertson, A. H. (1954).

"The Council of Europe, 1949–1953: I" .

The International and Comparative Law Quarterly .

3 (2): 235– 255.

doi : 10.1093/iclqaj/3.2.235 .

ISSN 0020-5893 .

JSTOR 755535 .

^ McManus, David (17 September 2008).

"New General Building of Council of Europe" .

e-architect . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ "Inauguration of the Agora Building" (PDF) (Press release) (in French). Council of Europe. 30 January 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 May 2008.

^ "2008 List of MIPIM winners" .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "European Wergeland Centre" . Archived from the original on 18 April 2009.

^ a b "List of external offices" .

Office of the Directorate General of Programmes . Retrieved 21 October 2022 .

^ "Statute of the Council of Europe, London, 5.V.1949" . Council of Europe.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Benoît-Rohmer, Florence ; Klebes, Heinrich (June 2005).

"Council of Europe law: Towards a pan-European legal area" (PDF) . Council of Europe.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2022.

^ "Statute of the Council of Europe is signed in London" . Council of Europe . Retrieved 23 June 2019 .

On 5 May 1949, at St James's Palace, London, the Foreign Ministers of Belgium, Denmark, France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom signed the Treaty establishing the Council of Europe.

^ "Turkey joins" . Council of Europe . Retrieved 23 June 2019 .

^ "Turkey – Member state" . Council of Europe . Retrieved 23 June 2019 .

^ "Turkey" . Council of Europe . Retrieved 23 June 2019 .

and Greece ^ "Greece – Member state" . Council of Europe . Retrieved 23 June 2019 .

Greece and Turkey became the 11th and 12th member State of the Council of Europe on 9 August 1949.

^ "Iceland joins" . Council of Europe . Retrieved 23 June 2019 .

.

^ "Iceland – Member state" . Council of Europe . Retrieved 23 June 2019 .

Iceland became the 13th member State of the Council of Europe on 7 March 1950.

^ "13 July 1950: Federal Republic of Germany joins the Council of Europe" . Council of Europe.

^ Lansing Warren (3 May 1951), "Council of Europe Raises Bonn To the Status of a Full Member" , The New York Times .

^ Carlos Lopez (2010), "Franco's Spain and the Council of Europe" , Archived 11 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine , Centre virtuel de la connaissance sur l'Europe .

^ "Census of population, households and dwellings in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2013: Final results" (PDF) . Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina. June 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 December 2017 . Retrieved 1 July 2016 .

^ "United States // Observer" , Council of Europe.

^ "Venice Commission :: Council of Europe" .

^ "Assembly of Kosovo*" .

PACE .

Archived from the original on 11 October 2022 . Retrieved 16 October 2022 .

^ "The situation in Kosovo* and the role of the Council of Europe" .

PACE website . 2016.

Archived from the original on 14 October 2022 . Retrieved 16 October 2022 .

^ "DELEGACIONI I ASOCIACIONIT TË KOMUNAVE PO PËRFAQËSON KOSOVËN NË PUNIMET e KONGRESIT TË KËSHILLIT TË EVROPËS – Asociacioni i Komunave të Kosovës" .

^ a b c d Kanstantsin Dzehtsiarou & Donal K. Coffey, Suspension and expulsion of members of the Council of Europe: difficult decisions in troubled times , International & Comparative Law Quarterly , Vol. 68, Issue 2 (2019).

^ Vasilopoulou, Sofia. (2018) The party politics of Euroscepticism in times of crisis: The case of Greece .

Politics , 38. DOI: 10.1177/0263395718770599.

^ a b c d e f Steven Erlanger, Council of Europe Restores Russia's Voting Rights , New York Times (25 June 2019).

^ Russia cancels payment to Council of Europe after claiming its delegates are being persecuted over Crimea , The Independent . 30 June 2017 ^ a b "Russia withholds payments to the Council of Europe" .

Deutsche Welle . Retrieved 19 September 2018 .

^ a b Buckley, Neil (26 November 2017).

"Russia tests Council of Europe in push to regain vote" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 10 December 2022.

^ "A Classic Dilemma: Russia's Threat to Withdraw from the Council of Europe" .

Heinrich Böll Stiftung European Union . Retrieved 19 September 2018 .

^ Weise, Zia (17 May 2019).

"Council of Europe restores Russia's voting rights" .

POLITICO . Retrieved 18 May 2019 .

^ a b Steven Erlanger, The Council of Europe suspends Russia for its attack on Ukraine.

, New York Times (3 March 2022).

^ Pooja Mehta, Russia withdraws from Council of Europe , JURIST (12 March 2022).

^ "Council of Europe suspends Russia's rights of representation" .

COE . 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 .

^ "The Russian Federation is excluded from the Council of Europe" (Press release). Council of Europe. 16 March 2022.

^ "Russia Quits Europe's Rule of Law Body, Sparking Questions Over Death Penalty" .

The Moscow Times . 10 March 2022 . Retrieved 14 March 2022 .

^ Nilsen, Thomas (26 February 2022).

"Dmitry Medvedev vows to reintroduce death penalty" .

The Independent Barents Observer . Retrieved 14 March 2022 .

^ "Full list – Treaty Office – publi.coe.int" .

Treaty Office . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ "CoE Conventions" . Conventions.coe.int. 31 December 1998. Archived from the original on 7 August 2011 . Retrieved 11 February 2012 .

^ "Council of the European Union" .

European Union .

Archived from the original on 25 June 2013 . Retrieved 26 October 2022 .

^ "The Council of Europe and the European Union – Portal – publi.coe.int" .

Portal . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ "The Council of Europe and the European Union sign an agreement to foster mutual cooperation" . Council of Europe. 23 May 2007 . Retrieved 5 August 2008 .

^ Juncker, Jean-Claude (2006).

"Council of Europe – European Union: "A sole ambition for the European continent" " (PDF) . Council of Europe.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2022 . Retrieved 5 August 2008 .

^ "Draft treaty modifying the treaty on the European Union and the treaty establishing the European community" (PDF) .

Open Europe . 24 July 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 August 2007 . Retrieved 5 August 2008 .

^ "Home" . Schoolsofpoliticalstudies.eu . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ "Schools of Political Studies" . Coe.int . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ "The Council of Europe's Relations with the United Nations" .

The Council of Europe . Retrieved 25 August 2017 .

^ "COUNCIL OF EUROPE COMMITTEE OF MINISTERS Resolution Res(2003)8 Participatory status for international non-governmental organisations with the Council of Europe (Adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 19 November 2003 at the 861st meeting of the Ministers' Deputies)" .

wcd.coe.int . Retrieved 22 June 2022 .

^ "UEFA and the Council of Europe sign Memorandum of Understanding" . UEFA. 30 May 2018 . Retrieved 2 June 2018 .

^ "Council of Europe and FIFA ink landmark deal on cooperation in shared areas" .

TASS (in Russian) . Retrieved 3 December 2018 .

^ "Council of Europe's co-operation sector and NGOs – Civil Society Portal" .

^ a b General Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Council of Europe Archived 22 April 2001 at the Wayback Machine , Council of Europe ^ Resolutions on the Council of Europe Staff Regulations , Council of Europe ^ a b "Flag, anthem and logo: the Council of Europe's symbols" . Council of Europe. Archived from the original on 31 July 2008 . Retrieved 5 August 2008 .

^ "Logo of the Council of Europe" . Council of Europe. Archived from the original on 2 January 2011 . Retrieved 5 August 2008 .

^ European Stability Initiative.

"What the 2014 Havel Prize says about the Council of Europe – and what should happen now" . No. 29 September 2014. ESI web. Archived from the original on 1 October 2014 . Retrieved 29 September 2014 .

^ "What is the Council of Europe?" .

BBC News . 5 February 2015 . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ Morgan, Sam (26 April 2017).

"The Brief: Council of Europe in hunt for relevance" . Euractiv.com . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ "Azerbaijan and the Council of Europe" .

The Economist . 23 March 2013. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014 . Retrieved 26 October 2022 .

^ a b Lorne Cook; Karel Janicek; Sylvie Corbet (6 October 2022).

"Europe holds 44-leader summit, leaves Russia in the cold" .

Associated Press . Retrieved 6 October 2022 .

^ a b c d "Council of Europe members suspected of corruption, inquiry reveals" .

The Guardian . 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ Human Rights Watch (29 September 2014).

"Azerbaijan: Government Repression Tarnishes Chairmanship Council of Europe's Leadership Should Take Action" . Retrieved 29 September 2014 .

^ a b Jennifer Rankin, Council of Europe urged to investigate Azerbaijan bribery allegations , The Guardian , 1 February 2017.

^ a b Matthew Valencia (19 June 2020).

"Heaping on the Caviar Diplomacy" .

The Economist . Archived from the original on 26 September 2020 . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ Gabanelli, Milena.

"Il Consiglio d'Europa e il caso Azerbaijan tra regali e milioni" [The Council of Europe and the Azerbaijan case between gifts and millions].

Corriere della Sera (in Italian) . Retrieved 30 January 2017 .

^ Zdravko Ljubas, Italian Court Sentences Former Council of Europe MP for Bribery , Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (14 January 2021).

Further reading [ edit ] Dedman, Martin (2006).

The Origins and Development of the European Union 1945–1995 . Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780203131817 .

ISBN 9780203131817 .

Dinan, Desmond.

Europe Recast: A History of European Union (2nd ed. 2004).

excerpt Archived 21 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine ; the excerpt covers the historiography Gillingham, John.

Coal, Steel, and the Rebirth of Europe, 1945–1955: The Germans and French from Ruhr Conflict to Economic Community (Cambridge UP, 2004).

Guerrieri, Sandro (2014). "From the Hague Congress to the Council of Europe: Hopes, achievements and disappointments in the parliamentary way to European integration (1948–51)".

Parliaments, Estates and Representation .

34 (2): 216– 227.

doi : 10.1080/02606755.2014.952133 .

S2CID 142610321 .

Kopf, Susanne.

Debating the European Union Transnationally: Wikipedians' Construction of the EU on a Wikipedia Talk Page (2001–2015) . (PhD dissertation Lancaster University, 2018) online .

Moravcsik, Andrew.

The Choice for Europe: Social Purpose and State Power from Messina to Maastricht (Cornell UP, 1998).

ISBN 9780801435096 .

OCLC 925023272 .

Stone, Dan.

Goodbye to All That?: The Story of Europe Since 1945 (Oxford UP, 2014).

Urwin, Derek W. (2014).

The Community of Europe . Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781315843650 .

ISBN 9781315843650 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Council of Europe Institutions Secretary General Committee of  Ministers Parliamentary  Assembly Congress Court of Human Rights Commissioner for Human Rights Commission for the Efficiency of Justice Commission against Racism and Intolerance Venice Commission Pompidou Group Members Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Observers Canada Holy See Israel Japan Mexico United States EU relations Former members Czechoslovakia (1991–1992) Russia (1996–2022) relations Saar (assoc. 1950–1956) Serbia and Montenegro (2003–2006) Links to related articles v t e Europe articles History Chronology Bibliography of European history Prehistory Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages Early modernity World War I World War II Pax Europaea Crisis situations and unrest since 2000 COVID-19 pandemic Russian invasion of Ukraine By topic Military Sovereignty predecessor states Geography Areas and populations Countries by area European microstates Largest metropolitan areas Cities Climate Climate change Extreme points Geology Islands Lakes Mountains Regions Rivers Sovereign states and dependent territories by population Villages Politics Eurosphere International organisations Integration Law Post-Soviet Europe Transatlantic relations Intergovernmental Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) Council of Europe (CoE) Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO) Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) European Political Community (EPC) GUAM Organization Open Balkan North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) statistics Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation European Union Economy relations free trade agreements Education European Economic Area (EEA) European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) Eastern Partnership Euronest Parliamentary Assembly European Union Customs Union (EUCU) Eurozone Foreign relations Members enlargement Politics Schengen Area Visa policy Statistics Economy History Financial (and social) rankings Free trade areas Energy Telecommunications Transport Rail Road Intergovernmental Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) Eurasian Customs Union (EACU) Eurasian Economic Community (EAEC) European Free Trade Association (EFTA) Sovereign states by Average wage Budget revenues per capita GDP (nominal) per capita GDP (PPP) per capita GNI (nominal) per capita GNI (PPP) per capita HDI Internet users (%) Minimum wage Press Freedom Index Unemployment rate (%) Health expense per capita Military spending (%) Urban population (%) Electricity use per capita Society Ages of consent Etiquette Social (and financial) rankings Languages endangered Tattooing Universities Bologna Process Erasmus Culture Art painting sculpture Architecture Capital of Culture Cinema film festivals Classical music Cuisine Dance Folklore Literature Philosophy Religion Christianity Islam Judaism Sport Symbols ( Armorial , Flags ) Demographics Ageing Childhood population (%) Ethnic groups genetic history Immigration Life expectancy by region Retirement Outline Index Category Portal Maps v t e Regional organizations Bodies African Union Alliance of Sahel States Amazon Cooperation Treaty Organization Arab League Arctic Council Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Asia Cooperation Dialogue Asia Council Asia-Europe Foundation Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Assembly of European Regions Association of Caribbean States AUKUS Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples' Trade Treaty Benelux British–Irish Council Bucharest Nine Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Central American Integration System Central European Free Trade Agreement Central European Initiative Collective Security Treaty Organization Commonwealth of Independent States Commonwealth of Nations Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations Community of Democratic Choice Community of Latin American and Caribbean States Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership Conference of European Regions with Legislative Power Council of the Baltic Sea States Council of Europe Craiova Group East African Community Eastern Partnership Economic Community of West African States Economic Cooperation Organization Eurasian Economic Union European Political Community European Union Forum for the Progress and Integration of South America GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development Gulf Cooperation Council Indian Ocean Rim Association International Conference on the Great Lakes Region Liptako–Gourma Authority Latin American Economic System Latin American Integration Association Latin American Parliament Lublin Triangle Melanesian Spearhead Group Mercosur New Hanseatic League Nordic-Baltic Eight Nordic Council North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Open Balkan Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Organization of American States Organization of Ibero-American States Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Pacific Alliance Pacific Islands Forum Paneuropean Union Polynesian Leaders Group Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Regional Cooperation Council Shanghai Cooperation Organisation South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone South-East European Cooperation Process Southern African Development Community TAKM Three Seas Initiative Trilateral Cooperation Secretariat Organization of Turkic States Union of South American Nations Visegrád Group West African Economic and Monetary Union West Nordic Council Western Balkans Quad Topics Regional integration Regional organizations by population Regionalism (international relations) v t e Power in international relations Types Climate Economic Energy Food Hard Maritime National Politics Realpolitik Sharp Smart Soft Status Small Middle Regional Emerging Great ( Least Great ) Super ( Potential ) Geopolitics African American ( Pax ) Asian Chinese Indian Pacific History List of ancient great powers List of medieval great powers List of modern great powers International relations (1814–1919) Theory American decline Balance of power European Deterrence theory Hegemonic stability theory Internationalism Multilateralism Philosophy of power Polarity Power projection Power transition theory Second Superpower Sphere of influence Superpower collapse Superpower disengagement Studies Composite Index of National Capability Comprehensive National Power Organizations and groups by region Africa African Union Union for the Mediterranean Africa–Asia Arab League Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC) Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) Americas Association of Caribbean States (ACS) Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Central American Integration System (SICA) Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) Mercosur North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Organization of American States (OAS) Union of South American Nations (UNASUR) Asia Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD) Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia (CICA) Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) Trilateral Cooperation Secretariat (TCS) Europe Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Council of Europe (CoE) European Political Community (EPC) European Union (EU) Nordic Council Visegrád Group (V4) Eurasia Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) Eurasian Economic Union (EaEU) Organization of Turkic States North America–Europe Arctic Council North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Africa–Asia–Europe Union for the Mediterranean Africa–South America South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone Oceania–Pacific Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Australia–New Zealand–United States Security Treaty (ANZUS) Melanesian Spearhead Group (MSG) Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) Polynesian Leaders Group (PLG) Non–regional Brazil–Russia–India–China–South Africa (BRICS) Commonwealth of Nations Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries E9 G4 G7 G8 G8+5 G20 G24 G77 India–Brazil–South Africa Dialogue Forum (IBSA) Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Organisation internationale de la Francophonie (OIF) Uniting for Consensus (UfC) Global United Nations (UN) Council of Europe at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons News from Wikinews Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Vatican Israel Finland Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nchxs
Cached time: 20250818020537
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.095 seconds
Real time usage: 2.500 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16111/1000000
Revision size: 97712/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 534876/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 92271/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 86/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 518651/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.242/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18551253/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2136.536      1 -total
 37.73%  806.128      2 Template:Reflist
 27.36%  584.633     99 Template:Cite_web
 16.73%  357.452      1 Template:Infobox_Geopolitical_organization
 12.29%  262.563      1 Template:Politics_of_the_Council_of_Europe
 12.19%  260.525      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.10%  151.721     47 Template:Flaglist
  6.16%  131.554      1 Template:Navboxes
  5.76%  123.136      3 Template:Lang
  4.96%  105.938      1 Template:Europe_topics_(small) Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5865:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818020537 and revision id 1303100387. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Council_of_Europe&oldid=1303100387 " Categories : Council of Europe 1949 establishments in England Councils International organizations based in Europe International organizations based in France Organizations based in Strasbourg Organizations established in 1949 Politics of Europe United Nations General Assembly observers Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1: unfit URL CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from February 2014 Use dmy dates from August 2021 Articles containing French-language text Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2023 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2023 Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 03:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Council of Europe 114 languages Add topic

