Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition and viewpoints 2 Forms Toggle Forms subsection 2.1 Alleged link to human violence and psychological disorders 2.2 Animal testing 2.2.1 International trade in primates 2.2.2 Unnecessary scientific experiments or demonstrations 2.3 Cruelties in connection with meals 2.3.1 Eating live animals 2.3.2 Highly intelligent animals 2.4 Cultural rituals 2.5 Declawing 2.6 Entertainment 2.6.1 Animal fighting 2.6.1.1 Baiting 2.6.2 Animals in professional wrestling 2.6.3 Chilean rodeo 2.6.4 Circuses 2.6.5 Media 2.6.5.1 Internet videos 2.6.5.2 Television and filmmaking 2.6.6 Rattlesnake round-ups 2.6.7 Zoos and aquariums 2.7 Fur farming 2.8 Hoarding and breeding 2.9 Hunting 2.10 Industrial animal farming 2.11 Invasive cosmetic procedures 2.12 Neglect 2.13 No pet policies and abandonment 2.14 Pinioning 2.15 Retreat practices 2.16 Sexual abuse 2.17 Smuggling 2.17.1 Illegal drug trade 2.17.2 Wildlife smuggling 2.18 Transport 2.19 Trapping 2.20 Warfare 2.21 Welfare concerns of farm animals 2.22 Working animals 2.23 Historical 3 Laws by country Toggle Laws by country subsection 3.1 Africa 3.1.1 Egypt 3.1.2 Nigeria 3.1.3 South Africa 3.1.4 South Sudan 3.2 Americas 3.2.1 Argentina 3.2.2 Brazil 3.2.3 Canada 3.2.4 Chile 3.2.5 Colombia 3.2.6 Costa Rica 3.2.7 Mexico 3.2.8 United States 3.2.8.1 State welfare laws 3.2.9 Venezuela 3.3 Asia 3.3.1 Israel 3.3.2 China 3.3.3 Hong Kong 3.3.4 India 3.3.5 Iran 3.3.6 Japan 3.3.7 Malaysia 3.3.8 Saudi Arabia 3.3.9 South Korea 3.3.10 Taiwan 3.3.11 Thailand 3.4 Europe 3.4.1 European Union 3.4.2 France 3.4.3 Germany 3.4.4 Italy 3.4.5 Ireland 3.4.6 Portugal 3.4.7 Sweden 3.4.8 Switzerland 3.4.9 Turkey 3.4.10 United Kingdom 3.5 Oceania 3.5.1 Australia 3.5.2 New Zealand 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Sources 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Cruelty to animals 42 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Negligent or abusive action against animals by humans Calves in cages small for their size Chest X-ray of a cat that has been shot; the white spots are shotgun pellets Part of a series on Animal rights Overview Animal welfare Around the world History Timeline Animal cruelty Veganism Vegetarianism Primate rights in research Movement Advocates Vegans Vegetarians Groups Animal abuse Animal–industrial complex Killing Mutilation Wild animals Consumption Dogs Horses Cats Cattle Eating live seafood Bloodsports Bullfighting Hunting Fishing Animal testing Cosmetic Captivity Zoos Circuses Oceanariums Chick culling Fur farming Goldfish swallowing Companion animals Puppy mills Abandonment Ideas Animal ethics Abolitionism Animal protectionism Bambi effect Carnism Personism Sentientism Speciesism Related topics Cultured meat Environmentalism Radical Deep ecology Humanism Welfarism Animals portal v t e Criminal law Elements Actus reus Mens rea Causation Concurrence Scope of criminal liability Accessory Accomplice Complicity Corporate Mandated reporter Principal Use of force continuum Vicarious Severity of offense Felony (or Indictable offense ) Misdemeanor (or Summary offense ) Infraction (also called violation) Inchoate offenses Attempt Conspiracy Incitement Solicitation Offense against the person Assassination Assault Battery Child abuse Concealment of a corpse Criminal negligence Domestic violence False imprisonment Frameup Harassment Street Home invasion Hate crime Homicide Human trafficking Intimidation Kidnapping Manslaughter ( corporate ) Mayhem Murder felony Homicide Negligent homicide Reckless homicide Robbery Stalking Stabbing Torture Sexual offenses Adultery Bigamy Child sexual abuse Cybersex trafficking Fornication Homosexuality Groping Incest Indecent exposure Masturbation Obscenity Prostitution Rape Pederasty Sex trafficking Sexual assault Sexual harassment Sexual slavery Voyeurism Crimes against property Arson Arms trafficking Blackmail Bribery Burglary Cybercrime Embezzlement Extortion False pretenses Forgery Fraud Gambling Intellectual property violation Larceny Looting Payola Pickpocketing Possessing stolen property Robbery Smuggling Parallel import Tax evasion Theft Trespass to land Vandalism Mischief Crimes against justice Against public justice Justice delayed Compounding Contempt Malfeasance in office Miscarriage of justice Judicial misconduct Misprision Perjury Perverting the course of justice Crimes against the public Apostasy Corruption Censorship violation Dueling Genocide Ethnic cleansing Hostage-taking Illegal immigration People smuggling Insider trading Smuggling Illegal consumption (such as drugs , alcohol , and smoking ) Miscegenation Piracy Political corruption Regicide Terrorism Unreported employment Usurpation War crimes Crimes against animals Cruelty to animals Poaching Wildlife smuggling Bestiality Crimes against the state Lèse-majesté Treason Espionage Secession Sedition Subversion Defenses to liability Actual innocence Automatism Consent Defense of property Diminished responsibility Duress Entrapment Ignorantia juris non excusat Infancy Insanity Intoxication Justification Might makes right Mistake ( of law ) Necessity Possession is nine-tenths of the law Provocation Sanctuary Self-defense Statute of limitations Other common-law areas Contracts Defenses Evidence Property Torts Wills , trusts and estates Portals Law v t e Cruelty to animals , also called animal abuse , animal neglect or animal cruelty , is the infliction of suffering or harm by humans upon animals , either by omission (neglect) or by commission. More narrowly, it can be the causing of harm or suffering for specific achievements, such as killing animals for food or entertainment; cruelty to animals is sometimes due to a mental disorder, referred to as zoosadism . Divergent approaches to laws concerning animal cruelty occur in different jurisdictions throughout the world. For example, some laws govern methods of killing animals for food, clothing, or other products, and other laws concern the keeping of animals for entertainment, education, research, or pets. There are several conceptual approaches to the issue of cruelty to animals.

Even though some practices, like animal fighting , are widely acknowledged as cruel, not all people or cultures have the same definition of what constitutes animal cruelty. Many would claim that docking a piglet's tail without an anesthetic constitutes cruelty. Others would respond that it is a routine technique for meat production to prevent harm later in the pig's life. Additionally, laws governing animal cruelty vary from country to country. For instance docking a piglet's tail is routine in the US but prohibited in the European Union (EU).

[ 1 ] Utilitarian advocates argue from the position of costs and benefits and vary in their conclusions as to the allowable treatment of animals. Some utilitarians argue for a weaker approach that is closer to the animal welfare position, whereas others argue for a position that is similar to animal rights.

Animal rights theorists criticize these positions, arguing that the words "unnecessary" and "humane" are subject to widely differing interpretations and that animals have basic rights. They say that most animal use itself is unnecessary and a cause of suffering, so the only way to ensure protection for animals is to end their status as property and to ensure that they are never viewed as a substance or as non-living things.

Definition and viewpoints [ edit ] Main articles: Animal welfare and Animal rights Throughout history, some individuals, like Leonardo da Vinci for example, who once purchased caged birds in order to set them free, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] were concerned about cruelty to animals. His notebooks also record his anger with the fact that humans used their dominance to raise animals for slaughter.

[ 4 ] According to contemporary philosopher Nigel Warburton , for most of human history the dominant view has been that animals are there for humans to do with as they see fit.

[ 2 ] Sociologist David Nibert emphasizes that the process of domestication dramatically increased the exploitation of animals by humans, particularly in Eurasia , and asserts that this paved the way for the creation of a modern day, capitalist –driven animal–industrial complex .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Much of this exploitation involved not only direct physical violence, but also structural violence as their systemic oppression and enslavement "resulted in their inability to meet their basic needs, the loss of self-determination, and the loss of opportunity to live in a natural way." He says that the remains of domesticated animals from thousands of years ago found during archeological excavations revealed numerous bone pathologies, which provide evidence of extreme suffering: Excavations from 8500 BCE revealed bone deformities in enslaved goats and cows and provided "some indication of stress, presumably due to the conditions in which these early domestic animals were kept." Remains of sheep and goats from the early Bronze Age show a marked decrease in bone thickness, reflecting calcium deficiencies "resulting from the combined effects of poor nutrition and intensive milking." [ 7 ] Several religious traditions have promoted animal welfare as an important or fundamental concept, and encouraged vegetarianism or veganism . Examples include Buddhism , Jainism , Hinduism (with certain animals being considered sacred), and some forms of Judaism (many Orthodox Jews do not wear leather).

René Descartes believed that non-humans are automata — complex machines with no soul, mind, or reason.

[ 8 ] In Cartesian dualism , consciousness was unique to human among all other animals and linked to physical matter by divine grace. However, close analysis shows that many human features such as complex sign usage, tool use , and self-consciousness can be found in some animals.

[ 9 ] In 2012, a prominent group of neuroscientists signed the Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness . It stated that humans are not the only conscious beings, and that many other animals, including all mammals and birds, also possess consciousness, challenging the Cartesian view of animals as mechanical beings.

Charles Darwin , by presenting the theory of evolution , revolutionized the way that humans viewed their relationship with other species. Darwin believed that not only did human beings have a direct kinship with other animals, but the latter had social, mental, and moral lives too. Later, in The Descent of Man (1871), he wrote: "There is no fundamental difference between man and the higher mammals in their mental faculties." [ 10 ] Modern philosophers and intellectuals, such as Peter Singer and Tom Regan , have argued that animals' ability to feel pain as humans do makes their well-being worthy of equal consideration.

[ 11 ] There are many precursors of this train of thought.

Jeremy Bentham , the founder of utilitarianism , famously wrote in his An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1789): [ 12 ] The question is not, can they reason nor can they talk? but, can they suffer?

These arguments have prompted some to suggest that animals' well-being should enter a social welfare function directly, not just indirectly via its effect only on human well-being.

[ 13 ] Many countries have now formally recognized animal sentience and animal suffering , and have passed anti-cruelty legislation in response.

Forms [ edit ] Animal cruelty can be broken down into two main categories: active and passive. Passive cruelty is typified by cases of neglect, in which the cruelty is a lack of action rather than the action itself. Oftentimes passive animal cruelty is accidental, born of ignorance. In many cases of neglect in which an investigator believes that the cruelty occurred out of ignorance, the investigator may attempt to educate the pet owner, then revisit the situation. In more severe cases, exigent circumstances may require that the animal be removed for veterinary care.

[ 14 ] Alleged link to human violence and psychological disorders [ edit ] There are studies providing evidence of a link between animal cruelty and violence towards humans.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] A 2009 study found that slaughterhouse employment increases total arrest rates, arrests for violent crimes, arrests for rape, and arrests for other sex offenses in comparison with other industries.

[ 19 ] A large national survey by the Norwegian Centre for Violence and Traumatic Stress Studies found a "substantial overlap between companion animal abuse and child abuse" and that cruelty to animals "most frequently co-occurred with psychological abuse and less severe forms of physical child abuse." [ 20 ] A history of torturing pets and small animals, a behavior known as zoosadism , is considered one of the signs of certain psychopathologies , including antisocial personality disorder , also known as a psychopathic personality disorder. According to The New York Times , "[the FBI has found that a history of cruelty to animals is one of the traits that regularly appears in its computer records of serial rapists and murderers , and the standard diagnostic and treatment manual for psychiatric and emotional disorders lists cruelty to animals a diagnostic criterion for conduct disorders ." [ 21 ] "A survey of psychiatric patients who had repeatedly tortured dogs and cats found all of them had high levels of aggression toward people as well, including one patient who had murdered a young boy." [ 21 ] Robert K. Ressler , an agent with the Federal Bureau of Investigation's behavioral sciences unit, studied serial killers and noted, "Murderers like this ( Jeffrey Dahmer ) very often start by killing and torturing animals as kids." [ 22 ] Acts of intentional animal cruelty or non-accidental injury may be indicators of serious psychological problems.

[ 14 ] [ 23 ] According to the American Humane Association , 13% of intentional animal abuse cases involve domestic violence .

[ 24 ] As many as 71% of pet-owning women seeking shelter at safe houses have reported that their partner had threatened and/or hurt or killed one or more of their pets; 32% of these women reported that one or more of their children had also hurt or killed pets.

Battered women report that they are hesitant about leaving their abusers because they fear what will happen to the animals in their absence. Animal abuse is sometimes used as a form of intimidation in domestic disputes.

[ 25 ] Cruelty to animals is one of the three components of the Macdonald triad . This behavior is considered to be one of the signs of violent antisocial behavior in children and adolescents. According to the studies used to form this model, cruelty to animals is a common (but not universal) behavior in children and adolescents who grow up to become serial killers and other violent criminals. It has also been found that children who are cruel to animals have often witnessed or been victims of abuse themselves.

[ 26 ] In two separate studies cited by the Humane Society of the United States , roughly one-third of families suffering from domestic abuse indicated that at least one child had hurt or killed a pet.

[ 27 ] Monkey hate is a form of sadism where humans have a hatred for monkeys and take pleasure in their suffering.

[ 28 ] The phenomenon drew public attention after a global monkey torture ring was uncovered by the BBC in 2023.

[ 29 ] Animal testing [ edit ] Main article: Animal testing A Wistar laboratory rat Animal testing is regulated to varying degrees in different countries.

[ 30 ] In some cases it is strictly controlled while others have more relaxed regulations. There are ongoing debates about the ethics and necessity of animal testing. Proponents argue that it has led to significant advancements in medicine and other fields while opponents raise concerns about cruelty towards animals and question its effectiveness and reliability.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Laboratory animal sourcing can and has involved animal cruelty, particularly when animals are obtained through illegal or unethical means, or when regulations are not followed. Even when legal and regulated, the use of animals in research is ethically controversial because it often involves causing harm or death to sentient beings.

International trade in primates [ edit ] The international trade in primates sees 32,000 wild non-human primates (NHPs) trapped and sold on the international market every year.

[ citation needed ] They are sold mostly for use in animal testing , [ citation needed ] but also for food, for exhibition in zoos and circuses, and for private use as companion animals .

[ citation needed ] Unnecessary scientific experiments or demonstrations [ edit ] v t e Worldwide laws regarding testing cosmetics on animals Nationwide ban on all cosmetic testing on animals Partial ban on cosmetic testing on animals 1 Ban on the sale of cosmetics tested on animals No ban on any cosmetic testing on animals Unknown 1 some methods of testing are excluded from the ban or the laws vary within the country Main articles: Testing cosmetics on animals and Countries banning non-human ape experimentation Under all three of the conceptual approaches to animal cruelty discussed above, performing unnecessary experiments or demonstrations upon animals that cause them substantial pain or distress may be viewed as cruelty. Due to changes in ethical standards, this type of cruelty tends to be less common today than it used to be in the past. For example, schoolroom demonstrations of oxygen depletion routinely suffocated birds by placing them under a glass cover, [ 33 ] and animals were suffocated in the Cave of Dogs [ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] to demonstrate the density and toxicity of carbon dioxide to curious travelers on the Grand Tour .

Cruelties in connection with meals [ edit ] See also: Food and drink prohibitions Cattle in religion and mythology are considered sacred in the Indian religions of Hinduism , Jainism and Buddhism , as well as in some Chinese folk religion and in African paganism . Cattle played other major roles in many religions, including those of ancient Egypt , ancient Greece , ancient Israel , and ancient Rome . In some regions, especially most states of India , the slaughter of cattle is prohibited and their meat ( beef ) may be taboo .

The production of foie gras (the liver of a duck or a goose that has been specially fattened) involves the force-feeding of birds with more food than they would eat in the wild, and more than they would voluntarily eat domestically. The feed, usually corn boiled with fat (to facilitate ingestion), deposits large amounts of fat in the liver, thereby producing the fatty consistency sought by some gastronomes .

Pinikpikan is a chicken or duck dish from the mountains of the Cordillera region in the Philippines .

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] As a tradition of the indigenous Igorot people , [ 39 ] [ 40 ] pinikpikan is prepared by beating a live chicken to death with a stick prior to cooking. The beating bruises the chicken's flesh by bringing blood to its surface, which is said to improve the flavour after cooking.

[ 37 ] The act of beating the chicken, while done in preparation of the dish, violates the Philippine Animal Welfare Act 1998 .

[ 41 ] A lobster with its claws bound after being boiled alive The Homarus lobster is usually cooked alive.

[ 42 ] The Animal Welfare (Sentience) Act 2022 covers all vertebrates and some invertebrates such as octopuses and lobsters .

[ 43 ] A bile bear in a "crush cage" on Huizhou Farm, Huizhou , China [ 44 ] Bile bears , sometimes called battery bears, are bears kept in captivity to harvest their bile , a digestive fluid produced by the liver and stored in the gallbladder , which is used by some traditional Asian medicine practitioners.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] It is estimated that 12,000 bears are farmed for bile [ 48 ] in China , South Korea , Laos , Vietnam , and Myanmar .

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] Demand for the bile has been found in those nations as well as in some others, such as Malaysia [ 54 ] and Japan .

[ 55 ] Kopi luwak , also known as civet coffee , is a coffee that consists of partially digested coffee cherries , which have been eaten and defecated by the Asian palm civet ( Paradoxurus hermaphroditus ). The cherries are fermented as they pass through a civet's intestines , and after being defecated with other fecal matter, they are collected.

[ 56 ] Asian palm civets are increasingly caught in the wild and traded for this purpose.

[ 57 ] Growing numbers of intensive civet "farms" have been established and are operated in Southeast Asia, confining tens of thousands of animals to live in battery cages and be force-fed.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] Habushu ( ハブ酒 ) is an awamori -based liqueur made in Okinawa , Japan . Other common names include habu sake or Okinawan snake wine.

Habushu is named after the habu snake, Protobothrops flavoviridis , which belongs to the pit viper subfamily of vipers, and is closely related to the rattlesnake and copperhead .

[ 61 ] There are two methods of inserting the snake into the alcohol. The maker may choose to simply submerge the snake in the alcohol and seal the bottle, thus drowning the snake. Alternatively, the snake may be put on ice until it passes out, at which point it is gutted, bled and sewn up. When the viper is thawed and awakens, it will quickly die in an aggressive striking manner, which is what most producers look for.

[ citation needed ] The manufacturer will then put the Habu in an ethanol bath for a month to preserve it.

[ 62 ] Alfred Brehm wrote the following about the capture of sea turtles in the 19th century: The poor sea turtles are terribly tortured in the island of Ceylon. The buyers probably want to buy fresh meat, or the sellers don't want to bother with the slaughter, so they simply pull off the breastplate of the live animal and the buyer is cut the piece of meat he wants. And then the European is horrified to see the slow yawning and beating of the heart of the extremely hardy, half-skinned animal, whose organ is usually sold last.

[ 63 ] Eating live animals [ edit ] Casu marzu , a traditional Sardinian sheep milk cheese that contains insect larvae Eating live animals is a practice found in various cultures around the world, often considered a delicacy or traditional food. However, this practice may be considered cruel, as eating live animals or parts of live animals can cause significant suffering and distress, and is even unlawful in certain jurisdictions under animal cruelty laws.

Eating live seafood in Japanese cuisine includes practices such as ikizukuri (freshly killed and arranged to appear alive), and odorigui (seafood eaten while still moving), including odori ebi ("dancing shrimp"). All are controversial for animal welfare reasons.

One example of eating live larvae is the witchetty grub of Aboriginal Australian cuisine, which can be eaten alive and raw or cooked.

[ 64 ] Highly intelligent animals [ edit ] See also: Animal intelligence and Brain as food Eastern Lesser Bamboo Lemurs (Hapalemur griseus) killed in northeast Madagascar for bushmeat Primate cognition encompasses a wide range of advanced intellectual and behavioral skills, including problem-solving, tool use, social learning, cooperation, and even cultural transmission.

Monkey meat is the flesh and other edible parts derived from monkeys , a kind of bushmeat . Human consumption of monkey meat has been historically recorded in numerous parts of the world, including multiple Asian and African nations. Monkey meat consumption has been reported in parts of Europe and the Americas as well.

[ 65 ] Monkey brains is a supposed dish consisting of, at least, partially, the brain of some species of monkey or ape .

Dog meat for sale in a market in Hanoi , Vietnam Dog intelligence is widely recognized, with dogs demonstrating advanced problem-solving, emotional sensitivity, and strong social bonds.

Dog meat consumption, particularly in Vietnam , has been criticized by many both within the country and internationally, as most of the dogs are pets stolen and killed in brutal ways, usually by being bludgeoned, stabbed, burned alive, or having their throat slit.

[ 66 ] Cat intelligence is well-documented, with domestic cats exhibiting complex social behaviors, problem-solving skills, and the ability to form strong bonds with humans.

Cat meat is meat prepared from domestic cats for human consumption. Some countries serve cat meat as a regular food, whereas others have only consumed some cat meat in desperation during wartime, famine or poverty. As cat ownership grew in China, opposition to cat meat increased. In 2006, activists forced a Shenzhen restaurant to stop selling cat meat, two years after the Chinese Animal Protection Network (CAPN) began organizing protests against dog and cat meat in multiple cities. CAPN’s efforts helped raise awareness and reduce demand.

[ 67 ] In 2020, Four Paws and Change For Animals urged Vietnam to reinstate bans on the cat meat trade, highlighting ongoing regional concerns.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] A commercial chicken house with open sides raising broiler pullets for meat Bird intelligence is remarkable, with ducks and chickens showing advanced abilities. Bird brains have two-to-four times the neuron packing density of mammal brains, for higher overall efficiency. Despite this, both are widely used as food and often face cruel conditions in factory farming, raising serious ethical concerns about animal cruelty. Additionally, practices such as duck-baiting highlight a long legacy of animal exploitation.

According to some news reports, buntings were blinded before cooking.

[ note 1 ] [ 71 ] Pig intelligence is among the highest in the mammal world; pigs display a wide range of complex behaviors, like being able to play video games , understanding human instructions and even using tools. Despite this high level of intelligence and emotional sensitivity, pigs are frequently subjected to animal cruelty—such as being forced to participate in pig wrestling events, confined in cramped factory farms, or neglected—which causes them unnecessary stress, pain, and suffering.

Equine intelligence is increasingly recognized, with recent studies showing that horses possess advanced cognitive abilities such as strategic thinking, problem-solving, and model-based learning—skills once thought to be beyond their capacity.

Horse slaughter is the practice of slaughtering horses to produce meat for consumption. Humans have long consumed horse meat; the oldest known cave art, the 30,000-year-old paintings in France's Chauvet Cave , depict horses with other wild animals hunted by humans.

[ 72 ] Equine domestication is believed to have begun to raise horses for human consumption.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] The practice has become controversial in some parts of the world due to several concerns: whether horses are (or can be) managed humanely in industrial slaughter; whether horses not raised for consumption yield safe meat, and whether it is appropriate to consume what some view as a companion animal.

Eating octopus , is considered cruel by many due to cephalopod intelligence , as octopuses demonstrate advanced problem-solving skills and self-awareness.

Ethical concerns arise with eating dolphins because of cetacean intelligence , with dolphins exhibiting complex social behaviors, language comprehension, and a high degree of self-recognition.

Dolphin drive hunting , a practice involving the herding and killing of dolphins, intensifies these ethical issues.

Cultural rituals [ edit ] Many times, when Asiatic elephants are captured in Thailand , handlers use a technique known as the training crush , in which "handlers use sleep-deprivation, hunger, and thirst to 'break' the elephants' spirit and make them submissive to their owners"; moreover, handlers drive nails into the elephants' ears and feet.

[ 75 ] The practice of cruelty to animals for divination purposes is found in ancient cultures (see: Scapulimancy ) , and some modern religions such as Santeria continue to do animal sacrifices for healing and other rituals.

Taghairm was performed by ancient Scots to summon devils.

An investigation by the Animal Welfare Board of India concluded that " jallikattu is inherently cruel to animals".

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] Jallikattu (or Sallikkattu ), also known as Eru Taḻuvuṭal and Manju-virattu, [ 78 ] is a traditional event in which a zebu bull ( Bos indicus ), such as the Pulikulam [ 79 ] or Kangayam breeds, [ 80 ] is released into a crowd of people, and many people attempt to grab the large hump on the bull's back with both arms and hang on to it while the bull attempts to escape. Animal welfare organisations such as the Federation of Indian Animal Protection Organisations (FIAPO) [ 81 ] and PETA India have protested against the practice.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] The Kambala , Kambla or Kambula is an annual buffalo race held in the southwestern Indian state of Karnataka .

It is similar to maramadi from Kerala Traditionally, it is sponsored by local Tuluva landlords and households in the coastal districts of Dakshina Kannada , Udupi and Bhatkal of Karnataka and Kasaragod of Kerala , a region collectively known as Tulu Nadu . Many have criticised Kambala as cruel to the racing buffaloes, which are driven by whips.

[ 84 ] Noted animal-rights activist Maneka Gandhi expressed concerns about the ill treatment of buffaloes during the race. While Kambala organizers contend that whips are necessary to elicit maximum speed, government officials advise the riders to be gentle on buffaloes and avoid using whips during the race.

[ 84 ] Declawing [ edit ] Cat with red nail caps Onychectomy , popularly known as declawing , is an operation to remove an animal's claws surgically by means of the amputation of all or part of the distal phalanges , or end bones, of the animal's toes.

Declawing of crabs is the process whereby one or both claws of a crab are manually detached before the return of the live crab to the water, as practiced in the fishing industry worldwide. Crabs commonly have the ability to regenerate lost limbs after a period of time, and thus declawing is viewed as a potentially more sustainable method of fishing.

[ 85 ] Due to the time it takes for a crab to regrow lost limbs, however, whether or not the practice represents truly sustainable fishing is still a point of scientific inquiry, and the ethics of declawing are also subject to debates over pain in crustaceans .

Entertainment [ edit ] Spain has a number of festivals that involve some sort of animal cruelty. Among them are burning the bull , donkey baiting , shaving of the beasts (Galicia), garrotting the galgos , quail catapulting, Day of the Geese , running of the bulls , and bull fighting .

[ 86 ] Animal fighting [ edit ] A bull dying in a bullfight Bullfighting is criticized by animal rights or animal welfare activists, referring to it as a cruel or barbaric blood sport in which the bull suffers severe stress and slow, torturous death.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] Several activist groups undertake anti-bullfighting actions in Spain and other countries. In Spain, opponents of bullfighting are referred to as anti-taurinos.

The Bulletpoint Bullfight warns that bullfighting is "not for the squeamish", advising spectators to "be prepared for blood". It details prolonged and profuse bleeding caused by horse-mounted lancers, the charging by the bull of a blindfolded, armored horse who is "sometimes doped up, and unaware of the proximity of the bull", the placing of barbed darts by banderilleros, followed by the matador's fatal sword thrust. It stresses that these procedures are a normal part of bullfighting and that death is rarely instantaneous. It further warns those attending bullfights to "be prepared to witness various failed attempts at killing the animal before it lies down." [ 89 ] The Toro Jubilo, Madrid, 2014 The " Toro Jubilo " or Toro embolado in Soria , Medinaceli , Spain, is a festival associated with animal cruelty. During this festival, balls of pitch are attached to a bull's horns and set on fire. The bull is then released into the streets and will run around in pain, often smashing into walls in an attempt to douse the fire as spectators attempt to dodge the animal. The pitch balls can burn for hours, and they burn the bull's horns, body, and eyes. The animal rights group PACMA has described the fiesta as "a clear example of animal mistreatment".

[ 90 ] Dog fighting is a sport that turns dogs against one another in a ring or a pit for gambling or the entertainment of the spectators. Dogs are often bred and selected for gameness , a trait that refers to their willingness to continue fighting despite injury or exhaustion, which further intensifies the cruelty of these events.

Cockfighting is a blood sport involving domesticated roosters as the combatants.

Donkey-baiting is a blood sport involving the baiting of donkeys against dogs .

An elephant execution , sometimes called elephant lynching ,  is a pseudo-legal or performative public spectacle where a captive elephant is killed in order to punish it for being a "bad elephant" (behaviors that had, threatened, injured, or killed humans).

Ram fighting is a blood sport between two rams (large-horned male sheep), held in a ring or open field. It is commonly found in sheep or goat husbandry culture in Africa, Asia and Europe.

[ 91 ] In Nigeria , Uzbekistan and Indonesia , ram fighting gains popularity among locals.

[ 92 ] Although categorized as a blood sport and an act of animal cruelty , ram fights rarely resulted in the death of the defeated ram, as the loser often is allowed to flee the arena.

Baiting [ edit ] Main article: Baiting (blood sport) Baiting , including badger-baiting , bear-baiting , bull-baiting , duck-baiting , hyena-baiting , rat-baiting , or wolf-baiting refers to blood sports in which animals are provoked or attacked by dogs for entertainment, often resulting in significant suffering and injury, and are now widely condemned as forms of animal cruelty.

Animals in professional wrestling [ edit ] The usage of animals in professional wrestling has varied through the profession 's history. Animals that have been used as opponents to humans in matches include pig wrestling , bears, tigers, cheetahs and orangutans.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] The use of animals in professional wrestling, particularly in acts such as bear wrestling or involving wild animals as performers, is widely regarded as animal cruelty. These practices often subject animals to stressful, unnatural, and dangerous situations, sometimes resulting in injury, neglect, or death. Historical examples include, chained, declawed and muzzled bears forced to wrestle humans, as well as the use of snakes, tigers, and other wild animals in matches or as props. Such uses have been criticized for exploiting animals for entertainment, and bear wrestling is now illegal in many jurisdictions.

Chilean rodeo [ edit ] Chilean rodeo is generally considered more cruel than common (North American) rodeo by animal welfare organizations and critics, primarily due to differences in how calves are treated and the lack of protective regulations.

Animal rights organizations reject calling Chilean rodeo a sport, objecting to the treatment of animals—especially calves, which are repeatedly charged against a wall by horses for points. While supporters claim injuries are rare and animals are inspected, activists argue the events cause psychological and physical trauma. Protests have occurred, with some met by violence, and calls to ban rodeo have grown, similar to movements against bullfighting in Spain.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] Circuses [ edit ] v t e Worldwide laws on animal use in circuses [ 99 ] Nationwide ban Partial ban [ a ] Ban on import/export No ban Unknown ^ certain animals are excluded or the laws vary internally The use of animals in the circus has been controversial since animal welfare groups have documented instances of animal cruelty during the training of performing animals. Animal abuse in circuses has been documented such as keeping them in small enclosures, lack of veterinary care, abusive training methods, and lack of oversight by regulating bodies.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] Animal trainers have argued that some criticism is not based on fact, including beliefs that shouting makes the animals believe the trainer is going to hurt them, that caging is cruel and common, and that the use of whips, chains or training harms animals.

[ 102 ] Bolivia has enacted what animal rights activists called the world's first ban on all animals in circuses.

[ 103 ] Media [ edit ] Internet videos [ edit ] Cruelty to animals has often been filmed on video and uploaded to social media websites or private Internet groups. This may involve large-scale, systematic operations; a notable example of this was a global monkey torture ring uncovered by the BBC in June 2023, where participants would produce and distribute videos of monkeys being hurt and killed.

[ 104 ] Individuals who have published animal cruelty content include Luka Magnotta , a Canadian murderer who uploaded YouTube videos of himself torturing and killing cats; [ 105 ] Rubén Marrero Pernas, a man in Cuba who was found to be raping, torturing then killing dogs and recording the acts online for an audience; [ 106 ] and Leighton Labute, a Canadian man who was arrested in 2020 for torturing and killing three hamsters, and uploading the video to social media.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] The video-sharing site YouTube has been criticized for hosting thousands of videos of real-life animal cruelty, especially the feeding of one animal to another for entertainment and spectacle. Although some of these videos have been flagged as inappropriate by users, YouTube has generally declined to remove them, unlike videos that include copyright infringement .

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] In 2021, YouTube banned staged animal rescue videos, where animals were purposely put in danger before being saved.

[ 111 ] Television and filmmaking [ edit ] Demonstrations against animal cruelty in Iran Animal cruelty has long been an issue in filmmaking industry, with even some big-budget Hollywood films receiving criticism for allegedly harmful—and sometimes lethal—treatment of animals during production. Court decisions have addressed films that harm animals such as videos that in part depict dog fighting.

[ 112 ] Currently, there is no federal or state law specifically governing the use of animals in filmed media, though the federal Animal Welfare Act (AWA) and state cruelty laws indirectly apply.

The American Humane Association (AHA) has been associated with monitoring American film-making since the release of the film Jesse James (1939), in which a horse was pushed off a plank and drowned in a body of water after having fallen 40 feet into it.

[ 113 ] Initially, monitoring of animal cruelty was a partnership between the AHA and the Motion Picture Producers and Distributors of America (also called the Hays office) through the Motion Picture Production Code . Provisions in the code discouraged "apparent cruelty to children and animals", and because the Hays Office had the power to enforce this clause, the AHA often had access to sets to assess adherence to it. However, because the AHA's Hollywood office depended on the Hays Office for the right to monitor sets, the closure of the Hays Office in 1966 corresponded with an increase in animal cruelty on movie sets.

[ 114 ] By 1977, a three-year contract was in place between the Screen Actors Guild (SAG) and the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists which specified that the AHA should be "consulted in the use of animals 'when appropriate ' ", but the contract did not provide a structure for what "appropriate" meant, and had no enforcement powers. This contract expired in 1980.

[ 115 ] One of the most infamous examples of animal cruelty in the film was Michael Cimino 's flop Heaven's Gate (1980), in which numerous animals were brutalized and even killed during production. Cimino allegedly killed chickens and bled horses from the neck to gather samples of their blood to smear on actors for Heaven's Gate , and also allegedly had a horse blown up with dynamite while shooting a battle sequence, the shot of which made it into the film. This film played a large part in renewed scrutiny of animal cruelty in films and led to renewed official on-set jurisdiction to monitor the treatment of animals by the AHA in 1980.

[ 113 ] After the release of the film Reds (1981), the star and director of the picture, Warren Beatty apologized for his Spanish film crew's use of tripwires on horses while filming a battle scene, when Beatty was not present. Tripwires were used against horses when Rambo III (1988) and The 13th Warrior (1999) were being filmed. A water buffalo was sliced nearly in half during the production of Apocalypse Now (1979), while a donkey was bled to death for dramatic effect for the Danish film Manderlay (2005), in a scene later deleted from the film.

Captured sea turtle at Jamestown, Accra, Ghana There is a case of cruelty to animals in the South Korean film The Isle (2000), according to its director Kim Ki-Duk .

[ 116 ] In the film, a real frog is skinned alive while fish are mutilated. Seven animals were killed for the camera in the controversial Italian film Cannibal Holocaust (1980).

[ 117 ] The images in the film include the slow and graphic beheading and ripping apart of a turtle , a monkey being beheaded and its brains being consumed by natives and a spider being chopped apart.

Cannibal Holocaust was only one film in a collective of similarly themed movies ( cannibal films ) that featured unstaged animal cruelty. Their influences were rooted in the films of Mondo filmmakers , which sometimes contained similar content. In several countries, Cannibal Holocaust was banned or allowed for release with most of the animal cruelty edited out.

[ citation needed ] In the Hungarian Judit Elek 's film Memories of a River (1990), 14 sheep were burned alive. A horse was allegedly killed on the set of Andrzej Wajda 's film The Ashes (1965).

[ 118 ] In the film Fort Tilden (2014), the main characters find kittens in a trash can and - although they initially wanted to save them - end up leaving them there. In Al sur del edén (1984), a female character lies on her bed and rubs a live canary against her genitals for sexual gratification. (Only the woman's legs are shown from the side, the scene may not be real, and she only holds the bird between her legs.) In the film Malèna (2000), young boys burn ants to death on the beach with torches. In Anatomy of Hell (2004), a little boy throws a live baby bird to the ground.

Slaughterhouse animals being butchered are shown in the 1949 French film Blood of the Beasts (pigs) and in the 1963 Hungarian film Elégia (horses).

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] It is unclear whether a pig is killed in the Hungarian film Taxidermia (2006).

[ 119 ] [ 121 ] Slaughterhouse scenes as well as the trampling of frogs were shown in the Korean film Mago (2002), and an (allegedly dying) kitten is drowned in the Hungarian film Hypocritical (2006).

[ 119 ] [ 122 ] Vase de Noces contains scenes of extreme violence and sexual perversion against animals; [ according to whom?

] the film has been banned in several places.

[ where?

] [ citation needed ] The SAG has contracted with the AHA for monitoring animal use during filming or while on the set.

[ 123 ] Compliance with this arrangement is voluntary and only applies to films made in the United States. Films monitored by the American Humane Association may bear one of their end-credit messages. Many productions, including those made in the United States, do not advise AHA or SAG of animal use in films, so there is no oversight.

[ 124 ] In order to get the end credit disclaimer,  productions must register with American Humane and engage an AHA Certified Animal Safety Representative who monitors animal acting throughout production and must follow the guidelines for animal safety are important, however, not all films are required to use the "No Animals Were Harmed" disclaimer, and they can choose to film without American Humane monitoring, and others may include cost or logistical reasons.

Some other animal welfare organizations worldwide, such as the Animal Anti-Cruelty League in South Africa, have also monitored the use of animals in the film.

Rattlesnake round-ups [ edit ] Rattlesnake round-ups , also known as rattlesnake rodeos, are annual events common in the rural Midwest and Southern United States , where the primary attractions are captured wild rattlesnakes which are sold, displayed, killed for food or animal products (such as snakeskin ) or released back into the wild. The largest rattlesnake round-up in the United States is held in Sweetwater, Texas . Held every year since 1958, the event currently attracts approximately 30,000 visitors per year and in 2006 each annual round-up was said to result in the capture of 1% of the state's rattlesnake population.

[ 125 ] Rattlesnake round-ups became a concern by animal welfare groups and conservationists due to claims of animal cruelty.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] [ 128 ] In response, some round-ups impose catch-size restrictions or releasing captured snakes back into the wild.

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] Zoos and aquariums [ edit ] Zoos and aquariums can be considered a form of animal cruelty when the conditions of captivity negatively impact the physical and psychological well-being of the animals.

Roadside zoos are found throughout North America , particularly in remote locations. They are often small, for-profit zoos, often intended to attract visitors to some other facility, such as a gas station. The animals may be trained to perform tricks, and visitors are able to get closer to them than in larger zoos.

[ 131 ] Since they are sometimes less regulated, roadside zoos are often subject to accusations of neglect [ 132 ] and cruelty.

[ 133 ] Fur farming [ edit ] Main articles: Fur farming and Environmental impacts of fur farming A fox with dismembered tail in a fur farm cage Animal welfare activists suggest a total ban on fur production due to the suffering inflicted on animals, especially minks. It has been suggested that fur production is immoral as fur clothes are luxury items. Minks are solitary and territorial animals; however, in fur farms, they are raised in cages and skinned after being killed either by breaking their necks or using lethal gas.

[ 134 ] Hoarding and breeding [ edit ] A puppy mill in the rural United States Animal hoarding involves keeping more animals than can be properly cared for, often resulting in neglect and poor living conditions. Similarly, a puppy mill is a commercial breeding facility where dogs are kept in overcrowded, inhumane conditions for profit, with little regard for their welfare. Both situations cause significant suffering for the animals involved.

Hunting [ edit ] Rhinoceroses killed for their horns Some animal rights and anti-hunting activists regard hunting as a cruel, perverse and unnecessary blood sport .

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] Trophy hunting is largely a recreational activity causing death and injury to a significant number of animals. In poaching the animal is killed and valuable parts such as tusks or bones are collected.

Canned hunting refers to the practice of bringing exotic animals as trophies to private land for hunting. Despite being cruel to animals, hunting is practiced in thousands of private properties around the world and is considered a profitable business.

[ 137 ] Internet hunting is the practice of hunting via remotely controlled firearms that can be aimed and shot using online webcams . Internet hunting may be considered cruel because it involves shooting confined animals remotely, which may give them no chance to escape and may cause unnecessary suffering due to poor aim or delayed death. This practice may be condemned for treating animals as mere targets rather than respecting their welfare.

Industrial animal farming [ edit ] Main article: Intensive animal farming See also: Holocaust analogy in animal rights Footage of cruelty in a pig farm, that had been falsely described as 'Quality Assured', in England Cruelty in a pig farm Egg-laying hens in a crowded cage A chicken egg production facility Farm animals are generally produced in large, industrial facilities that house thousands of animals at high densities; these are sometimes called factory farms . The industrial nature of these facilities means that many routine procedures or animal husbandry practices impinge on the welfare of the animals and could be considered cruelty, with Henry Stephen Salt claiming in 1899 that "it is impossible to transport and slaughter vast numbers of large and highly-sensitive animals humanely".

[ 138 ] It has been suggested the number of animals hunted, kept as companions, used in laboratories, reared for the fur industry, raced, and used in zoos and circuses, is insignificant compared to farm animals, and therefore the "animal welfare issue" is numerically reducible to the "farm animal welfare issue".

[ 139 ] Similarly, it has been suggested by campaign groups that chickens, cows, pigs, and other farm animals are among the most numerous animals subjected to cruelty. For example, because male chickens do not lay eggs, newly hatched males are culled using macerators or grinders.

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] Worldwide meat overconsumption is another factor that contributes to the miserable situation of farm animals.

[ 142 ] Many undercover investigators have exposed the animal cruelty taking place inside the factory farming industry and there is evidence to show that consumers provided with accurate information about the process of meat production and the abuse that accompanies it has led to changes in their attitudes.

[ 143 ] The American Veterinary Medical Association accepts maceration subject to certain conditions, but recommends alternative methods of culling as more humane.

[ 144 ] [ 145 ] Egg-laying hens are then transferred to " battery cages " where they are kept in high densities. Matheny and Leahy attribute osteoporosis in hens to this caging method.

[ 139 ] Broiler chickens suffer similar situations, in which they are fed steroids to grow at a super-fast speed, so fast that their bones, heart, and lungs often cannot keep up. Broiler chickens under six weeks old suffer painful crippling due to fast growth rates, whilst one in a hundred of these very young birds dies of heart failure.

[ 146 ] To reduce aggression in overcrowded conditions, shortly after birth piglets are castrated, their tails are amputated, and their teeth are clipped, [ 9 ] and earmarked. Calves are sometimes raised in veal crates , which are small stalls that immobilize calves during their growth, reducing costs and preventing muscle development, making the resulting meat a pale color, preferred by consumers.

[ 139 ] In the United States, animal cruelty such as soring , which is illegal, sometimes occurs on farms and ranches, as does lawful but cruel treatment such as livestock branding . Since ag-gag laws prohibit video or photographic documentation of farm activities, these practices have been documented by secret photography taken by whistleblowers or undercover operatives from such organizations as Mercy for Animals and the Humane Society of the United States posing as employees. Agricultural organizations such as the American Farm Bureau Federation have successfully advocated for laws that tightly restrict secret photography or concealing information from farm employers.

[ 147 ] A downer is an animal, usually livestock , that cannot stand on its own and therefore is to be killed.  A downed animal, one that is unable to stand, is not necessarily a downer. Neglect, abuse, or inhumane handling of downer animals is considered animal cruelty and is illegal in many jurisdictions.

Invasive cosmetic procedures [ edit ] Tail docking in dogs is widely considered animal cruelty when performed for cosmetic or non-medical reasons.

Painting fish using artificial dyes, injections, or caustic dips is considered cruel and unnecessary by animal welfare organizations and experts.

Neglect [ edit ] Animal neglect is a form of abuse that involves failing to provide adequate care, nutrition, shelter, or medical attention to animals.

A study in Pinhais, Brazil, examined the crime of companion animal neglect within households and found it was more common in homes with a larger number of animals, poor economic conditions, the presence of disabled individuals, and lower educational levels among owners. Identifying these factors is important for creating strategies to prevent this crime.

[ 148 ] No pet policies and abandonment [ edit ] Main articles: Overpopulation in domestic pets and Pet abandonment Many apartment complexes and rental homes institute no-pet policies. No pet policies are a leading cause of animal abandonment, which is considered a crime in many jurisdictions. In many cases, abandoned pets have to be euthanized due to the strain they put on animal shelters and rescue groups. Abandoned animals often become feral or contribute to feral populations. In particular, feral dogs can pose a serious threat to pets, children, and livestock.

[ 149 ] In Ontario, Canada , no pet policies are outlawed under the Ontario Landlord and Tenant Act and are considered invalid even when a tenant signs a lease that includes a no pets clause.

[ 150 ] Similar legislation has also been considered in Manitoba .

[ 151 ] Pinioning [ edit ] Pinioning is the act of surgically removing one pinion joint , the joint of a bird 's wing furthest from the body, to prevent flight. Pinioning is often done to waterfowl and poultry. It is not typically done to companion bird species such as parrots. This practice is unnecessary and restricted in many countries.

Pinioning is legally restricted in many countries. In England, if the bird is more than 10 days old, its pinioning may only be performed using anaesthetic and, regardless of the bird's age, the procedure is illegal unless carried out by a veterinarian . It is also illegal to perform on farmed birds.

[ 152 ] In Austria, pinioning is prohibited based on §5 (Prohibition of cruelty to animals) and §7 (Prohibited interventions performed on animals) of the Animal Protection Act.

[ 153 ] Retreat practices [ edit ] The kambo ritual. A) Phyllomedusa bicolor . B) Collecting the frog's secretions. C) Applying kambo to burns on the skin. D) Closeup of skin marks.

[ 154 ] While traditional methods for collecting kambo (the secretion of Phyllomedusa bicolor ) and bufotoxin (from various toads, including Incilius alvarius ) for use in spiritual retreats aim to minimize harm and are not generally considered animal cruelty by Indigenous standards, the potential for animal distress exists—especially with non-traditional or commercialized practices in such settings.

Sexual abuse [ edit ] Animal sexual abuse, or bestiality , occurs when an individual exploits a non-human animal for their own sexual pleasure or for the pleasure of others. Bestiality is strongly associated by many with zoophilia , a paraphilia involving sexual attraction to non-human animals. One such individual is Douglas Spink , who was convicted of allegedly owning a bestiality farm in which several animals such as dogs, horses and mice were found.

[ 155 ] Horse-ripping , or horse slashing, is an animal cruelty phenomenon involving serious injuries in horses , often involving mutilation of their genitalia and slashing of the flank or neck. It has not been established, however, how often these injuries are caused by human cruelty. "Horse-ripping" is not an entirely neutral term since it implies there is always a human act behind the mutilations.

Smuggling [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Illegal drug trade [ edit ] The puppies pictured had packets of liquid heroin surgically implanted in them by a veterinarian drug smuggler.

In some cases, traffickers have attached drug packages to animals in an attempt to smuggle contraband. This method is more common than surgical implantation, as it is simpler and less risky for traffickers.

In very rare cases, traffickers have surgically implanted drugs into animals.

At Miami International Airport in 1993, authorities discovered that some of the 312 boa constrictors in a shipment from Colombia had been surgically filled with condoms containing a total of 80 pounds (36 kg) of cocaine , resulting in the death of all the snakes.

[ 156 ] [ 157 ] Wildlife smuggling [ edit ] Main article: Wildlife smuggling Smuggler of rare birds apprehended at the US border Wildlife smuggling often involves transporting live animals in cruel conditions, causing them great suffering. Animals are frequently confined in cramped spaces without food or water, leading to injury, illness, or death. This inhumane treatment makes wildlife smuggling a serious form of animal cruelty.

Transport [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Inside a truck transporting farm animals to slaughter . Dehydration, injuries, stress, and disease are common during preslaughter transport, and cramped and unhygienic conditions are typical of the process.

Despite existing regulations in many countries, transport cruelty remains a widespread problem due to inadequate enforcement and economic pressures to minimize costs. Animals being moved for slaughter, sale, or display are frequently kept in cramped conditions for extended periods, with minimal attention to their physical and psychological needs. This issue is especially pronounced during long-distance transport, such as when animals are shipped from other countries or even across continents. During these journeys, animals may endure days or even weeks of travel, often facing extreme temperatures, lack of food and water, and insufficient rest. The stress and injuries sustained during transport can have lasting effects on animal welfare, and in some cases, animals may not survive the journey. Addressing transport cruelty—particularly in the context of international and intercontinental movement—requires stricter oversight, better training for handlers, and a commitment to prioritizing animal well-being throughout the entire transportation process.

One concern about the welfare of horses destined for slaughter is the long distances the horses are sometimes transported to a slaughterhouse. In 2013, 32,841 horses were slaughtered in Italy; of these, 32,316 were transported from other EU states.

[ 158 ] Trapping [ edit ] Snares are one of the simplest traps and are very effective.

[ 159 ] They are cheap to produce and easy to set in large numbers. A snare traps an animal around the neck or the body; a snare consists of a noose made usually by wire or a strong string. Snares are widely criticised by animal welfare groups for their cruelty.

[ 160 ] Domestic animals accidentally captured in glue traps can be released by carefully applying cooking oil or baby oil to the contact areas and gently working until the animal is free.  Many animal rights groups, such as the Humane Society of the United States and In Defense of Animals , oppose the use of glue traps for their cruelty to animals.

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] Warfare [ edit ] See also: The Battle of Spokane Plains, where upwards of 900 horses were killed in retaliation and Battle of Palo Duro Canyon, where up to 2,000 horses were killed in retaliation by the U.S. Army Military animals are creatures that have been employed by humankind for use in warfare . They are a specific application of working animals ; examples include dogs , dolphins , elephants , and horses . Only recently has the involvement of animals in war been questioned, and practices such as using animals for fighting, as living bombs (see also: Exploding animal ) , or for military testing purposes (such as during the Bikini Atoll atomic experiments ) may now be criticized for being cruel.

[ 163 ] Princess Anne, Princess Royal , the patron of the British Animals in War Memorial , stated that animals adapt to what humans want them to do, but that they will not do things that they do not want to, even with training.

[ 164 ] Animal participation in the human conflict was commemorated in the United Kingdom in 2004 with the erection of the Animals in War Memorial in Hyde Park , London .

[ 165 ] In 2008 a video of a US Marine throwing a puppy over a cliff during the Iraq conflict was popularised as an internet phenomenon and attracted widespread criticism of the soldier's actions for being an act of cruelty.

[ 166 ] Welfare concerns of farm animals [ edit ] See also: Animal slaughter and Overview of discretionary invasive procedures on animals The following are lists of invasive procedures that cause pain, routinely performed on farm animals, and housing conditions that routinely cause animal welfare concerns. In one survey of United States homeowners, 68% of respondents said they consider the price of meat a more important issue.

[ 13 ] Welfare concerns of farm animals Species Invasive procedures Housing Broiler chickens Beak trimming High stocking density Restricted movement Cattle Branding [ 167 ] Castration [ 168 ] Dehorning [ 169 ] Ear tagging [ 170 ] Nose ringing [ 171 ] Restraint [ 172 ] Tail docking [ 173 ] Tongue resection (calves) High stocking density (feedlots) Restricted movement (feedlots) Veal crates Dairy cattle Restraint Artificial insemination Dehorning Ear tagging Tail docking Branding Nose ringing High stocking density Restricted movement Cow-calf separation , separation of mother and calf Bounded by milk machines Domestic turkeys Debeaking Desnooding [ a ] Detoeing Devocalization Spur removal Toe clipping Turkeybeating High stocking density Restricted movement Dogs Castration Docking Ear cropping Ear notching Slaughter by electrocution Slaughter by beating [ 174 ] High stocking density [ 175 ] Restricted movement [ 174 ] Ducks and geese Force-feeding Live-plucking Wing clipping High stocking density Restricted movement Egg laying hens Debeaking Blinders [ b ] Dubbing [ c ] Forced molting High stocking density Hock burns Restricted movement Goats and sheep Ear tagging Ear notching Dehorning Marking [ d ] Mulesing [ e ] Tail docking Teeth grinding [ 176 ] High stocking density (fine wool industry, live export ) Restricted movement (fine wool industry, live export ) Horses Branding Castration Chaining Gingering High stocking density Restricted movement Pigs Castration CO 2 stunning [ 177 ] Ear cropping Ear tagging Earmarking Nose ringing Tail docking Tattooing Teeth clipping Tusk trimming Gestation crates High stocking density Restricted movement ^ 'Desnooding' is the removal of the snood , a fleshy appendage on the forehead of turkeys.

^ 'Blinders' or 'spectacles' are included as some versions require a pin to pierce the nasal septum.

^ 'Dubbing' is the procedure of removing the comb , wattles and sometimes earlobes of poultry. Removing the wattles is sometimes called "dewattling".

^ 'Marking' is the simultaneous mulesing, castration, and tail docking of lambs.

^ 'Mulesing' is the removal of strips of wool-bearing skin from around the breech ( buttocks ) of a sheep to prevent flystrike (myiasis) Working animals [ edit ] Main article: Coconut § Monkey labor controversy A Southern pig-tailed macaque sits in the crown of a coconut palm in Malaysia, grasping a coconut as it prepares to harvest it The Southern pig-tailed macaque is the only monkey species widely used for labor, especially in Thailand and Malaysia , where they have been trained for centuries—mainly through punishment-based methods—to harvest coconuts and other fruits.

[ 178 ] Although now limited to a small number of farmers, the practice persists, with training schools still operating in southern Thailand and the Malaysian state of Kelantan .

[ 179 ] [ 180 ] [ 181 ] The practice drew international attention in 2019 when PETA exposed the use of macaques for coconut harvesting in Thailand, leading to calls for boycotts of coconut products; PETA later clarified that this practice does not occur in other major coconut-producing regions such as the Philippines , India , Brazil , Colombia , or Hawaii .

[ 182 ] Historical [ edit ] Bear pits have largely fallen out of favor, as many zoos now try to make their animals' accommodations more natural. Zoo visitors tend to view animals in natural settings as "active", and those in more artificial settings as "passive".

[ 183 ] Bull running was a custom practised in England until the 19th century.

[ a ] It involved chasing a bull through the streets of a town until it was weakened, then slaughtering the animal and butchering it for its meat.

[ 185 ] Bull running became illegal in 1835, and the last bull run took place in Stamford, Lincolnshire , in 1839.

[ 186 ] [ 187 ] The practice was not confined to any particular region, with bull runs also documented at Axbridge in the south west , Canterbury and Wokingham in the south east , Tutbury in the midlands , and Wisbech in the east .

[ 188 ] [ 189 ] Cat burning was a form of cruelty to animals as an entertainment or festivity in Western and Central Europe prior to the 1800s. People would gather cats and hoist them onto a bonfire causing death by burning or otherwise through the effects of exposure to extreme heat. In the medieval to early modern periods, cats, which were associated with vanity and witchcraft , were sometimes burned as symbols of the devil .

[ 190 ] The Cave of Dogs ( Italian : Grotta del Cane ) is a cave near Naples , Italy. Volcanic gases seeping into the cave give the air inside a high concentration of carbon dioxide . Dogs held inside would faint; at one time this was a tourist attraction.

A diving horse is an attraction that was popular in North America in the mid-1880s, [ 191 ] in which a horse would dive into a pool of water , sometimes from as high as 60 feet.

[ 192 ] Dog spinning ( Bulgarian : тричане на куче(та) , trichane na kuche(ta) ) is a ritual that was traditionally practiced on the first day of Lent in the village of Brodilovo in southeastern Bulgaria .  The ritual is thought to have pagan origins [ 193 ] The Foreign Cattle Market is a significant historical example of industrial animal handling and slaughter. While not intended as animal cruelty, many of its practices would be considered problematic today.

Geek shows were an act in traveling carnivals and circuses of early America and were often part of a larger sideshow . The billed performer's act consisted of a single geek , who stood in the center ring to chase live chickens. It ended with the performer biting the chickens' heads off and swallowing them.

[ 194 ] Goat throwing (in Spanish: Lanzamiento de cabra desde campanario or Salto de la cabra ) was a festival celebrated in the town of Manganeses de la Polvorosa , province of Zamora , Spain, on the fourth Sunday of January. The festival coincided with the commemoration of Saint Vincent the Martyr .

The act of goldfish swallowing was a fad first popularized by students at American colleges in the late 1930s.

[ 195 ] Kots Kaal Pato ( Spanish for 'Strangle the Duck') was an event held annually in the town of Citilcum, located in the municipality of Izamal , within the state of Yucatán , Mexico . In it, piñatas stuffed with live animals were broken and ducks were hung from a wooden structure to later behead them. Since 2016, as a result of the efforts of Humane Society International Mexico and local organizations, the event no longer has this type of practices, instead featuring various sports and cultural activities.

[ 196 ] Laws by country [ edit ] Main article: Animal rights by country or territory Many jurisdictions around the world have enacted statutes that forbid cruelty to some animals but these vary by country and in some cases by the use or practice.

Legal requirements for ritual slaughter around the world: Stunning not required Post-cut stunning required Simultaneous stunning required Pre-cut stunning required Ritual slaughter banned No data Africa [ edit ] Egypt [ edit ] Main article: Animal welfare in Egypt Egyptian law states that anyone who inhumanely beats or intentionally kills any domesticated animal may be jailed or fined.

[ 197 ] The Egyptian Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals was established over a hundred years ago and was instrumental in promoting a 1997 ban on bullfighting in Egypt.

[ 198 ] In ancient Egyptian law, the killers of cats or dogs were executed.

[ 199 ] [ 200 ] Nigeria [ edit ] Animal cruelty in Nigeria is prohibited under Section 495 of the Criminal Code (1990). These include, according to 495(1)(a), cruelly beating, kicking, over-loading, infuriating, or terrifying an animal, or allowing this to happen as the owner. Section 495(1)(b) defines failure to act as the willful or unreasonable doing or omission of any act that causes unnecessary suffering (or as the owner, permitting an act that causes unnecessary suffering). This section also prohibits transporting animals in a way that causes unnecessary suffering (c), administering poison (d), performing operations without due care (e), and actions related to animal fighting (f).

[ 201 ] South Africa [ edit ] The Animal Protection Act No 71 of 1962 in South Africa covers "farm animals, domestic animals and birds, and wild animals, birds, and reptiles that are in captivity or under the control of humans." The Act contains a detailed list of prohibited acts of cruelty including overloading, causing unnecessary suffering due to confinement, chaining or tethering, abandonment, unnecessarily denying food or water, keeping in a dirty or parasitic condition, or failing to provide veterinary assistance. There is also a general provision prohibiting wanton, unreasonable, or negligible commission or omission of acts resulting in unnecessary suffering. The Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries for 2013/14 to 2016/17 mentions updating animal protection legislation.

[ 202 ] The NSPCA is the largest and oldest animal welfare organization in South Africa that enforces 90% of all animal cruelty cases in the country by means of enforcing the Animals Protection Act.

South Sudan [ edit ] The Criminal Code of South Sudan has laws against the maltreatment of animals. The laws read: [ 203 ] 196. Ill-treatment of Domestic Animal .

Whoever cruelly beats, tortures, or otherwise willfully ill-treats any tame, domestic, or wild animal, which has previously been deprived of its liberty, or arranges, promotes, or organizes fights between cocks, rams, bulls, or other domestic animals or encourages such acts, commits an offense, and upon conviction, shall be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two months or with a fine.

197. Riding and Neglect of Animal .

Whoever wantonly rides, overdrives, or overloads any animal or intentionally drugs or employs any animal, which by reason of age, sickness, wounds or infirmity is not in a condition to work, or neglects any animal in such a manner as to cause it unnecessary suffering, commits an offense, and upon conviction, shall be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month or with a fine or with both.

Americas [ edit ] Argentina [ edit ] In Argentina , National Law 14346 sanctions from 15 days to one year in prison for those who mistreat or inflict acts of cruelty on animals.

[ 204 ] Brazil [ edit ] Main article: Animal welfare and rights in Brazil Brazil is a high-volume animal producer, slaughtering around 30.8 land-based animals per person per year, compared to a global average of 10.1. The country's dependency on farmed animals is relatively high, with around 8 farmed animals per person, double the global average of 4.1.
A 1998 law prohibits the abuse of domestic and wild animals. It imposes more serious penalties for cruelty than the 1934 decree, with a sentence of 3 months to a year plus a fine, with the penalty increased by one-sixth to one-third of the animal is killed.

Canada [ edit ] Main article: Animal welfare and rights in Canada In Canada, it is an offense under the Criminal Code to intentionally cause unnecessary pain, suffering, or injury to an animal.

[ 205 ] Poisoning animals is specifically prohibited.

[ 205 ] It is also an offense to threaten to harm an animal belonging to someone else.

[ 206 ] Most provinces and territories also have animal protection legislation.

[ 207 ] However, it is not explicitly illegal in Canadian law to kill a dog or cat for consumption.

[ 208 ] The Animal Legal Defense Fund releases an annual report ranking the animal protection laws of every province and territory based on their relative strength and general comprehensiveness. In 2014, the strongest four jurisdictions were Manitoba , British Columbia , Ontario , and Nova Scotia . The weakest four were Saskatchewan , Northwest Territories , Quebec , and Nunavut .

[ 209 ] Chile [ edit ] Law 20380 established sanctions including fines, from 2 to 30 Mensual Tributary Units, and prison, from 541 days to 3 years, for those involved in acts of animal cruelty. Also, it facilitates animal care through school education and establishes a Bioethics Committee to define policies related to experiments with animals.

[ 210 ] A bullfight in Bogotá, a legacy of Spanish culture. The practice of bullfighting is criticized by numerous organizations in Colombia. It remains legal in the country.

Colombia [ edit ] Main article: Animal rights in Colombia In Colombia , there is little control over cruel behaviors against animals, and the government has proposed that bullfighting be declared a " Cultural Heritage "; other activities like cockfighting are given the same legal treatment.

[ 211 ] Costa Rica [ edit ] Toucan Grecia with 3D printed prosthetic beak after losing half its beak In 2017, after many years of legal wrangling, Costa Rica passed their Animal Welfare Law. It includes prison sentences of three months to one year for harming or killing a domesticated animal or for conducting animal fights. There are monetary fines for those who mistreat, neglect or abandon animals, for breeding or training animals for fighting, or for violating regulations on animal experimentation. The law does not cover agricultural practices, aquaculture , zootechnical or veterinary activities, killing of animals for consumption, for sanitary or scientific reasons, or reproductive control. Wild animals are covered under the Wild Life Act.

[ 212 ] [ 213 ] The bill had stalled its motion through the legislature until an injured toucan was found which had lost the top half of its beak. News and images of the injured bird, now named Grecia , raised enough contributions to create a 3D printed prosthesis for her, and helped spur the bill's progress.

[ 214 ] Mexico [ edit ] The current policy of Mexico , in civil law , condemns physical harm to animals as property damage to the owners of the abused animal, considering the animals as owned property.

In criminal law , the situation is different. In December 2012, the Legislative Assembly of the Federal District reformed the existing Penal Code of Mexico City , establishing abuse and cruelty to animals as criminal offenses, provided the animals are not deemed to be plagues or pests . Abandoned animals are not considered to be plagues. A subsequent reform was entered into force on 31 January 2013, by a decree published in the Official Gazette of the Federal District. The law provides penalties of six months to two years imprisonment, and a fine of 50 to 100 days at minimum wage, to persons who cause obvious injury to an animal, and the penalty is increased by one-half of those injuries endanger its life. The penalty rises to two to four years of prison, and a fine of 200 to 400 days at minimum wage, if the person intentionally causes the death of an animal.

[ 215 ] This law is considered to extend throughout the rest of the 31 constituent states of the country. In addition, The Law of Animal Protection of the Federal District is wide-ranging, based on banning "unnecessary suffering". Similar laws now exist in most states.

[ 216 ] United States [ edit ] Main article: Animal welfare in the United States The primary federal law relating to animal care and conditions in the US is the Animal Welfare Act of 1966 , amended in 1970, 1976, 1985, 1990, 2002, and 2007. It is the only Federal law in the United States that regulates the treatment of animals in research, exhibition, transport, and by dealers. Other laws, policies, and guidelines may include additional species coverage or specifications for animal care and use, but all refer to the Animal Welfare Act as the minimum acceptable standard.

[ 217 ] The Animal Legal Defense Fund releases an annual report ranking the animal protection laws of every state based on their relative strength and general comprehensiveness. In a 2013's report, the top five states for their strong anti-cruelty laws were Illinois , Maine , Michigan , Oregon , and California . The five states with the weakest animal cruelty laws in 2013 were Kentucky , Iowa , South Dakota , New Mexico , and Wyoming .

[ 218 ] In Massachusetts and New York , agents of humane societies and associations may be appointed as special officers to enforce statutes outlawing animal cruelty.

[ 219 ] In 2004, a Florida legislator proposed a ban on "cruelty to bovines", stating: "A person who, for practice, entertainment , or sport, intentionally fells, trips, or otherwise causes a cow to fall or lose its balance using roping, lassoing, dragging, or otherwise touching the tail of the cow commits a misdemeanor of the first degree." [ 220 ] The proposal did not become law.

[ 220 ] In the United States, ear cropping , tail docking , rodeo sports, and other acts are legal and sometimes condoned. Penalties for cruelty can be minimal if pursued. Currently, 46 of the 50 states have enacted felony penalties for certain forms of animal abuse.

[ 221 ] However, in most jurisdictions, animal cruelty is most commonly charged as a misdemeanor offense. In one recent California case, a felony conviction for animal cruelty could theoretically net a 25-year to a life sentence due to their three-strikes law , which increases sentences based on prior felony convictions.

[ 222 ] In 2003, West Hollywood, California, passed an ordinance banning declawing of house cats.

[ 223 ] In 2007, Norfolk, Virginia passed legislation only allowing the procedure for medical reasons.

[ 224 ] However, most jurisdictions allow the procedure.

In April 2013, Texas Federal Court Judge Sim Lake ruled [ 225 ] that the Animal Crush Video Prohibition Act of 2010 , which criminalized the recording, sale, and transport of videos depicting animal cruelty as obscenity, violates the First Amendment . Judge Lake noted that obscenity tests require an explicitly sexual depiction, which the criminalized videos lack. This follows the precedent set by United States v. Stevens , which additionally held that restrictions on the possession of animal cruelty videos were unconstitutional.

In November 2019, U.S. President Donald Trump signed the Preventing Animal Cruelty and Torture Act , making certain intentional acts of cruelty to animals federal crimes carrying penalties of up to seven years in prison. The Act expanded upon the 2010 Animal Crush Video Prohibition Act signed by President Barack Obama that banned the creation and distribution of videos that showed animals being crushed, burned, drowned, suffocated, impaled, or subjected to other forms of torture. The underlying acts, which were not included in the 2010 bill, are part of the PACT Act and are now federal offenses. The bill was unanimously passed in both the House and Senate .

[ 226 ] [ 227 ] State welfare laws [ edit ] Several states have enacted or considered laws in support of humane farming.

On 5 November 2002, Florida voters passed Amendment 10 by a margin of 55%, amending the Florida Constitution to ban the confinement of pregnant pigs in gestation crates .

[ 228 ] On 14 January 2004, the bill AB-732 died in the California Assembly's Agriculture Committee.

[ 229 ] The bill would have banned gestation and veal crates, eventually being amended to include only veal crates.

[ 230 ] On 9 May 2007, the bill AB-594 was withdrawn from the California State Assembly. The bill had been effectively killed in the Assembly Agriculture Committee, by replacing the contents of the bill with language concerning tobacco cessation coverage under Medi-Cal.

[ 231 ] AB-594 was very similar to the current language of Proposition 2 .

[ 232 ] On 7 November 2006, Arizona voters passed Proposition 204 with 62% support. The measure prohibits the confinement of calves in veal crates and breeding sows in gestation crates.

[ 233 ] On 28 June 2007, Oregon Governor Ted Kulongoski signed a measure into law prohibiting the confinement of pigs in gestation crates (SB 694, 74th Leg. Assembly, Regular Session).

[ 234 ] In January 2008, Nebraska State Senate bill LB 1148, to ban the use of gestation crates for pig farmers, was withdrawn within five days amidst controversy.

[ 235 ] On 14 May 2008, Colorado Governor Bill Ritter signed into law a bill, SB 201, that phases out gestation crates and veal crates.

[ 236 ] [ 237 ] Venezuela [ edit ] Venezuela published a "Law for Protection of Domestic Fauna free and in captivity" in 2010, defining responsibilities and sanctions regarding animal care and ownership. Animal cruelty acts are fined, but are not a cause for imprisonment.

[ 238 ] The law also forbids the possession, breeding, and reproduction of pit bull dogs, among similar breeds that are alleged to be aggressive and dangerous. It elicited reactions from dog owners, who said that aggressiveness in dogs is determined more by treatment by the owner than by the breed itself.

[ citation needed ] Asia [ edit ] Israel [ edit ] Israel banned the sale of fur to the fashion industry in June 2021.

[ 239 ] China [ edit ] Main article: Animal welfare and rights in China As of the year 2006, there were no laws in China governing acts of cruelty to animals.

[ 240 ] There are no government-supported charitable organizations like the RSPCA , which monitors the cases of animal cruelty. All kinds of animal abuses, such as to fish, tigers, and bears, are to be reported to law enforcement and animal welfare .

[ 241 ] [ 242 ] [ 243 ] [ 244 ] [ 245 ] [ 246 ] In the absence of a unified law against animal mistreatment, the World Animal Protection notes that some legislation protecting the welfare of animals exists in certain contexts, especially ones used in research and zoos.

[ 247 ] In September 2009, legislation was drafted to address deliberate cruelty to animals in China. If passed, the legislation would offer some protection to pets, captive wildlife, and animals used in laboratories, as well as regulate how farm animals are raised, transported, and slaughtered.

[ 248 ] In 2008, the People's Republic of China was in the process of making changes to its stray-dog population laws in the capital city, Beijing . Mr. Zheng Gang who is the director of the Internal and Judicial Committee which comes under the Beijing Municipal People's Congress (BMPC), supported the draft of the Beijing Municipal Regulation on Dogs from the local government. The law would replace the Beijing Municipal Regulation on Dog Ownership, introduced in 1989. The extant regulation talked of "strictly" limiting dog ownership and controlling the number of dogs in the city. The proposed draft focused instead on "strict management and combining restrictions with management." [ 249 ] Hong Kong [ edit ] As of 2010, Hong Kong has supplemented or replaced the laws against cruelty with a positive approach using laws that specify how animals should be treated.

[ 250 ] The government department primarily responsible for animal welfare in Hong Kong is the Agriculture, Fisheries, and Conservation Department (AFCD).

Laws enforced by the AFCD include these: the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Ordinance (also enforced by the police) the Public Health (Animals and Birds) Ordinance (including regulations for licenses imposed on livestock keepers and animal traders and a Code of Standards for Licensed Animal Traders) the Dogs and Cats Ordinance the Pounds Ordinance the Rabies Ordinance the Wild Animals Protection Ordinance In addition, the Food and Environmental Hygiene Department (FEHD) does the following: enforces the Public Health and Municipal Services Ordinance, which includes regulations for slaughterhouses and wet markets publishes a Code of Practice for the Welfare of Food Animals (which describes their transport) publishes Operational Guidelines for the Welfare of Food Animals at Slaughterhouses The Department of Health does the following: enforces the Animals (Control of Experiments) Ordinance.

publishes a Code of Practice for the Care and Use of Animals for Experimental Purposes As of 2006, Hong Kong has a law titled "Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Ordinance", with maximum of 3-year imprisonment and fines of HKD$200,000.

[ 251 ] India [ edit ] This section needs to be updated . The reason given is: Contains 2012 information about a proposed act in 2011. Was it ever enacted?.

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( August 2020 ) Main article: Animal welfare and rights in India The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 was amended in the year 1982.

[ 252 ] According to the newly amended Indian animal welfare act, 2011 cruelty to animals is an offense and is punishable with a fine which shall not be less than ten thousand Rupees , which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees or with imprisonment up to two years or both in the case of a first offense. In the case of a second or subsequent offense, with a fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand Rupees, but may extend to one lakh Rupees and with imprisonment with a term which shall not be less than one year but may extend to three years.

[ 253 ] This amendment is currently [ needs update?

] awaiting ratification from the Government of India. The 1962 Act is the one that is practiced as of now. The maximum penalty under the 1962 Act is Rs. 50 (under $1).

[ 254 ] Many organizations, including ones such as the local SPCA , PF, A, and Fosterdopt are actively involved in assisting the general population in reporting cruelty cases to the police and helping bring the perpetrator to justice. Due to this, much change has been observed in the subcontinent. In 2022, A provision of a maximum of five-year imprisonment with a minimum 75 thousand rupees fine for killing an animal has been made. The draft Bill also suggests five freedoms of animals including freedom from thirst, hunger and malnutrition and from fear and distress, under Section 3A.

Iran [ edit ] Iranian government sponsored a law banning pets, breeding, selling, walking and keeping in the cities also including Najis animals/birds.

[ 255 ] Animals lives and wellbeing are to some limited extent protected under Islamic criminal code and feqh . Filming animal abuse is illegal.

[ 256 ] Euthanasia is haram .

Japan [ edit ] Main article: Animal welfare and rights in Japan In Japan, the 1973 Welfare and Management of Animals Act (amended in 1999 and 2005) [ 257 ] stipulates that "no person shall kill, injure, or inflict cruelty to animals without a due course", and in particular, criminalizes cruelty to all mammals, birds, and reptiles possessed by persons; as well as cattle, horses, goats, sheep, pigs, dogs, cats, pigeons, domestic rabbits, chickens, and domestic ducks regardless of whether they are in captivity.

Killing or injuring without due reason: up to one year's imprisonment with labor or a fine of up to one million yen Cruelty such as causing debilitation by discontinuing feeding or watering without due reason: a fine of up to five hundred thousand yen Abandonment: a fine of up to five hundred thousand yen Separate national and local ordinances exist about ensuring the health and safety of animals handled by pet shops and other businesses.

Animal experiments are regulated by the 2000 Law for the Humane Treatment and Management of Animals, which was amended in 2006.

[ 258 ] This law requires those using animals to follow the principles outlined in the 3Rs, which are listed as replacement, reduction, and refinement, [ 259 ] to use as few animals as possible, and cause minimal distress and suffering. Regulation is at a local level based on national guidelines, but there are no governmental inspections of institutions and no reporting requirement for the numbers of animals used.

[ 260 ] Malaysia [ edit ] Main article: Animal welfare and rights in Malaysia Cruelty towards animals protected under the Animal Welfare Act (2015) is punishable by a fine of 20–100,000 ringgit and/or imprisonment of up to three years. Cruelty towards animals protected under the Wildlife Conservation Act (2010) is punishable by a fine of 5–50,000 ringgit and/or up to one-year imprisonment.
Under the AA, a person commits an offense of animal cruelty if they "cruelly beats, kicks, ill-treats, overrides, overdrives, overloads, tortures, infuriates or terrifies any animal.

Saudi Arabia [ edit ] Veterinarian Lana Dunn and several Saudi nationals report that there are no laws to protect animals from cruelty since the term is not well-defined within the Saudi legal system. They point to a lack of a governing body to supervise conditions for animals, particularly in pet stores and in the exotic animal trade with East Africa.

[ 261 ] South Korea [ edit ] Main article: Animal welfare and rights in South Korea South Korea's animal welfare laws are weak by international standards.

[ 262 ] South Korea's animal protection law states that anyone who abuses or is cruel to animals may be sentenced to a maximum of three years in prison or fined 30 million won ($25,494), but the standards to decide penalties have been low as the animals are treated as objects under the current legal system, Choung said.

Taiwan [ edit ] The Taiwanese Animal Protection Act was passed in 1998, imposing fines of up to NT$250,000 for cruelty. Criminal penalties for animal cruelty were enacted in 2009
, including a maximum of one-year imprisonment.

[ 263 ] Thailand [ edit ] Main article: Animal welfare in Thailand Thailand introduced its first animal welfare law in 2014. The Cruelty Prevention and Welfare of Animal Act, B.E. 2557 (2014) came into being on 27 December 2014.

[ 264 ] [ 265 ] Europe [ edit ] European Union [ edit ] The European Union Council Directive 1999/74/EC [ 266 ] is a directive passed by the European Union on the minimum standards for keeping egg laying hens which effectively bans conventional battery cages . The directive passed in 1999, banned conventional battery cages in the EU from 1 January 2012 after a 13-year phase-out.

It is also illegal in many parts of Europe to declaw a cat.

[ 267 ] France [ edit ] In France, cruelty to animals is punishable by imprisonment of two years and a financial penalty (€30,000).

[ 268 ] Germany [ edit ] Further information: Animal welfare and rights in Germany and Animal welfare in Nazi Germany In Germany, killing animals or causing significant pain (or prolonged or repeated pain) to them is punishable by imprisonment of up to three years or a financial penalty.

[ 269 ] If the animal is of foreign origin, the act may also be punishable as criminal damage.

[ 270 ] Italy [ edit ] Acts of cruelty against animals can be punished with imprisonment, for a minimum of three months up to a maximum of three years, and with a fine ranging from a minimum of 3,000 Euros to a maximum of 160,000 Euros, as for the law n°189/2004.

[ 271 ] Ireland [ edit ] The Animal Health and Welfare Act 2013 [ 272 ] came into force in 2014, improving animal protection.

[ 273 ] The maximum penalty is up to €250,000 and up to five years in prison. Sentences of up to three years have been imposed in several cases.

[ 274 ] Portugal [ edit ] Since 1 October 2014, violence against animals has been a crime in Portugal . Legislation published in the Diário da República on 29 August criminalizes the mistreatment of animals and indicates that "those who, without reasonable cause, inflict pain, suffering, or any other hardship to a companion animal abuse" are to be subject to imprisonment of up to one year.

[ 275 ] If such acts result in the "death of the animal", the "deprivation of an important organ or member", or "serious and permanent impairment of its capacity of locomotion", those responsible will be punished by imprisonment up to two years.

[ 275 ] As for pets, the new law provides that "whoever, having the duty to store, monitor or pet watch, abandons them, thereby putting in danger their food and the provision of care owed" faces up to six months imprisonment.

[ 275 ] Sweden [ edit ] In Sweden cruelty to animals is punishable by a financial penalty and prison for up to two years. The owner will lose the right to own animals and the animals will be removed from the owner.

[ 276 ] Switzerland [ edit ] The Swiss animal protection laws are among the strictest in the world, comprehensively regulating the treatment of animals including the size of rabbit cages, and the amount of exercise that must be provided to dogs.

[ 277 ] In the canton of Zurich an animal lawyer, Antoine Goetschel , is employed by the canton government to represent the interests of animals in animal cruelty cases.

[ 278 ] Turkey [ edit ] Under Turkey 's Animal Protection Law No. 5199, cruelty to animals is considered a criminal offense, punishable by up to four years in prison.

[ 279 ] In July 2021, Turkey banned the opening of circuses which use animals, and dolphinariums.

[ 280 ] Existing facilities will cease operations in ten years.

[ 279 ] HAYTAP , the Animal Rights Federation in Turkey, used to believe that the previous law did not contain a strong enough punishment for animal abusers.

[ 281 ] In 2024, a cruelty to animals case caused widespread outrage in social media in Turkey.

Eros , a cat kept in a housing complex in Küçükçekmece, Istanbul, was tortured to death by İbrahim Keloğlan on January 1 in the early morning. The moments when Keloğlan tortured Eros to death were recorded by the security cameras of the site. Keloğlan was released with a good behavior discount at the first hearing of the case held on February 8 at the Küçükçekmece 16th Criminal Court of First Instance. A campaign was launched on social media against Keloğlan, who was given a good behavior discount, saying "Let İbrahim Keloğlan be arrested".

[ 282 ] A similar incident also occurred in 2025. Burak Alan, who came to a Başakşehir housing complex for renovations, tortured and killed a 6-year-old cat whose name was Cezve that approached him inside the building. The moment Alan tortured the cat was recorded second by second by the building's security camera. Justice Minister Yılmaz Tunç stated, "Following images circulating on social media of a cat being brutally kicked to death in Başakşehir, Istanbul, the Küçükçekmece Chief Public Prosecutor's Office immediately launched a judicial investigation under Law No. 5199 on the Protection of Animals. The suspect has been apprehended and detained, and legal proceedings regarding the incident are being meticulously pursued. These images of violence are unacceptable, neither in good conscience nor legally. Violence against animals will never go unpunished." [ 283 ] Burak Alan, who was referred to Küçükçekmece Courthouse, was arrested under the "Animal Protection Law" and sent to prison.

[ 284 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Main article: Animal welfare in the United Kingdom In the United Kingdom , cruelty to animals is a criminal offense for which one may be jailed for up to 6 months.

[ 285 ] On 18 August 1911, the House of Commons introduced the Protection of Animals Act 1911 (c.27) following lobbying by the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals ( RSPCA ). The maximum punishment was six months of hard labour with a fine of 25 pounds.

[ 286 ] In the Metropolitan Police Act 1839 "fighting or baiting Lions, Bears, Badgers, Cocks, Dogs, or other Animals" was prohibited in London, with a penalty of up to one-month imprisonment, with possible hard labor, or up to five pounds. The law laid numerous restrictions on how, when, and where animals could be driven, wagons unloaded, etc. It also prohibited owners from letting mad dogs run loose and gave police the right to destroy any dog suspected of being rabid or any dog bitten by a suspected rabid dog. The same law prohibited the use of dogs for drawing carts.

[ 287 ] Up until then, dogs were used for delivering milk, bread, fish, meat, fruit, vegetables, animal food (the cat's-meat man), and other items for sale and for collecting refuse (the rag-and-bone man ).

[ 288 ] [ 289 ] As Nigel Rothfels notes the prohibition against dogs pulling carts in or near London caused most of the dogs to be killed by their owners [ 290 ] as they went from being contributors to the family income to unaffordable expenses. Cart dogs were replaced by people with handcarts.

[ 291 ] About 150,000 dogs were killed or abandoned. Erica Fudge quotes Hilda Kean : [ 290 ] At the heart of nineteenth-century animal welfare campaigns is the middle-class desire not to be able to see cruelty.

— Hilda Kean, Animal Rights , 1998 [ 292 ] The Protection of Animals Act 1911 [ 293 ] extended the ban on draft dogs to the rest of the kingdom. As many as 600,000 dogs were killed or abandoned.

The Protection of Animals Act 1911 has since been largely superseded by the Animal Welfare Act 2006 , [ 294 ] which also superseded and consolidated more than 20 other pieces of legislation, including the Protection of Animals Act 1934 and the Abandonment of Animals Act 1960 . The Act introduced a new welfare offense, which means that animal owners have a positive duty of care, and outlaws neglect to provide for their animals' basic needs, such as access to adequate nutrition and veterinary care.

[ 295 ] Under the Criminal Damage Act 1971 , domestic animals can be classed as property that is capable of being "damaged or destroyed". A charge of criminal damage may be appropriate for the injury or death of an animal owned by someone other than the defendant, and prosecution under the Animal Welfare Act 2006 may also be appropriate.

[ 296 ] [ 297 ] Oceania [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] In Australia, all states and territories have enacted legislation governing animal welfare. The legislation is: [ 298 ] Animal Welfare Act 1992 (ACT) [ 299 ] [ 300 ] Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1979 (NSW) [ 301 ] [ 302 ] Animal Welfare Act (NT) [ 303 ] [ 304 ] Animal Care and Protection Act 2001 (Qld) [ 305 ] [ 306 ] Animal Welfare Act 1985 (SA) [ 307 ] [ 308 ] Animal Welfare Act 1993 (Tas) [ 309 ] [ 310 ] Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1986 (Vic) [ 311 ] [ 312 ] Animal Welfare Act 2002 (WA) [ 313 ] [ 314 ] Welfare laws have been criticized as not adequately protecting animals.

[ 315 ] Whilst police maintain an overall jurisdiction in the prosecution of criminal matters, in many states officers of the RSPCA and other animal welfare charities are accorded authority to investigate and prosecute animal cruelty offenses.

New Zealand [ edit ] Further information: Animal welfare in New Zealand The Animal Welfare Act 1999 protects animals from maltreatment.

[ 316 ] See also [ edit ] Bambi effect Bear-baiting Cat burning Crimes against nature Crush fetish Hunting Moral development RSPCA Goat throwing Pain in animals Poaching Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals List of animal welfare organizations Notes [ edit ] ^ Griffin-Kremer has suggested that bull running, as distinct from bull baiting, may also have occasionally occurred in Waterford, Ireland; however, the release of the bull through the town seems to have been a protest at the failure of newly-elected mayors to provide the traditional rope, collar and buckle "at the charge of the city revenue" for the annual bull baiting.

[ 184 ] ^ The use of the bird as food is now prohibited.

[ 70 ] References [ edit ] ^ Hussain, Grace (20 August 2021).

"Animal Cruelty: What Is Animal Cruelty and How to Recognize It" .

Sentient Media . Retrieved 18 June 2022 .

^ a b Warburton, Nigel (2013).

Philosophy: the basics (5th ed.). Routledge. p. 71.

ISBN 978-0-415-69317-2 .

^ "The life of Leonardo da Vinci by Giorgio Vasari" . Yale University Library Digital Collections.

Archived from the original on 6 July 2015 . Retrieved 21 August 2015 .

^ Jones, Jonathan (30 November 2011).

"Leonardo da Vinci unleashed: the animal rights activist within the artist" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 16 October 2015 . Retrieved 21 August 2015 .

^ Nibert, David (2013).

Animal Oppression and Human Violence: Domesecration, Capitalism, and Global Conflict .

Columbia University Press . pp. 189, 233– 240, 260– 261.

ISBN 978-0-231-15189-4 .

^ Nibert, David (2011).

"Origins and Consequences of the Animal Industrial Complex" . In Steven Best ; Richard Kahn; Anthony J. Nocella II; Peter McLaren (eds.).

The Global Industrial Complex: Systems of Domination .

Rowman & Littlefield . pp.

197– 209.

ISBN 978-0739136980 .

^ Nibert, David (2013).

Animal Oppression and Human Violence: Domesecration, Capitalism, and Global Conflict .

Columbia University Press . pp.

10– 11.

ISBN 978-0231151894 .

^ Midgley, Mary (24 May 1999).

"Descartes' prisoners" .

New Statesman .

Archived from the original on 8 December 2015.

^ a b Cassuto, David N. (2007). "Bred Meat: The Cultural Foundation of the Factory Farm".

Law and Contemporary Problems .

70 (1): 59– 87.

^ Darwin, Charles (1871).

The Descent of Man . D. Appleton and Company. p.

34 .

Archived from the original on 2 August 2020 . Retrieved 2 March 2020 .

^ Rader, Priscilla, "Virtue Ethics and Non-Human Animals: The Missing Link to the Animal Liberation Movement" (2012). Humanities Capstone Projects. Paper 13.

^ "An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation" .

ebooks.adelaide.edu.au . Archived from the original on 8 September 2015 . Retrieved 5 April 2017 .

^ a b Norwood, FB; Lusk, JL (2010). "Direct versus indirect questioning: An application to the well-being of farm animals".

Soc Indic Res .

96 (3): 551– 565.

doi : 10.1007/s11205-009-9492-z .

S2CID 145217722 .

^ a b "Pet-Abuse.Com – Animal Cruelty" . Pet-abuse.com.

Archived from the original on 11 December 2008 . Retrieved 6 November 2008 .

^ Lockwood, Randall; Hodge, Guy R. (1986).

"The tangled web of animal abuse: The links between cruelty to animals and human violence" .

Readings in Research and Applications : 77– 82.

Archived from the original on 23 June 2015.

^ Arluke, A.

; Levin, J.; Luke, C.; Ascione, F. (1999). "The relationship of animal abuse to violence and other forms of antisocial behavior".

Journal of Interpersonal Violence .

14 (9): 963– 975.

doi : 10.1177/088626099014009004 .

S2CID 145797691 .

^ Alleyne, E.

; Tilston, L.; Parfitt, C.; Butcher, R. (2015).

"Adult-perpetrated animal abuse: development of a proclivity scale" (PDF) .

Psychology, Crime & Law .

21 (6): 570– 588.

doi : 10.1080/1068316X.2014.999064 .

S2CID 143576557 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 July 2020 . Retrieved 5 December 2019 .

^ Baxendale, S.; Lester, L.; Johnston, R.; Cross, D. (2015). "Risk factors in adolescents' involvement in violent behaviours".

Journal of Aggression, Conflict and Peace Research .

7 (1): 2– 18.

doi : 10.1108/jacpr-09-2013-0025 .

^ Fitzgerald, Amy J.; Kalof, Linda; Dietz, Thomas (2009).

"Slaughterhouses and Increased Crime Rates: An Empirical Analysis of the Spillover From "The Jungle" Into the Surrounding Community" .

Organization & Environment .

22 (2). Santa Barbara, California: SAGE Publications : 158– 184.

doi : 10.1177/1350508416629456 .

S2CID 148368906 .

Archived from the original on 25 May 2019 . Retrieved 30 October 2019 .

^ Muri, K.; Augusti, E.M.; Bjørnholt, M.; Hafstad, G.S (2022).

"Childhood experiences of companion animal abuse and its co-occurrence with domestic abuse: Evidence from a national youth survey in Norway" .

Journal of Interpersonal Violence .

37 ( 23– 24): NP22627 – NP22646 .

doi : 10.1177/08862605211072176 .

PMC 9679564 .

PMID 35156447 .

S2CID 246806885 .

^ a b Felthous, Alan R. (1998).

Aggression against Cats, Dogs, and People. In Cruelty to Animals and Interpersonal Violence: Readings in Research and Applications . West Lafayette, Indiana: Purdue University Press. pp.

159– 167.

^ Goleman, Daniel (7 August 1991).

"Clues to a Dark Nurturing Ground for One Serial Killer" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 23 August 2020 . Retrieved 30 April 2010 .

^ Gibson, Caitlin (24 September 2014).

"Loudoun Program Underscores the Link between Domestic Violence, Animal Abuse" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 16 September 2016.

^ "Facts About Animal Abuse & Domestic Violence" .

American Humane Association . Archived from the original on 20 November 2012 . Retrieved 12 November 2006 .

^ "Domestic Violence & the Animal Abuse Link" . Animaltherapy.net. Archived from the original on 29 December 2008 . Retrieved 6 November 2008 .

^ Duncan, A.; et al. (2005). "Significance of Family Risk Factors in Development of Childhood Animal Cruelty in Adolescent Boys with Conduct Problems".

Journal of Family Violence .

20 (4): 235– 239.

doi : 10.1007/s10896-005-5987-9 .

S2CID 40008466 .

^ "Animal Cruelty and Family Violence: Making the Connection" .

Humane Society of the United States . Archived from the original on 25 October 2008 . Retrieved 26 October 2008 .

^ Messamore, W. E. (29 February 2020).

"YouTube Has a Vile Monkey Torture Community That Needs Nuking" .

CCN.com . Retrieved 4 July 2024 .

^ Ajengrastri, Astudestra; Gunter, Joel; Henschke, Rebecca (19 June 2023).

"Hunting the monkey torturers" .

BBC News . Retrieved 4 July 2024 .

^ Festing, Simon; Wilkinson, Robin (June 2007).

"The ethics of animal research. Talking Point on the use of animals in scientific research" .

EMBO Reports .

8 (6): 526– 530.

doi : 10.1038/sj.embor.7400993 .

ISSN 1469-221X .

PMC 2002542 .

PMID 17545991 .

^ Reddy, Navya; Lynch, Barry; Gujral, Jaspreet; Karnik, Kavita (September 2023). "Regulatory landscape of alternatives to animal testing in food safety evaluations with a focus on the western world".

Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology .

143 105470.

doi : 10.1016/j.yrtph.2023.105470 .

ISSN 1096-0295 .

PMID 37591329 .

S2CID 260938742 .

^ Petetta, Francesca; Ciccocioppo, Roberto (November 2021).

"Public perception of laboratory animal testing: Historical, philosophical, and ethical view" .

Addiction Biology .

26 (6): e12991.

doi : 10.1111/adb.12991 .

ISSN 1369-1600 .

PMC 9252265 .

PMID 33331099 .

^ Mangin, Arthur (23 August 1865).

"L'air et le monde aérien" . Tours, A. Mame et fils.

Archived from the original on 1 April 2016 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 – via Internet Archive.

^ Taylor, Alfred S. (October 1832).

"An Account of the Grotta del Cane; With Remarks Upon Suffocation by Carbonic Acid" .

The London Medical and Physical Journal . New Series.

LXVIII (76): 278– 285.

Archived from the original on 29 July 2020 . Retrieved 6 June 2020 .

^ Fleming & Johnson, Toxic Airs: Body, Place, Planet in Historical Perspective, Pittsburgh, 255–256.

^ Kroonenberg, Why Hell Stinks of Sulfur: Mythology and Geology of the Underworld, Chicago, 2013, 41–45.

^ a b The Ritual Preparation of the Pinikpikan , gobaguio.com ^ "The Brutal, Bloody Story Behind Pinikpikan" . 11 January 2015.

^ "Chicken Torture" .

Manila Standard . Retrieved 10 November 2021 .

^ Locsin, Rina (February 2006).

"Relocating Pinikpikan in Baguio City" .

Plaridel .

3 : 69– 86.

doi : 10.52518/2006.3.1-04mlcsn .

S2CID 257872233 .

^ "Republic Act No. 10631" .

Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines . Official Gazette . Retrieved 19 May 2016 .

^ "Miért élve főzik meg a homárt?" . 10 April 2018.

^ Sachkova, Margarita (28 April 2022).

"Huge Milestone! UK Law Now Recognises Animals as Being Sentient" .

PETA UK . Retrieved 16 March 2023 .

^ Asian Animal Protection Network Archived July 22, 2012, at the Wayback Machine . Aapn.org. Retrieved on 2011-09-26.

^ Czaja, Olaf (4 March 2019).

"The use of insects in Tibetan medicine" .

Centre pour l'Édition Électronique Ouverte .

50 (50).

doi : 10.4000/emscat.3994 .

ISSN 0766-5075 .

^ SAHA, GOUTAM KUMAR; MAZUMDAR, SUBHENDU (1 July 2017).

WILDLIFE BIOLOGY: AN INDIAN PERSPECTIVE . PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd.

ISBN 978-81-203-5313-8 .

^ Feng Y, Siu K, Wang N, Ng KM, Tsao SW, Nagamatsu T, Tong Y (2009).

"Bear bile: dilemma of traditional medicinal use and animal protection" .

Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine .

5 (1) 2.

doi : 10.1186/1746-4269-5-2 .

PMC 2630947 .

PMID 19138420 .

^ Hance, J. (2015).

"Is the end of 'house of horror' bear bile factories in sight?" .

The Guardian .

^ Gong, J. & Harris, R. B. (2006). "The status of bears in China".

Understanding Asian Bears to Secure Their Future . Japan Bear Network (compiler), Ibaraki, Japan. pp.

96– 101.

^ MacGregor, F. (2010).

"Inside a bear bile farm in Laos" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

^ Jacobs, A. (2013).

"Folk remedy extracted from captive bears stirs furor in China" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 8 October 2013 .

^ Gwang-lip, M. (2009).

"Vietnamese urge Koreans not to travel for bear bile" .

Korea JoongAng Daily . Archived from the original on 9 July 2012.

^ Black, R. (2007).

"BBC Test kit targets cruel bear trade" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2009 . Retrieved 1 January 2010 .

^ "Pills, Powders, Vials and Flakes: the bear bile trade in Asia" (PDF) .

Traffic . 2011.

^ "Bear Bile Farming" .

Animals Asia . Retrieved 23 October 2020 .

^ Mahendradatta, M.; Tawali, A. B. (2012).

Comparison of chemical characteristics and sensory value between luwak coffee and original coffee from China ( Coffea arabica L) and Robusta ( Coffea canephora L) varieties (PDF) . Makassar: Food Science and Technology Study Program, Department of Agricultural Technology, Faculty of Agriculture, Hasanuddin University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 October 2013 . Retrieved 21 August 2019 .

^ Shepherd, C. (2012).

"Observations of small carnivores in Jakarta wildlife markets, Indonesia, with notes on trade in Javan Ferret Badger Melogale orientalis and on the increasing demand for Common Palm Civet Paradoxurus hermaphroditus for civet coffee production" .

Small Carnivore Conservation .

47 : 38– 41.

S2CID 129958721 .

^ Wild, T. (2014).

"Civet cat coffee: can world's most expensive brew be made sustainably?" .

The Guardian .

^ "Civet cat coffee: A delicious beverage or a case of animal cruelty?" .

ABC News . 2015.

Archived from the original on 12 April 2015 . Retrieved 12 April 2015 .

^ "Coffee, civets and conservation" .

The Sunday Times Sri Lanka . 2015.

Archived from the original on 10 March 2015 . Retrieved 12 April 2015 .

^ Society for Science and the Public (1945), "Snakes from Okinawa", The Science News-Letter , 48 (14): 211– 212, doi : 10.2307/3922011 , JSTOR 3922011 ^ "Worm or Snake: Which do you prefer in your liquor?" . 15 August 2007. Archived from the original on 5 April 2012 . Retrieved 2 December 2011 .

^ "Brehm: Az állatok világa / 1. Nagy tengeri teknősök (Chelonia Latr.)" .

^ Nelson, B.

"7 animals that are eaten alive by humans" .

mnn.com . Mother Nature Network . Retrieved 4 January 2014 .

^ Hogenboom, Melissa (19 October 2014).

"Is bushmeat behind Ebola outbreak?" .

BBC News . Retrieved 16 September 2018 .

^ Hodal, Kate (27 September 2013).

"How eating dog became big business in Vietnam" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 22 February 2020 .

^ "Activists protest against cat eating in Shenzhen." In: Xinhua.

June 18, 2006.

[1] ^ Zheng Caixiong: "City bans popular Cantonese dish of snake and cat." In: China Daily.

November 6, 2007.

[2] ^ Merritt Clifton: "Guangzhou bans eating snakes—ban helps cats." In: Animal People.

November 2007.

[3] Archived March 4, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Az étel, ami annyira bűnös, hogy Isten szemei elől egy lepel alá bújva kell megenni" .

telex . 8 January 2022.

^ "Az étel, ami annyira bűnös, hogy Isten szemei elől egy lepel alá bújva kell megenni" . 8 January 2022.

^ "Chauvet Cave (ca. 30,000 B.C.)", Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History, The Metropolitan Museum of Art, retrieved May 9, 2012" . October 2002.

Archived from the original on 5 September 2012 . Retrieved 9 May 2012 .

^ Early Domestication of Horse Archived 2012-12-02 at the Wayback Machine , Lilian Lam, Swarthmore College Environmental Studies, retrieved May 9, 2012 ^ p. 21. Élise Rousseau. 2017.

Horses of the World.

Princeton University Press.

^ Hile, Jennifer (16 October 2002).

"Activists Denounce Thailand's Elephant "Crushing" Ritual" .

National Geographic Society . Archived from the original on 18 February 2007 . Retrieved 1 October 2014 .

Just before dawn in the remote highlands of northern Thailand, west of the village Mae Jaem, four-year-old elephant bellows as seven village men stab nails into her ears and feet. She is tied up and immobilized in a small, wooden cage. Her cries are the only sounds to interrupt the otherwise quiet countryside. The cage is called a "training crush." It's the centerpiece of a centuries-old ritual in northern Thailand designed to domesticate young elephants. In addition to beatings, handlers use sleep deprivation, hunger, and thirst to "break" the elephants' spirit and make them submissive to their owners.

^ Maulekhi, G. (13 January 2017).

"Jallikattu: Bull taming is cruelty at its best, TN parties using it for political gains" . FirstPost . Retrieved 25 January 2017 .

^ Rajagopol, Krishnadas (22 September 2016).

"SC to hear Animal Welfare Board's petition challenging jallikattu order" .

The Hindu .

^ Ramakrishnan, T.

"Governor clears ordinance on 'jallikattu' " .

The Hindu . Retrieved 26 February 2017 .

^ Valerie Porter; Lawrence Alderson; Stephen J.G. Hall; D. Phillip Sponenberg (9 March 2016).

Mason's World Encyclopedia of Livestock Breeds and Breeding, 2 Volume Pack . CAB International. p. 275.

ISBN 9781845934668 .

^ Ramesh, C.; Mariayyah, P.; Senthilkumar, A.; Rajendran, K. (2014). "A Study of Sports and Recreational Activities of Pura Village People and their Attitude Towards these Activities".

Journal of Recent Research and Applied Studies .

1 (7): 89– 94.

^ "Save the bulls, support the ban" . FIAPO. Archived from the original on 17 January 2017 . Retrieved 15 January 2016 .

^ PTI.

"PETA: Jallikattu stay 'partial victory' for bulls" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 26 February 2017 .

^ "PETA founder held in India over bullfight protest" .

Reuters . Retrieved 8 January 2016 .

^ a b "Pilikula Nisargadhama plays host to Kambala" .

The Hindu . 10 January 2012 . Retrieved 7 December 2012 .

^ Lynsey Patterson; Jaimie T. A. Dick; Robert W. Elwood (2009). "Claw removal and feeding ability in the edible crab, Cancer pagurus : implications for fishery practice".

Applied Animal Behaviour Science .

116 (2): 302– 305.

doi : 10.1016/j.applanim.2008.08.007 .

^ Dollimore, Laurence (4 February 2018).

"Seven Snish Traditions of Extreme Animal TortureThat Must be Stopped" .

The Olive Press .

^ "What is bullfighting?" . League Against Cruel Sports. Archived from the original on 30 September 2011.

^ "The suffering of bullfighting bulls" . Archived from the original on 26 January 2009.

^ The Bulletpoint Bullfight , p. 6, ISBN 978-1-4116-7400-4 ^ "Toro Jubilo fiesta returns to Medinaceli, Soria" .

Typically Spanish – Spain News . 29 October 2012. Archived from the original on 29 October 2012.

^ Bradford, Alina (31 July 2014).

"Rams: Facts About Male Bighorn Sheep" .

Live Science .

^ "Ram Fighting Battles For Acceptance in Nigeria" .

NBC News . 25 March 2016.

^ Eveleth, Rose (18 November 2013).

"There Are People Who Wrestle Bears, And They Say the Bears Could Win If They Wanted To" . smithsonianmag.com.

^ Cyriaque Lamar (2 July 2012).

"This is history's greatest photo of a bear beating up a man" .

Io9.gizmodo.com . Retrieved 24 February 2017 .

^ Kurchak, Sarah (29 June 2015).

"The Twisted and Terrible History of Men Fighting Bears" .

Fightland.vice.com . Retrieved 24 February 2017 .

^ Ryan Dilbert (13 August 2015).

"Exploring the Strange History of Pro Wrestlers Battling Bears" .

Bleacher Report . Retrieved 24 February 2017 .

^ "Reactions and Controversies" . El Rancahuaso. 2006 . Retrieved 9 August 2009 .

^ "Joven de 17 años laceada y arrastrada en un rodeo" . YouTube. 2010 . Retrieved 2 October 2011 .

^ "Circus bans" .

Stop Circus Suffering . Retrieved 3 November 2019 .

^ "Circus Incidents: Attacks, Abuse and Property Damage" (PDF) .

Humane Society of the United States . 1 June 2004.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 15 December 2015 .

^ "Circuses" .

Humane Society of the United States .

Archived from the original on 22 December 2015 . Retrieved 15 December 2015 .

^ Patton, K (1 April 2007).

"Frequently Asked Questions: Do circus trainers/handlers abuse animals?" . lionden.com. Archived from the original on 21 June 2008 . Retrieved 23 May 2008 .

^ Bolivia bans all circus animals Archived 21 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine . Associated Press (via Guardian). 31 July 2009. Retrieved on 14 December 2011.

^ Gunter, Joel; Henschke, Rebecca; Ajengrastri, Astudestra (19 June 2023).

"Global network of sadistic monkey torture exposed by BBC" .

BBC News . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

^ Pearce, Tilly (19 December 2019).

"Don't F**k With Cats: The horrifying truth of murderer Luka Magnotta" .

Metro . Retrieved 16 December 2023 .

^ Echarry, Irina (18 November 2018).

"Zoosadism in Cuba and No Law to Punish it" .

Havana Times .

^ Zielinski, Jen (18 August 2021).

"Kelowna hamster killer handed conditional sentence, not allowed in pet stores" .

Summerland Review . Retrieved 17 September 2023 .

^ Potenteau, Doyle (18 August 2021).

"Kelowna man, 21, receives conditional sentence for torturing, killing hamsters — Okanagan" .

Global News . Retrieved 17 September 2023 .

^ Times online, timesonline.co.uk Archived 19 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine 19 August 2007. Retrieved 25 August 2007.

^ Uproar at fish cruelty on YouTube . practicalfishkeeping.co.uk. 17 May 2007.

^ Knowles, Tom (25 March 2021).

"YouTube bans fake animal rescue videos" .

The Times & The Sunday Times . Retrieved 18 May 2024 .

^ Sherman, Mark (10 April 2010).

"Court voids law aimed at animal cruelty videos" . Associated Press. Archived from the original on 12 May 2012 . Retrieved 10 April 2010 .

^ a b "Turner Classic Movies - TCM.com" .

Turner Classic Movies .

Archived from the original on 16 August 2016 . Retrieved 20 July 2016 .

^ "27 Jun 1982, Page 14 - The Pantagraph at Newspapers.com" .

Archived from the original on 27 August 2016 . Retrieved 20 July 2016 .

[subscription required] ^ "30 Sep 1980, Page 56 - St. Louis Post-Dispatch at Newspapers.com" .

Archived from the original on 18 August 2016 . Retrieved 20 July 2016 .

^ Andy McKeague, An Interview with Kim Ki-Duk and Suh Jung on The Isle Archived 28 November 2007 at the Wayback Machine at monstersandcritics.com, 11 May 2005. Retrieved 11 March 2006.

^ "Pointless Cannibal Holocaust Sequel in the Works" .

Fangoria . Archived from the original on 21 February 2007 . Retrieved 13 January 2007 .

^ "Elek Judit megvédte a filmjét, ami miatt állatkínzással vádolják" .

^ a b c "Kuruc.info – Kismacskát fojtott meg a zsidó rendező – otthoni számával + videóval frissítve" .

^ "Film ∙ Elégia" .

^ "Ahol a kurtafarkú túr – malacok a moziban" . 6 February 2009.

^ "Megszüntették a nyomozást a filmen vízbe fojtott macska ügyében" . 13 January 2008.

^ "Entertainment Industry FAQ" . Archived from the original on 16 June 2008.

^ Movie Rating System. Earning Our Disclaimer . American humane. org ^ "Texas Town Welcomes Rattlesnakes, Handlers" . Associated Press. 11 March 2006. Archived from the original on 29 March 2006 . Retrieved 26 February 2008 .

^ Arena, Phillip C.; et al. (1995).

"Rattlesnake Round-ups" . In Knight, Richard L.; Gutzwiller, Kevin J. (eds.).

Wildlife and recreationists: coexistence through management and research . Island Press. pp.

313– 322.

ISBN 978-1-55963-257-7 .

Archived from the original on 23 August 2020 . Retrieved 11 August 2019 .

^ "American Society of Ichthyologists and herpetologists position paper on Rattlesnake roundups" (PDF) . American Society of Ichthyologists and herpetologists. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 May 2008 . Retrieved 7 October 2008 .

^ Rubio, Manny (1998). "Rattlesnake roundups".

Rattlesnake: Portrait of a Predator . Smithsonian Books.

ISBN 1-56098-808-8 .

Archived from the original on 23 August 2020 . Retrieved 7 August 2019 .

^ "Noxen Rattlesnake Roundup" .

Noxen, Pa . Retrieved 3 November 2015 .

^ "Environmentalists Tackle the Rattlesnake Rodeo" . Associated Press. 21 April 2010.

Archived from the original on 29 May 2013 . Retrieved 7 August 2019 .

^ Guzoo Animal Farm Archived May 10, 2008, at the Wayback Machine , website about Canadian roadside zoos, accessed June 18, 2009.

^ Roadside zoo animals starving.

Archived 2016-03-12 at the Wayback Machine Free Lance-Star.

11 Jan. 1997.

^ Dixon, Jennifer.

House panel told of abuses by zoos.

Archived 2016-03-12 at the Wayback Machine Times Daily.

8 July 1992.

^ Bale, Rachael (17 August 2016).

"Fur Farms Still Unfashionably Cruel, Critics Say" . National Geographic. Archived from the original on 1 October 2019 . Retrieved 5 November 2020 .

^ "Why Sport Hunting Is Cruel and Unnecessary" .

PETA . 15 December 2003.

Archived from the original on 23 November 2013 . Retrieved 20 March 2020 .

^ "Hunting" .

Animal Ethics . Archived from the original on 9 September 2017 . Retrieved 20 March 2020 .

^ "Why Sport Hunting Is Cruel and Unnecessary" .

PETA . 15 December 2003.

^ Salt, H.S. (1899) The Logic of Vegetarianism: Essays and Dialogues. London.

^ a b c Matheny, Gaverick; Leahy, Cheryl (2007). "Farm-Animal Welfare, Legislation, and Trade".

Law and Contemporary Problems .

70 (1): 325– 358.

^ "Are Farm Animals Not Considered Animals?" .

The Huffington Post . 25 August 2014.

Archived from the original on 27 August 2014.

^ "Video: Shocking undercover footage from an egg hatchery – Telegraph" .

Telegraph.co.uk . 1 September 2009. Archived from the original on 8 March 2018.

^ "Are we the cruellest we've ever been? The way we treat animals suggests we are" . 19 October 2015.

Archived from the original on 23 November 2015 . Retrieved 12 November 2015 .

^ Fiber-Ostrow, Pamela; Lovell, Jarret S (2016). "Behind a veil of secrecy: animal abuse, factory farms, and Ag-Gag legislation".

Contemporary Justice Review .

19 (2): 230– 249.

doi : 10.1080/10282580.2016.1168257 .

^ AVMA Guidelines for the Euthanasia of Animals: 2013 Edition Archived 1 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine . avma. org ^ "Executive Board meets pressing needs" . September 2006.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2014.

^ Rev. Sci. Tech. Off. Int. Epiz.,. Global Perspectives on Animal Welfare: Asia, the Far East, and Oceania (n.d.): n. pag. 24 February 2005. Web.

^ Richard A. Oppel Jr. (6 April 2013).

"Taping of Farm Cruelty Is Becoming the Crime" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 7 April 2013 . Retrieved 7 April 2013 .

^ Monsalve, S; Hammerschmidt, J; Izar, ML; Marconcin, S; Rizzato, F; Polo, G; Garcia, R (1 September 2018). "Associated factors of companion animal neglect in the family environment in Pinhais, Brazil".

Preventive Veterinary Medicine .

157 : 19– 25.

doi : 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2018.05.017 .

PMID 30086845 .

^ "U.S. Facing Feral-Dog Crisis" . Archived from the original on 21 April 2014.

^ "Why no-pet rental clauses lack teeth" .

thestar.com . 7 December 2012.

Archived from the original on 20 July 2017.

^ "No-pet policy for Man. renters could be outlawed" . 15 February 2010.

Archived from the original on 13 April 2014.

^ "The Mutilations (Permitted Procedures) (England) Regulations 2007" .

^ "Federal Act on the Protection of Animals (Austria) 12 August 2014" .

^ Silva, Francisco Vaniclei Araújo da; Monteiro, Wuelton Marcelo; Bernarde, Paulo Sérgio (2019).

" 'Kambô' frog (Phyllomedusa bicolor): use in folk medicine and potential health risks" .

Revista da Sociedade Brasileira de Medicina Tropical .

52 : e20180467.

doi : 10.1590/0037-8682-0467-2018 .

ISSN 1678-9849 .

PMID 30942261 .

S2CID 92997082 .

^ "Douglas spink case" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . 17 April 2010 . Retrieved 5 July 2024 .

^ "Writhing shipment yeilds smuggled cocaine – UPI Archives" .

UPI .

^ "Exotic animals trapped in net of drug trade" .

Reuters . 6 February 2009.

^ "Facts and figures on the EU horsemeat trade" . Humane Society International. 2014.

Archived from the original on 25 January 2019 . Retrieved 19 September 2016 .

^ Andelt, William F. (1993).

Publication No. 6.517 Proper use of snares for capturing furbearers (PDF) . Colorado State University Cooperative Extension . Retrieved 16 April 2009 .

^ "League Against Cruel Sports : Snaring" . League.org.uk. Archived from the original on 15 November 2009 . Retrieved 15 June 2009 .

^ "Glue Traps: FAQs" .

Humane Society International . 22 September 2015 . Retrieved 12 September 2019 .

^ "Glue Boards" .

humanesociety.org . Retrieved 19 December 2023 .

^ "Animals in War – The unseen casualties" .

Animal Aid . 1 June 2003. Archived from the original on 20 November 2008 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ Price, Eluned (1 November 2004).

"They served and suffered for us" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on 16 October 2011 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "Animal war heroes statue unveiled" .

BBC News . 24 November 2004.

Archived from the original on 16 February 2009 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ Naughton, Philippe (4 March 2008).

"Puppy-toss video makes Marine figure of hate" .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on 13 May 2008 . Retrieved 4 September 2009 .

^ Schwartzkopf-Genswein, K. S.; Stookey, J. M.; Welford, R. (1 August 1997). "Behavior of cattle during hot-iron and freeze branding and the effects on subsequent handling ease".

Journal of Animal Science .

75 (8): 2064– 2072.

doi : 10.2527/1997.7582064x .

ISSN 0021-8812 .

PMID 9263052 .

S2CID 18911989 .

^ Coetzee, Hans (19 May 2013).

Pain Management, An Issue of Veterinary Clinics: Food Animal Practice . Elsevier Health Sciences.

ISBN 978-1-4557-7376-3 .

Archived from the original on 29 July 2020 . Retrieved 5 April 2017 .

^ "Welfare Implications of Dehorning and Disbudding Cattle" .

www.avma.org .

Archived from the original on 23 June 2017 . Retrieved 5 April 2017 .

^ Goode, Erica (25 January 2012).

"Ear-Tagging Proposal May Mean Fewer Branded Cattle" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2017 . Retrieved 5 April 2017 .

^ Grandin, Temple (21 July 2015).

Improving Animal Welfare, 2 Edition: A Practical Approach . CABI.

ISBN 978-1-78064-467-7 .

Archived from the original on 29 July 2020 . Retrieved 5 April 2017 .

^ "Restraint of Livestock" .

www.grandin.com .

Archived from the original on 13 December 2017 . Retrieved 5 April 2017 .

^ Doyle, Rebecca; Moran, John (3 February 2015).

Cow Talk: Understanding Dairy Cow Behaviour to Improve Their Welfare on Asian Farms . Csiro Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4863-0162-1 .

Archived from the original on 29 July 2020 . Retrieved 5 April 2017 .

^ a b "The Issue" .

Stop Yulin Forever . Archived from the original on 31 October 2019 . Retrieved 5 November 2019 .

^ Rogers, Martin.

"Inside the grim scene of a Korean dog meat farm, just miles from the Winter Olympics" .

USA TODAY .

Archived from the original on 8 January 2020 . Retrieved 5 November 2019 .

^ "Sheep dentistry, including tooth trimming" . Australian Veterinary Association.

Archived from the original on 25 July 2014 . Retrieved 1 May 2013 .

^ "Stunning of Pigs with Carbon Dioxide: Submission to the OIE by the International Coalition for Animal Welfare" (PDF) .

International Coalition for Animal Welfare . 20 December 2019. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 December 2019 . Retrieved 29 March 2021 .

^ Bertrand, M (27 January 1967). "Training without reward: traditional training of pig-tailed macaques as coconut harvesters".

Science .

155 (3761): 484– 6.

Bibcode : 1967Sci...155..484B .

doi : 10.1126/science.155.3761.484 .

PMID 4959310 .

^ Barclay, Eliza (19 October 2015).

"What's Funny About The Business Of Monkeys Picking Coconuts?" .

NPR .

^ "The truth behind the "widespread" practice of monkeys harvesting coconuts in Thailand impacting on consumers & retailers" .

Vegworld Magazine . 31 July 2020 . Retrieved 18 April 2021 .

^ Pratruangkrai, Petchanet (16 July 2020).

"Focus: Thai coconut farmers reject monkey abuse charges, suffer lost income" .

Kyodo News . Retrieved 18 April 2021 .

^ Loyola, James A. (23 July 2020).

"Philippine coconut industry: No monkey business here" .

Manila Bulletin . Retrieved 18 April 2021 .

^ Croke, Vicki (1997).

The Modern Ark . Scribner.

^ Griffin-Kremer 2003 , pp. 107–8.

^ Peacock 1904 , p. 199.

^ Malcolmson 1973 , p. 133.

^ "Stamford Bull Running".

The Times . London. 17 November 1838. p. 5.

^ Bushaway 1993 , p. 76.

^ "Country News".

The Times . London. 18 August 1788. p. 4.

^ Rebold Benton, Janetta (1 April 1997).

Holy Terrors: Gargoyles on Medieval Buildings . Abbeville Press. pp.

82 .

ISBN 9780789201829 .

^ The Great Carver Show, Jumper, Diving Horse, and Sonora Webster the Horse Jumper ^ Dedicated to The Diving Horses Archived April 21, 2006, at the Wayback Machine ^ St. Clair, Stanislas Graham Bower; Brophy, Charles A. (1869).

A residence in Bulgaria . London: J. Murray. p. 39.

OL 24240013M .

^ "Definition of GEEK" . merriam-webster.com. 11 August 2023.

^ Meyer, Amelia (12 January 2011).

"1939: The year of goldfish gulping" .

National Museum of American History Behring Center . Smithsonian National Museum of American History . Retrieved 13 March 2019 .

^ " "Kots kaal pato, un ritual de sangre y muerte en Yucatán" " .

VICE (in Spanish). 25 December 2015 . Retrieved 3 January 2016 .

^ "Legislature Related to Animals in Egyptian Law" (PDF) .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Humanity, through animal care Archived 16 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine . Weekly.ahram.org.eg (10 September 2003). Retrieved on 14 December 2011.

^ (Not-So-) BIZARRE DOG LAW California Man Faces Life in Prison for Killing Dog; and Tennessee Judge Slam-Dunks Puppy Mill Owners 14 July 2002 Dogs in the News Archived 19 December 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Dennis C. Turner (26 June 2000).

The domestic cat: the biology of its behaviour . Cambridge University Press. pp. 185–.

ISBN 978-0-521-63648-3 .

Archived from the original on 13 October 2013 . Retrieved 15 December 2011 .

^ "Nigeria | World Animal Protection" .

api.world animal protection. org . Retrieved 17 June 2022 .

Despite the fact that there is no report that anybody has ever been tried and convicted for the offense, the 1999 Constitution prohibits the abuse of animals under Miscellaneous Offences. It states in Chapter 50 on 'Cruelly to Animals' that any person who cruelly beats, kicks, ill-treats, over-rides, over-drives, over-loads, tortures, infuriates, or terrifies any animal, or causes or procures, or, being the owner, permits any animal to be so used "is guilty of an offense of cruelty and is liable to imprisonment for six months or to a fine of fifty nairas, or to both such imprisonment and fine." ^ "NSPCA Cares about all Animals" . Nspca.co.za.

Archived from the original on 5 October 2018 . Retrieved 4 October 2018 .

^ The Penal Code Act, 2008 Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine . sudantribune.com ^ "LEY 14346 – MALOS TRATOS Y ACTOS DE CRUELDAD A LOS ANIMALES" (PDF) . Gobierno República de Argentina.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 December 2014 . Retrieved 7 September 2013 .

^ a b "Cattle and Other Animals" Archived 4 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine , Criminal Code, s. 445.

^ "Assaults" Archived 11 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine , Criminal Code, s. 264.1(1)(c).

^ "A Report on Animal Welfare Law in Canada" Archived 11 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine , Alberta Farm Animal Care, June 2004.

^ "Canine carcasses at Edmonton restaurant were coyotes – Canada – CBC News" . 17 March 2016. Archived from the original on 17 March 2016 . Retrieved 5 November 2019 .

^ "2014 Canadian Animal Protection Laws Rankings" Archived 10 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine , 5 June 2014, Animal Legal Defense Fund, report available for download at the link.

^ "Ley 20380, SOBRE PROTECCIÓN DE ANIMALES" (PDF) (in Spanish). MINISTERIO DE SALUD; SUBSECRETARÍA DE SALUD PÚBLICA. October 2009.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 January 2016 . Retrieved 7 September 2013 .

^ "Colombian president offers to grant bullfighting status of cultural heritage" . Retrieved 17 October 2012 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Arias, L (12 June 2017).

"President Solís signs new Animal Welfare Law" .

The Tico Times . Costa Rica.

Archived from the original on 1 August 2020 . Retrieved 1 August 2020 .

^ Arias, L (14 May 2017).

"Lawmakers pass Animal Welfare Bill on first-round vote" .

The Tico Times . Costa Rica.

Archived from the original on 1 August 2020 . Retrieved 1 August 2020 .

^ Khan, Carrie (27 August 2016).

"After Losing Half A Beak, Grecia The Toucan Becomes A Symbol Against Abuse" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on 14 September 2016 . Retrieved 14 September 2016 .

^ "Finally, reform to the Penal Code of Mexico City on animal abuse" . Archived from the original on 14 April 2013 . Retrieved 9 February 2013 .

^ "Lawmakers seek to position Federal enforcement of the Law of Animal Protection of the Federal District" .

Archived from the original on 22 July 2013 . Retrieved 9 February 2013 .

^ "Legislative History of the Animal Welfare Act" .

Archived from the original on 2 March 2013 . Retrieved 7 April 2010 .

^ "Annual Study Names 2013's "Top Five States to be an Animal Abuser" " .

Animal Legal Defense Fund . Archived from the original on 22 July 2014 . Retrieved 22 July 2014 .

^ Book Review: Brute Force: Animal Police and the Challenge of Cruelty Archived 28 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine . ccja-acjp.ca. Retrieved on 14 December 2011.

^ a b Emery, David.

"Florida to Consider Ban on Cow Tipping" . About.com.

Archived from the original on 4 July 2007 . Retrieved 7 June 2007 .

^ "ALDF: U.S. Jurisdictions With and Without Felony Animal Cruelty Provisions" . Aldf.org. Archived from the original on 29 June 2009 . Retrieved 29 April 2009 .

^ "Accused Dog Killer Could Get 25 Years to Life in Prison" . Archived from the original on 18 August 2010 . Retrieved 6 November 2008 .

^ Judge allows California cities to ban cat declawing Archived 18 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine . Sfgate.com (11 October 2007). Retrieved on 14 December 2011.

^ "Norfolk Bans De-Clawing Of Cats" . Archived from the original on 11 December 2008.

^ " 'Animal crush' video charges dismissed in the first case under new law" .

POLITICO . 23 April 2013.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2013.

^ Zaveri, Mihir (25 November 2019).

"President Trump Signs Federal Animal Cruelty Bill Into Law" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 10 October 2020 .

^ Zarrell, Matt (25 November 2019).

"President Trump signs animal cruelty bill into law, making it a federal felony" .

ABC News .

^ "PorkNet Newsletter" . MetaFarms.com, Inc. 7 November 2002. Archived from the original on 14 March 2006 . Retrieved 3 July 2008 .

^ "Criminal Justice and Judiciary" . California State Senate. 2004. Archived from the original on 18 February 2011.

^ "AB-732 Analysis" . California State Assembly. 14 January 2008. Archived from the original on 26 July 2010.

^ "2007 Mid Year Summary" . California Assembly Committee on Agriculture. 2007. Archived from the original on 10 January 2010.

^ "AB-594 Analysis" . California State Assembly. 9 May 2008. Archived from the original on 11 October 2008.

^ Andrea Johnson, "Polls Indicate Strong Support for Pen Gestation for Hogs" Archived 22 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine . 29 March 2007 ^ "Back door activists gain momentum" . Learfield Communications, Inc. 5 July 2007. Archived from the original on 17 July 2012 . Retrieved 3 July 2008 .

^ "Farm Animal Welfare Bill Killed in Legislature". Omaha World Daily. 17 February 2008.

^ "Farm Sanctuary Applauds Colorado for Passing Legislation Phasing out Veal and Gestation Crates" .

Reuters . 14 May 2008. Archived from the original on 11 November 2009 . Retrieved 3 July 2008 .

^ "Farm Animal Welfare Measure Becomes Law" . Federation of Animal Science Societies (FASS). 14 May 2008.

Archived from the original on 15 June 2008 . Retrieved 3 July 2008 .

^ Asamblea Nacional de la República Bolivariana de Venezuela.

"LEY PARA LA PROTECCIÓN DE LA FAUNA DOMÉSTICA LIBRE Y EN CAUTIVERIO" (PDF) . Diario El Universal. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 December 2013 . Retrieved 7 September 2013 .

^ Reich, Aaron (10 June 2021).

"Israel bans sale of fur to the fashion industry, the first country to do so" .

The Jerusalem Post | JPost.com .

Archived from the original on 9 June 2021 . Retrieved 16 December 2021 .

^ Richard Spencer.

Just who is the glamorous kitten killer of Hangzhou?

Archived 22 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine 3 April 2006.

^ SBS Australia.

"The Biggest Chinese Restaurant in the World" . Retrieved 4 November 2008 .

[ dead link ] ^ Journal of Ecotourism.

"The Shark Watching Industry and its Potential Contribution to Shark Conservation" .

Archived from the original on 8 January 2009 . Retrieved 8 November 2008 .

^ Sohu Forum.

"人類的飲食與野生動物的滅絕有著本質和必然的聯繫" . Archived from the original on 23 March 2012 . Retrieved 8 November 2008 .

^ 中國青年報.

"國家禁令擋不住虎骨酒熱銷" .

Archived from the original on 5 July 2009 . Retrieved 4 November 2008 .

^ Jadecampus.

"Conservationists Call on China to Support Law Over Tiger Farms" . Archived from the original on 17 May 2008 . Retrieved 4 November 2008 .

^ 中國青年報.

"拿什麼拯救你可憐的黑熊:能不能不用熊膽?" .

Archived from the original on 9 January 2009 . Retrieved 4 November 2008 .

^ "China" .

World Animal Protection .

Archived from the original on 19 December 2014 . Retrieved 23 February 2016 .

^ "China unveils first-ever animal cruelty legislation" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. 18 September 2009. Archived from the original on 23 September 2009 . Retrieved 18 September 2009 .

^ "Beijing loosens leash on pet dogs" . Chinadaily.com.cn.

Archived from the original on 13 October 2008 . Retrieved 6 November 2008 .

^ Review of Animal Welfare Legislation in Hong Kong Archived 21 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine by Amanda S. Whitfort and Fiona M. Woodhouse, June 2010. This document reviews animal welfare laws and compares them to those of Taiwan, Singapore, Australia, New Zealand, the European Union, and the United States.

^ Agriculture, Fisheries and Conservation Department, " Penalty for Cruelty to Animals Archived 23 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine ," Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Chapter 169, Section 3) 15 December 2006 ^ "The prevention of cruelty to animals act,1960" (PDF) .

Amendments . Ministry of environment and Forests, Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 April 2012 . Retrieved 9 February 2012 .

^ "Indian animal welfare act 2011" (PDF) .

Chapter IV. Cruelty to animals . Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 January 2012 . Retrieved 9 February 2012 .

^ "THE ANIMAL WELFARE ACT, 2011" (PDF) .

awbi.gov.in . Retrieved 18 August 2023 .

^ "کارزار حمایت از حیوانات خانگی در واکنش به طرح مجلس برای مقابله با "حیوانات مضر" " .

Radio Farda . 18 November 2021.

^ "تمهیدات قانونی برای جلوگیری از حیوان آزاری چیست؟" . 21 December 2020.

^ Act on Welfare and Management of Animals (Act No. 105 1 October 1973) Archived 26 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine . (PDF). cas.go.jp (in Japanese and English). Retrieved on 14 December 2011.

^ Christopher S. Stevenson, Lisa A. Marshall and Douglas W. Morgan Japanese guidelines and regulations for scientific and ethical animal experimentation.

Progress in Inflammation Research 2nd Edition 2006 p. 187.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-7643-7520-1_10 ^ Hubrecht, Robert C.; Carter, Elizabeth (30 September 2019).

"The 3Rs and Humane Experimental Technique: Implementing Change" .

Animals .

9 (10): 754.

doi : 10.3390/ani9100754 .

ISSN 2076-2615 .

PMC 6826930 .

PMID 31575048 .

^ Select Committee on Animals In Scientific Procedures Archived 1 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine Report July 2002, Accessed 23 August 2007 ^ Animal lovers lament lack of a law against cruelty Archived 9 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine . Arabnews.com (12 March 2009). Retrieved on 14 December 2011.

^ World Animal Protection (2 November 2014).

"Korea" .

Archived from the original on 12 May 2016 . Retrieved 8 May 2016 .

^ Kaohsiung Municipal Institute for Animal Health, " Laws and Regulations [ permanent dead link ] ," Animal Protection Act last amended 11 July 2007.

[ dead link ] ^ "CRUELTY PREVENTION AND WELFARE OF ANIMAL ACT, B.E. 2557 (2014)" .

Thai SPCA . Archived from the original on 13 May 2016 . Retrieved 11 May 2016 .

^ Kanchanalak, Pornpimol (13 November 2014).

"A landmark victory for animal rights" .

The Nation . Archived from the original on 25 September 2015 . Retrieved 22 November 2015 .

^ COUNCIL DIRECTIVE 1999/74/EC of 19 July 1999 Archived 7 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine . European Union ^ Declawing Cats: Manicure or Mutilation?

. dehumane.org ^ "Code pénal" . legifrance.gouv.fr.

Archived from the original on 23 May 2013 . Retrieved 28 November 2012 .

^ § 17 Tierschutzgesetz (TierSchG) Archived 7 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Bundesrecht.juris.de. Retrieved on 14 December 2011.

^ § 303 Strafgesetzbuch (StGB) Archived 6 October 2010 at the Wayback Machine . Bundesrecht.juris.de. Retrieved on 14 December 2011.

^ The Italian Parliament – Law 189/2004 – Art. 544/ter/quater/quinquies Archived 8 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Camera. it. Retrieved on 14 December 2011. (in Italian) ^ "Animal Health and Welfare Act 2013" .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2014.

^ "New animal welfare legislation introduced" .

RTE.ie . 7 March 2014.

Archived from the original on 25 October 2014.

^ "Carlow man jailed for 'atrocious levels of animal cruelty' loses sentence appeal" . 10 April 2019.

^ a b c The Agency.

"Boas Notícias – Animais: Lei que criminaliza maus-tratos entra em vigor" . Archived from the original on 3 October 2014.

^ "Brottsbalk (1962:700)" .

Archived from the original on 12 April 2015.

^ Scales of Justice: In Zurich, Even Fish Have a Lawyer Archived 22 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine , Deborah Ball.

The Wall Street Journal . 6 March 2010 ^ The lawyer who defends animals Archived 22 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine , Leo Hickman.

The Guardian . 5 March 2010 ^ a b "Hayvanları Koruma Kanunu" (in Turkish) . Retrieved 11 August 2021 .

^ "Turkish parliament approves animal rights bill" . Anadolu Agency. 9 July 2021 . Retrieved 11 August 2021 .

^ "HAYTAP: Animal Rights Federation in Turkey" Archived 25 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine , HAYTAP, accessed 7 December 2012 ^ "The villain tortured the poor cat to death in front of the camera" .

NSF News and Magazine . 15 February 2024 . Retrieved 15 February 2024 .

^ https://www.milliyet.com.tr/gundem/basaksehirde-vahset-cezve-isimli-kediyi-iskence-ederek-oldurdu-sahibi-konustu-7418989 ^ https://www.hurriyet.com.tr/gundem/cezveyi-iskence-yaparak-olduren-hayvan-dusmani-en-agir-cezayi-almali-42901435 ^ Animal Welfare Act 2006. Chapter 45 Archived 7 December 2009 at the Wayback Machine . (PDF). opsi.gov.uk. Retrieved on 14 December 2011.

^ The Times, Monday, 1 January 1912; p. 3; Issue 39783; col F "The Animals' New Magna Charter" ^ "London Police Act 1839, Great Britain Parliament. Section XXXI, XXXIV, XXXV, XLII" . Archived from the original on 24 April 2011 . Retrieved 23 January 2011 .

^ / Graham Robb (2007).

The discovery of France: a historical geography from the Revolution to the First World War . W. W. Norton & Company. pp.

167 –.

ISBN 978-0-393-05973-1 .

Archived from the original on 2 August 2020 . Retrieved 15 December 2011 .

^ Dog Carts and the Extinction of Memory Archived 8 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine . 15 October 2008 ^ a b Rothfels, Nigel (2002), Representing Animals , Indiana University Press, p. 12, ISBN 978-0-253-34154-9 . Chapter: 'A Left-handed Blow: Writing the History of Animals' by Erica Fudge ^ "igg.org.uk" . Archived from the original on 31 July 2010.

^ Animal Rights by Hilda Kean , 1998, University of Chicago Press.

Archived 11 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ Protection of Animals Act 1911 Archived 13 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Animallaw.info (18 August 1911). Retrieved on 14 December 2011.

^ "Pet abuse law shake-up unveiled" .

BBC News Online . 14 October 2005.

Archived from the original on 2 April 2015.

^ "BBC – Ethics – Animal Ethics: Animal Welfare Act" . BBC.

Archived from the original on 23 May 2010 . Retrieved 24 April 2010 .

^ "Cats And The Law – Cats Away" .

Archived from the original on 13 February 2015 . Retrieved 13 January 2015 .

^ "Offences involving Domestic and Captive Animals" . The Crown Prosecution Service.

Archived from the original on 24 October 2017 . Retrieved 13 January 2015 .

^ "What is the Australian legislation governing animal welfare?" .

Archived from the original on 25 October 2014.

^ "ACT legislation register – Animal Welfare Act 1992 – main page" .

Archived from the original on 29 January 2016.

^ "ANIMAL WELFARE ACT 1992" .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2016.

^ "NSW Legislation" .

Archived from the original on 27 January 2016.

^ "PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT 1979" .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2016.

^ "ANIMAL WELFARE ACT" .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "ANIMAL WELFARE ACT" .

Archived from the original on 14 March 2016.

^ "Animal Care and Protection Act 2001 (Qld)" (PDF) .

legislation.qld.gov.au .

Archived from the original on 31 January 2018.

^ "ANIMAL CARE AND PROTECTION ACT 2001" .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2016.

^ "South Australian Legislation" .

Archived from the original on 31 January 2016.

^ "ANIMAL WELFARE ACT 1985" .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2016.

^ "Legislation View Page" .

Archived from the original on 10 February 2016.

^ "ANIMAL WELFARE ACT 1993" .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2016.

^ "Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1986 (Vic)" (PDF) .

legislation.vic.gov.au .

^ "PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT 1986" .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2016.

^ "Western Australian Legislation" .

Archived from the original on 30 January 2016.

^ "ANIMAL WELFARE ACT 2002" .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2016.

^ Graeme McEwen.

The fox is in charge of the chickens Archived 12 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine Animals Australia. Retrieved 4 July 2008.

^ "Animal Welfare Act 1999" .

Archived from the original on 26 January 2016.

Sources [ edit ] Bushaway, Bob (1993), "Bulls, Ballads, Minstrels and Manors: Some Observations on the Defence of Customs in Eighteenth-Century England", in Buckland, Theresa; Wood, Juliette (eds.), Aspects of British Calendar Customs , Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, pp.

75– 93, ISBN 1-850-75243-5 Griffin-Kremer, Cozette (2003), "May Day and Mayhem: Portraits of a Holiday in Eighteenth-Century Dublin Ballads", in McKean, Thomas A. (ed.), The Flowering Thorn: International Ballad Studies , Logan: Utah State University Press, pp.

101– 128, ISBN 0-87421-491-2 Malcolmson, Robert W. (1973), Popular Recreations in English Society 1700-1850 , London: Cambridge University Press , ISBN 0-521-20147-0 Peacock, Mabel (1904), "Notes on the Stamford Bull-Running" , Folklore , 15 (2): 199– 202, doi : 10.1080/0015587x.1904.9719402 Further reading [ edit ] Arnold Arluke .

Brute Force: Animal Police and the Challenge of Cruelty , Purdue University Press (15 August 2004), hardcover, 175 pages, ISBN 1-55753-350-4 . An ethnographic study of humane law enforcement officers .

Fiber-Ostrow, Pamela, Lovell, Jarret S. "Behind a veil of secrecy: animal abuse, factory farms, and Ag-Gag legislation." Contemporary Justice Review (2016) 19(2), 230 – 249.

Lea, Suzanne Goodney (2007).

Delinquency and Animal Cruelty: Myths and Realities about Social Pathology , hardcover, 168 pages, ISBN 978-1-59332-197-0 . Lea challenges the argument made by animal rights activists that animal cruelty enacted during childhood is a precursor to human-directed violence.

McArthur, Jo-Anne ; Wilson, Keith, eds. (2020).

Hidden: Animals in the Anthropocene .

Lantern Books .

ISBN 978-1590566381 .

Munro H.

The battered pet (1999) In F. Ascione & P. Arkow (Eds.) Child Abuse, Domestic Violence, and Animal Abuse. West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press, 199–208.

ISBN 1-55753-143-9 Tichelar, Michael. "Royalty and Opposition to Blood Sports in Twentieth‐Century Britain: From Imperial Spoils to Wildlife Conservation?." History 103.357 (2018): 588–609.

Mance, Henry (2021).

How to love animals : in a human-shaped world (First North American edition ed.). New York.

ISBN 978-1-9848-7965-3 .

OCLC 1226175333 Singer, Peter (16 May 2023).

"Think humans' treatment of animals has improved in 50 years? Think again" .

Los Angeles Times .

v t e Abuse Types Adverse childhood experiences Anti-social behaviour Bullying Child abuse neglect sexual military marriage Cruelty to animals Disability abuse military draft Domestic abuse Elder abuse Financial Marriage Gaslighting Harassment Humiliation Incivility Institutional abuse Intimidation Neglect Persecution Professional abuse Psychological abuse Physical abuse Police brutality Religious abuse Social abuse Sexual abuse Stalking Structural abuse Substance abuse Alcohol abuse Surveillance abuse Referee and umpire abuse Verbal abuse more...

Related topics Abusive supervision Abuse of power Controlling behavior Complex post-traumatic stress disorder Dehumanization Denial Destabilisation Discrimination Exaggeration Just-world fallacy Lying Manipulation Minimisation Narcissism Playing the victim Psychological projection Psychological trauma Psychopathy Rationalization Sexual grooming Traumatic bonding Victim blaming Victimisation Victimology v t e Animal welfare Issues Abandoned pets Animal husbandry Animal testing Animals in sport Artificial insemination Barn fire Battery cage Beak trimming Bile bear Blood sports Captivity Chick culling Culling Concentrated animal feeding operation Cow-calf separation Dairy farming Discretionary invasive procedures on animals Eating live animals Eating live seafood Eyestalk ablation Feedback (pork industry) Foam depopulation Foie gras controversy Forced molting Fur farming Gestation crate Hunting Horse pain caused by the bit Intensive animal farming Intensive pig farming Livestock branding Livestock dehorning Livestock transportation Pet rental Poultry farming Puppy mill Testing cosmetics on animals Ventilation shutdown Vivisection Welfare of farmed insects Wild animal welfare Wildlife farming Zoos Concepts Abnormal behaviours in animals Animal psychopathology Animal shelter Animal welfare science Anthrozoology Behavioral enrichment Compassionate conservation Conservation welfare Ethics of uncertain sentience Ethical omnivorism Five Domains model Five Freedoms Humane law enforcement Intrinsic value in animal ethics Rescue group RSPCA Assured Three Rs principles Welfare biology Pain Pain in amphibians Pain in cephalopods Pain in crustaceans Pain in fish Pain in invertebrates Grimace scale Organisations ASPCA Animal Defence and Anti-Vivisection Society Animal Defenders International Animal Welfare Committee Animal Welfare Party Animals' Friend Society American Humane Animal Aid Unlimited Animal Welfare Board of India Animal Welfare Institute Animal Welfare Investigations Project Badger Trust Band of Mercy Battersea Best Friends Animal Society Blue Cross Blue Cross of India Care for the Wild International Cats Protection Church Society for the Promotion of Kindness to Animals Compassion in World Farming CAWF Cinnamon Trust Dogs Trust DSPA DSPCA Eurogroup for Animals Ferne Animal Sanctuary Four Paws FRAME Hedgehog Care Humane Canada Humane Farm Animal Care HSUS Humane Society International Humane Slaughter Association International Animal Rescue IFAW International Society for Applied Ethology ISPCA List of animal welfare organizations League Against Cruel Sports Marine Connection National Society for the Abolition of Cruel Sports Network for Animals Lord Dowding Fund for Humane Research MSPCA-Angell National Animal Welfare Trust National Anti-Vivisection Society National Council for Animals' Welfare OneKind Party for Animal Welfare People for Animals People's Dispensary for Sick Animals RNZSPCA RSPCA RSPCA Australia Save Me Scottish Animal Welfare Commission SSPCA Tiggywinkles Toronto Humane Society UFAW Wildlife Aid Foundation World Animal Protection World Horse Welfare Publications American Humane Magazine Animal Protection Animal Welfare AWI Quarterly Cruel Sports Human Advocate Journal of Applied Animal Welfare Science Our Dumb Animals The Animals' Friend The Animals' Guardian The Cat The Zoophilist Books A Few Notes on Cruelty to Animals (1846) Black Beauty (1877) Diet for a New America (1987) Min ko vill ha roligt (1990) Miracle Dog (2005) Striking at the Roots (2007) Pawprints of Katrina (2008) No Animals Were Harmed (2011) Activists and workers Contemporary Michael C. Appleby Cynthia Bathurst Matthew E. Bershadker Christa Blanke Moira Brown Jan Cameron Judy MacArthur Clark Kendra Coulter Peter Ronald Davies Petra Deimer Alanna Devine Robin Ganzert Celia Hammond Alison Hanlon Brian Hare Kathrin Glock Emily Patterson-Kane Philip Lymbery Damien Mander Christine Nicol Wayne Pacelle Sharon Pincott Ilka Reinhardt Jill Robinson Naomi Sagara Sepehr Salimi Adolfo Sansolini Rakesh Shukla Karen Stockin Patti Strand Sally Varma Tina M. Widowski Historical Gertrude Ansell Emily Appleton Gertrude Baillie-Weaver H. Baillie-Weaver Madeleine Bemelmans Henry Bergh Annie Bradshaw Victoria Braithwaite Mary Brancker Benjamin Bryan Roger A. Caras Ada Cole Edith Cole Jim Cronin Brian Davies Gerard Lysley Derriman Maria Dickin Marjorie Doggett Muriel Dowding Alice Drakoules Sarah J. Eddy Thomas Erskine Agnes Estcourt-Oswald Edward G. Fairholme Aida McAnn Flemming Lucy Furman Basil Goldstone Julia Goddard Robert Gower Norman Child Graham Colesworthey Grant George Greenwood Peter Gurney Catherine Victoria Hall Edward Hemingway Rachel Hirschfeld Sjoerd Hofstra Clive Hollands Douglas Houghton John A. Hoyt W. Hugenholtz Rowland Johns Velma Bronn Johnston Albert Knapp Agnes von Konow Titus Lander Carla Lane Etta Lemon Victoria Lidiard George Watson Little Alasdair Alpin MacGregor Terry Maple Fergus MacCunn Frederick Messer Richard Martin Shirley McGreal Lady Mount Temple Harriet Nevins Felix Ortt Catherine Louisa Pirkis Eliza Phillips Maude Gillette Phillips Duchess of Portland Samuel Jackson Pratt Nancy Price Wilfred Risdon Peter Roberts Jules Rühl Jan Salter Olive Smith-Dorrien Catherine Smithies Thomas Bywater Smithies Herbert Snow Ellin Prince Speyer Christine Stevens Douglas S. S. Steuart Elisabeth Svendsen Mary Tealby Ralph Waldo Trine Sidney Trist Ethel Venton M. Dudley Ward Jessey Wade Abiathar Wall Christopher Wathes Franz Weber Caroline Earle White Emily Williamson H. Fergie Woods Alice Morgan Wright Gretchen Wyler Scholars and writers Contemporary Arnold Arluke Jonathan Balcombe Michael Balls Geoffrey Barstow Marc Bekoff Donald Broom Marian Dawkins Bob Fischer Bruce Fogle Jane Goodall Temple Grandin Celia Haddon Jane Hurst Erich Hoyt Barbara J. King Alistair Lawrence David Macdonald Jeremy Marchant Jeff McMahan Daniel Mills Sy Montgomery Virginia Morell Yew-Kwang Ng Caitlin O'Connell-Rodwell Clare Palmer Susan J. Pearson Dale Peterson Jessica Pierce Diana Reiss Carl Safina Matthew Scully Paul Shapiro Jennifer Skiff Brian Tomasik Peter Wohlleben Historical George T. Angell Patrick Bateson Beddow Bayly Ernest Bell Edward Berdoe Arthur Broome Jean Burden Gerald Carson W. H. Cock Stephen Coleridge Christian Adam Dann J. Morewood Dowsett Audrey Eyton George Fleming Ralph Fletcher Ruth Harrison Caroline van der Hucht-Kerkhoven C. W. Hume E. Douglas Hume Beatrice Lindsay James Macaulay Basheer Ahmad Masri Francis Orpen Morris George Nicholson Siobhan O'Sullivan Charles Reinhardt Francis H. Rowley W. M. S. Russell Chris Sherwin Colin Spedding William O. Stillman John Styles Bell Taylor Ernst von Weber D. G. M. Wood-Gush Frans de Waal Meta Wellmer Hugh Wirth William Youatt Thomas Young Categories Animal advocacy parties Animal killing Animal rights Animal welfare and rights legislation Animal welfare in sports Animal sacrifice Animal sanctuaries Animal testing Animal welfare and rights by country Cruelty to animals Dishes involving the consumption of live animals Ethically disputed business practices towards animals Fur trade Pain in animals People associated with animal welfare Vivisection Whaling Religious considerations Dhabihah Jhatka Kutha Shechita Tza'ar ba'alei chayim Rituals and festivals Blessing of animals Bous al carrer Cock throwing Combat de Reines Eid al-Adha Gadhimai festival Goat throwing Goose pulling International Primate Day Kapparot Dog Meat Festival Monkey Buffet Festival October Horse Pushkar Camel Fair Rapa das Bestas of Sabucedo Running of the bulls Surin Elephant Round-up Toro embolado World Animal Day Legislation Animal testing regulations Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 (UK) Animal Welfare Act 1999 (NZ) Animal Welfare Act 2006 (UK) Animal Welfare Act of 1966 (US) Animal Welfare (Sentience) Act 2022 (UK) Cruelty to Animals Act 1876 (UK) EU Directive 2010/63/EU (EU) EU Directive 1999/74/EC (EU) Horse Protection Act of 1970 (US) Hunting Act 2004 (UK) List of international animal welfare conventions Philippine Animal Welfare Act 1998 (Philippines) Related List of animal rights advocates List of animal sanctuaries Category v t e Animal rights Topics (overviews, concepts, issues, cases) Overviews Movement History ( Ancient world ) Timeline Europe United States By country or territory Argentina Australia Austria Azerbaijan Brazil Canada China Denmark Ethiopia France Germany Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Malaysia Mexico Netherlands Russia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom United States Anarchism Punk subculture Religion Christianity Indian religions Islam Women Concepts Abolitionism Ahimsa Animal cognition Animal consciousness Animal–industrial complex Animal law Animal machine Animal protectionism Animal trial Animal welfare Animal-free agriculture Anthropocentrism Argument from marginal cases Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness Carnism Equal consideration of interests Emotion in animals Ethics of eating meat Ethics of uncertain sentience Holocaust analogy Insects in ethics Intrinsic value Meat paradox Mentophobia Moral circle expansion Nonviolence Nonkilling Open rescue Opposition to hunting Painism Personism Replaceability argument Sentientism Speciesism Total liberation Veganism Vegaphobia Vegetarianism Issues Animal husbandry Animal product Animal husbandry Battery cage Bile bear Chick culling Crocodiles CAFOs Cow-calf separation Feedback Fish Foam depopulation Fur Fur trade Insects Intensive Pigs Livestock Live export Poultry Wildlife Slaughter Slaughterhouse Ventilation shutdown Blood sport Badger-baiting Bear-baiting Boar-baiting Bull-baiting Donkey-baiting Duck-baiting Hog-baiting Human-baiting Hyena-baiting Lion-baiting Monkey-baiting Rat-baiting Wolf-baiting Cruelty Pest control ( Varmint hunting ) Sacrifice Working animal Animal testing History Alternatives Regulations Countries banning non-human ape experimentation Non-human primates Cosmetics Model organism Vivisection ( Anti-vivisection movement ) Organizations Huntingdon Life Sciences Nafovanny Green Scare ( Operation Backfire ) Animal welfare Abandoned pets Captivity Euthanasia ( insects ) Farmed insects Killing of animals Live food Pain Amphibians Cephalopods Crustaceans Fish Invertebrates Laboratory animals Sports Fishing Bait Commercial Farming Recreational Wild animals Culling Farming Hunting Techniques Coursing Spotlighting Trail hunting Trapping Treeing Trophy hunting Upland hunting Animals Alligators Bats Bears Birds Bison Boar Raccoons Deer Dolphins Foxes Hares Jackals Lions Mink Petrels Quail Rabbit Rooks Seals Squirrels Tigers Turtles Waterfowl Wild birds Whales Wolves Management Predation problem Suffering Trade Primates Ivory Welfare Cases Brown Dog affair Cambridge University primates McLibel case Monkey selfie copyright dispute Pit of despair SHAC Silver Spring monkeys University of California, Riverside 1985 laboratory raid Unnecessary Fuss War of the currents Studies Animal ethics Anthrozoology Critical animal studies Ethology Vegan studies Methodologies Direct Action Everywhere Hunt sabotage Observances World Animal Day World Day for Farmed Animals World Day for the End of Speciesism World Day for Laboratory Animals World Day for the End of Fishing World Vegan Day World Vegetarian Day Advocates (academics, writers, activists) Academics and writers Contemporary Carol J. Adams Aysha Akhtar Kristin Andrews Marc Bekoff Steven Best Paola Cavalieri Stephen R. L. Clark Alasdair Cochrane J. M. Coetzee Alice Crary David DeGrazia Daniel Dombrowski Sue Donaldson Josephine Donovan Joan Dunayer Mylan Engel Catia Faria Lawrence Finsen Michael W. Fox Gary L. Francione Robert Garner Valéry Giroux Lori Gruen John Hadley Oscar Horta Christine Korsgaard Dale Jamieson Kyle Johannsen Melanie Joy Hilda Kean Will Kymlicka Renan Larue Thomas Lepeltier Andrew Linzey Clair Linzey Dan Lyons David Nibert Martha Nussbaum Clare Palmer Charles Patterson David Pearce Jessica Pierce Evelyn Pluhar Mark Rowlands Richard D. Ryder Steve F. Sapontzis Jeff Sebo Jérôme Segal Peter Singer Gary Steiner Cass Sunstein David Sztybel Michael Tye Tatjana Višak Paul Waldau Corey Lee Wrenn Historical Tom Beauchamp Jeremy Bentham David Renaud Boullier Stephen St. C. Bostock Brigid Brophy Peter Buchan Mona Caird Priscilla Cohn Sherry Colb Henry Crowe Herman Daggett Richard Dean Wilhelm Dietler William Hamilton Drummond Edward Payson Evans T. Forster John Galsworthy Thomas G. Gentry V. A. Holmes-Gore Arthur Helps John Hildrop John Zephaniah Holwell Francis Hutcheson Soame Jenyns Marie Jungius Karl Christian Friedrich Krause John Lawrence Charles R. Magel Jean Meslier Mary Midgley J. Howard Moore José Ferrater Mora Robert Morris Leonard Nelson Edward Nicholson Siobhan O'Sullivan John Oswald Rod Preece Humphrey Primatt James Rachels Tom Regan Joseph Ritson Nathaniel Peabody Rogers Bernard Rollin Henry Stephens Salt Arthur Schopenhauer Laurids Smith John Styles Thomas Tryon Gary Varner Johann Friedrich Ludwig Volckmann Mary Anne Warren Adam Gottlieb Weigen Johann Heinrich Winckler Steven M. Wise Jon Wynne-Tyson Voltaire Thomas Young Activists Contemporary James Aspey Greg Avery Matt Ball Martin Balluch Carole Baskin Barbi Twins Brigitte Bardot Gene Baur Yves Bonnardel Joey Carbstrong Aymeric Caron Jake Conroy Rod Coronado Karen Dawn Chris DeRose John Feldmann Bruce Friedrich Juliet Gellatley Tal Gilboa Antoine Goetschel Mark Gold Brigitte Gothière Alex Hershaft Wayne Hsiung Charlotte Laws Ronnie Lee Howard Lyman Evanna Lynch Bill Maher Keith Mann Jim Mason Dan Mathews Joaquin Phoenix Jo-Anne McArthur Luísa Mell Virginia McKenna Morrissey Ingrid Newkirk Heather Nicholson Jack Norris Ric O'Barry David Olivier Alex Pacheco Craig Rosebraugh Jasmin Singer Kim Stallwood Lynda Stoner Marianne Thieme Darren Thurston Christine Townend Wendy Turner-Webster Jerry Vlasak Louise Wallis Ed Winters Gary Yourofsky That Vegan Teacher Historical Cleveland Amory Henry B. Amos Bob Barker Ernest Bell William Brown Edith Carrington Joseph Collinson Frances Power Cobbe Joan Court Karen Davis Royal Dixon Muriel Dowding Elizabeth Farians Emarel Freshel André Géraud Lewis Gompertz James Granger Barry Horne Marie Huot Lizzy Lind af Hageby Jessie Mackay Alfred Mansfield Mitchell J. Isaac Pengelly Norm Phelps Jill Phipps Maud Ingersoll Probasco Hans Ruesch Magnus Schwantje Nell Shipman Henry Spira Joseph Stratton Andrew Tyler Gretchen Wyler Movement (groups, parties) Groups Contemporary American Anti-Vivisection Society Animal Aid Animal Ethics Animal Justice Animal Justice Project Animal Legal Defense Fund Animal Liberation Animal Liberation Front Animal Liberation Press Office Animal Liberation Victoria Animal Rights Militia Animal Rising AnimaNaturalis Anti-Vivisection Coalition Anonymous for the Voiceless Beauty Without Cruelty Born Free Foundation Centre for Animals and Social Justice Chinese Animal Protection Network Cruelty Free International Direct Action Everywhere Doctors Against Animal Experiments Equanimal Every Animal Farm Animal Rights Movement Faunalytics Great Ape Project Hunt Saboteurs Association In Defense of Animals Korea Animal Rights Advocates L214 Last Chance for Animals Massachusetts Animal Rights Coalition Mercy for Animals Oxford Centre for Animal Ethics People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Revolutionary Cells – Animal Liberation Brigade Rise for Animals Sentience Politics Uncaged Campaigns United Activists for Animal Rights United Poultry Concerns UPF-Centre for Animal Ethics Viva!

Voice for Animals Humane Society Voiceless Historical Canadian Anti-Vivisection Society Humanitarian League (1891–1919) Millennium Guild Order of the Golden Age Oxford Group Parties Animal Justice Party (Australia) Animal Politics EU (Europe) Animal Protection Party of Canada (Canada) Animal Justice Party of Finland (Finland) Animals' Party (Sweden) Animalist Movement (Italy) Animalist Party with the Environment (Spain) DierAnimal (Belgium) Human Environment Animal Protection Party (Germany) Italian Animalist Party (Italy) Party for the Animals (Netherlands) People Animals Nature (Portugal) V-Partei³ (Germany) Activism Animal Rights National Conference Media (books, films, periodicals, albums) Books On Abstinence from Eating Animals (3rd century) A Reasonable Plea for the Animal Creation (1746) A System of Moral Philosophy, in Three Books (1755) The Cry of Nature (1791) An Essay on Humanity to Animals (1798) An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty (1802) Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes (1824) The Rights of Animals (1838) The Ethics of Diet (1883) A Plea for Vegetarianism and Other Essays (1886) Animals' Rights: Considered in Relation to Social Progress (1892) Evolutional Ethics and Animal Psychology (1897) Better-World Philosophy (1899) The Logic of Vegetarianism (1899) The Universal Kinship (1906) The New Ethics (1907) Animals, Men and Morals (1971) Animal Liberation (1975) The Case for Animal Rights (1983) Morals, Reason, and Animals (1987) Zoos and Animal Rights (1993) Animals, Property, and the Law (1995) The Lives of Animals (1999) Eternal Treblinka (2001) Do Animals Have Rights?

(2005) Striking at the Roots (2008) An American Trilogy (2009) An Introduction to Animals and Political Theory (2010) Animal Rights Without Liberation (2012) Political Animals and Animal Politics (2014) Animal (De)liberation (2016) Beating Hearts: Abortion and Animal Rights (2016) Sentientist Politics (2018) Wild Animal Ethics (2020) Animal Ethics in the Wild (2022) Making a Stand for Animals (2022) Animal Rights Law (2023) The Moral Circle (2025) Films The Animals Film (1981) A Cow at My Table (1998) Shores of Silence (2000) The Witness (2000) Meet Your Meat (2002) Legally Blonde 2 (2003) The Meatrix (2003) Peaceable Kingdom (2004) Earthlings (2005) Behind the Mask (2006) Your Mommy Kills Animals (2007) Food, Inc.

(2009) The Cove (2009) Peaceable Kingdom: The Journey Home (2009) Forks Over Knives (2011) Vegucated (2011) An Apology to Elephants (2013) Speciesism: The Movie (2013) The Ghosts in Our Machine (2013) Unlocking the Cage (2016) Land of Hope and Glory (2017) Carnage (2017) Okja (2017) Dominion (2018) Seaspiracy (2021) Periodicals Journals Animal Sentience Between the Species Cahiers antispécistes Etica & Animali Journal of Animal Ethics Relations. Beyond Anthropocentrism The Animals' Defender Magazines Arkangel Bite Back Muutoksen kevät No Compromise Satya Albums Animal Liberation (1987) Tame Yourself (1991) Manifesto (2008) Salvation of Innocents (2014) Onward to Freedom (2014) Fairs and exhibitions Holocaust on your Plate (2003) Category ( 138 ) v t e Types of crime Note: Crimes vary by jurisdiction . Not all types are listed here.

Classes Infraction Misdemeanor Felony Summary Indictable Hybrid Corruption Law portal Against the person Assassination Assault Battery Child abuse Concealment of a corpse Criminal negligence Domestic violence False imprisonment Frameup Harassment Street Home invasion Hate crime Homicide Human trafficking Intimidation Kidnapping Manslaughter ( corporate ) Mayhem Murder felony Homicide Negligent homicide Reckless homicide Robbery Stalking Stabbing Torture Against property Arson Arms trafficking Blackmail Bribery Burglary Cybercrime Embezzlement Extortion False pretenses Forgery Fraud Gambling Intellectual property violation Larceny Looting Payola Pickpocketing Possessing stolen property Robbery Smuggling Parallel import Tax evasion Theft Trespass to land Vandalism Mischief Against the public Apostasy Corruption Censorship violation Dueling Genocide Ethnic cleansing Hostage-taking Illegal immigration People smuggling Insider trading Smuggling Illegal consumption (such as drugs , alcohol , and smoking ) Miscegenation Piracy Political corruption Regicide Terrorism Unreported employment Usurpation War crimes Against the state Lèse-majesté Treason Espionage Secession Sedition Subversion Against justice Against public justice Justice delayed Compounding Contempt Malfeasance in office Miscarriage of justice Judicial misconduct Misprision Perjury Perverting the course of justice Against animals Cruelty to animals Poaching Wildlife smuggling Bestiality Sexual offenses Adultery Bigamy Child sexual abuse Cybersex trafficking Fornication Homosexuality Groping Incest Indecent exposure Masturbation Obscenity Prostitution Rape Pederasty Sex trafficking Sexual assault Sexual harassment Sexual slavery Voyeurism Inchoate offenses Attempt Conspiracy Incitement Solicitation WikiSource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Portal : Animals Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐q5th8
Cached time: 20250816225008
Cache expiry: 3600
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.996 seconds
Real time usage: 3.371 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 20662/1000000
Revision size: 210039/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 901713/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 18482/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 59/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1067832/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.881/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19912025/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2682.188      1 -total
 54.03% 1449.174      5 Template:Reflist
 26.39%  707.802    152 Template:Cite_web
 10.81%  290.073     14 Template:Navbox
  8.25%  221.248     52 Template:Cite_news
  7.70%  206.629      1 Template:Types_of_crime
  7.00%  187.808      8 Template:Excerpt
  5.45%  146.168     27 Template:Cite_journal
  5.10%  136.869     22 Template:Cite_book
  4.15%  111.429      7 Template:Efn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:683092:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816225008 and revision id 1305882981. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cruelty_to_animals&oldid=1305882981 " Categories : Cruelty to animals Crimes Animal law Ethical schools and movements Animal ethics Zoosadism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2020 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2017 Articles with dead external links from May 2016 Articles with dead external links from September 2012 CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2008 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Articles containing Tamil-language text Articles with unsourced statements from October 2018 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2025 Vague or ambiguous geographic scope from June 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Articles needing additional references from June 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Bulgarian-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2020 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles containing potentially dated statements from June 2025 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with excerpts Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 16:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cruelty to animals 42 languages Add topic

