Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 First space nurses 2 Present day space nursing Toggle Present day space nursing subsection 2.1 Career path and necessary qualifications 2.2 Medical complications surrounding space travel 2.2.1 Problems emerging during or upon return from space flight 2.2.2 Complications that can develop years later 3 Future Toggle Future subsection 3.1 Technology 3.1.1 Implications on earthly medicine 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Space nursing 4 languages العربية Català فارسی தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia One of the nursing specialties Astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.

, pilot of the Mercury-Atlas 6 earth-orbital space mission, confers with Astronaut Nurse Dolores O'Hara during prelaunch preparations.

Space nursing is a specialty that works with astronauts to determine medical fitness for their missions, equips NASA team members to handle emergencies in orbit and researches the effects of space travel on the human body. The career got its start during the space race of the 1960s and has grown—both in terms of number of people in the field and knowledge base—ever since. Research conducted by medical professionals in the aeronautics field has led to many breakthroughs in disease treatment of earthbound patients and the discipline continually develops new technology to make space medicine more effective.

History [ edit ] Since the beginning of commercial aviation in the 1920s, nurses have been part of aviation and flight.  In 1958, President Eisenhower signed the National Aeronautics and Space Act to form NASA .  Part of this act was to recruit nurses to work closely with medical teams to determine the health of astronauts prior to launch. Following their return, nurses assisted with performing medical assessments to determine the effects of space travel on the mission team.

First space nurses [ edit ] Lt Dolores "Dee" O'Hara (born 1935) and Lt Shirley Sineath were the first nurses assigned to work with the seven Project Mercury astronauts. Lieutenant O'Hara was the official staff nurse while Lieutenant Sineath was assigned as a surgical nurse on the recovery team.[5] Before her career with NASA, O’Hara worked as a registered nurse in the labor and delivery ward of Patrick Air Force Base in Cape Canaveral, FL. In 1959, she was called into the office of Colonel Knauf (the commander of the hospital). Knauf offered her a job as a nurse for Project Mercury and she accepted. Part of the reason O'Hara was selected for the team was so that she could gain the trust of the astronauts. NASA figured if the astronauts trusted their nurses, they would inform them when they were feeling ill—something they wouldn't tell their flight surgeons for fear that their flight would be grounded. In an interview conducted in 2002, O’Hara described her job as being to "go aboard recovery ships…be available [to] set up little hospitals aboard ships, should there be a problem upon landing" and to "put together these medical kits and everything that people on board the ships would need to treat an injured astronaut." Additionally, it was O'Hara's responsibility to perform the pre-flight physicals, which included height, weight, temperatures and blood pressure measurements.[3] Following her career as a nurse to astronauts,  O'Hara transferred to a role as manager of the Human Research Facility at Ames Research center in 1974, where she worked until her retirement in 1997.

Present day space nursing [ edit ] Career path and necessary qualifications [ edit ] In 1962 NASA announced the Space Nursing Program, which required applicants to have a previous bachelor's degree in nursing, a requirement that has remained to the present day. There are 2 main categories of career paths to working in aerospace medicine at NASA. The military route involves enlistment in either the US Air Force—which offers a residency program for aerospace medicine at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio—or US Navy (which offers a similar program at The Naval Aerospace Medical Institute in Pensacola, Florida). The civilian path entails courses at a university or institution, followed by a month-long clerkship at NASA, which they offer to medical students in their fourth year. Wright State University, the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston and Mayo Clinic are currently the only entities in the US with aerospace medicine programs.

Medical complications surrounding space travel [ edit ] Problems emerging during or upon return from space flight [ edit ] Lightheadedness Deterioration of proprioception (ability to sense the movement and location of ones body) Slower wound healing Immune system suppression Muscle atrophy Reduction in bone density Facial swelling Height increase Low blood pressure Fainting Blurred vision Poor nutrition: weight loss, dehydration Disruption to sleep patterns Fatigue Poor coordination Possible decreased fertility Complications that can develop years later [ edit ] Cancer due to radiation Hyperthyroidism Cataracts Future [ edit ] Technology [ edit ] There are many new devices and techniques, either in the process of research and development or already in use, to improve space medicine. A few examples are: Remote/telepresence surgery- a surgeon on earth controls robotic instruments that are physically performing the surgery in space Computer-Assisted Design and Computer Assisted Manipulation (CAD-CAM)- medical supplies assembled by technology using specification data contained on board or communicated from Earth Telemedicine- high quality pictures of injuries or symptoms experienced in orbit sent to a doctor on Earth who is then able to diagnose and recommend treatment without being physically present Devices that make medicine- the shelf life of many pharmaceuticals are not long enough to remain viable for long-term missions. Researchers are considering technology that manufactures drugs from stored substrates as they are needed by astronauts.

Implications on earthly medicine [ edit ] In 2018, Dr.

Serena Auñón-Chancellor completed a six-month space expedition to collect samples of her body fluids to be analyzed on earth. Her research has led to new knowledge and possible treatment breakthroughs for osteoporosis, Parkinson's, cancer and fertility.

See also [ edit ] Space Nursing Society Space medicine References [ edit ] Argueta, Erica. "Space Medicine Isn't Just for Astronauts. It's for All of Us." CNET, 19 Sept. 2019, www.cnet.com/features/space-medicine-isn't-just-for-astronauts-its-for-all-of-us/.

Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Creating a Vision for Space Medicine During Travel Beyond Earth Orbit; Ball, J. R.; Evans Jr., C. H. (2001).

Safe Passage: Astronaut Care for Exploration Missions . National Academies Press.

doi : 10.17226/10218 .

ISBN 978-0-309-07585-5 .

PMID 25057582 .

S2CID 201743936 .

"Dee O'Hara Oral History." NASA, NASA, 16 July 2010,                 historycollection.jsc.nasa.gov/JSCHistoryPortal/history/oral_histories/OHaraDB/OHaraDB_4-23- 02.htm.

Dunbar, Brian. "Space Medicine." NASA, NASA, 12 Aug. 2004, www.nasa.gov/audience/foreducators/9-                12/features/F_Space_Medicine.html.

Hollingham, Richard. "The Nurse Who Knew the First Astronauts inside Out." BBC Future, BBC, 24 Aug. 2016, www.bbc.com/future/article/20160823-the-nurse-who-knew-the-first-astronauts-inside-out.

Lay, Frances I. (July 1959).

"Next Stop- Outer Space" .

American Journal of Nursing .

59 (7): 971– 973.

PMID 13661229 .

Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on the Longitudinal Study of Astronaut Health; Longnecker, D. E.; Manning, F. J.; Worth Jr., M. H. (2004).

Review of NASA's Longitudinal Study of Astronaut Health . National Academies Press.

doi : 10.17226/10903 .

ISBN 978-0-309-09148-0 .

PMID 25009858 .

A Strategy for Research in Space Biology and Medicine into the Next Century . National Academies Press. 1998.

doi : 10.17226/6282 .

ISBN 978-0-309-52206-9 .

Nicogossian, Arnauld E., and James Fletcher Parker . Space Physiology and Medicine . NASA – National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Scientific and Technical Information Branch, 1982.

"Nursing NASA astronauts". Space Boffins podcast (Podcast). The Naked Scientists. September 10, 2016. Retrieved July 8, 2018.

Perrin, MM (Sep 1985). "Space nursing. A professional challenge". Nurs Clin North Am. 20 (3): 497–503. PMID 3851391.

Shayler David; Ian A. Moule (2006). Women in Space – Following Valentina. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 72.

ISBN 978-1-84628-078-8 .

"Space Medicine: A New Frontier for Aspiring Physicians." AAMC, 27 Sept. 2016, www.aamc.org/news-insights/space-medicine-new-frontier-aspiring-physicians.

v t e Nursing Levels of practice Generalists Student nurse Clinical nurse leader Licensed practical nurse Registered nurse Graduate nurse Nurse scientist Advanced practice APNs by role Clinical nurse specialist Nurse anesthetist Nurse midwife Nurse practitioner NPs by population Family Adult-gerontology Pediatrics Women's health Neonatal Psych/mental health Education and licensure Nightingale Pledge Associate of Science in Nursing Bachelor of Science in Nursing Diploma in Nursing Doctor of Nursing Practice Master of Science in Nursing Board of nursing Nurse Licensure Compact Nursing credentials and certifications Nurse education Nurse registry NCLEX TEAS Specialties and areas of practice Ambulatory care Cardiac Correctional nursing Critical care Dental Education Emergency Faith community Flight Forensic Geriatrics Holistic Home health Hyperbaric Legal consultation Management Matron Medical-surgical Midwifery Women's Health Care Nurse Military Neonatal Nursing informatics Obstetrics Occupational health Oncology Orthopedics Pediatrics Perianesthesia Perioperative Psychiatric and mental health Private duty Public health School Space Surgical Telenursing Travel health nursing WOCN Nursing process Nursing assessment Nursing diagnosis Nursing care plan Nursing theory Caregiver burden Classification systems NANDA Nursing Interventions Classification Nursing Minimum Data Set (NMDS) Nursing Outcomes Classification By country International Nurses Day Australia ( timeline ) Canada Germany Hong Kong India Iran Japan Kenya New Zealand ( timeline ) Pakistan Philippines Republic of Ireland South Africa Spain Taiwan United Kingdom ( history ) United States ( history ) Category Commons WikiProject v t e Space medicine Main areas Artificial gravity Astronautical hygiene Bioastronautics Neuroscience in space Space exposure Space food Space nursing Space weather Weightlessness Illness and injuries Asthenization Ebullism Illness and injuries during spaceflight Medical treatment during spaceflight Space adaptation syndrome Space and survival Spaceflight osteopenia Organizations Aerospace Medical Association National Space Biomedical Research Institute Rubicon Foundation Space Nursing Society Other topics Adverse health effects from lunar dust exposure Alcohol Cardiac rhythm problems during space flight Central nervous system effects from radiation exposure during spaceflight Effect of spaceflight on the human body Effects of sleep deprivation in space Epidemiology data for low-linear energy transfer radiation Sleep in space Health threat from cosmic rays Intervertebral disc damage and spaceflight List of microorganisms tested in outer space Psychological and sociological effects of spaceflight Radiobiology evidence for protons and HZE nuclei Reduced muscle mass, strength and performance in space Renal stone formation in space Spaceflight radiation carcinogenesis Team composition and cohesion in spaceflight missions Visual impairment due to intracranial pressure v t e Spaceflight General Astrodynamics History Timeline Space Race Records Accidents and incidents Space launch Space policy Australia China European Space Agency European Union India Japan North Korea South Korea Russia Soviet Union United States Space law Outer Space Treaty Rescue Agreement Space Liability Convention Registration Convention Moon Treaty Space warfare Space command Space force Militarisation of space Private spaceflight Billionaire space race Applications Astronomy Earth observation Archaeology Imagery and mapping Reconnaissance Weather and environment monitoring Communications satellite Internet Radio Telephone Television Satellite navigation Commercial use of space Space launch market competition Space architecture Space exploration Space research Space technology Space weather Human spaceflight General Astronaut commercial Life-support system Animals in space Bioastronautics Space suit Extravehicular activity Overview effect Weightlessness Space toilet Space tourism Space colonization Space diving Programs Vostok Mercury Voskhod Gemini Soyuz Apollo Skylab Apollo–Soyuz Space Shuttle Mir Shuttle–Mir International Space Station Shenzhou Tiangong New Shepard Artemis Health issues Effect of spaceflight on the human body Space adaptation syndrome Health threat from cosmic rays Space psychology Psychological and sociological effects Space and survival Space medicine Space nursing Space sexology Spacecraft Launch vehicle Rocket Space capsule Orbital module Reentry capsule Service module Spaceplane Robotic spacecraft Satellite Space probe Lander Rover Self-replicating spacecraft Space telescope Spacecraft propulsion Rocket engine Electric propulsion Solar sail Gravity assist Destinations Sub-orbital Orbital Geocentric Geosynchronous Interplanetary Interstellar Intergalactic Space launch Direct ascent Escape velocity Expendable and reusable launch systems Launch pad Non-rocket spacelaunch Spaceport Ground segment Flight controller Ground station Pass Mission control center Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Space_nursing&oldid=1285645097 " Categories : Space nursing Human spaceflight Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 April 2025, at 22:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Space nursing 4 languages Add topic

