Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early years 1.2 Political activity 1.3 American years 2 Works 3 See also 4 Footnotes 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Wilhelm Weitling 27 languages العربية বাংলা Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German tailor, inventor, political activist and communist theorist William Weitling A photograph of Wilhelm Weitling Born Wilhelm Weitling ( 1808-10-05 ) October 5, 1808 Magdeburg , Kingdom of Westphalia Died January 25, 1871 (1871-01-25) (aged 62) New York City, U.S.

Occupation(s) Tailor , activist Part of a series on Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related  topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Wilhelm Christian Weitling ( German: [ˈvaɪ̯tlɪŋ] ; October 5, 1808 – January 25, 1871) was a German tailor, inventor, radical political activist and one of the first theorists of communism . Weitling gained fame in Europe as a social theorist before he immigrated to the United States.

[ 1 ] In addition to his extensive political writing, Weitling was a successful inventor of attachments for commercial sewing machines, including devices for double-stitching and the creation of button holes.

Biography [ edit ] Early years [ edit ] Wilhelm Christian Weitling was born in Magdeburg , Westphalia , the son of Christiane Weitling and Guilliaume Terijon. Weitling's father was a young French officer who was billeted in occupied Prussia, who met and fell in love with Weitling's mother, a household maid.

[ 2 ] His parents never married, with his father dying in the ill-fated 1812 French invasion of Russia .

[ 3 ] Weitling was raised in dire poverty, frequently in the care of others while his mother eked out a meager living as a maid and cook.

[ 3 ] His formal education was minimal, limited to elementary study in the public school of Magdeburg and such reading as he was able to do on his own at the local library.

[ 4 ] He was raised as a Roman Catholic through the age of 12, and read the Bible attentively, retaining an ability to quote scripture throughout his life.

[ 4 ] In keeping with the dual nationality of his birth, Weitling was bilingual in French and German , learning English as well as the basics of Italian later in his life.

[ 4 ] Weitling was apprenticed to a tailor at an early age, living with his master and learning the skill of tailoring garments for women and men thoroughly.

[ 5 ] He became a journeyman at the age of 18, leaving his hometown to travel across the German states in search of employment.

[ 6 ] He landed in the city of Leipzig in 1830, where he began to take an interest in politics and to try his hand at the writing of satirical poetry.

[ 7 ] He made his way to Dresden in the fall of 1832 and from there to Vienna in 1834, where he worked fabricating artificial flowers and decorations for women's clothing.

[ 8 ] In the fall of 1837 Weitling immigrated to Paris , a city which he had briefly visited two years before.

[ 9 ] He would remain there for four years, [ 9 ] becoming deeply involved in the radical political ideas of the day, in particular the writings of Fourier , Owen and Cabet .

Political activity [ edit ] After joining the League of the Just in 1837, Weitling joined Parisian workers in protests and street battles in 1839.

Tristram Hunt called his doctrine "a highly emotional mix of Babouvist communism , chiliastic Christianity, and millenarian populism": In conformity with the work of the Christian radical Felicité de Lamennais , Weitling urged installing communism by physical force with the help of a 40,000-strong army of ex-convicts. A prelapsarian community of goods , fellowship, and societal harmony would then ensue, directed by Weitling himself. While Marx and Engels struggled with the intricacies of industrial capitalism and modern modes of production, Weitling revived the apocalyptic politics of the sixteenth-century Münster Anabaptists and their gory attempts to usher in the Second Coming . Much to Marx and Engels's annoyance, Weitling's giddy blend of evangelism and protocommunism attracted thousands of dedicated disciples across the Continent.

[ 10 ] In 1838, he published his first work, Die Menschheit, wie sie ist und wie sie sein sollte (The human race as it is, and as it should be), which was translated into Hungarian and other languages.

In 1841, after the abortive rebellion of the Blanquists , he went to Switzerland , visiting Geneva , Vevey and Langenthal in the canton of Bern , and finally settling in Zürich in 1843. At all these places, he promoted the doctrines of communism with his preaching and publications, including the 1842 work Garantien der Harmonie und Freiheit (Guarantees of harmony and freedom).

Weitling's work Das Evangelium eines armen Sünders (The Poor Sinner's Gospel) came out in 1845, but by this time the attention of the Swiss authorities had been attracted. He was arrested and prosecuted for revolutionary agitation, including blasphemy on account of having published a text which depicted Jesus Christ as both a communist and the illegitimate child of Mary . Found guilty, he was given a six-month sentence.

[ 11 ] On his release, he was deported back to Prussia. He resided for a time in Hamburg , but then left on a journey which took him to London, Treves , Brussels and New York City.

In Weitling's 1847 book Gospel of Poor Sinners, he traced communism back to early Christianity.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Upon the outbreak of the revolutions of 1848 in Germany , Weitling returned to Germany, preaching his communism to little effect.  When the revolutions failed in 1849, he returned to New York thus becoming one of the Forty-Eighters .

[ 14 ] His book Guarantees of Harmony and Freedom was praised by Bruno Bauer , Ludwig Feuerbach and Mikhail Bakunin , the latter of whom Weitling was to meet in Zürich in 1843.

[ 15 ] Karl Marx , in an article from 1844, referred to Weitling's work as the "vehement and brilliant literary debut of the German workers," [ 16 ] Although John Spargo suggested that "what won from Marx this high-sounding praise was simply the fact that Weitling's appeals were addressed to the workers as a class", [ 17 ] Marx himself emphasized Weitling's theoretical and philosophical "brilliance," which compared favorably to the more "economically" inclined English workers and the more practical "politically" oriented French workers.

[ 18 ] American years [ edit ] Weitling continued his activism on behalf of communism in the United States.  In January 1850, he began the publication of a monthly journal, Die Republik der Arbeiter .  By the end of the year, it had a circulation of 4,000.  Toward the end of his life he turned from activism to technological and astronomical studies. For seven years, he was register at Castle Garden.  He received nine patents for improvements to sewing machines , among which were double stitch, button hole and embroidery attachments. He received a patent for a dress-trimming crimper which he had worked on for 17 years, and on his death left several unfinished machines.

[ 19 ] He participated with the experimental German-American settlement of Communia, Iowa . Weitling died in New York City. A widow and six children survived him.

[ 19 ] Works [ edit ] Die Menschheit, wie sie ist und wie sie sein sollte (1838/39) German text online Guarantees of Harmony and Freedom ( Garantien der Harmonie und Freiheit ; 1842) The Poor Sinner's Gospel ( Das Evangelium eines armen Sünders ; 1845) Ein Nothruf an die Männer der Arbeit und der Sorge, Brief an die Landsleute (1847) See also [ edit ] League of the Just Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Nygaard, Bertel (2022), van der Linden, Marcel (ed.), "Wilhelm Weitling and Early German Socialism" , The Cambridge History of Socialism , vol. 1, Cambridge University Press, pp.

214– 231, ISBN 978-1-108-48134-2 ^ Carl Wittke, The Utopian Communist: A Biography of Wilhelm Weitling, Nineteenth-Century Reformer.

Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press, 1950; pg. 3.

^ a b Wittke, The Utopian Communist, pg. 4.

^ a b c Wittke, The Utopian Communist, pg. 5.

^ Wittke, The Utopian Communist, pg. 6.

^ Wittke, The Utopian Communist, pp. 7-8.

^ Wittke, The Utopian Communist, pg. 8.

^ Wittke, The Utopian Communist, pp. 8-9.

^ a b Wittke, The Utopian Communist, pg. 11.

^ Hunt, Marx's General , pp. 131-32.

^ Wilson, Edmund (2003). "Marx and Engels Take a Hand at Making History".

To the Finland Station: A Study in the Writing and Acting of History . New York Review of Books. p. 164.

^ Frederick Engels: On The History of the Communist League, Nov 12-26, 1885 in Sozialdemokrat ^ Antonio Labriola, Socialism and Philosophy, VII, Rome, June 16, 1897.

^ Morris Hillquit, History of Socialism in the United States.

New York: Funk & Wagnalls, 1906; pg. 163.

^ Leier, 106.

^ Marx, "Critical Marginal Notes on the Article "The King of Prussia and Social Reform," in The Marx-Engels Reader, 2nd ed., ed. Robert C. Tucker (New York: Norton, 1978), p. 129.

^ John Spargo, Karl Marx: His Life and Work.

B. W. Huebsch, 1910; p. 89.

^ Marx, "Critical Marginal Notes," p. 129.

^ a b "Wilhelm Weitling: An Inventor of Prominence — A Remarkable Career," New York Times, Jan. 27, 1871.

Sources [ edit ] Frederick Converse Clark, "A Neglected Socialist," Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, vol. 5 (March 1895), pp. 66–87.

Anton Jansson, "Building or destroying community: The concept of Sittlichkeit in the political thought of Vormärz Germany." Global Intellectual History 5.1 (2020): 86–103.

online . Argues Weitling rejected this Hegelian idea as oppressive and said socialists must work to destroy it.

Anton Jansson, "'The Pure Teachings of Jesus': On the Christian Language of Wilhelm Weitling’s Communism." Praktyka Teoretyczna vol. 29, no. 3 (2018): 30–48.

online .

Bruce Levine, The Spirit of 1848: German Immigrants, Labor Conflict, and the Coming of the Civil War.

Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1992.

Hans Mühlestein, "Marx and the Utopian Wilhelm Weitling," Science & Society, vol. 12,  no. 1 (Winter 1948), pp. 113–129.

Daniel Nagel, Von republikanischen Deutschen zu deutsch-amerikanischen Republikanern. Ein Beitrag zum Identitätswandel der deutschen Achtundvierziger in den Vereinigten Staaten 1850–1861.

St. Ingbert, 2012.

Waltraud Seidel-Höppner, Wilhelm Weitling, 1808–1871: Eine politische Biographie.

In two volumes. Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Peter Lang, 2014.

Waltraud Seidel-Höppner, Wilhelm Weitling. Leben und Politisches Wirken.

Leipzig, Germany: Rosa-Luxembourg-Verein, 1993.

Carl Wittke, The Utopian Communist: A Biography of Wilhelm Weitling, Nineteenth-Century Reformer.

Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press, 1950.

External links [ edit ] Wilhelm Weitling at Marxist Internet Archive Guide to the Wilhelm Weitling papers held at the New York Public Library Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wilhelm_Weitling&oldid=1304258541 " Categories : 1808 births 1871 deaths 19th-century American inventors American anti-capitalists American Christian socialists American communists Christian communists Politicians from Magdeburg German-American Forty-Eighters German anti-capitalists German Christian socialists German communists German expatriates in Austria German expatriates in France German expatriates in Switzerland German people imprisoned abroad German people of French descent People convicted of blasphemy People deported from Switzerland Prisoners and detainees of Switzerland American tailors 19th-century American artisans Utopian socialists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 23:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wilhelm Weitling 27 languages Add topic

