Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Zoroastrianism 2 Judaism Toggle Judaism subsection 2.1 In the Hebrew Bible 2.2 Rabbinic literature 2.3 Late and modern Judaism 3 Christianity Toggle Christianity subsection 3.1 New Testament 3.2 Roman Catholic Church 3.2.1 Angels as guardians 3.2.2 Saints and their angels 3.3 Anglican Communion 3.4 Eastern Orthodox Church 3.5 Lutheran Church 3.6 Methodist Church 3.7 Reformed and Presbyterian Churches 4 Islam 5 Renaissance magic Toggle Renaissance magic subsection 5.1 Christian Kabbalah 5.2 Enochian magic 6 Thelema 7 Literary usage 8 In popular culture 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Notes 10.2 Citations 10.3 Works cited 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Guardian angel 40 languages Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Protective and tutelary angel This article is about the religious concept. For the non-profit group, see Guardian Angels . For other uses, see Guardian angel (disambiguation) .

Icon of a guardian angel Guardian Angel by Pietro da Cortona , 1656 Schutzengel-Mosaik (1907) am Hauptportal der Antonskirche, Antonsplatz, Wien-Favoriten/ Guardian angel mosaic ( 1907 ) at the main portal of St. Anthony's Church, Antonsplatz, Vienna -Favoriten A guardian angel is a type of angel that is assigned to protect and guide a particular person, group or nation. Belief in tutelary beings can be traced throughout all antiquity. The idea of angels that guard over people played a major role in Ancient Judaism . In Christianity , the hierarchy of angels was extensively developed in the 5th century by Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite . The theology of angels and tutelary spirits has undergone many changes since the 5th century. The belief is that guardian angels serve to protect whichever person God assigns them to. The Memorial of the Holy Guardian Angels is celebrated on 2 October.

The idea of a guardian angel is central to the 15th-century book The Book of the Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage by Abraham of Worms, a German Cabalist . In 1897, this book was translated into English by Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers (1854–1918), a co-founder of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn , who styled the guardian angel as the Holy Guardian Angel.

Aleister Crowley (1875–1947), the founder of the esoteric religion Thelema , considered the Holy Guardian Angel to be representative of one's truest divine nature and the equivalent of the Genius of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, the Augoeides of Iamblichus , the Atman of Hinduism , and the Daimon of the ancient Greeks . Following the teachings of the Golden Dawn, Crowley refined their rituals which were intended to facilitate the ability to establish contact with one's guardian angel.

Zoroastrianism [ edit ] Main article: Fravashi In Zoroastrianism they are also known as Arda Fravaš - Holy Guardian Angels. Each person is accompanied by a guardian angel, [ 1 ] which acts as a guide throughout life. They originally patrolled the boundaries of the ramparts of heaven, [ 2 ] but volunteer to descend to earth to stand by individuals to the end of their days.

[ non-primary source needed ] Judaism [ edit ] In the Hebrew Bible [ edit ] The guardian angel concept is present in the books of the Hebrew Bible , and its development is well marked. These books described God's angels as his ministers who carried out his behests, and who were at times given special commissions, regarding men and mundane affairs.

[ 3 ] In Genesis 18–19, angels not only acted as the executors of God's wrath against the cities of the plain, but they delivered Lot from danger; in Exodus 32:34, God said to Moses: my angel shall go before thee.

The story of Tobias concerns the angel Archangel Raphael guiding and aiding its primary character. Psalm 91:11 reads: For He will command His angels concerning you to guard you in all your ways (Cf. Psalm 33:8 and 34:5 — 34:7 and 35:6 in Protestant Bibles).

[ non-primary source needed ] The belief that angels can be guides and intercessors for men can be found in Job 33:23–26, and in Daniel 10:13 angels seem to be assigned to certain countries. In this latter case, the "prince of the kingdom of Persia" contends with Gabriel. The same verse mentions " Michael , one of the chief princes".

[ non-primary source needed ] Rabbinic literature [ edit ] In rabbinic literature , the rabbis expressed the notion that there are indeed guardian angels appointed by God to watch over people.

Rashi on Daniel 10:7 "Our Sages of blessed memory said that although a person does not see something of which he is terrified, his guardian angel, who is in heaven, does see it; therefore, he becomes terrified." [ 4 ] Lailah is an angel of the night in charge of conception and pregnancy. Lailah serves as a guardian angel throughout a person's life and at death, leads the soul into the afterlife .

[ 5 ] Late and modern Judaism [ edit ] According to Rabbi Leo Trepp , in late Judaism , the belief developed that, "the people have a heavenly representative, a guardian angel. Every human being has a guardian angel. Previously the term Malakh (angel) simply meant messenger of God." [ 6 ] Chabad believes that people might indeed have guardian angels. For Chabad, God watches over people and makes decisions directly with their prayers and it is in this context that the guardian angels are sent back and forth as emissaries to aid in this task. Thus, they are not prayed to directly, but the angels are part of the workings of how the prayer and response comes about.

[ 7 ] In the view of Rabbi Adin Steinsaltz : The nature of the angel is to be, to a degree, as its name in Hebrew signifies, a messenger, to constitute a permanent contact between our world of action and the higher worlds. An angel's missions go in two directions: it may serve as an emissary of God downward… and it may also serve as the one carries things upwards from below... The angel cannot reveal its true form to man, whose being, senses and instruments of perception belong only to the world of action — it continues to belong to a different dimension even when apprehended in one form or another... The angel who is sent to us from another world does not always have a significance or impact beyond the normal laws of physical nature. Indeed it often happens that the angel precisely reveals itself in nature, in the ordinary common-sense world of causality.

[ 8 ] In Judaism, there are references to angels with specific protective functions. An example of this can be seen in the birth protection rituals practiced among others by Ashkenazi Jews in parts of Alsace , Switzerland and Southern Germany. Pregnant women and newborn children would be given text amulets bearing the names of the angels Senoi, Sansenoi and Semangelo. These angels were supposed to protect pregnant women and newborn children from Lilith . This can be traced back to the story of Lilith, in which God sends three angels to bring Lilith back to Adam . They are unsuccessful in this task, but Lilith admits to having been created to harm children. She promises to spare children who carry the name or likeness of the three angels with them.

[ 9 ] Samael was identified as the guardian angel and prince of Rome and the archenemy of Israel . By the beginning of Jewish culture in Europe , Samael had been established as a representative of Christianity , due to his identification with Rome.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Christianity [ edit ] A guardian angel in a 19th-century print by Fridolin Leiber New Testament [ edit ] In the New Testament the concept of guardian angel may be noted. Angels are everywhere the intermediaries between God and man; and Christ set a seal upon the Old Testament teaching: "See that you despise not one of these little ones: for I say to you, that their angels in heaven always see the face of my Father who is in heaven." (Matthew 18:10). Guardian angels work both for single persons and for communities of people.

Revelation 2:1–29 and Revelation 3:1–22 refers of the angels of the seven churches of Asia who work in the role of their guardians.

[ 12 ] Roman Catholic Church [ edit ] Guarding angel on a c.

100 -year-old tankard According to Saint Jerome , the concept of guardian angels is in the "mind of the Church". He stated: how great the dignity of the soul, since each one has from his birth an angel commissioned to guard it .

[ 3 ] The first Christian theologian to outline a specific scheme for guardian angels was Honorius of Autun in the 12th century. He said that every soul was assigned a guardian angel the moment it was put into a body.

Scholastic theologians augmented and ordered the taxonomy of angelic guardians.

Thomas Aquinas agreed with Honorius and believed that it was the lowest order of angels who served as guardians, and his view was most successful in popular thought, but Duns Scotus said that any angel is bound by duty and obedience to the Divine Authority to accept the mission to which that angel is assigned. In the 15th century, the Feast of the Guardian Angels was added to the official calendar of Catholic holidays.

In his 31 March 1997 Regina Caeli address, Pope John Paul II referred to the concept of guardian angels and concluded the address with the statement: Let us invoke the Queen of angels and saints, that she may grant us, supported by our guardian angels, to be authentic witnesses to the Lord's paschal mystery .

[ 13 ] In his 2014 homily for the Feast of Holy Guardian Angels , 2 October, Pope Francis told those gathered for daily Mass to be like children who pay attention to their "traveling companion".

No one journeys alone and no one should think that they are alone , the Pope said.

[ 14 ] During the Morning Meditation in the chapel of Santa Marta, the Pope noted that oftentimes, we have the feeling that I should do this, this is not right, be careful.

This, he said, "is the voice of" our guardian angel.

[ 15 ] According to Church tradition we all have an angel with us, who guards us...

The Pope instructed each, Do not rebel, follow his advice!

The Pope urged that this "doctrine on the angels" not be considered "a little imaginative", as it is rather one of "truth": it is what Jesus, what God said: 'I send an angel before you, to guard you, to accompany you on the way, so you will not make a mistake' .

[ 15 ] Pope Francis concluded with a series of questions so that each one can examine their own conscience: How is my relationship with my guardian angel? Do I listen to him? Do I bid him good day in the morning? Do I tell him: 'guard me while I sleep'? Do I speak with him? Do I ask his advice?

Each one of us can do so in order to evaluate the relationship with this angel that the Lord has sent to guard me and to accompany me on the path, and who always beholds the face of the Father who is in heaven.

[ 16 ] He reiterated this in a homily on 2 October 2018: Listen to the inspirations, which are always from the Holy Spirit – but the angel inspires them. But I want to ask you a question: Do you speak with your angel? Do you know the name of your angel? Do you listen to your angel?

[ 17 ] The Congregation for Divine Worship and Discipline of the Sacraments discourages assigning names to angels beyond those revealed in scripture: Michael, Gabriel, and Raphael.

[ 18 ] The celebration of the Guardian Angel at Fondachelli-Fantina on second Sunday of July, Sicily The Opus Sanctorum Angelorum is a public association of the Catholic Church that Christians can join as members in order to promote devotion to the holy angels and a covenant bond with them through a consecration approved by the Church, so that the holy angels may lead us more effectively to God.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Within the Opus Sanctorum Angelorum is the Confraternity of the Holy Guardian Angels that one becomes eligible for after entering a two year formation period.

[ 20 ] Angels as guardians [ edit ] Guardian angel, German postcard, 1900 According to Aquinas, On this road man is threatened by many dangers both from within and without, and therefore as guardians are appointed for men who have to pass by an unsafe road, so an angel is assigned to each man as long as he is a wayfarer.

By means of an angel, God is said to introduce images and suggestions leading a person to do what is right.

[ 21 ] Saints and their angels [ edit ] Father Giovangiuseppe Califano recounted how, one day, a newly appointed bishop confessed to Pope John XXIII that he could not sleep at night due to an anxiety which was caused by the responsibility of his office .

The pope told him, 'You know, I also thought the same when I was elected pope. But one day, I dreamed about my guardian angel, and it told me not to take everything so seriously.' [ 22 ] Pope John attributed the idea of calling Second Vatican Council to an inspiration from his guardian angel.

[ 23 ] Saint Gemma Galgani , a Roman Catholic mystic, stated that she had interacted with and spoken with her guardian angel.

[ 24 ] Saint Pio of Pietrelcina was known to instruct his parishioners to send him their guardian angel to communicate a trouble or issue to him when they could not travel to get to him or another urgency existed.

[ 25 ] Anglican Communion [ edit ] Of the Intercession and Invocation of Angels and Saints , printed in the Library of Anglo-Catholic Theology , held that "many learned Protestants think it probable that each of the faithful, at least, has a guardian angel. It seems certainly proved by Scripture.

Zanchius says that all the Fathers held this opinion".

[ 26 ] Building upon sacred scripture and the teachings of the Church Fathers, Richard Montagu , the Anglican Bishop of Norwich in the 17th century, stated that It is an opinion received, and hath been long, that if not every man, each son of Adam, yet sure each Christian man regenerate by water and the Holy Ghost, at least from the day of his regeneration and new birth unto God, if not from the time of his coming into the world, hath by God's appointment and assignation an Angel Guardian to attend upon him at all assayes, in all his ways, at his going forth, at his coming home .

[ 27 ] Eastern Orthodox Church [ edit ] Sergei Bulgakov writes that the Eastern Orthodox Church teaches that: each man has a guardian angel who stands before the face of the Lord. This guardian angel is not only a friend and a protector, who preserves from evil and who sends good thought; the image of God is reflected in the creature—angels and men—in such a way that angels are celestial prototypes of men. Guardian angels are especially our spiritual kin. Scripture testified that the guardianship and direction of the elements, of places, of peoples, of societies, are confided to the guardian angels of the cosmos, whose very substance adds something of harmony to the elements they watch over.

[ 28 ] As such, before the Eastern Orthodox liturgy of the Communion of the Faithful, a prayer asks For an angel of peace, a faithful guide, a guardian of our souls and bodies, let us entreat the Lord. Amen.

[ 29 ] Lutheran Church [ edit ] The Morning Prayer and Evening Prayer found in Martin Luther 's Small Catechism include the supplication Let your holy angel be with me, that the evil foe may have no power over me .

[ 30 ] Donald Schneider, a Lutheran priest, states that Martin Luther may have based these prayers on Psalm 91 , which includes a verse stating For [God] will command his angels concerning you to guard you in all your ways. On their hands they will bear you up, lest you strike your foot against a stone .

[ 31 ] [ better source needed ] Methodist Church [ edit ] John W. Hanner, a Methodist minister and theologian, wrote on the topic of guardian angels in his Angelic Study , stating that: Perhaps every Christian has a guardian angel. It may be that there is one angel to every Christian, or a score of them; or one may have charge of a score of Christians. Some of the ancient fathers believed that every city had a guardian angel, while others assigned one to every house and every man. None of us know how much we are indebted to angels for our deliverance from imminent peril, disease, and malicious plots of men and devils. Where the pious die, angels are to carry the soul to heaven, though it be a soul of a Lazarus ." [ 32 ] In May and June 1743, Methodists experienced persecution in Wednesbury and Walsall and the founder of the Methodist Church, John Wesley , was threatened with death by a mob who dragged him in the rain; however, Wesley escaped unharmed and he believed that he had been protected by his guardian angel .

[ 33 ] Reformed and Presbyterian Churches [ edit ] 18th-century rendition of a guardian angel In Reformed Dogmatics , Heinrich Heppe states that some Reformed theologians espoused the view of guardian angels, including Bucan, who taught: That as a rule to each elect person a certain particular good angel is appointed by God to guard him, may be gathered from Christ's words, Mt. 18. 10, where it is said 'Their angels do continually behold the face of my Father.' Also from Ac. 12.15 where the believers who had assembled in Mark's house said of Peter knocking at the door, 'It is his angel'. These believers were speaking according to the opinion received among the people of God." [ 34 ] Islam [ edit ] There is a similar Islamic belief in the Mu'aqqibat . According to many Muslims, each person has two guardian angels, in front of and behind him, while the two recorders are located to the right and left.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Renaissance magic [ edit ] Christian Kabbalah [ edit ] The idea of a Holy Guardian Angel is central to the book The Book of the Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage by Abraham of Worms, a German Christian Cabalist who wrote the book on ceremonial magic during the 15th century and which was later translated by Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers , a co-founder of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn . He elaborated on this earlier work, giving it extensive magical notes. In Mathers' publication of The Book of the Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage , he writes: If thou shalt perfectly observe these rules, all the following Symbols and an infinitude of others will be granted unto thee by thy Holy Guardian Angel; thou thus living for the Honour and Glory of the True and only God, for thine own good, and that of thy neighbour. Let the Fear of God be ever before the eyes and the heart of him who shall possess this Divine Wisdom and Sacred Magic.

[ 37 ] Enochian magic [ edit ] The Enochian system of 16th-century occultist John Dee discusses the guardian angel. In this dialog between Dee and the angel Jubanladace on p.

18, Cotton Appendix XLVI 1, the angel says the following: Dee: If I should not offend you, I would gladly know of what order you are or how your state is in respect of Michael , Gabriel , Raphael or Uriel .

Jubanladace: Unto men, according unto their deserts, and the first excellency of their soul, God hath appointed a good Governor or Angel, from among the orders of those that are blessed. For every soul that is good, is not of one and the self same dignification. Therefore according to his excellency we are appointed as Ministers from that order, whereunto his excellency accordeth: to the intent that he may be brought, at last, to supply those places which were glorified by a former: and also to the intent, that the Prince of darkness might be counterposed in God's justice.

[ a ] Thelema [ edit ] See also: Thelema Having studied The Book of Abramelin during his time with the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, occult writer Aleister Crowley adapted the concept of the Holy Guardian Angel from Renaissance magic (see above ) and made it central to the philosophy and practices of Thelema , popularizing it in the process.

In his earlier writings, Crowley states that the Holy Guardian Angel is the "silent self", [ 38 ] the equivalent of the Genius of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, the Augoeides of Iamblichus , the Ātman of Hinduism , and the Daimon of the ancient Greeks .

[ 39 ] In his late sixties, when composing Magick Without Tears , he states that the Holy Guardian Angel is not one's self, but rather a discrete and independent being, who may have been previously human.

[ 40 ] It should never be forgotten for a single moment that the central and essential work of the Magician is the attainment of the Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel. Once he has achieved this he must of course be left entirely in the hands of that Angel, who can be invariably and inevitably relied upon to lead him to the further great step—crossing of the Abyss and the attainment of the grade of Master of the Temple.

[ 41 ] Literary usage [ edit ] Statue of a guardian angel in Memmelsdorf , Germany Guardian angels were often considered to be matched by a personal demon who countered the angel's efforts, especially in popular medieval drama such as morality plays like the 15th-century The Castle of Perseverance . In Christopher Marlowe 's play The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus , c.

1592 , Faustus has a "Good Angel" and "Bad Angel" who offer competing advice (Act 2, scene 1, etc.).

[ 42 ] Guardian angels appear in literary works of the medieval and Renaissance periods. Later the Anglican English physician and philosopher Sir Thomas Browne (1605–1682), stated his belief in Religio Medici (part 1, paragraph 33): Therefore for Spirits I am so farre from denying their existence, that I could easily beleeve, that not onely whole Countries, but particular persons have their Tutelary, and Guardian Angels: It is not a new opinion of the Church of Rome, but an old one of Pythagoras and Plato; there is no heresie in it, and if not manifestly defin'd in Scripture, yet is it an opinion of a good and wholesome use in the course and actions of a mans life, and would serve as an Hypothesis to salve many doubts, whereof common Philosophy affordeth no solution: [ 43 ] By the 19th century, the guardian angel was no longer viewed in Anglophone lands as an intercessory figure, but rather as a force protecting the believer from performing sin.

[ citation needed ] A parody appears in Lord Byron 's 1819 poem Don Juan : Her guardian angel had given up his garrison (Canto I, xvii).

[ citation needed ] In Cardinal Newman's 1865 poem The Dream of Gerontius , the departed soul is met by his guardian angel.

[ 44 ] J. R. R. Tolkien talks of a Guardian Angel in several letters to his children. He described the Guardian Angel as "God's very attention itself, personalised".

[ 45 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Clarence Odbody , the guardian angel in the 1946 film It's a Wonderful Life and the 1990 film Clarence , "earned his wings" through bringing awareness that life was worth living to the 1946 film's protagonist, George Bailey .

[ 46 ] Teen Angel, Frenchy's guardian angel in the 1978 film Grease , who advises her to return to high school in the song " Beauty School Dropout ".

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Angel of God – Roman Catholic traditional prayer Angel of Portugal – Guardian angel of Portugal Recording angel – Angel who records a person's life and prayers Shoulder angel – Plot device used for an effect in fictional works References [ edit ] This article has an unclear citation style .

The references used may be made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation and footnoting .

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Notes [ edit ] ^ Now in various collections of the British Library. See especially Sloane MSS 3188, 3189 and 3191, and Cotton Appendix XLVI. All the above are available in digital scans at: "Enochian Manuscripts Online" . Archived from the original on 30 December 2011 . Retrieved 5 January 2012 .

Citations [ edit ] ^ Yasna 26.4, 55.1 ^ Bundahišn 6.3, Zatspram 5.2 ^ a b "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Guardian Angels" .

www.newadvent.org .

Archived from the original on 3 March 2016.

^ "The Book of Daniel, Chapter 10" .

Tanach with Rashi . Chabad.org and Judaica Press.

Archived from the original on 25 October 2012 . Retrieved 16 May 2012 .

^ Schwartz, Howard (1 October 1994).

Gabriel's Palace: Jewish Mystical Tales . OUP USA.

ISBN 9780195093889 – via Google Books.

^ Trepp, Leo (2001).

A History of the Jewish Experience . Behrman House. p. 55.

ISBN 978-0874416725 .

^ "Do we believe in guardian angels?" . Chabad.org Ask the Rabbi.

Archived from the original on 16 August 2012 . Retrieved 16 May 2012 .

^ The Thirteen Petalled Rose: A Discourse On The Essence Of Jewish Existence And Belief , Basic Books (1985), Page 9, 13, 15 ^ Lubrich, Naomi, ed. (2022).

Birth Culture: Jewish Artifacts from Rural Switzerland and Environs (in English and German). Basel: Schwabe Verlag .

ISBN 9783796546075 .

^ Gross, Abraham (1995).

Iberian Jewry from Twilight to Dawn: The World of Rabbi Abraham Saba . Leiden, Netherlands: Brill Publishers . p. 133.

ISBN 978-9004100534 .

^ Ivry, Elliot R. Wolfson (2013) [1998].

Perspectives on Jewish Thought . Routledge. p. 263.

ISBN 978-1136650123 .

^ "Revelation 1:20" .

Archived from the original on 17 October 2013.

^ John Paul II.

"Regina Caeli, 31 March 1997" .

www.vatican.va .

Archived from the original on 13 December 2009.

^ France-Presse, Agence (2 October 2014).

"I believe in angels, says Pope Francis – and they help you make right decisions" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 27 September 2016.

^ a b Schneible (2014) .

^ Pope Francis (10 October 2014).

"We all have an angel" .

L'Osservatore Romano . No. 41 (English weekly ed.). Archived from the original on 2 November 2014.

^ Ceraso, Gabriella (2 October 2018).

"Pope at Mass: Guardian angels, our daily gate to the Father" .

Vatican News .

^ Congregation for Divine Worship and Discipline of the Sacraments, "Directory on Popular Piety and the Liturgy", §217 Archived 23 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ Bukuras, Joe; Jones, Kevin J. (14 October 2022).

"EWTN Poll: U.S. Catholics have strong belief in angels, but Eucharistic devotion lags" . North Texas Catholic . Retrieved 29 April 2024 .

^ a b "Membership Formation" .

Opus Sanctorum Angelorum . Retrieved 29 April 2024 .

^ Lovasik SVD, Lawrence.

Friendship With the Angels , Tarentum, Pennsylvania ^ Jimenez, Marta and Harris, Elise. "Postulators Reflect on Humanity of John Paul II, John XXIII", National Catholic Register , April 23, 2014 Archived 18 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Boeddeker, O.F.M., Alfred. "Our Guardian Angels", The Catholic Resource Network" .

ewtn.com .

Archived from the original on 8 February 2015.

^ Rudolph M. Bell, 2003 The Voices of Gemma Galgani: the Life and Afterlife of a Modern Saint University of Chicago Press ISBN 978-0-226-04196-4 pages 47 and 185 ^ Pio, Padre.

"The Guardian Angels" .

The Mystic . Archived from the original on 15 February 2015.

^ "Of the Intercession and Invocation of Angels and Saints".

The Library of Anglo-Catholic Theology .

16 (2).

John Henry Parker : 46. 1856.

^ Palmer, William (1846).

A Harmony of Anglican Doctrine with the Doctrine of the Catholic and Apostolic Church of the East: Being the Longer Russian Catechism: with an Appendix Consisting of Notes and Extracts from Scottish and Anglican Authorities and by all means, whoever searches this reference shall be blessed in the name of the Lord . A. Brown. p. 145.

^ Bulgakov, Sergiĭ (1988).

The Orthodox Church . St Vladimir's Seminary Press. p. 127.

ISBN 9780881410518 .

^ Guiley, Rosemary (2004).

The Encyclopedia of Angels . Infobase Publishing. p. 155.

ISBN 9781438130026 .

^ Pfatteicher, Philip H. (1990).

Commentary on the Lutheran Book of Worship: Lutheran Liturgy in Its Ecumenical Context . Augsburg Fortress.

ISBN 9780800603922 .

Luther's prayers are cast in the singular and the German has "let your holy angel." This could be a reference to one's guardian angel, and thus when the prayer is put in the plural the noun angel should logically be made plural also.

^ Schneider, Donald (1 October 2013). "Of Guardian Angels".

Faith Lutheran Church .

Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod .

^ Hanner (1858) , p. 77.

^ Wigger (2009) , p. 25.

^ Heppe (2008) , pp. 212–213.

^ Quran 13:11 English&Arabic , archived from the original on 17 April 2015 ^ "Quran Surah Ar-Ra'd (Verse 11) with English Translation" .

IReBD.com . Archived from the original on 26 January 2018 . Retrieved 26 January 2018 .

لَهُ مُعَقِّبَاتٌ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ يَحْفَظُونَهُ مِنْ أَمْرِ اللَّهِ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يُغَيِّرُ مَا بِقَوْمٍ حَتَّىٰ يُغَيِّرُوا مَا بِأَنْفُسِهِمْ ۗ وَإِذَا أَرَادَ اللَّهُ بِقَوْمٍ سُوءًا فَلَا مَرَدَّ لَهُ ۚ وَمَا لَهُمْ مِنْ دُونِهِ مِنْ وَالٍ ^ Mathers (2004) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Gunther (2014) , p. 336.

^ Grant (2010) .

^ Crowley (1982) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Crowley (1982) , ch. 83.

^ Mullan (2010) .

^ Religio Medici 1:33 ^ "Newman Reader – Dream of Gerontius – 1" .

www.newmanreader.org .

Archived from the original on 17 December 2004.

^ Mullens O.P., Bede. "Quodlibet 38: Guardian Angels", February 4, 2020 ^ "It's a Wonderful Life (1946) – Synopsis" . Turner Classic Movies. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021.

Works cited [ edit ] Crowley, Aleister (1982).

Magick Without Tears . Phoenix, AZ: Falcon Press.

ISBN 1-56184-018-1 .

Crowley, Aleister (1997).

Magick: Liber ABA (2nd ed.). York Beach, Maine: Samuel Weiser .

ISBN 978-0877289197 .

Grant, Kenneth (2010).

The Magical Revival . United Kingdom: Starfire Publishing.

ISBN 978-1906073039 .

Gunther, J. D. (2014).

The Angel and the Abyss: The Inward Journey, Books II and III . Nicolas Hays.

ISBN 978-0-89254-211-6 .

Hanner, John W. (1858). "The Methodist Pulpit, South". In Smithson, William T. (ed.).

Angelic Study .

Methodist Episcopal Church, South .

Heppe, Heinrich (2008).

Reformed Dogmatics . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 978-1556357756 .

Mathers, S. L. MacGregor (2004).

The Book of the Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage . Book Tree.

ISBN 1-58509-252-5 .

Mullan, John (12 November 2010).

"Ten of the best angels in literature" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 5 March 2017.

Schneible, Ann (2 October 2014).

"Be like children – believe in your guardian angel, Pope says" .

Catholic News Agency . Archived from the original on 26 December 2014.

Wigger, John (2009).

American Saint: Francis Asbury and the Methodists .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0199741250 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bellarmine, Robert (1902).

"First Sunday: Angel Guardians" .

Sermons from the Latins . Benziger Brothers.

Corrias, A. (2013). "From Daemonic Reason to Daemonic Imagination: Plotinus and Marsilio Ficino on the Soul's Tutelary Spirit".

British Journal for the History of Philosophy .

21 (3): 443– 462.

doi : 10.1080/09608788.2013.771608 .

S2CID 170479884 .

Nickell, Joe (14 May 2012).

"On a Wing and a Prayer: The Search for Guardian Angels" .

Skeptical Briefs .

21 (3) . Retrieved 5 December 2022 – via Csicop.org.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Guardian angels at Wikimedia Commons v t e Angels in Abrahamic religions Angels in Judaism Individuals Michael Gabriel Raphael Uriel Angel of the Lord Angel of the Presence Destroying Angel Azrael Ariel Arariel Azazel Camael Cassiel Dobiel Dumah Eisheth Hadraniel Haniel Jerahmeel Jophiel Kushiel Lailah Mastema Metatron Nuriel Pravuil Raziel Sachiel Samael Samyaza Sandalphon Senoy, Sansenoy and Semangelof Tzaphqiel Yahoel Zadkiel Zerachiel Groups Seraphim Chayot Ophanim Cherubim Hashmallim Ishim Sons of God Recording angels Angels in Christianity Individuals Michael Gabriel Abaddon Raphael Uriel Ariel Azazel Sariel Sandalphon Raguel Ramiel Selaphiel Barachiel Jegudiel Camael Guardian Angel of Portugal Jerahmeel Jophiel Metatron Samyaza Pravuil Sachiel Zadkiel Sarathiel Zerachiel Phanuel Aker Gabuthelon Arphugitonos Beburos Zebuleon Daniel Kerubiel Kokabiel Kushiel Leliel Muriel Pahaliah Seraphiel Shamsiel Chazaqiel Groups Seraphim Cherubim Ophanim / Thrones Dominions / Lordships Virtues Powers / Authorities Principalities / Rulers Archangels Watchers / Guardian angels Angels in Islam Individuals Mikha'il Jibra'il Israfil Azra'il ar-Rūḥ ʿAzāzīl Iblis Artiya'il Darda'il Dumah Kalqa'il Futrus Ḥabīb Harut and Marut Mālik Munkar and Nakir Riḍwan Groups Mu'qarrabun ( Cherubim and Seraphim ) Archangels Angels of Hell Hafaza ( Guardian angel ) Recording angels Nāzi'āt and Nāshiṭāt Uthras (angels) in Mandaeism Individuals Yushamin Abatur Ptahil Hibil Shitil Anush Sam Ziwa Manda d-Hayyi Shilmai Nidbai Adathan and Yadathan Yufin-Yufafin Urfeil and Marfeil Tar and Tarwan Bihram Zihrun Etinsib Ziwa Nbat Nsab Gubran Shihlun Yurba Yukabar Yukashar Yawar Ziwa Simat Hayyi Saureil Groups Niṭufta Gupna Ziwa Related Angel Moroni Mormonism Hierarchy of angels Heavenly host Seven Archangels Three Angels' Messages Watcher Fallen angels List of angels in theology List of angels in Ars Paulina Ambiguous Chalkydri Elioud Nephilim Teraphim In culture Art List of angels in fiction List of films about angels v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal v t e Thelema Organizations A∴A∴ Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica Fraternitas Saturni O∴A∴A∴ Open Source Order of the Golden Dawn Ordo Templi Orientis Society Ordo Templi Orientis Thelemic Order of the Golden Dawn Typhonian Order Personalities List of Thelemites Ankh-af-na-khonsu Aleister Crowley Kenneth Anger Allan Bennett William Breeze Mary Butts Marjorie Cameron Lon Milo DuQuette Jeanne Robert Foster J. F. C. Fuller Karl Germer Kenneth Grant Lady Frieda Harris Leah Hirsig Christopher Hyatt Charles Stansfeld Jones George Cecil Jones Richard Kaczynski Rose Edith Kelly James Lees Grady Louis McMurtry Mogg Morgan Marcelo Ramos Motta Nema Andahadna Victor Neuburg Sara Northrup Jack Parsons Helen Parsons Smith Theodor Reuss C. F. Russell Phyllis Seckler Wilfred Talbot Smith Leila Waddell James Wasserman Sam Webster Jane Wolfe Thelemic texts Aleister Crowley bibliography The Book of Lies The Book of the Law ( Liber AL vel Legis ) The Book of Thoth Clouds without Water Collected Works Confessions The Diary of a Drug Fiend Eight Lectures on Yoga The Equinox The Blue Equinox The Equinox of the Gods The Holy Books of Thelema Konx Om Pax The Law is for All Liber 777 Liber Aleph Liber OZ Liber Pennae Praenumbra Liber Resh Liber Trigrammaton Little Essays Toward Truth Magick (Book 4) Magick Without Tears Moonchild One Star in Sight The Stratagem and other Stories Thoth Tarot The Vision and the Voice White Stains Concepts and ideas 93 Abyss Aeon Agape Astral projection Body of light English Qaballa Great Work Hermetic Qabalah Holy Guardian Angel Magical formula Night of Pan Stele of Revealing Stellar wisdom True Will Magick Abrahadabra Ceremonial magic Enochian magic Eroto-comatose lucidity Goetia Obeah and wanga Sex magic Ceremony and ritual Liber Resh Pentagram Ritual Bornless Ritual Gnostic Mass Rites of Eleusis Godforms Nuit Hadit Heru-ra-ha Aiwass Therion Babalon Chaos Ma'at Harpocrates Symbolism Number of the beast Pentagram Rose Cross Tree of Life Unicursal hexagram Related topics Abbey of Thelema Abramelin oil Agape Lodge Boleskine House Book of Abramelin Cake of Light Choronzon Dianism Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn IPSOS Magical alphabet Magical organization Solar deity Solar Lodge The Beast Whore of Babylon Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐94d6s
Cached time: 20250818003552
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.961 seconds
Real time usage: 1.167 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8657/1000000
Revision size: 39558/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 216318/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 24281/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 185249/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.586/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19522473/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  953.770      1 -total
 20.48%  195.371      2 Template:Reflist
 13.14%  125.342     13 Template:Cite_web
 12.44%  118.634      9 Template:Blockquote
 10.88%  103.815     18 Template:Cite_book
 10.85%  103.502      4 Template:Annotated_link
 10.50%  100.186     11 Template:Sfnp
  9.97%   95.052      8 Template:Navbox
  9.17%   87.494     10 Template:Fix
  6.94%   66.163      1 Template:Angels_in_Abrahamic_religions Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:313663:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818003552 and revision id 1302580171. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Guardian_angel&oldid=1302580171 " Categories : Classes of angels Angels in Judaism Angels in Christianity Angels in Islam Angels in Thelema Tutelary deities Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing Arabic-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2021 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2024 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from July 2024 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from January 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2021 Wikipedia references cleanup from January 2024 All articles needing references cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from January 2024 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 08:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Guardian angel 40 languages Add topic

