Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure 2 Genome 3 Replication 4 References Toggle the table of contents Thaspiviridae 2 languages Deutsch Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Family of viruses Thaspiviridae TEM image of virions of Nitrosopumilus spindle-shaped virus 1.

Virus classification (unranked): Virus Family: Thaspiviridae Genus: Nitmarvirus Species Nitmarvirus maris Synonyms Nitmarvirus NSV1 Nitrosopumilus spindle-shaped virus 1 Virus name NSV1 Virus name abbr.

MK57005: GenBank accession NC_048199 REFSEQ accession Thaspiviridae is a family of incertae sedis spindle-shaped viruses . The family contains a single genus, Nitmarvirus , which contains a single species, Nitrosopumilus spindle-shaped virus 1 (NSV1, Nitmarvirus maris ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Thaspiviridae are known to infect mesophilic ammonia-oxidizing archaea of the genus Nitrosopumilus .

[ 3 ] Structure [ edit ] The virion is spindle-shaped, measuring 64±3 nm in diameter and 112±6 nm in length, with short fibres at one pole. Its morphology  is very similar to that of the members of the families Fuselloviridae and Halspiviridae , which infect hyperthermophilic and hyperhalophilic archaea, respectively.

[ 3 ] Genome [ edit ] Its genome is linear dsDNA of length 27–29 kbp, with 176 bp terminal inverted repeats . The virus genome is predicted to carry 48 genes. With the exception of protein-primed B DNA polymerase, which is also found in several groups of archaeal viruses and non-viral mobile genetic elements that also have linear genomes with terminal inverted repeats, the proteins encoded by Nitrosopumilus spindle-shaped virus 1 are unrelated to those of other archaeal and bacterial viruses.

[ 3 ] Replication [ edit ] The virus is non-lytic (capable of exiting host cells without killing them), and chronic (can be demonstrated in the body at all times and the disease may be present or absent for an extended period of time). The virus genome is likely to be replicated by the virus-encoded protein-primed family B DNA polymerase, as has been inferred for other viruses. The virus also encodes a proliferating cell nuclear antigen which is also likely to be involved in viral genome replication.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Virus Taxonomy: 2024 Release" . International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses . Retrieved 28 March 2025 .

^ "Species List: Thaspiviridae " . International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses . Retrieved 28 March 2025 .

^ a b c d Kim, JG; Gazi, KS; Krupovic, M; Rhee, SK; Ictv Report, Consortium (July 2021).

"ICTV Virus Taxonomy Profile: Thaspiviridae 2021" .

The Journal of General Virology .

102 (7): 001631.

doi : 10.1099/jgv.0.001631 .

PMC 8491892 .

PMID 34328827 .

v t e Life , non-cellular life , and comparable structures Cellular life " Prokaryota " Archaea Bacteria Mitochondrion Plastid LUCA Eukaryota Animalia Fungi Plantae " Protista " Incertae sedis Parakaryon Microbes with highly unusual DNA (?) Non-cellular life Virus Viroid Satellite Realms Adnaviria Duplodnaviria Monodnaviria Riboviria Ribozyviria Varidnaviria Unassigned Classes Naldaviricetes Families Alphasatellitidae Ampullaviridae Anelloviridae Avsunviroidae Bicaudaviridae Clavaviridae Finnlakeviridae Fuselloviridae Globuloviridae Guttaviridae Halspiviridae Ovaliviridae Plasmaviridae Polydnaviridae Portogloboviridae Pospiviroidae Spiraviridae Thaspiviridae Tolecusatellitidae Genera Dinodnavirus Rhizidiovirus Other Nanobe (?) Obelisk Comparable structures Bio-like structure Cancer cell HeLa Clonally transmissible cancer Cosmid Defective interfering particle Endogenous viral element Fosmid Integrative and conjugative element Jeewanu " Nanobacterium " Phagemid Plasmid Prion Fungal prion Proteinoid microsphere Retroelements not elsewhere classified Retron Diversity-generating retroelement Telomerase reverse transcriptase Reverse transcriptase-related cellular gene Ribozyme Spiegelman's Monster Tandem repeat Transposable element Retroposon Transpoviron Xenobot Taxon identifiers Thaspiviridae Wikidata : Q92011333 CoL : H5G GBIF : 10753378 Nitmarvirus Wikidata : Q92044714 CoL : 64GK GBIF : 10762040 Nitmarvirus NSV1 Wikidata : Q92116705 CoL : 47JK8 GBIF : 10861916 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thaspiviridae&oldid=1282860462 " Category : Virus families Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats Taxonbars with multiple manual Wikidata items This page was last edited on 29 March 2025, at 01:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thaspiviridae 2 languages Add topic

