Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Family 1.2 Youth 1.3 First publications 1.4 Exile, return, and ordination 2 Essai sur l'indifférence en matière de religion 3 Political advocacy Toggle Political advocacy subsection 3.1 During the Bourbon Restoration 3.2 Ultramontane and theocratic democracy advocacy 3.3 Separation from the Church, imprisonment, and further publications 3.4 Involvement in the Second Republic 4 Later years and death 5 Works 6 References 7 Sources 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Félicité de La Mennais 30 languages العربية Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Magyar مصرى مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina کوردی Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French Catholic priest and philosopher (1782–1854) The Reverend Félicité de La Mennais Felicité de La Mennais (1827); portrait by L. D. Lancôme Born Félicité Robert de La Mennais 19 June 1782 Saint-Malo , Brittany , Kingdom of France Died 27 February 1854 (1854-02-27) (aged 71) Paris , France Philosophical work Era 19th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Catholic philosophy , French liberalism Main interests Social Catholicism , French liberalism , democracy , ultramontanism , liberal Catholicism Félicité Robert de La Mennais (or Lamennais , French: [lamɛnɛ] ; 19 June 1782 – 27 February 1854) was a French Catholic priest , philosopher and political theorist. He was one of the most influential intellectuals of Restoration France . Lamennais is also considered the forerunner of both liberal Catholicism and Modernism .

His opinions on matters of religion and government changed dramatically over the course of his life. He initially held rationalistic views, but in part due to the influence of his elder brother, Jean-Marie , came to see religion as an antidote for the anarchy and tyranny unleashed by revolution. He derided Napoleon, in part because of the Organic Articles , in which France acting unilaterally amended the Concordat of 1801 between France and the papacy. Lamennais vocally assailed both Gallicanism and Caesaropapism , views that demanded a completely subservient relationship by the Church to the State, and he was for a time a staunch defender of the independence of the Church.

Lamennais was ordained a priest in 1817, the same year he published Essai sur l'indifférence en matière de religion . In 1830, he founded L'Ami de l'ordre (precursor of L'Avenir ) with Montalembert and Lacordaire . His social ideas embraced an enlarged suffrage, separation of church and state , universal freedom of conscience, instruction, assembly, and the press. His radicalism distanced him from a number of his friends. In 1833, he broke with the Church and the following year published Paroles d'un croyant , which Pope Gregory XVI condemned for its philosophical theories.

He served as a deputy for Paris to the Constituent Assembly; his draft for a Constitution was rejected as too radical. He died in Paris in 1854.

Biography [ edit ] Family [ edit ] Félicité Robert de la Mennais was born in Saint-Malo. He belonged to family Robert de la Mennais [ fr ] , which was engaged in international maritime trade.

Louis-François Robert de La Mennais (1717–1804), his paternal grandfather, was the founder of the “Compagnie commerciale et maritime” in Saint-Malo. He was a trader, and he armed boats for the needs of trade, in order to provide all the equipment, provisions, sometimes even a few cannons, to choose a serious captain who knows how to recruit a crew, in order to maintain counters in foreign ports. It was a job that required a certain daring and temerity. Then, when his sons were old enough to take responsibility, he handed over the administration of the company to them.

[ citation needed ] Pierre Lorin (1719–1799), his maternal grandfather, was a lawyer at the Parliament of Paris, and Subdelegate of the Jurisdictions of Saint-Malo, that is to say, representative of the royal power for the district of Saint-Malo, which at the time corresponded to about thirty parishes. He worked under the orders of the Intendant of Brittany. A man of heart, he had a great social sense and worked against the suffering and poverty which were great, especially in the countryside. He advocated, for example, in each parish, the establishment of a charity office. He acquired La Chésnaie in 1781, he built a bourgeois house there, it was in this place that Félicité would later found a school of theological thought.

[ citation needed ] The two sisters, Gratienne Lorin and Félicité Lorin (daughters of Pierre Lorin and Bertranne Roce) were married on the same day, September 5, 1775, in Saint-Malo, with the two sons Robert (son of Louis-François Robert): Pierre -Louis Robert de la Mennais and Denis Robert des Saudrais.

Félicité was one of the five children of Pierre-Louis Robert, sieur de La Menais and of Gatienne Lorin, who died in 1787 when he was five years old, so that 'he was brought up by one of his uncles.

[ citation needed ] Youth [ edit ] Lamennais was born at Saint-Malo in the ancient Province of Brittany on 19 June 1782, the son of a wealthy merchant who had recently received a coat of arms from the king. He lost his mother at the age of five and as a result, he and his brother, Jean-Marie, were sent for education to an uncle, Robert des Saudrais at La Chênaie, an estate near Saint-Malo. Resistant to any kind of discipline, his uncle would lock him in the library where he spent long hours reading Rousseau and Pascal , among others, and acquired a vast and varied learning.

[ 1 ] Revolution was to have a profound effect on Lammennais. His family sheltered non-juring priests . Father Vielle said Mass on occasion in the dark at La Chênaie.

First publications [ edit ] Bust of Félicité Robert de Lamennais by David d'Angers (1839) Of a sickly and sensitive nature, and shocked by the events of the French Revolution , Lamennais developed a morbid frame of mind. He first held rationalistic views, but partly through the influence of his brother Jean-Marie and partly as a result of his philosophical and historical studies, he came to see the power of faith and religion. He voiced his convictions in Réflexions sur l'état de l'église en France pendant le 18ieme siècle et sur sa situation actuelle , published anonymously in Paris in 1808. The idea for this work and the materials were due to Jean-Marie, but the actual writing was done almost exclusively by Félicité. It recommended religious revival and active clerical organization and the awakening of an ultramontane spirit.

[ 2 ] Napoleon 's police deemed the book dangerously ideological and tried to suppress it.

[ 1 ] Lamennais devoted most of the following year to translating Louis de Blois 's Speculum Monachorum into French, which he published in 1809 under the title Le Guide spirituel .

[ 2 ] In 1811 Lamennais received the tonsure and became professor of mathematics in an ecclesiastical college at Saint-Malo founded by his brother, who had been ordained a Catholic priest in 1804.

[ 2 ] When the school was closed by imperial authority the following year, Félicité withdrew to La Chênaie, while his brother became vicar-general of the diocese of Saint-Brieuc.

[ 1 ] In 1814 he published, with his brother, De la tradition de l'Église sur l'institution des évêques (1814), in which he strongly condemned Gallicanism and the interference of political authority in ecclesiastical affairs. It was provoked by Napoleon's nomination of Jean Siffrein Maury as Archbishop of Paris in accordance with the provisions of the Concordat of 1801 .

Exile, return, and ordination [ edit ] Lamennais hailed the Bourbon restoration of 1814, which he witnessed in Paris , because he saw Louis XVIII as a force for religious regeneration. During the Hundred Days , he escaped to London , where he worked in Kensington at an institution for the children of poor immigrants.

[ 3 ] After the final overthrow of Napoleon in 1815, he returned to Paris. Lamennais sought in religion a remedy for the anarchy and tyranny unleashed by the revolution. He undertook the study of theology and was ordained a subdeacon on 21 December. At this time he considered joining the Jesuits , however the prospect of a novitiate year led him to decide to become a secular priest. It was in Saint-Brieuc, in February 1816 that Lamennais received the diaconate. He was ordained by the Bishop of Rennes on 9 March 1817.

[ 3 ] Essai sur l'indifférence en matière de religion [ edit ] The first volume of his great work, Essai sur l'indifference en matière de religion , or Essay on Indifference in Matters of Religion , [ 4 ] appeared in 1817 and established his reputation throughout Europe. He became, according to Lacordaire , "a humble priest with all the authority once enjoyed by Bossuet ". His experience of Napoleon persuaded him that the state had no right to interfere in religion. Lamennais denounced religious indifference by the state and toleration while advocating for a restoration of the pre-Revolutionary authority of the Catholic Church. He contended that private judgment, introduced by Martin Luther into religion, by Descartes and Leibniz into philosophy and science, and by Rousseau and the Encyclopedists into politics, had resulted in practical atheism and spiritual death. He asserted that ecclesiastical authority, founded on the absolute revelation delivered to the Jewish people, but supported by the universal tradition of all nations, was the sole hope of regenerating the European communities.

[ 5 ] Three more volumes (Paris, 1818–1824) followed and met with a mixed reception from the Gallican bishops and monarchists, but with the enthusiastic support from the younger clergy. Three Roman theologians examined his work and Pope Leo XII gave it his formal approval. Leo XII held Lamennais in high personal regard having a portrait of him hung in his private chambers. When the later visited Rome in 1824 Leo offered him a Vatican apartment and in 1828 a cardinalate, which Lamennais declined.

[ 5 ] According to Cardinal Nicholas Wiseman before the full consistory he said that Lamennais was " a distinguished writer, whose works had not only rendered eminent services to religion, but rejoiced and astonished Europe." However, some believe that the quote was actually about the historian John Lingard .

[ 6 ] Lamennais also published works of piety, for example, a widely read French version of The Imitation of Christ with notes and reflections (1824), Guide du premier âge , Journée du Chrétien , and Recueil de piété (1828). The failure of a publishing house aimed at spreading this pious literature resulted in his own financial ruin.

Political advocacy [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Liberalism in France Schools Catholic Classical Orthodox Pure orléanism Economic National Radical Jacobinism Social Principles Civic nationalism Civil and political rights Economic freedom Equality before the law Freedom of the press Freedom of speech Internationalism Laicism Laissez-faire Liberté, égalité, fraternité Republicanism Laïcité History Dreyfusards February Revolution French Resistance French Revolution July Monarchy July Revolution Lumières People Alain Aron Bastiat Brissot Clemenceau Condorcet Constant Doumergue Fallières Freund Gambetta de Gouges Grévy Hugo Lamennais Louis Philippe I Macron Manent Mendès France Merleau-Ponty de Molinari Montesquieu Poincaré Robespierre Rougier Say Thiers Tocqueville de Tracy Voltaire Parties Active Agir Centrist Alliance The Centrists Democratic European Force Democratic Movement Liberal Alternative Liberal Democratic Party Radical Party Radical Party of the Left Renaissance Union of Democrats and Independents Defunct Democratic Republican Alliance Doctrinaires Independent Radicals Jacobins Girondins Liberal Party Moderate Republicans (1848) Moderate Republicans (1871) Progressive Republicans Radical Movement Republican Union Union for French Democracy Media Active BFM TV La Chaîne Info Courrier International Les Echos Le Figaro Le Monde L'Opinion Le Parisien Defunct L'Aurore Related topics Anti-clericalism Centrism in France Nouveaux Philosophes Political positions of Emmanuel Macron Rally of Republican Lefts Sinistrisme Together (coalition) Liberalism portal France portal v t e During the Bourbon Restoration [ edit ] On his return to France he took a prominent part in political work. Together with Chateaubriand and the Comte de Villèle he was a regular contributor to Le Conservateur littéraire . However, when  Villèle became the chief supporter of absolute monarchy, Lamennais withdrew his support and started two rival organs, Le Drapeau blanc and Le Mémorial catholique . He authored a pamphlet criticizing the 1825 Anti-Sacrilege Law introduced by Villèle's administration. Various other minor works, together with De la religion considérée dans ses rapports avec l'ordre civil et politique (1825–1826) kept his name before the public.

[ 5 ] Ultramontane and theocratic democracy advocacy [ edit ] Medallion featuring de Lamennais, dating from 1831 He retired to La Chênaie and gathered a group of disciples, including Montalembert , Lacordaire and Maurice de Guérin . He espoused ultramontanism and aimed to create an organized body of opinion to campaign against Gallicanism , the control and influence of the state in church matters.

Les Progrès de la revolution et de la guerre contre l'église , or On the Progress of the Revolution and the War against the Church , (1828) marked his complete renunciation of royalist principles and from that time on he advocated on behalf of a theocratic democracy.

[ 5 ] J.P.T. Bury suggests that Lamennais and his associates found inspiration in a Belgian Liberal Catholic movement centered in Malines and led by Archbishop de Méan 's vicar-general, Engelbert Sterckx .

[ 7 ] Largely Catholic Belgium seceded from the Netherlands in 1830 and established a constitutional monarchy. Sterckx, who became archbishop in 1832 found a way not merely to tolerate the new liberal constitution, but to expand the Church under the new liberties guaranteed.

Lamennais founded L'Ami de l'ordre (precursor of L'Avenir ) the first issue of which appeared on 16 October 1830, with the motto "God and Liberty." His social theories became more radical. The paper was aggressively democratic, demanding rights of local administration, an enlarged suffrage, separation of church and state , universal freedom of conscience , instruction, assembly , and the press . Styles of worship were to be criticized, improved or abolished in absolute submission to the spiritual, not to the temporal authority.  His views were opposed by the bishops and supported by the younger clergy, but he lost even their support when he said priests should not be paid by the state.

[ 8 ] With the help of Montalembert, he founded the Agence générale pour la défense de la liberté religieuse , which became a far-reaching organization with agents throughout France who monitored violations of religious freedom. As a result, the periodical's career was stormy and its circulation opposed by conservative bishops.

[ 5 ] Although pressured by the French government and the French hierarchy, Pope Gregory XVI would have preferred not to make an official issue of the matter.

[ 9 ] However, Lamennais, Montalembert, and Lacordaire suspended their work and in November 1831 set out to Rome to obtain the Pope's approval.

Archbishop Quélen of Paris had warned Lammenais that he was being unrealistic and was viewed as a demagogue in favor of revolution. As Quelen was a Gallican, Lammenais ignored him.

[ 8 ] After much opposition, they gained an audience, but only on condition that their political project should not be mentioned.

Metternich , whose Austrian troops ensured the stability of the Papal States , pressed for a condemnation.

[ 8 ] A few days later they received a letter from Cardinal Pacca , advising their departure from Rome and suggesting that the Holy See, while admitting the justice of their intentions, would like the matter left open for the present.

[ 5 ] Lacordaire and Montalembert departed immediately, but Lamennais stayed on until Gregory's letter to the Polish bishops, which denounced the Polish revolution against the Tsar , dashed his last hopes.

[ 5 ] Gregory thought the Polish revolutionaries were seeking to undermine Russian Tsar Nicholas I's efforts to support the Catholic royalist cause in France by forcing him to divert his troops to suppress the uprising in Poland. While staying in Munich, Lamennais received the 1832 encyclical Mirari vos , which condemned religious pluralism in general and certain of Lamennais's ideas advanced in L'Avenir without mentioning his name. After this, Lamennais and his two lieutenants declared that out of deference to the pope they would not resume the publication of L'Avenir and dissolved the Agence générale as well.

Lamennais in 1828 Separation from the Church, imprisonment, and further publications [ edit ] Lamennais retired to La Chênaie, an estate near Saint-Malo , Brittany. He communicated his resentment and political beliefs only through correspondence. The Vatican in turn demanded his frank and full adhesion to the encyclical Mirari vos . Lamennais refused to submit without qualification and in December 1833 renounced his ecclesiastical functions and abandoned all external profession of Christianity.

In May 1834, Lamennais penned Paroles d'un croyant , or Words of a Believer (1834), a collection of aphorisms that denounced the established social order—what he called the conspiracy of kings and priests against the people—and declared his rupture with the Church. In the encyclical Singulari nos of 25 June 1834, Pope Gregory XVI condemned the book as "small in size, [but] enormous in wickedness" [ 10 ] and censured Lamennais' philosophical system.

[ 11 ] Paroles was inspired by Adam Mickiewicz 's Księgi narodu polskiego i pielgrzymstwa polskiego ( Books of the Polish Nation and Polish Pilgrimage ).

[ 12 ] The Paroles marked Lamennais' turn to a Christian socialism that inspired a whole generation of socialists. His radical ideas reflected an overlap of Catholic and socialist discourses that can be traced back to the 1820s.

[ 13 ] Sometime after 5 April 1836 he was imprisoned at Ste. Pelagie, a prison for debtors.

[ 14 ] Lamennais was increasingly abandoned by his friends and in 1837 published Les Affaires de Rome, des maux de l'Église et de la société , in which he provided his perspective on his relations with Gregory XVI.

After this, Lamennais penned several articles in the Revue des Deux Mondes , the Revue du Progrès and Le Monde , and published the pamphlets Le Livre du peuple (1837), De l'esclavage moderne (1839), Politique a l'usage du peuple (1839), Discussions critiques (1841), Du passé et de l'avenir du peuple (1841), Amschaspands et Darvands (1843), in which he espoused popular sovereignty and attacked contemporary society and the public authorities. After the publication of Le Pays et le gouvernement (1840), he was censored and imprisoned for a year in 1841.

From 1841 to 1846 Lamennais published the four volumes of Esquisse d'une philosophie , a treatise on metaphysics, which detailed his departure from Christianity. The third volume, an exposition of art as a development of the aspirations and needs of worship, formed its core. Lamennais also published Les Evangiles , a French translation of the Gospels with added notes and reflections.

In 1846 Lamennais published Une voix de prison , written during his imprisonment.

Involvement in the Second Republic [ edit ] Lamennais sympathized with the Revolution of 1848 and was elected a deputy for Paris to the Constituent Assembly. He drew up a plan for a Constitution, which was rejected as too radical. After this, he confined himself to silent participation in the sessions. He also started the newspapers Le Peuple constituant and La Révolution démocratique et sociale , espousing radical revolution. Both papers quickly ceased publication. He was also named president of the Société de la solidarité républicaine . He remained a deputy in the legislative assemblies until Napoleon III 's 1851 coup , which depressed and isolated him once more.

[ 5 ] Later years and death [ edit ] After 1851, he occupied himself with La Divine Comédie , a translation of Dante's Divine Comedy , and refused several attempts to reconcile him to the Church. He died in Paris in 1854 and was buried at Père Lachaise Cemetery in a common grave, [ 14 ] without funeral rites, mourned by political and literary admirers.

Works [ edit ] There are two complete works in ten volumes, the first published in 1836–1837 as Œuvres complètes de La Mennais , the second published in 1844 as Œuvres complètes de Lamennais . Both are incomplete.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c Dégert, Antoine. "Félicité Robert de Lamennais." The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 8. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. 21 November 2015 ^ a b c Chisholm 1911 , p. 124.

^ a b "Felicité Robert de Lamennais", InfoBretagne.com ^ Essay on Indifference in Matters of Religion (1895) John Macqueen, London ^ a b c d e f g h Chisholm 1911 , p. 125.

^ Kitchin, Rev. William P.H. (1922).

"The Story of Lamennais" .

Catholic Historical Review .

8 (2): 202-203.

JSTOR 25011855 .

^ Bury, J.P.T., "Religion and Relations of Churches and States", The New Cambridge Modern History , Vol. 10, CUP Archive, 1960 ISBN 978-0521045483 ^ a b c Chadwick, Owen. "Gregory XVI", A History of the Popes, 1830–1914 , Oxford University Press, 2003 ISBN 978-0199262861 ^ Bernard, Cook. "Lamennais, Hugues-Felicité Robert de (1782–1854)", Encyclopedia of 1848 Revolutions , (James Chastain, ed.), Ohio University, 2005 ^ Singulari nos, 2 ^ Pope Gregory XVI.

Singulari Nos , §6, 1834 ^ Czesław Miłosz (1983).

The History of Polish Literature . University of California Press. p. 227.

ISBN 978-0-520-04477-7 . Retrieved 16 March 2013 .

^ Strube, Julian (2016).

Sozialismus, Katholizismus und Okkultismus im Frankreich des 19. Jahrhunderts . De Gruyter, Berlin/Boston ISBN 978-3-11-047810-5 .

^ a b Lamennais (1895) "Essay on Indifference in Matters of Religion" , translated by Baron Henry Edward John Stanley, Translator's Preface, page ix (London: John Macqueen) Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Lamennais, Hugues Félicité Robert de ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 16 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

124– 126.

Further reading [ edit ] Morrall, J. B.  "Lamennais: A Liberal Catholic" History Today (Dec 1958) 8#12 pp 821–828.

Gurian, Waldemar. “Lamennais.” The Review of Politics 9, no. 2 (1947): 205–29.

http://www.jstor.org/stable/1404222 .

Carolina Armenteros, The French Idea of History: Joseph de Maistre and his Heirs, 1794–1854 (Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press, 2011).

Thomas Bokenkotter, Church and Revolution: Catholics and the Struggle for Democracy and Social Justice (NY: Doubleday, 1998).

Jean-Rene Derré, Lamennais, ses amis et le mouvement des idées à l'époque romantique 1824–1834 (Paris: Klincksieck, 1962).

Julian Strube, Sozialismus, Katholizisimus und Okkultismus im Frankreich des 19. Jahrhunderts (Berlin/Boston: De Gruyter, 2016).

Kitchin, William P. H. “The Story of Lamennais.” The Catholic Historical Review 8, no. 2 (1922): 198–211.

[1] .

External links [ edit ] "France" (obit), The New York Times , March 2, 1854 Works by Félicité de La Mennais at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Romanticism Countries Denmark England (literature) France (literature) Germany Japan Norway Poland Russia (literature) Scotland Spain (literature) Sweden (literature) Movements Ancients Bohemianism Coppet group Counter-Enlightenment Dark Düsseldorf School German historical school Gothic revival Hudson River School Indianism Jena Lake Poets Nationalist Nazarene movement Neo Pre Sturm und Drang Post Purismo Transcendentalism Ukrainian school Ultra Wallenrodism Themes Blue flower British Marine Gesamtkunstwerk Gothic fiction Hero Byronic Romantic Historical fiction Mal du siècle Medievalism Noble savage Nostalgia Ossian Pantheism Rhine Romantic genius Wanderlust Weltschmerz White Mountain art Writers Brazil Abreu Alencar Manuel Antônio de Almeida Alves Assis Azevedo Barreto Dias Guimarães Macedo Magalhães Reis Taunay Varela France Baudelaire Bertrand Chateaubriand Dumas Gautier Hugo Lamartine Mérimée Musset Nerval Nodier Staël Vigny Germany A. v. Arnim B. v. Arnim Beer Brentano Eichendorff Fouqué Goethe Brothers Grimm Günderrode Gutzkow Hauff Heine Hoffmann Hölderlin Jean Paul Kleist Mörike Novalis Schwab Tieck Uhland Great Britain Barbauld Blake Anne Brontë C. Brontë E. Brontë Burns Byron Carlyle Clare Coleridge de Quincey Maria Edgeworth Keats Maturin Polidori Radcliffe Mary Robinson Scott Seward M. Shelley P. B. Shelley Southey Wordsworth Poland Fredro Krasiński Józef Ignacy Kraszewski Malczewski Mickiewicz Norwid Potocki Wincenty Pol Słowacki Portugal Castelo Branco Castilho João de Deus Dinis Garrett Herculano Soares dos Passos Romania Mihail Kogălniceanu Constantin Negruzzi Vasile Alecsandri Dimitrie Bolintineanu Mihai Eminescu George Coșbuc Octavian Goga Alexandru Macedonski Barbu Ștefănescu Delavrancea Russia Baratynsky Batyushkov Gogol Karamzin Küchelbecker Lermontov Pushkin Tyutchev Vyazemsky Zhukovsky Serbia Jakšić Kostić Njegoš Radičević Stojadinović-Srpkinja Zmaj Spain Bécquer Rosalía de Castro Espronceda Gutiérrez Saavedra Zorrilla U.S.

Bryant Cooper Emerson Hawthorne Josiah Gilbert Holland Irving Longfellow Lowell Poe Other Abovian Alfieri Andersen Baratashvili Botev Chavchavadze Foscolo Frashëri Geijer Grundtvig Heliade Isaacs Lenau Leopardi Mácha Manzoni Maturin Oehlenschläger Orbeliani Prešeren Raffi Runeberg Shevchenko Topelius Vörösmarty Wergeland Musicians Austria Bruckner Czerny Hummel Mahler Schubert Thalberg Wolf Czechia Dvořák Moscheles Reicha Smetana Voříšek France Adam Alkan Auber Berlioz Fauré Halévy Méhul Onslow Saint-Saëns Germany Beethoven Brahms Bruch Kalkbrenner Loewe Marschner Fanny Mendelssohn Felix Mendelssohn Meyerbeer Moszkowski C. Schumann R. Schumann Spohr Strauss Wagner Weber Great Britain Elgar Holst Vaughan Williams Hungary Erkel Goldmark Heller Hubay Joachim Liszt Italy Bellini Busoni Cherubini Donizetti Paganini Respighi Rossini Spontini Verdi Poland Bortkiewicz Chopin Lipiński Moniuszko Paderewski Stolpe Tausig Wieniawski Russia Arensky Balakirev Borodin Cui Glinka Lyapunov Medtner Mussorgsky Rachmaninoff Rimsky-Korsakov Rubinstein Scriabin Tchaikovsky Serbia Hristić Konjović Mokranjac Stanković U.S.

Chadwick Beach Foote Foster Joplin MacDowell Sousa Other Bennett Berwald Field Franck Grieg Sibelius Sor Philosophers Belinsky Berchet Burke Carlyle Chaadayev Coleridge Constant Emerson Fichte Goethe Hazlitt Hegel Khomyakov Lamennais Larra Maistre Mazzini Michelet Müller Novalis Quinet Rousseau Schelling Schiller A. Schlegel F. Schlegel Schleiermacher Senancour Snellman Staël Thoreau Tieck Wackenroder Visual artists Aivazovsky Bierstadt Blake Bonington Bryullov Chassériau Church Constable Cole Corot Dahl David d'Angers Delacroix Edelfelt Friedrich Fuseli Gallen-Kallela Géricault Girodet Głowacki Goya Gude Hayez Janmot Jones Kiprensky Koch Lampi Leutze Martin Michałowski Palmer Porto-Alegre Préault Révoil Richard Rude Runge Saleh Scheffer Stattler Stroy Tidemand Tropinin Turner Veit Ward Wiertz Scholars Abraham Abrams Barzun Beiser Berlin Blanning Bloom Blume Dahlhaus Ferber Frye Janion Lacoue-Labarthe Lovejoy de Man Nancy Porthan Ricks Rosen Wellek Related topics Coleridge's theory of life German idealism List of romantics List of Romantic poets Middle Ages in history Opium and Romanticism Romantic ballet Romantic epistemology Romantic medicine Romantic poetry Romantic psychology Romanticism and economics Romanticism and the French Revolution Romanticism in science Bacon Evolution theory Wanderer above the Sea of Fog ← Age of Enlightenment Modernism → Category v t e Liberalism Ideas Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history Schools Classical Economic Fiscal Neo Equity feminism Georgist Radical Anti-clerical Civic nationalism Republican Utilitarian Whig Physiocratic Encyclopaedist Conservative Liberal conservatism National Ordo Social Green Liberal feminism Ecofeminism Liberal socialism Social democracy Progressivism Third Way Other Constitutional Constitutional patriotism Cultural Corporate International Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Geolibertarianism Neoclassical liberalism Paleolibertarianism Right-libertarianism Radical centrism Religious Christian Islamic Secular Techno By region Africa Egypt Nigeria Senegal South Africa Tunisia Zimbabwe Asia China Hong Kong India Iran Israel Japan South Korea Anti- Chinilpa Centrist reformist Progressive Philippines Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech lands Denmark Estonia Finland France Orléanist Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Italy Berlusconism Liberism Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Moldova Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Muscular Radical Whiggist Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Brazil Lulism Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay North America Canada United States Jacksonian Jeffersonian Libertarian Modern Progressive Oceania Australia Small-l New Zealand Philosophers Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organisations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism Portal Portals : Biography Catholic Church France Liberalism Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia 2 Czech Republic Spain Portugal 2 3 Netherlands Norway Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Sweden Poland Vatican 2 Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People Netherlands Sycomore Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Félicité_de_La_Mennais&oldid=1295480616 " Categories : 1782 births 1854 deaths 18th-century French philosophers 19th-century French philosophers 19th-century French Roman Catholic priests Aphorists Breton Roman Catholic priests Burials at Père Lachaise Cemetery Catholic philosophers Clergy from Saint-Malo French counter-revolutionaries French male poets French Roman Catholic writers Liberal Catholicism Members of the 1848 Constituent Assembly Members of the National Legislative Assembly of the French Second Republic Politicians from Saint-Malo People of the Bourbon Restoration The Mountain (1849) politicians Translators of Dante Alighieri Writers from Brittany Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Articles containing French-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with LibriVox links Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 01:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Félicité de La Mennais 30 languages Add topic

