Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Description 3 Morphology 4 Function 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Sepal 60 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Latina Lietuvių Lombard Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Plattdüütsch Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska తెలుగు ไทย ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Any of the separate parts of the calyx of a flower (excluding the bracts), usually green This article may be too technical for most readers to understand .

Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts , without removing the technical details.

( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In a mature flower, the perianth consists of a calyx (sepals) and the corolla ( petals ) it supports.

A sepal ( / ˈ s ɛ p əl , ˈ s iː p əl / ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] is a part of the flower of angiosperms (flowering plants). Usually green, sepals typically function as protection for the flower in bud, and often as support for the petals when in bloom.

[ 4 ] Etymology [ edit ] Tetramerous flower of Ludwigia octovalvis showing petals and sepals After blooming, the sepals of Hibiscus sabdariffa expand into an edible accessory fruit .

In many Fabaceae flowers, a calyx tube surrounds the petals.

The large calyx of the medlar fruit is the source of its vulgar nicknames.

The term sepalum was coined by Noël Martin Joseph de Necker in 1790, and derived from Ancient Greek σκέπη ( sképē ) ' covering ' .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Collectively, the sepals are called the calyx (plural: calyces), [ 7 ] the outermost whorl of parts that form a flower. The word calyx was adopted from the Latin calyx , [ 8 ] not to be confused with calix 'cup, goblet'.

[ 9 ] The Latin calyx is derived from Greek κάλυξ kalyx 'bud, calyx, husk, wrapping' ( cf.

Sanskrit kalika 'bud'), [ 10 ] while calix is derived from Greek κύλιξ kylix 'cup, goblet'; both words have been used interchangeably in botanical Latin.

[ 11 ] Description [ edit ] The term tepal is usually applied when the parts of the perianth are difficult to distinguish, [ 12 ] e.g. the petals and sepals share the same color or the petals are absent and the sepals are colorful. When the undifferentiated tepals resemble petals, they are referred to as "petaloid", as in petaloid monocots , orders of monocots with brightly colored tepals. Since they include Liliales , an alternative name is lilioid monocots. Examples of plants in which the term tepal is appropriate include genera such as Aloe and Tulipa . In contrast, genera such as Rosa and Phaseolus have well-distinguished sepals and petals.

[ citation needed ] The number of sepals in a flower is its merosity .  Flower merosity is indicative of a plant's classification. The merosity of a eudicot flower is typically four or five.  The merosity of a monocot or palaeodicot flower is three, or a multiple of three.

The development and form of the sepals vary considerably among flowering plants .

[ 13 ] They may be free (polysepalous) or fused together (gamosepalous).

[ 14 ] Often, the sepals are much reduced, appearing somewhat awn -like, or as scales, teeth, or ridges. Most often such structures protrude until the fruit is mature and falls off.

Examples of flowers with much-reduced perianths are found among the grasses .

In some flowers, the sepals are fused towards the base, forming a calyx tube (as in the family Lythraceae , [ 15 ] and Fabaceae ). In other flowers (e.g., Rosaceae, Myrtaceae), a hypanthium includes the bases of sepals, petals, and the attachment points of the stamens .

Mechanical cues may be responsible for sepal growth and there is a strong evidence suggesting that microtubules are present and determine the tensile strength and direction of growth at a molecular level.

[ 16 ] Morphology [ edit ] Morphologically , both sepals and petals are modified leaves. The calyx (the sepals) and the corolla (the petals) are the outer sterile whorls of the flower, which together form the perianth .

[ 17 ] In some plants, such as Aristolochia , the calyx is the primary whorl, forming a flower up to 20 inches (51 cm) wide, with one sepal growing to a length of 13 feet (4.0 m) – Aristolochia grandiflora , the largest of all calyces.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Function [ edit ] Similarly to ordinary leaves, sepals are capable of performing photosynthesis . However, photosynthesis in sepals occurs at a slower rate than in ordinary leaves due to sepals having a lower stomatal density which limits the spaces for gas exchange.

[ 20 ] After flowering, most plants have no more use for the calyx which withers or becomes vestigial, although in a few plants such as Lodoicea and eggplant ( Solanum melongena ) the calyx grows along with the fruit, possibly to protect the attachment point.  Some plants retain a thorny calyx, either dried or live, as protection for the fruit or seeds. Examples include species of Acaena , some of the Solanaceae (for example the tomatillo , Physalis philadelphica ), and the water caltrop , Trapa natans . In some species, the calyx not only persists after flowering but instead of withering, begins to grow until it forms a bladder-like enclosure around the fruit. This is an effective protection against some kinds of birds and insects, for example in Hibiscus trionum and the Cape gooseberry .  In other species, the calyx grows into an accessory fruit .

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sepals .

Plant morphology References [ edit ] ^ From French sépale , from Neo-Latin sepalum , a blend of sep- from Greek skepē 'covering' and -alum from Neo-Latin petalum 'petal', influenced by French pétale 'petal'.

^ "Oxford Languages | The Home of Language Data" .

languages.oup.com .

^ "sepal" .

Collins English Dictionary .

HarperCollins .

^ Beentje, Henk (2010).

The Kew Plant Glossary . Richmond, Surrey: Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew .

ISBN 978-1-84246-422-9 .

, p. 106 ^ Stearn, William T. (2000). Botanical Latin, 4th ed.: 38–39.

ISBN 0-88192-321-4 ^ Necker, N.J. de (1790).

Corollarium ad Philosophiam botanicam Linnaei 18 , 31 ^ Shorter Oxford English dictionary, 6th ed . United Kingdom: Oxford University Press. 2007. p. 3804.

ISBN 978-0199206872 .

^ Jackson, Benjamin, Daydon; A Glossary of Botanic Terms with their Derivation and Accent; Published by Gerald Duckworth & Co. London, 4th ed 1928 ^ John Entick, William Crakelt, Tyronis thesaurus, or, Entick's new Latin English dictionary. Publisher: E.J. Coale, 1822 ^ Tucker, T. G. (1931).

A Concise Etymological Dictionary of Latin . Halle (Saale): Max Niemeyer Verlag.

^ Stearn, William T. (2000). Botanical Latin, 4th ed.: 38 ^ Beentje 2010 , p. 119 ^ Sattler, R. 1973.

Organogenesis of Flowers. A Photographic Text-Atlas . University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 0-8020-1864-5 .

^ Beentje 2010 , pp. 51 & 91.

^ Carr, Gerald.

" Lythraceae " . University of Hawaii. Archived from the original on 5 December 2008 . Retrieved 20 December 2008 .

^ Hervieux, Nathan; Dumond, Mathilde; Sapala, Aleksandra; Routier-Kierzkowska, Anne-Lise; Kierzkowski, Daniel; Roeder, Adrienne H.K.; Smith, Richard S.; Boudaoud, Arezki; Hamant, Olivier (April 2016).

"A Mechanical Feedback Restricts Sepal Growth and Shape in Arabidopsis" .

Current Biology .

26 (8): 1019– 1028.

Bibcode : 2016CBio...26.1019H .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2016.03.004 .

hdl : 11858/00-001M-0000-002B-1620-2 .

PMID 27151660 .

^ Davis, P.H.; Cullen, J. (1979).

The identification of flowering plant families, including a key to those native and cultivated in north temperate regions . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 106.

ISBN 0-521-29359-6 .

^ Rohwer, Jens G. (2002).

Tropical Plants of the World . New York: Sterling. p. 208.

^ Pfeifer, HW (November 1966).

"Revision of the North and Central American Species of Aristolochia" .

Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden .

53 (2): 164.

doi : 10.2307/2394940 .

JSTOR 2394940 .

^ Aschan, G.; Pfanz, H.; Vodnik, D.; Batič, F. (1 March 2005).

"Photosynthetic performance of vegetative and reproductive structures of green hellebore (Helleborus viridis L. agg.)" .

Photosynthetica .

43 (1): 55– 64.

Bibcode : 2005Phsyn..43...55A .

doi : 10.1007/s11099-005-5064-x .

S2CID 24426595 .

v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Authority control databases : National United States Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sepal&oldid=1303344636 " Category : Plant morphology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2021 Wikipedia articles that are too technical from February 2021 All articles that are too technical Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2014 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 12:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sepal 60 languages Add topic

