Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification Toggle Classification subsection 1.1 By passivity 1.2 By linearity 1.3 By lumpiness 2 Classification of sources Toggle Classification of sources subsection 2.1 Independent 2.2 Dependent 3 Applying electrical laws 4 Design methods 5 Network simulation software Toggle Network simulation software subsection 5.1 Linearization around operating point 5.2 Piecewise-linear approximation 6 See also Toggle See also subsection 6.1 Representation 6.2 Design and analysis methodologies 6.3 Measurement 6.4 Analogies 6.5 Specific topologies 7 References Toggle the table of contents Electrical network 77 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية Asturianu বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Монгол Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt Wolof 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Electric circuit ) Assemblage of connected electrical elements For electrical power transmission grids and distribution networks, see Electrical grid .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Electrical network" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Electromagnetism Electricity Magnetism Optics History Computational Textbooks Phenomena Electrostatics Charge density Conductor Coulomb law Electret Electric charge Electric dipole Electric field Electric flux Electric potential Electrostatic discharge Electrostatic induction Gauss's law Insulator Permittivity Polarization Potential energy Static electricity Triboelectricity Magnetostatics Ampère's law Biot–Savart law Gauss's law for magnetism Magnetic dipole Magnetic field Magnetic flux Magnetic scalar potential Magnetic vector potential Magnetization Permeability Right-hand rule Electrodynamics Bremsstrahlung Cyclotron radiation Displacement current Eddy current Electromagnetic field Electromagnetic induction Electromagnetic pulse Electromagnetic radiation Faraday's law Jefimenko equations Larmor formula Lenz's law Liénard–Wiechert potential London equations Lorentz force Maxwell's equations Maxwell tensor Poynting vector Synchrotron radiation Electrical network Alternating current Capacitance Current density Direct current Electric current Electric power Electrolysis Electromotive force Impedance Inductance Joule heating Kirchhoff's laws Network analysis Ohm's law Parallel circuit Resistance Resonant cavities Series circuit Voltage Watt Waveguides Magnetic circuit AC motor DC motor Electric machine Electric motor Gyrator–capacitor Induction motor Linear motor Magnetomotive force Permeance Reluctance (complex) Reluctance (real) Rotor Stator Transformer Covariant formulation Electromagnetic tensor Electromagnetism and special relativity Four-current Four-potential Mathematical descriptions Maxwell equations in curved spacetime Relativistic electromagnetism Stress–energy tensor Scientists Ampère Biot Coulomb Davy Einstein Faraday Fizeau Gauss Heaviside Helmholtz Henry Hertz Hopkinson Jefimenko Joule Kelvin Kirchhoff Larmor Lenz Liénard Lorentz Maxwell Neumann Ohm Ørsted Poisson Poynting Ritchie Savart Singer Steinmetz Tesla Thomson Volta Weber Wiechert v t e A simple electric circuit made up of a voltage source and a resistor. Here, v = i R {\displaystyle v=iR} , according to Ohm's law .

An electrical network is an interconnection of electrical components (e.g., batteries , resistors , inductors , capacitors , switches , transistors ) or a model of such an interconnection, consisting of electrical elements (e.g., voltage sources , current sources , resistances , inductances , capacitances ). An electrical circuit is a network consisting of a closed loop, giving a return path for the current. Thus all circuits are networks, but not all networks are circuits (although networks without a closed loop are often referred to as " open circuits ").

A resistive network is a network containing only resistors and ideal current and voltage sources.

Analysis of resistive networks is less complicated than analysis of networks containing capacitors and inductors. If the sources are constant ( DC ) sources, the result is a DC network. The effective resistance and current distribution properties of arbitrary resistor networks can be modeled in terms of their graph measures and geometrical properties.

[ 1 ] A network that contains active electronic components is known as an electronic circuit . Such networks are generally nonlinear and require more complex design and analysis tools.

Classification [ edit ] By passivity [ edit ] An active network contains at least one voltage source or current source that can supply energy to the network indefinitely. A passive network  does not contain an active source.

An active network contains one or more sources of electromotive force . Practical examples of such sources include a battery or a generator . Active elements can inject power to the circuit, provide power gain, and control the current flow within the circuit.

Passive networks do not contain any sources of electromotive force. They consist of passive elements like resistors and capacitors.

By linearity [ edit ] Linear electrical networks, a special type consisting only of sources (voltage or current), linear lumped elements (resistors, capacitors, inductors), and linear distributed elements (transmission lines), have the property that signals are linearly superimposable .  They are thus more easily analyzed, using powerful frequency domain methods such as Laplace transforms , to determine DC response , AC response , and transient response .

Passive networks are generally taken to be linear, but there are exceptions.  For instance, an inductor with an iron core can be driven into saturation if driven with a large enough current.  In this region, the behaviour of the inductor is very non-linear.

By lumpiness [ edit ] Discrete passive components (resistors, capacitors and inductors) are called lumped elements because all of their, respectively, resistance, capacitance and inductance is assumed to be located ("lumped") at one place.  This design philosophy is called the lumped-element model and networks so designed are called lumped-element circuits .  This is the conventional approach to circuit design.  At high enough frequencies, or for long enough circuits (such as power transmission lines ), the lumped assumption no longer holds because there is a significant fraction of a wavelength across the component dimensions.  A new design model is needed for such cases called the distributed-element model .  Networks designed to this model are called distributed-element circuits .

A distributed-element circuit that includes some lumped components is called a semi-lumped design.  An example of a semi-lumped circuit is the combline filter .

Classification of sources [ edit ] Sources can be classified as independent sources and dependent sources.

Independent [ edit ] An ideal independent source maintains the same voltage or current regardless of the other elements present in the circuit. Its value is either constant (DC) or sinusoidal (AC). The strength of voltage or current is not changed by any variation in the connected network.

Dependent [ edit ] Dependent sources depend upon a particular element of the circuit for delivering the power or voltage or current depending upon the type of source it is.

Applying electrical laws [ edit ] A number of electrical laws apply to all linear resistive networks. These include: Kirchhoff's current law : The sum of all currents entering a node is equal to the sum of all currents leaving the node.

Kirchhoff's voltage law : The directed sum of the electrical potential differences around a loop must be zero.

Ohm's law : The voltage across a resistor is equal to the product of the resistance and the current flowing through it.

Norton's theorem : Any network of voltage or current sources and resistors is electrically equivalent to an ideal current source in parallel with a single resistor.

Thévenin's theorem : Any network of voltage or current sources and resistors is electrically equivalent to a single voltage source in series with a single resistor.

Superposition theorem : In a linear network with several independent sources, the response in a particular branch when all the sources are acting simultaneously is equal to the linear sum of individual responses calculated by taking one independent source at a time.

Applying these laws results in a set of simultaneous equations that can be solved either algebraically or numerically.  The laws can generally be extended to networks containing reactances .  They cannot be used in networks that contain nonlinear or time-varying components.

Design methods [ edit ] Linear network analysis Elements Components Series and parallel circuits Impedance transforms Generator theorems Network theorems Network analysis methods Two-port parameters view talk edit See also: Network analysis (electrical circuits) To design any electrical circuit, either analog or digital , electrical engineers need to be able to predict the voltages and currents at all places within the circuit.  Simple linear circuits can be analyzed by hand using complex number theory . In more complex cases the circuit may be analyzed with specialized computer programs or estimation techniques such as the piecewise-linear model.

Circuit simulation software, such as HSPICE (an analog circuit simulator), [ 2 ] and languages such as VHDL-AMS and verilog-AMS allow engineers to design circuits without the time, cost and risk of error involved in building circuit prototypes.

Network simulation software [ edit ] More complex circuits can be analyzed numerically with software such as SPICE or GNUCAP , or symbolically using software such as SapWin .

Linearization around operating point [ edit ] When faced with a new circuit, the software first tries to find a steady state solution , that is, one where all nodes conform to Kirchhoff's current law and the voltages across and through each element of the circuit conform to the voltage/current equations governing that element.

Once the steady state solution is found, the operating points of each element in the circuit are known.  For a small signal analysis, every non-linear element can be linearized around its operation point to obtain the small-signal estimate of the voltages and currents.  This is an application of Ohm's Law.  The resulting linear circuit matrix can be solved with Gaussian elimination .

Piecewise-linear approximation [ edit ] Software such as the PLECS interface to Simulink uses piecewise-linear approximation of the equations governing the elements of a circuit.  The circuit is treated as a completely linear network of ideal diodes .  Every time a diode switches from on to off or vice versa, the configuration of the linear network changes.  Adding more detail to the approximation of equations increases the accuracy of the simulation, but also increases its running time.

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Electrical circuits .

Look up electrical circuit in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Digital circuit Ground (electricity) Impedance Load Memristor Open-circuit voltage Short circuit Voltage drop Representation [ edit ] Circuit diagram Schematic Netlist Design and analysis methodologies [ edit ] Network analysis (electrical circuits) Mathematical methods in electronics Superposition theorem Topology (electronics) Mesh analysis Prototype filter Measurement [ edit ] Network analyzer (electrical) Network analyzer (AC power) Continuity test Analogies [ edit ] Hydraulic analogy Mechanical–electrical analogies Impedance analogy (Maxwell analogy) Mobility analogy (Firestone analogy) Through and across analogy (Trent analogy) Specific topologies [ edit ] Bridge circuit LC circuit RC circuit RL circuit RLC circuit Potential divider Series and parallel circuits References [ edit ] ^ Kumar, Ankush; Vidhyadhiraja, N. S.; Kulkarni, G. U . (2017). "Current distribution in conducting nanowire networks".

Journal of Applied Physics .

122 (4): 045101.

Bibcode : 2017JAP...122d5101K .

doi : 10.1063/1.4985792 .

^ "HSPICE" (PDF) .

HSpice . Stanford University, Electrical Engineering Department. 1999.

Portal : Electronics Authority control databases : National Germany Japan Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐744bd5f668‐chbzd
Cached time: 20250812121031
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.420 seconds
Real time usage: 0.627 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1123/1000000
Revision size: 10440/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 52358/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1351/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 33747/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.269/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5972898/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  441.340      1 -total
 18.82%   83.075      1 Template:Reflist
 16.26%   71.769      1 Template:Electromagnetism
 15.89%   70.144      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.62%   68.928      1 Template:Cite_journal
 15.57%   68.706      1 Template:Refimprove
 14.34%   63.295      1 Template:Ambox
 14.24%   62.827      1 Template:Short_description
 11.54%   50.933      1 Template:Authority_control
  9.58%   42.262      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:9559:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812121031 and revision id 1300632589. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Electrical_network&oldid=1300632589 " Categories : Electricity Electrical engineering Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2016 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 13:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Electrical network 77 languages Add topic

