Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Spacecraft design and instrumentation Toggle Spacecraft design and instrumentation subsection 2.1 Scientific instruments 3 Mission profile 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Enceladus Orbilander 2 languages Français Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Proposed NASA space probe to Saturn's moon Enceladus Enceladus Orbilander Artist's impression of the Enceladus Orbilander Mission type Enceladus Orbiter and Lander Operator NASA Website https://space.jhuapl.edu/projects-and-studies/enceladus-orbilander Mission duration Overall : ~15 years total [ 1 ] : 2–3,33-37 3.5 years at Enceladus En route : 7 year cruise 4 years Saturnian moons tour Science Phase : 1.5 years Enceladus orbit 2 years on Enceladus surface Spacecraft properties Manufacturer APL (proposed) Launch mass 6610 kg [ 1 ] : 18 Dry mass 2690 kg Power 741 W (at launch) 589 W (landing) Start of mission Launch date October 2038 (proposed) [ 1 ] : 33 Rocket Space Launch System Block 2 (proposed) Launch site Kennedy Space Center , Pad 39B Contractor NASA Flyby of Jupiter Closest approach October 2040 (proposed) Distance 4,730,000 km (2,940,000 mi) Saturn orbiter Orbital insertion August 2045 (proposed) Orbital departure early 2050 (proposed) Enceladus orbiter Orbital insertion early 2050 (proposed) Orbital departure mid 2051 (proposed) Enceladus lander Landing date mid 2051 (proposed) Large Strategic Science Missions Planetary Science Division ← Uranus Orbiter and Probe Solar System Exploration program Enceladus' south pole, captured by NASA's Cassini-Huygens spacecraft , 2015 The Enceladus Orbilander is a proposed NASA Flagship mission to Saturn's moon Enceladus . The Enceladus Orbilander would spend a year and a half orbiting Enceladus and sampling its water plumes , which stretch into space, before landing on the surface for a two-year mission to study materials for evidence of life.

[ 1 ] The mission, with an estimated cost of $4.9 billion, could launch in the late 2030s on a Space Launch System or Falcon Heavy with a landing in the early 2050s. It was proposed in the 2023–2032 Planetary Science Decadal Survey as the second highest priority Flagship mission, after the Uranus Orbiter and Probe .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Background [ edit ] At 500 kilometres (310 miles) in diameter, Enceladus is the sixth largest moon of Saturn and the 19th largest in the Solar System .

[ 4 ] Enceladus has been visited and imaged in detail by three other probes: the twin Voyager spacecraft , and the Saturn orbiting Cassini spacecraft . Out of these, Cassini investigated Enceladus in the most detail and contributed the most to the current scientific understanding of Enceladus. Cassini's 23 targeted close flybys [ 5 ] helped discover that Enceladus is a geologically active world, with young (recently formed/solidified) terrain. The flybys also showed active, warm water plumes, along with evidence hinting at a subsurface ocean.

[ 6 ] Cassini also provided evidence of hydrothermal processes driving both the geysers and Enceladus' active geology, making the moon one of the most attractive places to find life within the solar system.

After Cassini's mission, a variety of proposals to follow-up on Cassini's findings at Enceladus.

[ 7 ] Journey to Enceladus and Titan , an astrobiology mission to Enceladus and Titan, competed for the 13th Discovery Program mission but was not selected.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Later, In 2017, two Enceladus focused astrobiology missions, Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability and Enceladus Life Finder competed for the 4th New Frontiers mission, but were ultimately not selected.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The Enceladus Orbilander proposal was created by a team led by Shannon MacKenzie to support the Planetary Science Decadal Survey .

[ 12 ] While previous mission studies had investigated multiple flybys to study Enceladus, MacKenzie's team, studying a Flagship mission architecture with a greater budget cap, decided to study an orbiter, lander, or a combination thereof.

[ 13 ] Ultimately, the decision to combine the orbiter and lander into one spacecraft was informed by Enceladus' small size and negligible gravity, which results in trivial delta-v to land.

[ 14 ] In the 2022-2032 Planetary Decadal Survey , the Enceladus Orbilander was recommended as the second highest priority new flagship mission.

[ 15 ] The selection was motivated by proposal's exobiology and planetary habitability focus.

[ 16 ] Spacecraft design and instrumentation [ edit ] Due to Enceladus's small size, the amount of energy required to land compared to capturing into orbit is negligible. Therefore, the Enceladus Orbilander is envisioned uniquely combine both the functions of an orbiter and a lander into a single spacecraft.

[ 17 ] Scientific instruments [ edit ] The proposed spacecraft will carry three separate instrument suites and a sampling system. Each instrument suite is tailored towards a different regime of science operations.

The proposed instruments are: [ 1 ] : 10, B7-B10 Instrument Heritage Instrument (Mission) Science Suite High-Resolution Mass Spectrometer (HRMS) MASPEX ( Europa Clipper ) Life Detection Suite Separation Mass Spectrometer (SMS) Sample Analysis at Mars ( Curiosity ) Electrochemical Sensor Array (ESA) Wet Chemistry Laboratory ( Phoenix ) Microcapillary Electrophoresis-Laser Induced Fluorescence N/A Microscope MECA Atomic Force Microscope ( Phoenix ) Solid State Nanopore Sequencer N/A Narrow Angle Camera (NAC) Long Range Reconnaissance Imager ( New Horizons ) Remote Sensing and Reconnaissance Suite Wide Angle Camera (WAC) ECAM-M50 ( Janus ) Thermal Emission Spectrometer (TES) Mercury Radiometer and Thermal Infrared Spectrometer ( BepiColombo ) Context Imager Stereo Surface Imager ( Phoenix ) In Situ Suite Seismometer Seismic Experiment for Interior Structure ( Insight ) Additionally, three separate sampling systems are proposed for each stage of flight: a 1 square meter funnel to passively collect particles, a scoop for active particle collection on the surface, and a gas inlet for gas emissions.

[ 1 ] : 10, B11 Mission profile [ edit ] The Enceladus Orbilander is proposed to be launched in October 2038.

[ 1 ] : 4 The spacecraft is proposed to be launched by a Space Launch System Block II variant with a Castor 30B upper stage, although a Falcon Heavy has also been considered but would require the spacecraft to launch on a slower trajectory with flybys of Venus.

[ 1 ] : 7 The spacecraft's proposed launch is timed so that a Jupiter gravity assist can be performed in October 2040 to save propellant for Saturn orbital insertion in August 2045.

[ 1 ] : 19 In Saturn orbit, the spacecraft will embark on a complex, 4.5 year long tour of the moons of Saturn , using gravity assists off moons such as Titan , Rhea , Dione , and Tethys to lower the orbital inclination of the spacecraft.

[ 1 ] : 21-22 After a series of flybys with Enceladus itself, the spacecraft will enter Enceladus orbit.

The spacecraft will spend 1.5 years in a 12 hours long elliptical orbit around Enceladus.

[ 1 ] : 20 The closest point of the orbit to the surface  will pass over the south polar tiger stripes to collect plume particles and remote sensing data. Whilst orbiting Enceladus, mission planners will use high resolution images and other data to determine a safe landing ellipse .

[ 14 ] When mission planners decide to land the spacecraft, the Enceladus Orbilander will lower its orbit and begin a powered descent towards the surface.   The spacecraft will use terrain-relative navigation similar to systems used on OSIRIS-REx to avoid hazards during the descent.

[ 17 ] When the spacecraft is 10 metres (33 ft) above the surface, the main engine shuts off to avoid contaminating the area, and the spacecraft pitches to its side before soft landing.

[ 1 ] : 16 See also [ edit ] Astronomy portal Biology portal Abiogenesis Astrobiology Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability (ELSAH) Explorer of Enceladus and Titan (E 2 T) Europa Clipper Journey to Enceladus and Titan (JET) Life Investigation For Enceladus (LIFE) THEO References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l MacKenzie, Shannon M.; Kirby, Karen W.; Greenauer, Peter J.; Neveu, Marc; Gold, Rob; Davila, Alfonso; Lunine, Jonathan I.; Cable, Morgan; Craft, Kate; Eigenbrode, Jennifer; Glein, Christopher; Hofgartner, Jason; Mckay, Christopher; Phillips-Lander, Charity; Waite, Hunter; Burton, Dana; Seifert, Helmut; Boye, Jeff; Brock, Spencer; Chen, Michelle; Coker, Rob; Colonel, Grace; Criss, Tom; Crowley, Doug (14 October 2020).

"Enceladus Orbilander: A Flagship Mission Concept for Astrobiology" .

NASA Technical Reports Server . Retrieved 26 April 2024 .

^ https://nap.nationalacademies.org/resource/26522/interactive/ [ bare URL ] ^ Foust, Jeff (19 April 2022).

"Planetary science decadal endorses Mars sample return, outer planets missions" . SpaceNews . Retrieved 19 April 2022 .

^ "Enceladus: Facts & Figures" .

Solar System Exploration . NASA. 12 August 2013. Archived from the original on 16 October 2013 . Retrieved 26 April 2014 .

^ Cofield, Calla (26 October 2017).

"How Cassini Mission's Twists and Turns Led to Discovery of Enceladus' Plumes" .

Space.com . Future US Inc . Retrieved 29 April 2024 .

^ "Cassini at Enceladus: A Decade-Plus of Discovery - NASA Science" .

NASA . 24 January 2024 . Retrieved 29 April 2024 .

^ Carter, Jamie (10 June 2022).

"Seven Things You Need To Know About NASA's New $4.9 Billion Mission To Enceladus, A Tiny Moon Of Saturn" .

Forbes . Retrieved 29 April 2024 .

^ Sotin, C.; Altwegg, K.

; Brown, R.H.; et al. (2011).

JET: Journey to Enceladus and Titan (PDF) . 42nd Lunar and Planetary Science Conference.

Lunar and Planetary Institute .

^ Brown, Dwayne.

"NASA Selects Two Missions to Explore the Early Solar System - NASA" .

nasa.gov . NASA . Retrieved 30 July 2024 .

^ Chang, Kenneth (15 September 2017).

"Back to Saturn? Five Missions Proposed to Follow Cassini" .

The New York Times .

^ Inner Workings: Icy ocean worlds offer chances to find life . Adam Mann, PNAS ,  2 May 2017, vol. 114 no. 18 4566–4568, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1703361114 ^ Bartels, Meghan = (5 October 2020).

"If we want to find life on Saturn's moon Enceladus, we need to rule out Earthly hitchhikers" .

Space.com . Retrieved 30 July 2024 .

^ MacKenzie, Shannon M.; Neveu, Marc; Davila, Alfonso F.; Lunine, Jonathan I.; Craft, Kathleen L.; Cable, Morgan L.; Phillips-Lander, Charity M.; Hofgartner, Jason D.; Eigenbrode, Jennifer L.; Waite, J. Hunter; Glein, Christopher R.; Gold, Robert; Greenauer, Peter J.; Kirby, Karen; Bradburne, Christopher; Kounaves, Samuel P.; Malaska, Michael J.; Postberg, Frank; Patterson, G. Wesley; Porco, Carolyn; Núñez, Jorge I.; German, Chris; Huber, Julie A.; McKay, Christopher P.; Vera, Jean-Pierre de; Brucato, John Robert; Spilker, Linda J. (27 April 2021).

"The Enceladus Orbilander Mission Concept: Balancing Return and Resources in the Search for Life" .

The Planetary Science Journal .

2 (2): 77.

Bibcode : 2021PSJ.....2...77M .

doi : 10.3847/PSJ/abe4da .

ISSN 2632-3338 .

^ a b Strauss, Mark (19 June 2023).

"Diamond in the Dark" .

Air & Space Quarterly . Smithsonian Institution . Retrieved 1 May 2024 .

^ Blatt, Josh.

"Report Identifies Priority Planetary Science Missions, Planetary Defense Efforts, and Strategic Investments for the Next Decade" .

www.nationalacademies.org . National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine . Retrieved 29 April 2024 .

^ "Origins, Worlds, and Life: A Decadal Strategy for Planetary Science and Astrobiology 2023-2032" .

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine . 23 October 2023.

doi : 10.17226/26522 .

ISBN 978-0-309-47578-5 . Retrieved 30 July 2024 .

^ a b Atkinson, Nancy.

"Meet Orbilander, a Mission to Search for Life on Enceladus" .

The Planetary Society . Retrieved 26 April 2024 .

v t e Spacecraft missions to Saturn Past Flybys Pioneer 11 Voyager 1 Voyager 2 Orbiters Cassini–Huygens timeline retirement Landers Huygens (on Titan) Planned Dragonfly (to Titan, 2028) Proposed Saturn , rings Kronos Saturn Atmospheric Entry Probe SPRITE Titan Saturn System Mission Enceladus Enceladus Orbilander Breakthrough Enceladus mission Enceladus Life Finder Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Explorer Life Investigation For Enceladus Titan AVIATR Oceanus TALISE Titan Mare Explorer Titan Submarine Several moons Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Journey to Enceladus and Titan There are no ongoing missions to Saturn v t e Astrobiology Disciplines Astrochemistry Astrophysics Atmospheric sciences Biochemistry Evolutionary biology Exoplanetology Geomicrobiology Microbiology Paleontology Planetary oceanography Planetary science Main topics Abiogenesis Allan Hills 84001 Biomolecule Biosignature Drake equation Earliest known life forms Earth analog Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial sample curation Extremophiles Hypothetical types of biochemistry List of microorganisms tested in outer space Ocean planet Panspermia Planetary protection Search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) Yamato meteorite Planetary habitability Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Space missions Earth orbit BIO BIOCORE Biolab Bion BIOPAN Biosatellite program E-MIST ERA Eu:CROPIS EXOSTACK EXPOSE Lunar Micro Ecosystem O/OREOS OREOcube Tanpopo VEGGIE Mars Beagle 2 Fobos-Grunt Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover Mars 2020 Perseverance rover Phoenix Tianwen-1 Zhurong rover Trace Gas Orbiter Viking Comets and asteroids Hayabusa2 OSIRIS-REx Rosetta Heliocentric BioSentinel Planned Dragonfly Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover Proposed Breakthrough Enceladus BRUIE CAESAR Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder‎ Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Orbilander Europa Lander ExoLance Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Mars sample return mission Oceanus THEO Trident Cancelled and undeveloped Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection Kazachok Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher MELOS Northern Light Red Dragon Terrestrial Planet Finder Institutions and programs Astrobiology Society of Britain Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Breakthrough Starshot Carl Sagan Institute Center for Life Detection Science European Astrobiology Network Association NASA Astrobiology Institute Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Ocean Worlds Exploration Program Spanish Astrobiology Center‎ Category Commons v t e Enceladus Geography Plains Diyar Planitia Sarandib Planitia Sulci Harran Sulci Labtayt Sulci Samarkand Sulci Fossae Bassorah Fossa Daryabar Fossa Isbanir Fossa Craters Ahmad Al-Bakbuk Al-Fakik Al-Haddar Al-Kuz Al-Mustazi Aladdin Ali Baba Ayyub Behram Dalilah Duban Dunyazad Fitnah Ghanim Gharib Hassan Jansha Julnar Khusrau Marjanah Musa Otbah Peri-Banu Rayya Salih Samad Shahrazad Shahryar Shakashik Sharrkan Shirin Sindbad Zumurrud Other Atmosphere Tiger stripes Exploration Past flybys Pioneer 11 Voyager 1 Voyager 2 Cassini–Huygens Proposed Enceladus Orbilander Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability (ELSAH) Enceladus Explorer (EnEx) Enceladus Life Finder (ELF) Explorer of Enceladus and Titan (E 2 T) Journey to Enceladus and Titan (JET) Life Investigation For Enceladus (LIFE) Titan Saturn System Mission (TSSM) Enceladus Icy Jet Analyzer (ENJIA) Related In mythology In fiction Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Enceladus_Orbilander&oldid=1305699861 " Categories : Proposed NASA space probes Enceladus Hidden categories: All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from August 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from March 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from March 2021 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 15:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Enceladus Orbilander 2 languages Add topic

