Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification and evolution 2 General appearance and characteristics 3 Range and habitat 4 Movement patterns 5 Diet 6 Life cycle and mating 7 Aggressive behavior 8 Wool 9 Threats 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Mountain goat 54 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Basa Bali Български Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Diné bizaad Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kaszëbsczi Kotava Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål پنجابی Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Species of mammal For other uses, see Mountain goat (disambiguation) .

Mountain goat Mountain goat in the Cascades Conservation status Least Concern ( IUCN 3.1 ) [ 1 ] Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Order: Artiodactyla Family: Bovidae Subfamily: Caprinae Tribe: Caprini Genus: Oreamnos Species: O. americanus Binomial name Oreamnos americanus ( Blainville , 1816) Synonyms Mazama dorsata Rafinesque, 1817 R[upicapra]. americanus de Blainville, 1816 The mountain goat ( Oreamnos americanus ), also known as the Rocky Mountain goat , is a cloven-footed mammal that is endemic to the remote and rugged mountainous areas of western North America . A subalpine to truly alpine species, it is a sure-footed climber commonly seen on sheer rock faces, near-vertical cliffs and icy passages. Mountain goats generally avoid venturing down into lower elevations—except during seasonal food shortages or during particularly bad weather—as the extreme elevation which they inhabit is their primary defense against predators such as black and brown bears , pumas and wolves .

Despite its vernacular name and both genera being in the same subfamily ( Caprinae ), the mountain goat is not a member of Capra , the genus that includes all true goats (such as the wild goat ( Capra aegagrus ), from which the domestic goat is derived); rather, it is more closely allied with the other bovids known as “ goat-antelopes ”, including the European chamois ( Rupicapra ), the gorals ( Naemorhedus ), the takins ( Budorcas ) and the serows ( Capricornis ), of Japan and eastern South Asia.

Classification and evolution The mountain goat is an even-toed ungulate of the order Artiodactyla and the family Bovidae (along with antelopes , gazelles , and cattle ). It belongs to the subfamily Caprinae , along with true goats , wild sheep , the chamois , the muskox and other species. The takins of the Himalayan region, while not a sister lineage of the mountain goat, are nonetheless very closely related and almost coeval to the mountain goat; they evolved in parallel from an ancestral goat. Other members of this group are the bharal , the true goats, and the Himalayan tahr . The sheep lineage is also very closely related, while the muskox lineage is somewhat more distant. The mountain goats probably diverged from their relatives in the late Tortonian , some 7.5 to 8 million years ago.

[ citation needed ] Given that all major caprine lineages emerged in the Late Miocene and contain at least one but usually several species from the eastern Himalayan region, their most likely place of origin is between today's Tibet and Mongolia or nearby. The mountain goat's ancestors thus probably crossed the Bering Strait after they split from their relatives, presumably before the Wisconsinian glaciation . No Pliocene mountain goats have been identified yet; the known fossil record is fairly recent, entirely from North America, and barely differs from the living animals. In the Pleistocene era, the small prehistoric mountain goat Oreamnos harringtoni lived in the southern Rocky Mountains .

Ancient DNA studies suggest that this was the sister species of the living mountain goat, not its ancestor; consequently, the living species would also date back to the Pleistocene at least.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The mountain goat is the only living species in the genus Oreamnos . The name Oreamnos is derived from the Greek term ὄρος óros (stem ore- ) meaning "mountain" (or, alternatively, oreas "mountain nymph") and the word ἀμνός amnós meaning "lamb".

General appearance and characteristics Mountain goat on Mount Massive , Colorado , United States Both male and female mountain goats have beards, short tails, and long black horns, 15–28 cm (5.9–11 in) in length, which contain yearly growth rings. They are protected from the elements by their woolly greyish white double coats. The fine, dense wool of their undercoats is covered by an outer layer of longer, hollow hairs. Mountain goats molt in spring by rubbing against rocks and trees, with the adult billies shedding their extra wool first and the pregnant nannies shedding last. Their coats help them to withstand winter temperatures as low as −46 °C (−51 °F) and winds of up to 160 kilometres per hour (99 mph).

Close-up of head A male goat stands about 1 m (3.3 ft) at the shoulder to the waist and can weigh considerably more than the female (around 30% more in some cases). Male goats also have longer horns and longer beards than females. The head-and-body length can range from 120–179 cm (47–70 in), with a small tail adding 10–20 cm (3.9–7.9 in).

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] The mountain goat's feet are well-suited for climbing steep, rocky slopes with pitches exceeding 60°, with inner pads that provide traction and cloven hooves that can spread apart. The tips of their feet have sharp dewclaws that keep them from slipping. They have powerful shoulder and neck muscles that help propel them up steep slopes.

[ 7 ] Based on a field recording in the Rocky Mountains of Canada of a mountain goat climbing a 45-degree slope, researchers were able to measure the goat's whole body movement as it climbed. Researchers observed that when the goat propelled itself forward, it extended its back legs and the front legs were tucked close up to its chest during its first phase. During the second phase, the goat raised its back legs near to its chest, while the front leg's humerus stayed locked in a persistent location relative to the goat's chest, therefore allowing the elbow to be detained in close proximity to the whole body's center of balance. Extension of the elbow and carpal joints resulted in a vertical translation of the center of mass up the mountain slope.

[ 8 ] Range and habitat Kenai National Wildlife Refuge , Alaska The mountain goat inhabits the Rocky Mountains and Cascade Range and other mountain regions of the Western Cordillera of North America, from Washington , Idaho and Montana through British Columbia and Alberta , into the southern Yukon and southeastern Alaska . British Columbia contains half of the world's population of mountain goats.

[ 9 ] Its northernmost range is said to be along the northern fringe of the Chugach Mountains in south-central Alaska. Introduced populations can also be found in such areas as Idaho , Wyoming , Utah , Nevada , Oregon , Colorado , South Dakota , and the Olympic Peninsula of Washington.

Mountain goats are the largest mammals found in their high-altitude habitats , which can exceed elevations of 13,000 ft (4,000 m). They sometimes descend to sea level in coastal areas although they are primarily an alpine and subalpine species. The animals usually stay above the tree line throughout the year but they will migrate seasonally to higher or lower elevations within that range. Winter migrations to low-elevation mineral licks often take them several kilometers through forested areas.

[ 10 ] Movement patterns In the Cascade Range , Mount Rainier National Park , near the southwestern limit of their distribution Daily movements by individual mountain goats are primarily confined to areas on the same mountain face, drainage basin , or alpine opening. Daily movements reflect an individual's needs for foraging, resting, thermoregulation and security from predators or disturbance. Seasonal movements primarily reflect nutritional needs (such as movements to and from mineral licks/salt lick ), reproductive needs (in other words, movement of pre-parturient females to "kidding" areas; movement to rutting areas), and climatic influences (including movement to areas in response to foraging conditions). In general, seasonal movements are likely to exhibit a strong elevational component, whereby lower, forested elevations are used during the spring-summer (security cover effects) to access lower elevation mineral licks, and during winter (thermal cover effects) to access forage. The farthest movements are expected to be by dispersing mountain goats. Such movements are likely to involve mountain goats crossing forested valleys as they move between mountain blocks.

Diet Young mountain goat licking handrail for salt Mountain goats are herbivores and spend most of their time grazing. Their diets include grasses , herbs , sedges , ferns , mosses , lichens , and twigs and leaves from the low-growing shrubs and conifers of their high-altitude habitat.

A mountain goat grazing at Mount Rushmore , South Dakota In captivity, the mountain goat's diet can also include grain, alfalfa , fruits, vegetables and grass .

Life cycle and mating This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( December 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A taxidermied mountain goat at the Milwaukee Public Museum In the wild, mountain goats usually live 12 to 15 years, with their lifespans limited by the wearing down of their teeth. In zoos, however, they can live for 16-20 years.

Mountain goat kid at Cawridge, Alberta Mountain goats reach sexual maturity at about 30 months.

[ 11 ] Nannies in a herd undergo synchronized estrus in late October through early December, at which time females and males participate in a mating ritual. Mature billies stare at nannies for long periods, dig rutting pits, and fight each other in showy (though occasionally dangerous) scuffles. Nannies often ignore young billies, who try to participate but are discounted in favor of older partners.  Both females and males usually mate with multiple individuals during breeding season, although some billies try to keep other males away from certain nannies. After the breeding season is over, females and males move away from each other. Nannies form loose-knit nursery groups of up to 50 animals. The adult billies leave, often alone or with two or three other billies.

Mountain goat with kid in Glacier National Park Kids are born in the spring (late May or early June) after a six-month gestation period. Nannies give birth, usually to a single offspring, after moving to an isolated ledge; post partum , they lick the kid dry and ingest the placenta . Kids weigh a little over 3 kg (6.6 lb) at birth and begin to run and climb (or attempt to do so) within hours. Although lactation is mostly finished at one month, kids follow their mothers closely for the first year of life (or until the nanny gives birth again, if this does not occur the next breeding season); nannies protect their young by leading them out of danger, standing over them when faced by predators, and positioning themselves below their kids on steep slopes to stop freefalls.

Aggressive behavior Nannies can be very competitive and protective of their space and food sources. They fight with one another for dominance in conflicts that can ultimately include all the nannies in the herd.  In these battles, nannies circle each other with their heads lowered, displaying their horns. These conflicts can occasionally lead to injury or death, but are usually harmless. To avoid fighting, an animal may show a posture of nonaggression by stretching low to the ground.

In regions below the tree line, nannies use their fighting abilities to protect themselves and their offspring from predators. Predators, including wolves , wolverines , lynxes , and bears , attack goats of most ages given the opportunity. The cougar , or mountain lion, is perhaps the primary predator, being powerful enough to overwhelm the largest adults and uniquely nimble enough to navigate the rocky ecosystem of the goats. Though their size protects them from most potential predators in higher altitudes, nannies must sometimes defend their young from both bald and golden eagles , [ 12 ] which can be a predatory threat to kids.

[ 5 ] Nannies have even been observed trying to dominate the more passive, but often heavier bighorn sheep that share some of their territory. In 2021, a mountain goat gored a grizzly bear to death in Yoho National Park , British Columbia .

[ 13 ] Mountain goats introduced in the 1920s into Washington’s Olympic Mountains were in time found to be a nuisance there, in particular while seeking human urine and sweat for its salt content, the park lacking natural salt licks , and even aggressively approaching human visitors.

[ 14 ] One such goat killed a hiker in 2010.

[ 15 ] Officials finally chose to eradicate them from the Olympic Peninsula , removing hundreds, mostly by capturing them and relocating them to the Cascade Mountains .

[ 16 ] Wool Further information: Salish weaving § Mountain goat's wool Although mountain goats have never been domesticated and commercialized for their wool , pre-Columbian indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast did incorporate their wool into their weaving by collecting spring moulted wool left by wild goats.

[ 17 ] Threats Avalanches can constitute 23-65% of Alaskan mountain goat mortality depending on the region.

[ 18 ] References ^ Festa-Bianchet, M. (2020).

" Oreamnos americanus " .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species .

2020 : e.T42680A22153133.

doi : 10.2305/IUCN.UK.2020-2.RLTS.T42680A22153133.en . Retrieved November 13, 2021 .

^ Campos et al 2010 [ full citation needed ] ^ Bibi 2013 [ full citation needed ] ^ "Mountain Goat. Oreamnos americanus" .

NatGeo . Archived from the original on February 18, 2021 . Retrieved December 29, 2007 .

^ a b Oreamnos americanus . Animal Diversity Web. Retrieved on 2012-07-24.

^ Burnie D and Wilson DE (Eds.) (2005).

Animal: The Definitive Visual Guide to the World's Wildlife . DK Adult ISBN 0-7894-7764-5 ^ Lewinson, Ryan T.; Stefanyshyn, Darren J. (2016). "A descriptive analysis of the climbing mechanics of a mountain goat (Oreamnos americanus)".

Zoology .

119 (6): 541– 546.

Bibcode : 2016Zool..119..541L .

doi : 10.1016/j.zool.2016.06.001 .

PMID 27402383 .

^ Lewinson, Ryan; Stefanyshyn, Darren (December 2016). "A descriptive analysis of the climbing mechanics of a mountain goat ( Oreamnos americanus )".

Zoology (Jena, Germany) .

119 (6): 541– 546.

Bibcode : 2016Zool..119..541L .

doi : 10.1016/j.zool.2016.06.001 .

PMID 27402383 .

^ "Mtngoat" .

bc.gov.ca .

BC Parks . Retrieved March 20, 2022 .

< ^ "Mountain Goats" .

nps.gov .

National Park Service . Retrieved October 21, 2010 .

^ Chadwick, D. (1983).

A Beast the Color of Winter – The Mountain Goat Observed . San Francisco: Sierra Club Books .

ISBN 0803264216 – via Google Books.

^ Hamel, Sandra; Côté, Steeve D. (2009).

"Maternal defensive behavior of mountain goats against predation by Golden Eagles" .

Western North American Naturalist .

69 (1): 115– 118.

doi : 10.3398/064.069.0103 .

hdl : 20.500.11794/69862 .

ISSN 1527-0904 .

S2CID 28259274 .

^ "Mountain goat gores grizzly to death in British Columbia" . September 21, 2021.

^ Bush, Evan (May 22, 2024).

"Mountain goats were flown to a new home in Washington, but few survived" .

NBC News . Retrieved May 22, 2024 .

^ Hiker killed by mountain goat in Olympic Nat'l. Park .

Seattle Post-Intelligencer (2010-10-16). Retrieved on 2011-09-15.

^ [1] . www.nps.gov (2021-9-29). Retrieved on 2022-5-24.

^ "Mountain Goat" . Archived from the original on April 25, 2012 . Retrieved October 3, 2011 .

^ White, Kevin S.; Hood, Eran; Wolken, Gabriel J.; Peitzsch, Erich H.; Bühler, Yves; Wikstrom Jones, Katreen; Darimont, Chris T. (April 29, 2024).

"Snow avalanches are a primary climate-linked driver of mountain ungulate populations" .

Communications Biology .

7 (1): 423.

doi : 10.1038/s42003-024-06073-0 .

ISSN 2399-3642 .

PMC 11058775 .

PMID 38684895 .

Further reading A. W. F. Banfield (1974).

The Mammals of Canada . University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 0-8020-2137-9 M. Festa-Bianchet and S.D. Côté (2008). "Mountain Goats: Ecology, Behaviour and Conservation of an Alpine Ungulate". Island Press.

ISBN 978-1-59726-170-8 . 265 p.

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to mountain goat .

Loyal J. Johnson (1994) Alaska Department of Fish & Game US Forest Service – Oreamnos americanus v t e Extant Artiodactyla species Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Infraclass: Eutheria Superorder: Laurasiatheria Suborder Ruminantia Antilocapridae Antilocapra Pronghorn ( A. americana ) Giraffidae Okapia Okapi ( O. johnstoni ) Giraffa Northern giraffe ( G. camelopardalis ) Southern giraffe ( G. giraffa ) Reticulated giraffe ( G. reticulata ) Masai giraffe ( G. tippelskirchi ) Moschidae Moschus Anhui musk deer ( M. anhuiensis ) Dwarf musk deer ( M. berezovskii ) Alpine musk deer ( M. chrysogaster ) Kashmir musk deer ( M. cupreus ) Black musk deer ( M. fuscus ) Himalayan musk deer ( M. leucogaster ) Siberian musk deer ( M. moschiferus ) Tragulidae Hyemoschus Water chevrotain ( H. aquaticus ) Moschiola Indian spotted chevrotain ( M. indica ) Yellow-striped chevrotain ( M. kathygre ) Sri Lankan spotted chevrotain ( M. meminna ) Tragulus Java mouse-deer ( T. javanicus ) Lesser mouse-deer ( T. kanchil ) Greater mouse-deer ( T. napu ) Philippine mouse-deer ( T. nigricans ) Vietnam mouse-deer ( T. versicolor ) Williamson's mouse-deer ( T. williamsoni ) Cervidae Large family listed below Bovidae Large family listed below Family Cervidae Cervinae Muntiacus Bornean yellow muntjac ( M. atherodes ) Hairy-fronted muntjac ( M. crinifrons ) Fea's muntjac ( M. feae ) Gongshan muntjac ( M. gongshanensis ) Sumatran muntjac ( M. montanus ) Southern red muntjac ( M. muntjak ) Pu Hoat muntjac ( M. puhoatensis ) Leaf muntjac ( M. putaoensis ) Reeves's muntjac ( M. reevesi ) Roosevelt's muntjac ( M. rooseveltorum ) Truong Son muntjac ( M. truongsonensis ) Northern red muntjac ( M. vaginalis ) Giant muntjac ( M. vuquangensis ) Elaphodus Tufted deer ( E. cephalophus ) Dama European fallow deer ( D. dama ) Persian fallow deer ( D. mesopotamica ) Axis Chital ( A. axis ) Calamian deer ( A. calamianensis ) Bawean deer ( A. kuhlii ) Hog deer ( A. porcinus ) Rucervus Barasingha ( R. duvaucelii ) Eld's deer ( R. eldii ) Elaphurus Père David's deer ( E. davidianus ) Rusa Visayan spotted deer ( R. alfredi ) Philippine sambar ( R. mariannus ) Rusa deer ( R. timorensis ) Sambar ( R. unicolor ) Cervus Thorold's deer ( C. albirostris ) Red deer ( C. elaphus ) Elk ( C. canadensis ) Central Asian red deer ( C. hanglu ) Sika deer ( C. nippon ) Capreolinae Alces Moose ( A. alces ) Hydropotes Water deer ( H. inermis ) Capreolus European roe deer ( C. capreolus ) Siberian roe deer ( C. pygargus ) Rangifer Reindeer ( R. tarandus ) Hippocamelus Taruca ( H. antisensis ) South Andean deer ( H. bisulcus ) Mazama Red brocket ( M. americana ) Small red brocket ( M. bororo ) Merida brocket ( M. bricenii ) Dwarf brocket ( M. chunyi ) Pygmy brocket ( M. nana ) Amazonian brown brocket ( M. nemorivaga ) Little red brocket ( M. rufina ) Central American red brocket ( M. temama ) Ozotoceros Pampas deer ( O. bezoarticus ) Blastocerus Marsh deer ( B. dichotomus ) Pudu Northern pudu ( P. mephistophiles ) ?

Southern pudu ( P. pudu ) Pudella Peruvian Yungas pudu ( P. carlae ) Northern pudu ( P. mephistophiles ) Odocoileus Mule deer ( O. hemionus ) Yucatan brown brocket ( O. pandora ) White-tailed deer ( O. virginianus ) Subulo Gray brocket ( S. gouazoubira ) Family Bovidae Hippotraginae Hippotragus Roan antelope ( H. equinus ) Sable antelope ( H. niger ) Oryx East African oryx ( O. beisa ) Scimitar oryx ( O. dammah ) Gemsbok ( O. gazella ) Arabian oryx ( O. leucoryx ) Addax Addax ( A. nasomaculatus ) Reduncinae Kobus Waterbuck ( K. ellipsiprymnus ) Kob ( K. kob ) Lechwe ( K. leche ) Nile lechwe ( K. megaceros ) Puku ( K. vardonii ) Redunca Southern reedbuck ( R. arundinum ) Mountain reedbuck ( R. fulvorufula ) Bohor reedbuck ( R. redunca ) Aepycerotinae Aepyceros Impala ( A. melampus ) Peleinae Pelea Grey rhebok ( P. capreolus ) Alcelaphinae Beatragus Hirola ( B. hunteri ) Damaliscus Common tsessebe ( D. lunatus ) Bontebok ( D. pygargus ) Alcelaphus Hartebeest ( A. buselaphus ) Connochaetes Black wildebeest ( C. gnou ) Blue wildebeest ( C. taurinus ) Pantholopinae Pantholops Tibetan antelope ( P. hodgsonii ) Caprinae Large subfamily listed below Bovinae Large subfamily listed below Antilopinae Large subfamily listed below Family Bovidae (subfamily Caprinae ) Ammotragus Barbary sheep ( A. lervia ) Arabitragus Arabian tahr ( A. jayakari ) Budorcas Takin ( B. taxicolor ) Capra Wild goat ( C. aegagrus ) West Caucasian tur ( C. caucasia ) East Caucasian tur ( C. cylindricornis ) Markhor ( C. falconeri ) Domestic goat ( C. hircus ) Alpine ibex ( C. ibex ) Nubian ibex ( C. nubiana ) Iberian ibex ( C. pyrenaica ) Siberian ibex ( C. sibirica ) Walia ibex ( C. walie ) Capricornis Japanese serow ( C. crispus ) Red serow ( C. rubidus ) Mainland serow ( C. sumatraensis ) Taiwan serow ( C. swinhoei ) Hemitragus Himalayan tahr ( H. jemlahicus ) Naemorhedus Red goral ( N. baileyi ) Long-tailed goral ( N. caudatus ) Himalayan goral ( N. goral ) Chinese goral ( N. griseus ) Oreamnos Mountain goat ( O. americanus ) Ovibos Muskox ( O. moschatus ) Nilgiritragus Nilgiri tahr ( N. hylocrius ) Ovis Argali ( O. ammon ) Domestic sheep ( O. aries ) Bighorn sheep ( O. canadensis ) Dall sheep ( O. dalli ) Mouflon ( O. gmelini ) Snow sheep ( O. nivicola ) Urial ( O. vignei ) Pseudois Bharal ( P. nayaur ) Rupicapra Pyrenean chamois ( R. pyrenaica ) Chamois ( R. rupicapra ) Family Bovidae (subfamily Bovinae ) Boselaphini Tetracerus Four-horned antelope ( T. quadricornis ) Boselaphus Nilgai ( B. tragocamelus ) Bovini Bubalus Wild water buffalo ( B. arnee ) Domestic water buffalo ( B. bubalis ) Lowland anoa ( B. depressicornis ) Tamaraw ( B. mindorensis ) Mountain anoa ( B. quarlesi ) Bos American bison ( B. bison ) European bison ( B. bonasus ) Bali cattle ( B. domesticus ) Gayal ( B. frontalis ) Gaur ( B. gaurus ) Domestic yak ( B. grunniens ) Zebu ( B. indicus ) Banteng ( B. javanicus ) Wild yak ( B. mutus ) Cattle ( B. taurus ) Pseudoryx Saola ( P. nghetinhensis ) Syncerus African buffalo ( S. caffer ) Tragelaphini Tragelaphus (including kudus ) Nyala ( T. angasii ) Mountain nyala ( T. buxtoni ) Bongo ( T. eurycerus ) Lesser kudu ( T. imberbis ) Harnessed bushbuck ( T. scriptus ) Sitatunga ( T. spekeii ) Greater kudu ( T. strepsiceros ) Cape bushbuck ( T. sylvaticus ) Taurotragus Giant eland ( T. derbianus ) Common eland ( T. oryx ) Family Bovidae (subfamily Antilopinae ) Antilopini Ammodorcas Dibatag ( A. clarkei ) Antidorcas Springbok ( A. marsupialis ) Antilope Blackbuck ( A. cervicapra ) Eudorcas Mongalla gazelle ( E. albonotata ) Red-fronted gazelle ( E. rufifrons ) Thomson's gazelle ( E. thomsonii ) Heuglin's gazelle ( E. tilonura ) Gazella Arabian gazelle ( G. arabica ) Chinkara ( G. bennettii ) Cuvier's gazelle ( G. cuvieri ) Dorcas gazelle ( G. dorcas ) Mountain gazelle ( G. gazella ) Rhim gazelle ( G. leptoceros ) Speke's gazelle ( G. spekei ) Goitered gazelle ( G. subgutturosa ) Litocranius Gerenuk ( L. walleri ) Nanger Dama gazelle ( N. dama ) Grant's gazelle ( N. granti ) Bright's gazelle ( N. notatus ) Peter's gazelle ( N. petersii ) Soemmerring's gazelle ( N. soemmerringii ) Procapra Mongolian gazelle ( P. gutturosa ) Goa ( P. picticaudata ) Przewalski's gazelle ( P. przewalskii ) Saigini Saiga Saiga antelope ( S. tatarica ) Neotragini Dorcatragus Beira ( D. megalotis ) Madoqua Günther's dik-dik ( M. guentheri ) Kirk's dik-dik ( M. kirkii ) Silver dik-dik ( M. piacentinii ) Salt's dik-dik ( M. saltiana ) Neotragus Royal antelope ( N. pygmaeus ) Nesotragus Bates' pygmy antelope ( N. batesi ) Suni ( N. moschatus ) Oreotragus Klipspringer ( O. oreotragus ) Ourebia Oribi ( O. ourebi ) Raphicerus Steenbok ( R. campestris ) Cape grysbok ( R. melanotis ) Sharpe's grysbok ( R. sharpei ) Cephalophini Cephalophus Aders's duiker ( C. adersi ) Brooke's duiker ( C. brookei ) Peters' duiker ( C. callipygus ) White-legged duiker ( C. crusalbum ) Bay duiker ( C. dorsalis ) Harvey's duiker ( C. harveyi ) Jentink's duiker ( C. jentinki ) White-bellied duiker ( C. leucogaster ) Red forest duiker ( C. natalensis ) Black duiker ( C. niger ) Black-fronted duiker ( C. nigrifrons ) Ogilby's duiker ( C. ogilbyi ) Ruwenzori duiker ( C. rubidis ) Red-flanked duiker ( C. rufilatus ) Yellow-backed duiker ( C. silvicultor ) Abbott's duiker ( C. spadix ) Weyns's duiker ( C. weynsi ) Zebra duiker ( C. zebra ) Philantomba Blue duiker ( P. monticola ) Maxwell's duiker ( P. maxwellii ) Walter's duiker ( P. walteri ) Sylvicapra Common duiker ( S. grimmia ) Suborder Suina Suidae Babyrousa Buru babirusa ( B. babyrussa ) North Sulawesi babirusa ( B. celebensis ) Togian babirusa ( B. togeanensis ) Hylochoerus Giant forest hog ( H. meinertzhageni ) Phacochoerus Desert warthog ( P. aethiopicus ) Common warthog ( P. africanus ) Porcula Pygmy hog ( P. salvania ) Potamochoerus Bushpig ( P. larvatus ) Red river hog ( P. porcus ) Sus Palawan bearded pig ( S. ahoenobarbus ) Bornean bearded pig ( S. barbatus ) Visayan warty pig ( S. cebifrons ) Celebes warty pig ( S. celebensis ) Domestic pig ( S. domesticus ) Flores warty pig ( S. heureni ) Oliver's warty pig ( S. oliveri ) Philippine warty pig ( S. philippensis ) Wild boar ( S. scrofa ) Timor warty pig ( S. timoriensis ) Javan warty pig ( S. verrucosus ) Tayassuidae Tayassu White-lipped peccary ( T. pecari ) Catagonus Chacoan peccary ( C. wagneri ) Dicotyles Collared peccary ( D. tajacu ) Suborder Tylopoda Camelidae Lama Llama ( L. glama ) Guanaco ( L. guanicoe ) Alpaca ( L. pacos ) Vicuña ( L. vicugna ) Camelus Domestic Bactrian camel ( C. bactrianus ) Dromedary/Arabian camel ( C. dromedarius ) Wild Bactrian camel ( C. ferus ) Suborder Whippomorpha Hippopotamidae Hippopotamus Hippopotamus ( H. amphibius ) Choeropsis Pygmy hippopotamus ( C. liberiensis ) Cetacea see Cetacea v t e Game animals and shooting in North America Game birds Bobwhite quail Chukar Hungarian partridge Greater prairie-chicken Mourning dove Ring-necked pheasant Ptarmigan Ruffed grouse Sharp-tailed grouse Snipe (common snipe) Spruce grouse Turkey Woodcock Waterfowl hunters Waterfowl Black duck Canada goose Canvasback Gadwall Greater scaup Lesser scaup Mallard Northern pintail Redhead Ross's goose Snow goose Wood duck Big game Bighorn sheep Black bear Razorback Brown bear Bison (buffalo) Caribou Cougar (mountain lion) Elk Moose White-tailed deer Wolf Mountain goat Mule deer Pronghorn Muskox Dall sheep Polar bear Whales Other quarry American alligator Badger Bobcat Coyote Fox squirrel Gray fox Gray squirrel Opossum Rabbit Raccoon Red fox Snowshoe hare See also Bear hunting Big-game hunting Bison hunting Deer hunting Fox hunting Waterfowl hunting Whaling Fishing Wolf hunting Upland hunting Taxon identifiers Oreamnos americanus Wikidata : Q242602 Wikispecies : Oreamnos americanus ADW : Oreamnos BOLD : 17477 CoL : 6T4ZD EoL : 328659 EPPO : OREAAM FEIS: oram GBIF : 2441151 iNaturalist : 42414 IRMNG : 11384160 ITIS : 180713 IUCN : 42680 MDD : 1006201 MSW : 14200811 NatureServe : 2.104036 NCBI : 34873 Observation.org : 79948 Open Tree of Life : 274550 Paleobiology Database : 49372 Xeno-canto : Oreamnos-americanus Rupicapra americana Wikidata : Q109647464 GBIF : 9355991 Authority control databases National Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wnncg
Cached time: 20250817050230
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.185 seconds
Real time usage: 1.516 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11969/1000000
Revision size: 20112/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 392436/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9565/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 31/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 86238/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.771/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11939232/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 22/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1250.244      1 -total
 27.64%  345.598      1 Template:Speciesbox
 27.02%  337.841      1 Template:Taxobox/core
 17.20%  215.078      1 Template:Reflist
 15.13%  189.174      1 Template:Taxonbar
 12.88%  161.094      1 Template:Artiodactyla
 12.64%  158.075      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.17%  102.083     33 Template:Navbox
  7.59%   94.946      1 Template:Cite_iucn
  4.83%   60.387      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:619020:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817050230 and revision id 1293466104. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mountain_goat&oldid=1293466104 " Categories : IUCN Red List least concern species Mammals described in 1816 Caprids Fauna of the Rocky Mountains Fauna of the Western United States Mammals of Canada Mammals of the United States Native American cuisine Hidden categories: All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from April 2020 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use mdy dates from May 2024 Articles with 'species' microformats All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2020 Articles needing additional references from December 2013 All articles needing additional references Commons link is on Wikidata Taxonbars with automatically added original combinations Taxonbars with 20–24 taxon IDs This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 21:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mountain goat 54 languages Add topic

