Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Levels of analysis Toggle Levels of analysis subsection 1.1 Micro level 1.2 Meso level 1.3 Macro level 2 Origins 3 Contemporary abstracting 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Abstraction (sociology) 1 language Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Levels at which theoretical concepts can be understood This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Abstraction" sociology – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Sociological abstraction refers to the varying levels at which theoretical concepts can be understood. It is a tool for objectifying and simplifying sociological concepts.

[ 1 ] This idea is very similar to the philosophical understanding of abstraction .  There are two basic levels of sociological abstraction: sociological concepts and operationalized sociological concepts.

A sociological concept is a mental construct that represents some part of the world in a simplified form.  An example of a mental construct is the idea of class, or the distinguishing of two groups based on their income, culture, power, or some other defining characteristic(s).

An operational definition specifies concrete, replicable procedures that reliably produce a differentiated, measurable outcome. Similarly, concepts can remain abstract or can be operationalized.  Operationalizing a sociological concept takes it to the concrete level by defining how one is going to measure it.  Thus, with the concept of social class one could operationalize it by actually measuring people's income.  Once operationalized, you have a concrete representation of a sociological concept.

[ 2 ] Levels of analysis [ edit ] In addition to the basic levels of sociological abstraction, sociological concepts are often understood at multiple levels as a result of sociological theorizing.  Sociological theories postulate relationships between sociological concepts.  It is generally understood that there are three levels of sociological theorizing, also known as levels of analysis : Micro level [ edit ] The smallest level of analysis is the micro level of analysis, also referred to as Microsociology . It concerns the nature of everyday human social interactions and agency on a small scale: face to face.

[ 3 ] : 5 Microsociology is based on interpretative analysis rather than statistical or empirical observation, [ 4 ] : 18–21 and shares close association with the philosophy of phenomenology . Methods include symbolic interactionism and ethnomethodology ; ethnomethodology in particular has led to many academic sub-divisions and studies such as micro- linguistical research and other related aspects of human social behaviour. Examples of micro levels of analysis include, but are not limited to, the following individual analysis type approach: Alien , stateless person , asylum seeker , refugee Person Citizen Partnership , marriage Families Household Neighborhood Meso level [ edit ] See also: Mesosociology and Middle-range theory (sociology) In general, a meso-level analysis indicates a population size that falls between the micro and macro levels, such as a community or an organization . However, meso level may also refer to analyses that are specifically designed to reveal connections between micro  and macro levels. It is sometimes referred to as mid range , especially in sociology . Examples of meso-level units of analysis include the following: Clan Tribe Community Village , town , city Formal organization State Macro level [ edit ] Macrosociology involves a large-scale approach to sociology, emphasizing the analysis of social systems and populations at the structural level , often at a necessarily high level of theoretical abstraction.

[ 5 ] Though macrosociology does concern itself with individuals, families, and other constituent aspects of a society, it does so in relation to larger social system of which such elements are a part. The approach is also able to analyze generalized collectivities (e.g. " the city ", " the church ").

[ 6 ] [ need quotation to verify ] Examples of macro-level units of analysis include, but are not limited to, the following: Nation Society Civilization International Global Origins [ edit ] The issue with associating a concrete definition to the term sociological abstraction, is that there is no universally accepted definition. Although the earliest form of abstraction in sociology was discussed by sociologist Talcott Parsons in the 1950s, his work in The Social System (1951) failed to identify an exact definition. Rather, he emphasized the abstract element of sociological theory and made the distinction between what constitutes a theory, on one hand, and the object it refers to, on the other. He also argued that something becomes a fact first when it has been incorporated into an abstract conceptual scheme.

[ 7 ] In the following years, the topic was discussed by Robert K. Merton , C. Wright Mills , Paul Lazarsfeld , along with other theorist, who criticized parson work on abstraction in a variety of ways. During its peak of discussion in the 1950s, the debate over the concept became so intricate, it risked being disembedded and artificial type of analysis along the lines of Parsons.

Contemporary abstracting [ edit ] While previous studies emphasize the importance of organization, little is said about organization itself. Sociologists today focus on how organization is discerned, represented, and explained. Organization is a matter of interactions between casually differentiated parts within a complex system. The article Abstraction and the Organization of Mechanisms, goes into detail with a variety of models which represent the organization of abstraction. They visually represent the interaction between different factors and highlight casual connectivity between mechanisms. As an example, the FFL model clarifies an important aspect of abstraction. Omitting detail permits one to distinguish those underlying factors that matter from those that do not. In other words, it is easier to capture the relevant aspects and connections of the abstracted concept, when other less relevant details, are absent from the model.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] High- and low-level Level of analysis Integrative level References [ edit ] ^ Swedberg, Richard (2019). "On the use of abstractions in sociology: The classics and beyond".

Journal of Classical Sociology .

20 (4): 274.

doi : 10.1177/1468795x19861086 .

S2CID 198667889 .

^ Chazel, François (2013). "Les étapes de l'abstraction en sociologie:actualité et limites du cheminement parsonien".

L'Année sociologique .

56 (2): 353– 368.

doi : 10.3917/anso.062.0353 .

^ Smelser, Neil J. 1997.

Problematics of Sociology.

.

^ Goffman, Erving. 1972.

Relations in Public.

^ Calhoun, Craig, ed. 2002. "Macrosociology." Dictionary of the Social Sciences.

New York: Oxford University Press .

^ Scott, John, and Gordon Marshall, eds. 2000.

Dictionary of Sociology . New York: Oxford University Press .

^ Swedberg, Richard (2019). "On the use of abstractions in sociology: The classics and beyond".

Journal of Classical Sociology .

20 (4): 259.

doi : 10.1177/1468795x19861086 .

S2CID 198667889 .

^ Levy, Arnon; Bechtel, William (2013). "Abstraction and the Organization of Mechanisms".

Philosophy of Science .

80 (2): 241– 261.

doi : 10.1086/670300 .

S2CID 62677634 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abstraction_(sociology)&oldid=1251254485 " Categories : Sociological terminology Abstraction Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2021 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from October 2024 This page was last edited on 15 October 2024, at 05:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abstraction (sociology) 1 language Add topic

