Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In drawing 2 In computer graphics Toggle In computer graphics subsection 2.1 Surface angle to a light source 2.2 Types of lighting 2.2.1 Ambient lighting 2.2.2 Point lighting 2.2.3 Spotlighting 2.2.4 Area lighting 2.2.5 Directional lighting 2.3 Distance falloff 2.3.1 Calculation 2.4 Shading techniques 2.4.1 Flat shading 2.4.2 Smooth shading 2.4.2.1 Gouraud shading 2.4.2.2 Phong shading 2.4.3 Deferred shading 2.4.3.1 Other approaches 2.4.4 Flat vs. smooth shading 3 Computer vision 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Shading 19 languages 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi ไทย Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Depicting depth through varying levels of darkness This article is about shading in computer graphics. For the GPU technology that performs these techniques, see Shader . For other uses, see Shade .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Shading" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Flat shading describes a number of simple lighting techniques. In this case, the lighting value is determined once for each face. The color value can also be determined per object or per vertex.

Gouraud shading (1971) improved the appearance of curved objects.

Phong shading interpolation is a more realistic shading technique developed by Bui Tuong Phong in 1973.

Shading refers to the depiction of depth perception in 3D models (within the field of 3D computer graphics ) or illustrations (in visual art ) by varying the level of darkness .

[ 1 ] Shading tries to approximate local behavior of light on the object's surface and is not to be confused with techniques of adding shadows, such as shadow mapping or shadow volumes , which fall under global behavior of light.

In drawing [ edit ] Shading is used traditionally in drawing for depicting a range of darkness by applying media more densely or with a darker shade for darker areas, and less densely or with a lighter shade for lighter areas. Light patterns, such as objects having light and shaded areas, help when creating the illusion of depth on paper.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] There are various techniques of shading, including cross hatching , where perpendicular lines of varying closeness are drawn in a grid pattern to shade an area. The closer the lines are together, the darker the area appears. Likewise, the farther apart the lines are, the lighter the area appears.

Powder shading is a sketching shading method. In this style, stumping powder and paper stumps are used to draw a picture. (This is also in color.) The stumping powder is smooth and doesn't have any shiny particles. The paper to be used should have small grains on it so that the powder remains on the paper.

In computer graphics [ edit ] Gouraud shading , developed by Henri Gouraud in 1971, was one of the first shading techniques developed for 3D computer graphics .

A knot shaded with different materials including aluminum, brass, bronze, copper, electrum, gold, iron, pewter, silver, clay, foil, glaze, plastic, rubber, satin, and velvet. created in Mathematica 13.1 In computer graphics , shading refers to the process of altering the color of an object/surface/polygon in the 3D scene, based on things like (but not limited to) the surface's angle to lights, its distance from lights, its angle to the camera and material properties (e.g.

bidirectional reflectance distribution function ) to create a photorealistic effect.

Shading is performed during the rendering process by a program called a shader .

Surface angle to a light source [ edit ] Shading alters the colors of faces in a 3D model based on the angle of the surface to a light source or light sources.

The first image below has the faces of the box rendered, but all in the same color. Edge lines have been rendered here as well which makes the image easier to see.

The second image is the same model rendered without edge lines. It is difficult to tell where one face of the box ends and the next begins.

The third image has shading enabled, which makes the image more realistic and makes it easier to see which face is which.

Rendered image of a box. This image has no shading on its faces, but instead uses edge lines (also known as wireframe ) to separate the faces and a bolder outline to separate the object from the background.

This is the same object with the lines removed; the only indication of the interior geometry are the points of the object's silhouette .

This is the same object rendered with flat shading . The color of the 3 visible front faces has been set based on their angle (determined by the normal vector ) to the light sources.

Types of lighting [ edit ] Shading effects from a floodlight using a ray tracer When a shader computes the result color, it uses a lighting model to determine the amount of light reflected at specific points on the surface. Different lighting models can be combined with different shading techniques — while lighting says how much light is reflected, shading determines how this information is used in order to compute the final result. It may for example compute lighting only at specific points and use interpolation to fill in the rest. The shader may also decide about how many light sources to take into account etc.

Ambient lighting [ edit ] An ambient light source represents an omnidirectional, fixed-intensity and fixed-color light source that affects all objects in the scene equally (is omnipresent). During rendering, all objects in the scene are brightened with the specified intensity and color. This type of light source is mainly used to provide the scene with a basic view of the different objects in it. This is the simplest type of lighting to implement, and models how light can be scattered or reflected many times, thereby producing a uniform effect.

Ambient lighting can be combined with ambient occlusion to represent how exposed each point of the scene is, affecting the amount of ambient light it can reflect. This produces diffused, non-directional lighting throughout the scene, casting no clear shadows, but with enclosed and sheltered areas darkened. The result is usually visually similar to an overcast day.

Point lighting [ edit ] Light originates from a single point and spreads outward in all directions.

Spotlighting [ edit ] Models a spotlight : light originates from a single point and spreads outward in a cone .

Area lighting [ edit ] Light originates from a small area on a single plane . (A more realistic model than a point light source.) Directional lighting [ edit ] A directional light source illuminates all objects equally from a given direction , like an area light of infinite size and infinite distance from the scene; there is shading, but cannot be any distance falloff. This is like the sun .

Distance falloff [ edit ] Two boxes rendered with OpenGL (Note that the color of the two front faces is the same even though one is farther away.) The same model rendered using ARRIS CAD , which implements distance falloff to make surfaces that are closer to the eye brighter Theoretically, two surfaces which are parallel are illuminated virtually the same amount from a distant unblocked light source such as the sun. The distance falloff effect produces images which have more shading and so would be realistic for proximal light sources.

The left image doesn't use distance falloff. Notice that the colors on the front faces of the two boxes are exactly the same. It may appear that there is a slight difference where the two faces directly overlap, but this is an optical illusion caused by the vertical edge below where the two faces meet.

The right image does use distance falloff. Notice that the front face of the closer box is brighter than the front face of the back box. Also, the floor goes from light to dark as it gets farther away.

Calculation [ edit ] Distance falloff can be calculated in a number of ways: Power of the distance – For a given point at a distance x from the light source, the light intensity received is proportional to 1/ x n .

None ( n = 0 ) – The light intensity received is the same regardless of the distance between the point and the light source.

Linear ( n = 1 ) – For a given point at a distance x from the light source, the light intensity received is proportional to 1/ x .

Quadratic ( n = 2 ) – This is how light intensity decreases in reality if the light has a free path (i.e. no fog or any other thing in the air that can absorb or scatter the light). For a given point at a distance x from the light source, the light intensity received is proportional to 1/ x 2 .

Any number of other mathematical functions may also be used.

Shading techniques [ edit ] During shading a surface normal is often needed for lighting computation. The normals can be precomputed and stored for each vertex of the model.

Flat shading [ edit ] Flat shading a textured cuboid Graphics complex of a seashell with flat shading modeled in Mathematica Here, the lighting is evaluated only once for each polygon (usually for the first vertex in the polygon, but sometimes for the centroid for triangle meshes), based on the polygon's surface normal and on the assumption that all polygons are flat. The computed color is used for the whole polygon, making the corners look sharp. This is usually used when more advanced shading techniques are too computationally expensive.

Specular highlights are rendered poorly with flat shading: If there happens to be a large specular component at the representative vertex, that brightness is drawn uniformly over the entire face. If a specular highlight doesn't fall on the representative point, it is missed entirely. Consequently, the specular reflection component is usually not included in flat shading computation.

Smooth shading [ edit ] In contrast to flat shading where the colors change discontinuously at polygon borders, with smooth shading the color changes from pixel to pixel, resulting in a smooth color transition between two adjacent polygons. Usually, values are first calculated in the vertices and bilinear interpolation is used to calculate the values of pixels between the vertices of the polygons. Types of smooth shading include Gouraud shading [ 4 ] and Phong shading .

[ 5 ] Gouraud shading [ edit ] Determine the normal at each polygon vertex.

Apply an illumination model to each vertex to calculate the light intensity from the vertex normal.

Interpolate the vertex intensities using bilinear interpolation over the surface polygon.

Problems: Due to lighting being computed only at vertices, the inaccuracies (especially of specular highlights on large triangles) can become too apparent.

T-junctions with adjoining polygons can sometimes result in visual anomalies. In general, T-junctions should be avoided.

Phong shading [ edit ] Phong shading is similar to Gouraud shading, except that instead of interpolating the light intensities the normals are interpolated between the vertices and the lighting is evaluated per-pixel. Thus, the specular highlights are computed much more precisely than in the Gouraud shading model.

Compute a normal N for each vertex of the polygon.

Using bilinear interpolation compute a normal, N i for each pixel. (Normal has to be renormalized each time.) Apply an illumination model to each pixel to calculate the light intensity from N i .

Deferred shading [ edit ] Deferred shading is a shading technique by which computation of shading is deferred to later stage by rendering in two passes, potentially increasing performance by not discarding expensively shaded pixels. The first pass only captures surface parameters (such as depth, normals and material parameters), the second one performs the actual shading and computes the final colors.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] : 884 Other approaches [ edit ] Both Gouraud shading and Phong shading can be implemented using bilinear interpolation . Bishop and Weimer [ 9 ] proposed to use a Taylor series expansion of the resulting expression from applying an illumination model and bilinear interpolation of the normals. Hence, second-degree polynomial interpolation was used. This type of biquadratic interpolation was further elaborated by Barrera et al., [ 10 ] where one second-order polynomial was used to interpolate the diffuse light of the Phong reflection model and another second-order polynomial was used for the specular light.

Spherical linear interpolation ( Slerp ) was used by Kuij and Blake [ 11 ] for computing both the normal over the polygon, as well as the vector in the direction to the light source. A similar approach was proposed by Hast, [ 12 ] which uses quaternion interpolation of the normals with the advantage that the normal will always have unit length and the computationally heavy normalization is avoided.

Flat vs. smooth shading [ edit ] Flat Smooth Uses the same color for every pixel in a face – usually the color of the first vertex Smooth shading uses linear interpolation of either colors or normals between vertices Edges appear more pronounced than they would on a real object because in reality almost all edges are somewhat round The edges disappear with this technique Same color for any point of the face Each point of the face has its own color Individual faces are visualized underlying surface are visualized Not suitable for smooth objects Suitable for any objects Less computationally expensive More computationally expensive Computer vision [ edit ] " Shape from shading " reconstruction In computer vision , some methods for 3D reconstruction are based on shading, or shape-from-shading . Based on an image's shading, a three-dimensional model can be reconstructed from a single photograph.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Computer graphics lighting Lambertian reflectance List of art techniques List of common shading algorithms Shader Zebra analysis to visualize curvature References [ edit ] ^ "Graphics: Shading" .

hexianghu.com . Retrieved 2019-09-10 .

^ "Drawing Techniques" . Drawing With Confidence. Archived from the original on November 24, 2012 . Retrieved 19 September 2012 .

^ "Shading Tutorial, How to Shade in Drawing" . Dueysdrawings.com. 2007-06-21 . Retrieved 2012-02-11 .

^ Gouraud, Henri (1971). "Continuous shading of curved surfaces".

IEEE Transactions on Computers .

C-20 (6): 623– 629.

doi : 10.1109/T-C.1971.223313 .

S2CID 123827991 .

^ B. T. Phong, Illumination for computer generated pictures , Communications of ACM 18 (1975), no. 6, 311–317. ( PDF ) ^ "Forward Rendering vs. Deferred Rendering" . 28 October 2013.

^ "LearnOpenGL - Deferred Shading" .

^ Akenine-Möller, Tomas; Haines, Eric; Hoffman, Naty (2018).

Real-Time Rendering (Fourth ed.). CRC Press.

ISBN 978-1-1386-2700-0 .

^ Gary Bishop and David M. Weimer. 1986. Fast Phong shading.

SIGGRAPH Comput. Graph . 20, 4 (August 1986), 103–106.

^ T. Barrera, A. Hast, E. Bengtsson.

Fast Near Phong-Quality Software Shading .

WSCG'06 , pp. 109–116. 2006 ^ Kuijk, A. A. M. and E. H. Blake, Faster Phong shading via angular interpolation .

Computer Graphics Forum 8(4):315–324. 1989 ( PDF ) ^ A. Hast.

Shading by Quaternion Interpolation .

WSCG'05 . pp. 53–56. 2005.

^ Horn, Berthold K.P. " Shape from shading: A method for obtaining the shape of a smooth opaque object from one view ." (1970). ( PDF ) Further reading [ edit ] Introduction to Shading.

v t e Color topics Color science Color physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colors Chromophore Structural coloration Animal coloration Color of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Color perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Color calibration Color constancy Color task Color code Color temperature Color vision test Evolution of color vision Impossible colors Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Color psychology Color symbolism Color preferences Lüscher color test Kruithof curve Political color National colors Chromophobia Chromotherapy Color reproduction Color photography Color balance Color cast Digital image processing Color management Color printing Multi-primary color display Quattron Color model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Color space Color mapping Color philosophy Color scheme Color tool Monochromatic colors Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colors Analogous colors Achromatic colors (Neutral) Polychromatic colors Light-on-dark Web colors Tinctures in heraldry Color theory Color mixing Primary color Secondary color Chromaticity Color solid Color wheel Color triangle Color analysis (fashion) Color realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Color terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Gray Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Color history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Color in Chinese culture Traditional colors of Japan Human skin color Color dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colorfulness Pastel colors Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Color organizations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Color Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) List of colors by shade List of color palettes List of color spaces List of Crayola crayon colors history Color chart List of RAL colors List of web colors Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index v t e Computer graphics Vector graphics Diffusion curve Pixel 2D graphics Alpha compositing Layers Text-to-image 2.5D Isometric graphics Mode 7 Parallax scrolling Ray casting Skybox 3D graphics 3D projection 3D rendering ( Image-based Spectral Unbiased ) Aliasing Anisotropic filtering Cel shading Fluid animation Lighting Global illumination Hidden-surface determination Polygon mesh ( Triangle mesh ) Shading Deferred Surface triangulation Wire-frame model Concepts Affine transformation Back-face culling Clipping Collision detection Planar projection Reflection Rendering Beam tracing Cone tracing Checkerboard rendering Ray tracing Path tracing Ray casting Scanline rendering Rotation Scaling Shadow mapping Shadow volume Shear matrix Shader Texel Translation Volume rendering Voxel Graphics software 3D computer graphics software animation modeling rendering Raster graphics editors Vector graphics editors Algorithms List of computer graphics algorithms Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐5j7cm
Cached time: 20250817234911
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.527 seconds
Real time usage: 0.705 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1900/1000000
Revision size: 18260/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 86484/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1167/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 55267/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.314/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6602441/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  528.823      1 -total
 30.15%  159.455      1 Template:Reflist
 24.26%  128.313      5 Template:Cite_web
 19.87%  105.080      7 Template:Navbox
 17.77%   93.982      1 Template:Color_topics
 13.87%   73.336      1 Template:Short_description
 13.36%   70.673      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 12.33%   65.214      1 Template:Ambox
  7.75%   40.990      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.29%   27.951      1 Template:About Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:250304:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817234911 and revision id 1296135548. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shading&oldid=1296135548 " Categories : Shading Virtual reality Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2007 All articles needing additional references Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 18 June 2025, at 01:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shading 19 languages Add topic

