Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career and research 3 Legacy 4 References Toggle the table of contents Carolyn Attneave 1 language Hausa Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American psychologist (1920-1992) Carolyn Attneave Born ( 1920-07-02 ) July 2, 1920 El Paso, Texas , United States Died June 22, 1992 (1992-06-22) (aged 71) Nationality Native American (Delaware Indian) Alma mater Stanford University (M.A, Ph.D.) California State University, Chico (B.A.) Occupation Clinical Psychologist Carolyn Lewis Attneave (July 2, 1920 – June 22, 1992) was a Native American psychologist. She worked initially for the Oklahoma State Department of Health providing mental health services to seven Native American tribes before she moved to Philadelphia to focus on network therapy as an alternative to hospitalisation. She was a founding member of the Boston Indian Council and what would become the Society of Indian Psychologists. She taught at Harvard University and the University of Washington . The American Psychological Association's Carolyn Attneave Diversity Award is awarded in her honour.

Early life and education [ edit ] Attneave was born in El Paso, Texas , to Scandinavian and Delaware Native American parents. Attneave spent most of her early years in South Texas, but frequently spent summers with her Delaware relatives in Oklahoma. Her culturally aware upbringing would go on to influence her decision to research diversity. Attneave earned a bachelor's in English and Theatre at Chico State College in California in 1940. She would stay at Chico state College to earn another bachelor's in secondary education. After spending six years as a school teacher, she earned both her master's and doctorate in clinical psychology from Stanford University in 1947 and 1952, respectively.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Career and research [ edit ] Attneave was the first Native American woman who earned her Ph.D. in psychology and is arguably the most "well-known psychologist of American-Indian background." [ 4 ] In 1962, Attneave relocated to Oklahoma to work for the Oklahoma State Department of Health, where she worked to provide mental health services to seven Native American tribes in the area. This work would go on to influence her later efforts to provide Native American-specific mental health treatment.

In 1968, she moved to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania , to work at the Child Guidance Clinic. It was here that she began to focus on network therapy, an alternative to the hospitalization in which the clients focus on their personal networks that may include their families and neighborhood communities. In an attempt to gain a better cultural understanding of the cultural contexts of her clients, she relocated to a primarily black area of Philadelphia, where she was able to understand different therapy networks.

In 1973, her book Family Networks , written with Ross Speck , was published. Later, she moved to Boston, Massachusetts , where she was a founding member of the Boston Indian Council which held the title as the largest Indian council in the country. In 1970, Attneave founded, wrote, and edited the Network of Indian Psychologist that facilitated cultural resources for Indian communities. The Network of Indian Psychologist newsletter eventually grew into what is now known as the Society of Indian Psychologists.

Beginning in 1973, she began her teaching career at Harvard University 's School of Public Health and later joined the faculty at the University of Washington , where she directed the University's American Indian Studies Program.

[ 5 ] Attneave retired in 1980 where she continued to write, lecture, and travel until her death in 1992.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Legacy [ edit ] The Carolyn Attneave Diversity Award, given out annually by the American Psychological Association , is named after her and recognizes "the promotion of diversity in family psychology." [ 6 ] In 2019, Stanford University ’s Serra House where the Clayman Institute for Gender Research is located was renamed the Carolyn Lewis Attneave House.

[ 7 ] It was formerly named after Junípero Serra .

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b La Fromboise, Teresa D.; Trimble, Joseph E.

"Featured Psychologist: Carolyn Lewis Attneave, PhD" .

American Psychologist Association . Retrieved 8 November 2014 .

^ a b George, Meghan.

"Carolyn Attneave" .

Psychology's Feminist Voices . Feminist Voices . Retrieved 8 November 2014 .

^ a b Wayne, Tiffany K. (2011).

American women of science since 1900 . Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 9781598841589 .

^ Trimble, J. E., & Clearing-Sky, M. (2009). An historical profile of American Indians and Alaska Natives in Psychology.

Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology , 15 , 338-351. doi: 10.1037/a0015112 ^ La Fromboise, Teresa (1996).

"Carolyn Lewis Attneave" (PDF) .

American Psychologist . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 8 November 2014 .

^ "Carolyn Attneave Diversity Award" . APA . Retrieved 8 November 2014 .

^ a b Jason Green (2019).

"Stanford renames buildings for Sally Ride, Carolyn Attneave" .

Mercurynews.com . Retrieved 2019-03-02 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States Netherlands Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Carolyn_Attneave&oldid=1285445204 " Categories : American women psychologists 20th-century American psychologists People from El Paso, Texas California State University, Chico alumni Stanford University School of Humanities and Sciences alumni 1920 births 1992 deaths 20th-century American women educators 20th-century American educators Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 13 April 2025, at 18:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Carolyn Attneave 1 language Add topic

