Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mission 2 Relationship to other Organizations 3 Activities Toggle Activities subsection 3.1 Amaldi Conferences on Gravitational Waves 3.2 GWIC Thesis Prize 3.3 Roadmap 3.4 Statements 4 Member Projects 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Gravitational Wave International Committee 1 language Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Gravitational Wave International Committee Abbreviation GWIC Formation 1997 Region served Worldwide Official language English Website GWIC Official website The Gravitational Wave International Committee (or GWIC) is a panel of gravitational wave detection Laboratory or Observatory directors that promotes cooperation and collaboration between the gravitational wave detector projects and provides direction and advice on the future development of the field. Barry Barish founded the GWIC in 1997 and served as the chair from 1997-2003.

[ 1 ] Mission [ edit ] The mission of GWIC is to facilitate international collaboration and cooperation in the construction, operation and use of the major gravitational wave detection facilities worldwide: Promote international cooperation in all phases of construction and scientific exploitation of gravitational-wave detectors; Coordinate and support long-range planning for new instrument proposals, or proposals for instrument upgrades; Promote the development of gravitational-wave detection as an astronomical tool, exploiting especially the potential for multi-messenger astrophysics; Organize regular, world-inclusive meetings and workshops for the study of problems related to the development and exploitation of new or enhanced gravitational-wave detectors, and foster research and development of new technology; Represent the gravitational-wave detection community internationally, acting as its advocate; Provide a forum for project leaders to regularly meet, discuss, and jointly plan the operations and direction of their detectors and experimental gravitational-wave physics generally.

Relationship to other Organizations [ edit ] GWIC is affiliated with the International Union of Pure and Applied Physics (IUPAP) as its Working Group 11 (WG11).  In 1999, GWIC was adopted by an earlier IUPAP Working Group, the Particle and Nuclear Astrophysics and Gravitation International Committee (PaNAGIC). PaNAGIC was created to support international exchange of ideas and to support the convergence of the international scientific community with respect to large-scale activities on particle and nuclear astrophysics, gravitation and cosmology. It adopted GWIC as a sub-panel specializing in gravitational waves.  PaNAGIC was dissolved by IUPAP in 2011, but the important role of GWIC was recognized and it was promoted to full Working Group status.

GWIC also works with the International Society on General Relativity and Gravitation (ISGRG) in some areas.  ISGRG is an Affiliated Commission of IUPAP (designated AC2).  The main scientific meetings of GWIC (the Amaldi Meeting on Gravitational Waves) and ISGRG (the GRxx series of conferences) were held together in Sydney in 2007 [ 2 ] and will be held together again in Warsaw in 2013. The ISGRG also administers the GWIC Thesis Prize funds.  The membership of GWIC includes a representative from ISGRG to ensure communication between the two organizations.

Activities [ edit ] Amaldi Conferences on Gravitational Waves [ edit ] The Edoardo Amaldi Conference series on Gravitational Waves is 
coordinated by GWIC as the cornerstone conference for the 
Gravitational Wave Detection community worldwide.   These conferences 
are held every two years, and move around the world to locations 
where gravitational wave research is active.

GWIC Thesis Prize [ edit ] GWIC awards a prize for an outstanding PhD thesis on any aspect of gravitational waves science. First awarded as a biennial award open to LIGO Scientific Collaboration members, it is now an annual award open to the broader gravitational wave science field. A summary article of the research of past winners is found on the 2Physics blog [1] .

Roadmap [ edit ] In June 2010, GWIC released a document detailing a strategic roadmap for the gravitational wave astronomy field for the next 30 years [2] . This roadmap sets out recommended priorities for developing current projects and initiating new detectors based on scientific opportunities. The goal of the roadmap is to serve the international gravitational wave community and its stake-holders as a tool for the development of capabilities and facilities needed to address the exciting scientific opportunities on the intermediate and long-term horizons.

[ 3 ] Statements [ edit ] In order to aid funding agencies to see the significance of proposals (either continuing existing projects or initiating new projects),  GWIC may issue statements to indicate international support and consensus among the gravitational wave detection field. Statements or letters are issued if GWIC reaches a  strong consensus, and  " such statements carry the full backing of the leaders of the projects represented on GWIC [3] .

" In 2010, GWIC released statements supporting the expansion of the interferometric detector network through the IndIGO , [ 4 ] LIGO -Australia, and LCGT projects.

[ 5 ] Member Projects [ edit ] GWIC members are representatives from all established gravitational wave detector projects. Including ground- and space-based interferometric detectors, resonant mass detectors, spacecraft Doppler tracking and pulsar timing.  As of October 2012, the committee consists of 23 members from 15 projects or communities.

Projects Represented ACIGA AURIGA Archived 2010-10-06 at the Wayback Machine Einstein Telescope EXPLORER/NAUTILUS Archived 2011-07-16 at the Wayback Machine European Pulsar Timing Array GEO 600 IndIGO KAGRA LIGO , LSC LISA Community NANOGrav PPTA Spherical Detectors VIRGO Theory Community/ ISGRG References [ edit ] ^ "GWIC Past Members" . Archived from the original on 2016-03-12 . Retrieved 2016-03-11 .

^ http://www.amaldi7.com [ usurped ] ^ Quote from THE GRAVITATIONAL WAVES INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE ROADMAP, The future of gravitational wave astronomy.

Retrieved September 19, 2010 from http://gwic.ligo.org/roadmap/Roadmap_100814.pdf ^ India set for building prototype gravitational wave detector , by R. Ramachandran, The Hindu, September 19, 2010 http://www.hinduonnet.com/2010/09/19/stories/2010091962371500.htm [ permanent dead link ] ^ List of GWIC formal statements http://gwic.ligo.org/statements/ External links [ edit ] GWIC homepage Particle and Nuclear Astrophysics and Gravitation International Committee (PaNAGIC) Amaldi Meeting on Gravitational Waves International Society on General Relativity and Gravitation (ISGRG) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gravitational_Wave_International_Committee&oldid=1288749369 " Categories : International scientific organizations Physics organizations Scientific organizations established in 1997 Gravitational wave observatories Organizations associated with IUPAP Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 16:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gravitational Wave International Committee 1 language Add topic

