Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation 2 Controversy 3 Uses 4 Λ and Σ baryon experiment 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Diquark 8 languages Afrikaans Català Español Italiano Македонски 日本語 Português Tagalog Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Proposed baryon model Not to be confused with meson .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( January 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In particle physics , a diquark , or diquark correlation/clustering , is a hypothetical state of two quarks grouped inside a baryon (that consists of three quarks).

[ 1 ] Corresponding models of baryons are referred to as quark–diquark models . The diquark is often treated as a single subatomic particle with which the third quark interacts via the strong interaction . The existence of diquarks inside the nucleons is a disputed issue, but it helps to explain some nucleon properties and to reproduce experimental data sensitive to the nucleon structure. Diquark–antidiquark pairs have also been advanced for anomalous particles such as the X(3872) .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Formation [ edit ] The forces between the two quarks in a diquark is attractive when both the colors and spins are antisymmetric.

[ clarification needed ] When both quarks are correlated in this way, they tend to form a very low energy configuration. This low energy configuration has become known as a diquark.

[ 4 ] Controversy [ edit ] Many scientists theorize that a diquark should not be considered a particle. Even though they may contain two quarks they are not color neutral, and therefore cannot exist as isolated bound states. So instead they tend to float freely inside hadrons as composite entities; while free-floating they have a size of about 1 fm . This also happens to be the same size as the hadron itself.

Uses [ edit ] Diquarks are the conceptual building blocks, and as such give scientists an ordering principle for the most important states in the hadronic spectrum. There are many different pieces of evidence that prove diquarks are fundamental in the structure of hadrons. One of the most compelling pieces of evidence comes from a recent study of baryons. In this study the baryon had one heavy and two light quarks. Since the heavy quark is inert, [ clarification needed ] the scientists were able to discern the properties of the different quark configurations in the hadronic spectrum.

[ clarification needed ] Λ and Σ baryon experiment [ edit ] An experiment was conducted using diquarks in an attempt to study the Λ and Σ baryons that are produced in the creation of hadrons created by fast-moving quarks. In the experiment the quarks ionized the vacuum area. This produced the quark–antiquark pairs, which then converted themselves into mesons . When generating a baryon by assembling quarks, it is helpful if the quarks first form a stable two-quark state. The Λ and the Σ are created as a result of up , down and strange quarks . Scientists [ who?

] found that the Λ contains the [ud] diquark, however the Σ does not. From this experiment scientists inferred that Λ baryons are more common [ clarification needed ] than Σ baryons, and indeed they are more common by a factor of 10.

References [ edit ] ^ Lichtenberg, D. B.; Namgung, W.; Predazzi, E.; Wills, J. G. (1982-06-14).

"Baryon Masses in a Relativistic Quark-Diquark Model" .

Physical Review Letters .

48 (24): 1653– 1656.

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.48.1653 .

ISSN 0031-9007 .

^ Ali, Ahmed; Maiani, Luciano; Polosa, Antonio D. (2019).

Multiquark Hadrons .

Cambridge University Press . p. 152.

ISBN 978-1-107-17158-9 . Retrieved 23 June 2020 .

^ Peloso, Marco (2008).

Continuous Advances In Qcd 2008 - Proceedings Of The Conference . World Scientific. p. 63.

ISBN 978-981-4468-76-3 . Retrieved 23 June 2020 .

^ Montagna, G.; Nicrosini, O.; Vercesi, V. (2007).

IFAE 2006: Incontri di Fisica delle Alte Energie - Italian Meeting on High Energy Physics - Pavia, Italy, 19-21 April 2006 . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 52.

ISBN 978-88-470-0530-3 . Retrieved 23 June 2020 .

Further reading [ edit ] R. Rapp; T. Schëfer; E. Shuryak; M. Velkovsky (1998). "Diquark bose condensates in high density matter and instantons".

Physical Review Letters .

81 (1): 53– 56.

arXiv : hep-ph/9711396 .

Bibcode : 1998PhRvL..81...53R .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.81.53 .

S2CID 89610959 .

v t e Particles in physics Elementary Fermions Quarks Up (quark antiquark) Down (quark antiquark) Charm (quark antiquark) Strange (quark antiquark) Top (quark antiquark) Bottom (quark antiquark) Leptons Electron Positron Muon Antimuon Tau Antitau Neutrino Electron neutrino Electron antineutrino Muon neutrino Muon antineutrino Tau neutrino Tau antineutrino Bosons Gauge Photon Gluon W and Z bosons Scalar Higgs boson Ghost fields Faddeev–Popov ghosts Hypothetical Superpartners Gauginos Gluino Gravitino Photino Others Axino Chargino Higgsino Neutralino Sfermion ( Stop squark ) Others Axion Curvaton Dilaton Dual graviton Graviphoton Graviton Inflaton Leptoquark Magnetic monopole Majoron Majorana fermion Dark photon Preon Sterile neutrino Tachyon W′ and Z′ bosons X and Y bosons Composite Hadrons Baryons Nucleon Proton Antiproton Neutron Antineutron Delta baryon Lambda baryon Sigma baryon Xi baryon Omega baryon Mesons Pion Rho meson Eta and eta prime mesons Bottom eta meson Phi meson J/psi meson Omega meson Upsilon meson Kaon B meson D meson Quarkonium Exotic hadrons Tetraquark ( Double-charm tetraquark ) Pentaquark Others Atomic nuclei Atoms Exotic atoms Positronium Muonium Tauonium Onia Pionium Protonium Antihydrogen Superatoms Molecules Hypothetical Baryons Hexaquark Heptaquark Skyrmion Mesons Glueball Theta meson T meson Others Mesonic molecule Pomeron Diquark R-hadron Quasiparticles Anyon Davydov soliton Dropleton Exciton Fracton Hole Magnon Phonon Plasmaron Plasmon Polariton Polaron Roton Trion Lists Baryons Mesons Particles Quasiparticles Timeline of particle discoveries Related History of subatomic physics timeline Standard Model mathematical formulation Subatomic particles Particles Antiparticles Nuclear physics Eightfold way Quark model Exotic matter Massless particle Relativistic particle Virtual particle Wave–particle duality Particle chauvinism Physics portal Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Diquark&oldid=1292245782 " Categories : Quarks Hypothetical elementary particles Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2013 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2013 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2013 This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 23:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Diquark 8 languages Add topic

