Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical context 2 Construction Toggle Construction subsection 2.1 Naming 3 Design Toggle Design subsection 3.1 Construction method 3.2 Sails and rigging 3.3 Performance 3.4 Armament 3.4.1 Bronze and iron guns 3.4.2 Hand-held weapons 3.5 Crew 4 Military career Toggle Military career subsection 4.1 First French war 4.2 Second French war 4.3 Maintenance and "in ordinary" 4.4 Third French war 4.5 Battle of the Solent 5 Causes of sinking Toggle Causes of sinking subsection 5.1 Contemporary accounts 5.2 Modern theories 5.3 Experiments 6 History as a shipwreck Toggle History as a shipwreck subsection 6.1 Deterioration 6.2 Rediscovery in 19th century 6.3 Modern rediscovery 6.3.1 Survey and excavation 6.3.2 Raising the ship 7 Archaeology Toggle Archaeology subsection 7.1 Finds 7.1.1 Musical instruments 7.1.2 Navigation tools 7.1.3 Barber-surgeon's cabin 7.1.4 Hatch 7.2 Conservation 8 Display 9 See also 10 Explanatory notes 11 Notes 12 References 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Mary Rose 32 languages العربية Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית ქართული Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 50°47′59″N 1°06′24″W ﻿ / ﻿ 50.79972°N 1.10667°W ﻿ / 50.79972; -1.10667 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English Tudor warship (1511–1545) For other uses, see Mary Rose (disambiguation) .

The Mary Rose as depicted in the Anthony Roll . It has the distinct carrack profile with high "castles" fore and aft. Although the number of guns and gun ports is not exact, it is an overall accurate illustration of the ship as she appeared in the 1540s.

History England Name Mary Rose Namesake Mary Tudor, Queen of France and/or the Virgin Mary Laid down 29 January 1510 ; 515 years ago ( 1510-01-29 ) Launched July 1511 Completed 1512 Homeport Portsmouth , England Fate Sank in battle in 1545, raised in 1982 Status Museum exhibit 50°47′59″N 1°06′24″W ﻿ / ﻿ 50.79972°N 1.10667°W ﻿ / 50.79972; -1.10667 General characteristics Tons burthen 500 (700–800 after 1536) Propulsion Sail Complement 200 sailors, 185 soldiers, and 30 gunners Armament 78–91 guns (including anti-personnel weapons) The Mary Rose was a carrack in the English Tudor navy of King Henry VIII . She was launched in 1511 and served for 34 years in several wars against France, Scotland, and Brittany. After being substantially rebuilt in 1536, she saw her last action on 19 July 1545. She led the attack on the galleys of a French invasion fleet, but sank off Spithead in the Solent , the strait north of the Isle of Wight .

The wreck of the Mary Rose was located in 1971 and was raised on 11 October 1982 by the Mary Rose Trust in one of the most complex and expensive maritime salvage projects in history. The surviving section of the ship and thousands of recovered artefacts are of great value as a Tudor period time capsule. The excavation and raising of the Mary Rose was a milestone in the field of maritime archaeology, comparable in complexity and cost to the raising of the 17th-century Swedish warship Vasa in 1961. The Mary Rose site is designated under the Protection of Wrecks Act 1973 by statutory instrument 1974/55. The wreck is a Protected Wreck managed by Historic England.

The finds include weapons, sailing equipment, naval supplies, and a wide array of objects used by the crew. Many of the artefacts are unique to the Mary Rose and have provided insights into topics ranging from naval warfare to the history of musical instruments. The remains of the hull have been on display at the Portsmouth Historic Dockyard since the mid-1980s while undergoing restoration. An extensive collection of well-preserved artefacts is on display at the Mary Rose Museum , built to display the remains of the ship and her artefacts.

Mary Rose was one of the largest ships in the English navy through more than three decades of intermittent war, and she was one of the earliest examples of a purpose-built sailing warship. She was armed with new types of heavy guns that could fire through the recently invented gun-ports. She was substantially rebuilt in 1536 and was also one of the earliest ships that could fire a broadside , although the line of battle tactics had not yet been developed. Several theories have sought to explain the demise of the Mary Rose , based on historical records, knowledge of 16th-century shipbuilding, and modern experiments. The precise cause of her sinking is subject to conflicting testimonies and a lack of conclusive evidence.

Historical context [ edit ] Portrait of Henry VIII in 1509, the year of his coronation, by Meynnart Wewyck.

In the late 15th century, England was still reeling from its dynastic wars first with France and then among its ruling families back on home soil. The great victories against France in the Hundred Years' War were in the past; only the small exclave of Calais in northern France remained of the vast continental holdings of the English kings. The War of the Roses – the civil war between the houses of York and Lancaster – had ended with Henry VII 's establishment of the House of Tudor , the new ruling dynasty of England. The ambitious naval policies of Henry V were not continued by his successors, and from 1422 to 1509 only six ships were built for the crown. The marriage alliance between Anne of Brittany and Charles VIII of France in 1491, and his successor Louis XII in 1499, left England with a weakened strategic position on its southern flank. Despite this, Henry VII managed to maintain a comparatively long period of peace and a small but powerful core of a navy.

[ 1 ] At the onset of the early modern period , the great European powers were France, the Holy Roman Empire and Spain . All three became involved in the War of the League of Cambrai in 1508. The conflict was initially aimed at the Republic of Venice but eventually turned against France. England's close economic relationship with the Low Countries , ruled by the Spanish Habsburgs and any ambition of the young Henry VIII to recover territory in France made Spain the obvious ally. In 1509, six weeks into his reign, Henry married the Spanish princess Catherine of Aragon and joined the League, intent on certifying his historical claim as king of both England and France. By 1511 Henry was part of an anti-French alliance that included Ferdinand II of Aragon , Pope Julius II and Holy Roman emperor Maximilian .

[ 2 ] The small navy that Henry VIII inherited from his father had only two sizeable ships, the carracks Regent and Sovereign . Just months after his accession, two large ships were ordered: the Mary Rose and the Peter Pomegranate (later known as Peter after being rebuilt in 1536) of about 500 and 450 tons respectively. Which king ordered the building of the Mary Rose is unclear; although construction began during Henry VIII's reign, the plans for naval expansion could have been in the making earlier. Henry VIII oversaw the project and he ordered additional large ships to be built, most notably the Henry Grace à Dieu ("Henry by the Grace of God"), or Great Harry at more than 1000 tons burthen .

[ 3 ] By the 1520s the English state had established a de facto permanent "Navy Royal", the organizational ancestor of the modern Royal Navy .

[ 4 ] Construction [ edit ] The Embarkation of Henry VIII at Dover , a painting that commemorated King Henry's voyage to the Field of the Cloth of Gold in 1520, painted in 1540. The vessels in the painting are shown decorated with wooden panels similar to those that would have been used on the Mary Rose on special occasions.

Construction of Mary Rose began on 29 January 1510 in Portsmouth and she was launched in July 1511. She was then towed to London and fitted with rigging and decking , and supplied with armaments. Other than the structural details needed to sail, stock and arm the Mary Rose , she was also equipped with flags, banners and streamers (extremely elongated flags that were flown from the top of the masts) that were either painted or gilded.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Constructing a warship of the size of the Mary Rose was a major undertaking, requiring vast quantities of high-quality material. For a state-of-the-art warship, these materials were primarily oak. The total amount of timber needed for the construction can only be roughly calculated since only about one third of the ship still exists.

[ 7 ] One estimate for the number of trees is around 600 mostly large oaks , representing about 16 hectares (40 acres) of woodland.

[ 8 ] The huge trees that had been common in Europe and the British Isles in previous centuries were by the 16th century quite rare, which meant that timbers were brought in from all over southern England. The largest timbers used in the construction were of roughly the same size as those used in the roofs of the largest cathedrals in the High Middle Ages . An unworked hull plank would have weighed over 300 kg (660 lb), and one of the main deck beams would have weighed close to three-quarters of a tonne.

[ 8 ] Naming [ edit ] The common explanation for the ship's name was that it was inspired by Henry VIII's favourite sister, Mary Tudor, Queen of France , and the rose as the emblem of the Tudors .

[ 9 ] According to the historians David Childs, David Loades and Peter Marsden, no direct evidence of naming the ship after the King's sister exists. It was far more common at the time to give ships pious Christian names, a long-standing tradition in Western Europe, or to associate them with their royal patrons. Names like Grace Dieu ( Hallelujah ) and Holighost ( Holy Spirit ) had been common since the 15th century and other Tudor navy ships had names like the Regent and Three Ostrich Feathers (referring to the crest of the Prince of Wales ).

[ 10 ] The Virgin Mary is a more likely candidate for a namesake, and she was also associated with the Rosa Mystica (mystic rose). The name of the sister ship of the Mary Rose , the Peter Pomegranate , is believed to have been named in honour of Saint Peter , and the badge of the Queen Catharine of Aragon , a pomegranate . According to Childs, Loades and Marsden, the two ships, which were built around the same time, were named in honour of the king and queen, respectively.

[ 10 ] Design [ edit ] The remains of the Mary Rose ' s hull. All deck levels can be made out clearly, including the minor remnants of the sterncastle deck.

The Mary Rose was substantially rebuilt in 1536. The 1536 rebuilding turned a ship of 500 tons into one of 700 tons, and added an entire extra tier of broadside guns to the old carrack -style structure. By consequence, modern research is based mostly on interpretations of the concrete physical evidence of this version of the Mary Rose . The construction of the original design from 1509 is less known.

The Mary Rose was built according to the carrack -style with high "castles" fore and aft with a low waist of open decking in the middle. The hull has tumblehome : above the waterline, the hull gradually narrows. This makes boarding more difficult and reduces the quantity (and so weight) of heavy structural timbers that carry the higher guns.

[ 11 ] Modern understanding is that tumblehome does not improve stability by positioning the guns closer to the centreline, though that may have been the belief and intention of her builders.

[ 12 ] Since only part of the hull has survived, it is not possible to determine many of the basic dimensions with any great accuracy. The moulded breadth , the widest point of the ship roughly above the waterline, was about 12 metres (39 feet) and the keel about 32 metres (105 feet), although the ship's overall length is uncertain.

[ 13 ] The hull had four levels separated by three decks . Because the terminology for these was not yet standardised in the 16th century, the terms used here are those that were applied by the Mary Rose Trust . The hold lay furthest down in the ship, right above the bottom planking and below the waterline. This is where the galley was situated and the food was cooked. Directly aft of the galley was the mast step, a rebate in the centre-most timber of the keelson , right above the keel , which supported the main mast, and next to it the main bilge pump . To increase the stability of the ship, the hold was where the ballast was placed and much of the supplies were kept. Right above the hold was the orlop , the lowest deck. Like the hold, it was partitioned and was also used as a storage area for everything from food to spare sails.

[ 14 ] Above the orlop lay the main deck , which housed the heaviest guns. The side of the hull on the main deck level had seven gunports on each side fitted with heavy lids that would have been watertight when closed. This was also the highest deck that was caulked and waterproof. Along the sides of the main deck there were cabins under the forecastle and aftercastle which have been identified as belonging to the carpenter, barber-surgeon , pilot and possibly also the master gunner and some of the officers.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] The top deck in the hull structure was the upper deck (or weather deck ) which was exposed to the elements in the waist. It was a dedicated fighting deck without any known partitions and a mix of heavy and light guns. Over the open waist, the upper deck was entirely covered with a boarding net , a coarse netting that served as a defence measure against boarding.

[ 15 ] Though very little of the upper deck has survived, it has been suggested that it housed the main living quarters of the crew underneath the aftercastle. A drain located in this area has been identified as a possible "piss-dale", a general urinal to complement the regular toilets which would probably have been located in the bow.

[ 16 ] The castles of the Mary Rose had additional decks, but since almost nothing of them survives, their design has had to be reconstructed from historical records. Contemporary ships of equal size were consistently listed as having three decks in both castles. Although speculative, this layout is supported by the illustration in the Anthony Roll and the gun inventories.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] During the early stages of excavation of the wreck, it was erroneously believed that the ship had originally been built with clinker (or clench) planking, a technique in which the hull consisted of overlapping planks that bore the structural strength of the ship.

[ 19 ] Later examination indicates that the clinker planking was never present throughout the ship; only the outer structure of the sterncastle is built with overlapping planking, though not with a true clinker technique.

[ 20 ] Construction method [ edit ] The hull of Mary Rose is carvel built. The ship is an early example of this method of construction in England. Her hull shape is now known to have been set out using the three arc method of producing the hull cross section. This geometric process is similar to that known to have been used some two hundred years later, so giving a much earlier date for this technique. This, and studies of other ships specified in the 15th century, is suggestive that the three arc methodology was probably already in existence before the time Mary Rose was built.

[ 21 ] The construction sequence began with laying the keel and setting up the stem and sternpost. The midships frame and a few other frames (master frames) controlled the shape of the hull, so the floor s in those positions were fastened to the top of the keel. Then planking started with the garboard s being fastened to the keel and those floors that were already installed. A temporary timber batten (called a ribband) was fastened across the floors that had been fitted and the remaining floors were shaped to fit the curve delineated by the ribbands and the garboards. The keelson was fastened over the top of the floors and planking continued up from the garboards to near the end of the floors. The first futtock s were then installed, again using ribbands to achieve a fair shape relative to the master frames. The hull construction continued with phases of planking and the fitting of second and third futtocks until deck level was reached.

[ 22 ] Mary Rose does not have the characteristic dove-tailed mortises seen joining the floors and first futtocks in Basque -built ships such as the Red Bay wreck 24M . There is some fastening of floors to timbers in Mary Rose that is less systematic and robust, but there are no treenails connecting frame elements to each other as seen on later vessels. This demonstrates that the hull was not made by first building the hull framework and then adding the planking once that was complete. Instead planking and framing were carried out in alternating steps, with later futtocks being added as planking carried on up to the weather deck level. This is in sharp contrast to the usual way of building a carvel hull today.

[ 23 ] The construction sequence used for Mary Rose was typical for a ship built during the lengthy transition period during which carvel became established in Northern Europe and the precise detail is one of the milestones in that story.

[ 24 ] Sails and rigging [ edit ] A small selection of the many rigging blocks raised from the Mary Rose Although only the lower fittings of the rigging survive, a 1514 inventory and the only known contemporary depiction of the ship from the Anthony Roll have been used to determine how the Mary Rose was rigged. Nine, or possibly ten, sails were set from four masts and a bowsprit: the foremast had two square sails and the mainmast three; the mizzen mast had a lateen sail and a small square sail; the bonaventure mizzen had at least one lateen sail and possibly also a square sail; and the bowsprit set a small square spritsail .

[ 25 ] According to the Anthony Roll illustration (see top of this section), the yards (the spars from which the sails were set) on the foremast and mainmast were also equipped with sheerhooks – twin curved blades sharpened on the inside – that were intended to cut an enemy ship's rigging during boarding actions.

[ 26 ] The operation of Mary Rose 's rig and some of its fitments were substantially different from several phases of later versions of square rig. All the yards were hoisted and lowered as part of the normal processes of setting, hand ing or reducing sail. The furling of the square sails pulled much of the bulk of the sail into the centre of the yard, so the work aloft did not involve a lot of work on the yards (the foot-rope did not come into use until the early 18th century), with much being done from the tops. Ships of this era generally did not have reefing points (though they existed on boats' sails). Instead a square sail might be equipped with a bonnet – an extra section of sail that is laced onto the foot of a square sail. Instead of reefing, the bonnet was removed. Lacing that would suit a bonnet was found on Mary Rose .

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Performance [ edit ] When the wreck of Mary Rose was first recovered, there was surprise that this was not the beamy vessel that was expected. The relatively narrow length to breadth ratio was accompanied by fine lines , particularly in the run (the underwater hull shape abaft the midship section). Even in the full sections in the forward part of the hull there are some hollow lines. Generally, hull shape is a major contributor, in conjunction with the efficiency of the sails, to good sailing performance. This hull shape can certainly explain the reported good sailing qualities that Mary Rose displayed prior to her rebuild.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] The sailing capabilities of the Mary Rose were commented on by her contemporaries and were once even put to the test. In March 1513 a contest was arranged off The Downs , east of Kent , in which she raced against nine other ships. She won the contest, and Admiral Edward Howard described her enthusiastically as "the noblest ship of sayle [of any] gret ship, at this howr, that I trow [believe] be in Cristendom".

[ 31 ] Several years later, while sailing between Dover and The Downs, Vice-Admiral William Fitzwilliam noted that both the Henry Grace à Dieu and the Mary Rose performed very well, riding steadily in rough seas and that it would have been a "hard chose" between the two.

[ 32 ] The reports of good sailing performance early in her career did not continue after successive repairs and the major rebuild altered her characteristics.

[ 33 ] Armament [ edit ] An illustration from a French edition of the Froissart Chronicle depicting the Battle of Sluys in 1340. The picture clearly shows how medieval naval tactics focused on close combat fighting and boarding.

The Mary Rose represented a transitional ship design in naval warfare. Since ancient times, war at sea had been fought much as on land: with melee weapons and bows and arrows, only on floating wooden platforms rather than battlefields. Though the introduction of guns was a significant change, it only slowly changed the dynamics of ship-to-ship combat.

[ 34 ] As guns became heavier and able to take more powerful gunpowder charges, they needed to be placed lower in the ship, closer to the water line. Gunports cut in the hull of ships had been introduced as early as 1501, only about a decade before the Mary Rose was built.

[ 35 ] This made broadsides [ a ] – coordinated volleys from all the guns on one side of a ship – possible, at least in theory, but in practice this was a relatively minor part of the gunnery tactics of the time. Throughout the 16th century and well into the 17th century the focus was on countering the oar-powered galleys that were armed with heavy guns in the bow, facing forwards, which were aimed by turning the entire ship against its target. Sailing warships did this first with their chase guns . Combined with inefficient gunpowder and the difficulties inherent in firing accurately from moving platforms, this meant that boarding remained the primary tactic for decisive victory throughout the 16th century.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Bronze and iron guns [ edit ] Two culverins and two demi-cannons from the Mary Rose on display at the Mary Rose Museum in Portsmouth Mary Rose served during a period of both the development of ship-borne guns and the design features of ships that deployed these weapons. By the time of her sinking, the number of heavy guns had roughly doubled. The heavy armament was a mix of older-type wrought iron and more modern cast bronze guns, which differed considerably in size, range and design. The large iron guns were made up of staves or bars welded into cylinders and then reinforced by shrinking iron hoops and breech loaded and equipped with simpler gun-carriages made from hollowed-out elm logs with only one pair of wheels, or without wheels entirely.

[ 38 ] The bronze guns were cast in one piece and rested on four-wheel carriages which were essentially the same as those used until the 19th century. The breech-loaders were cheaper to produce and both easier and faster to reload, but could take less powerful charges than cast bronze guns. Generally, the bronze guns used cast iron shot and were more suited to penetrate hull sides while the iron guns used stone shot that would shatter on impact and leave large, jagged holes, but both could also fire a variety of ammunition intended to destroy rigging and light structure or injure enemy personnel.

[ 39 ] The majority of the guns were small iron guns with short range that could be aimed and fired by a single person. The two most common are the bases , breech-loading swivel guns , most likely placed in the castles, and hailshot pieces , small muzzle-loaders with rectangular bores and fin-like protrusions that were used to support the guns against the railing and allow the ship structure to take the force of the recoil. Though the design is unknown, there were two top pieces in a 1546 inventory (finished after the sinking) which were probably similar to a base, but placed in one or more of the fighting tops.

[ 40 ] Distribution and range of guns at sinking [ 41 ] Gun type Main deck Upper deck Castle decks Fighting tops Range in metres (feet) Port pieces 12 0 0 0 130+ (425+) Culverins and demi-culverins 2 4 2 0 299–413 (980–1355) Cannons and demi-cannons 4 0 0 0 c. 225 (740) Sakers 0 2 0 0 219–323 (718–1060) Fowlers 0 6 0 0 "short" Falcon ?

?

?

0 144–287 (472–940) Slings 0 6 0 0 "medium" Bases 0 0 30 0 "close" Hailshot pieces 0 0 20 0 "close" Top pieces 0 0 0 2 "close" A cast bronze culverin (front) and a wrought iron port piece (back), modern reproductions of two of the guns that were on board the Mary Rose when she sank, on display at Fort Nelson near Portsmouth The ship went through several changes in her armament throughout her career, most significantly accompanying her "rebuilding" in 1536 (see below), when the number of anti-personnel guns was reduced and a second tier of carriage-mounted long guns fitted. There are three inventories that list her guns, dating to 1514, 1540 and 1546.

[ 42 ] Together with records from the armoury at the Tower of London , these show how the configuration of guns changed as gun-making technology evolved and new classifications were invented. In 1514, the armament consisted mostly of anti-personnel guns like the larger breech-loading iron murderers and the small serpentines , demi-slings and stone guns.

[ 43 ] Only a handful of guns in the first inventory were powerful enough to hole enemy ships, and most would have been supported by the ship's structure rather than resting on carriages. The inventories of both the Mary Rose and the Tower had changed radically by 1540. There were now the new cast bronze cannons , demi-cannons , culverins and sakers and the wrought iron port pieces (a name that indicated they fired through ports), all of which required carriages, had longer range and were capable of doing serious damage to other ships. The analysis of the 1514 inventory combined with hints of structural changes in the ship both indicate that the gunports on the main deck were indeed a later addition.

[ 43 ] Type of guns [ 44 ] Date Total Carriage-mounted Ship-supported Anti-ship Anti-personnel 1514 78 20–21 57–58 5–9 64–73 1540 96 36 60 17–22 74–79 1545 91 39 52 24 67 Various types of ammunition could be used for different purposes: plain spherical shot of stone or iron smashed hulls, spiked bar shot and shot linked with chains would tear sails or damage rigging, and canister shot packed with sharp flints produced a devastating shotgun effect.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Trials made with replicas of culverins and port pieces showed that they could penetrate wood the same thickness of the Mary Rose's hull planking, indicating a stand-off range of at least 90 m (300 ft). The port pieces proved particularly efficient at smashing large holes in wood when firing stone shot and were a devastating anti-personnel weapon when loaded with flakes or pebbles.

[ 47 ] Hand-held weapons [ edit ] Some of the bollock daggers found on board the Mary Rose ; for most of the daggers, only the handles have remained while the blades have either rusted away or have been preserved only as concretions .

To defend against being boarded, Mary Rose carried large stocks of melee weapons, including pikes and bills ; 150 of each kind were stocked on the ship according to the Anthony Roll , a figure confirmed roughly by the excavations. Swords and daggers were personal possessions and not listed in the inventories, but the remains of both have been found in great quantities, including the earliest dated example of a British basket-hilted sword .

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] A total of 250 longbows were carried on board, and 172 of these have so far been found, as well as almost 4,000 arrows, bracers (arm guards) and other archery-related equipment.

[ 50 ] Longbow archery in Tudor England was mandatory for all able adult men, and despite the introduction of field artillery and handguns, they were used alongside new missile weapons in great quantities. On the Mary Rose , the longbows could only have been drawn and shot properly from behind protective panels in the open waist or from the top of the castles as the lower decks lacked sufficient headroom. There were several types of bows of various size and range. Lighter bows would have been used as "sniper" bows, while the heavier design could possibly have been used to shoot fire arrows.

[ 51 ] The inventories of both 1514 and 1546 [ 42 ] also list several hundred heavy darts and lime pots that were designed to be thrown onto the deck of enemy ships from the fighting tops, although no physical evidence of either of these weapon types has been identified. Of the 50 handguns listed in the Anthony Roll, the complete stocks of five matchlock muskets and fragments of another eleven have been found. They had been manufactured mainly in Italy, with some originating from Germany. Found in storage were several gunshields , a rare type of firearm consisting of a wooden shield with a small gun fixed in the middle.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] Crew [ edit ] Throughout her 33-year career, the crew of the Mary Rose changed several times and varied considerably in size. It would have a minimal skeleton crew of 17 men or fewer in peacetime and when she was " laid up in ordinary " (in reserve).

[ 54 ] The average wartime manning would have been about 185 soldiers, 200 sailors, 20–30 gunners and an assortment of other specialists such as surgeons, trumpeters and members of the admiral's staff, for a total of 400–450 men. When taking part in land invasions or raids, such as in the summer of 1512, the number of soldiers could have swelled to just over 400 for a combined total of more than 700. Even with the normal crew size of around 400, the ship was quite crowded, and with additional soldiers would have been extremely cramped.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] Vice-Admiral George Carew , who perished with the Mary Rose ; contemporary miniature by Hans Holbein the Younger Little is known of the identities of the men who served on the Mary Rose , even when it comes to the names of the officers, who would have belonged to the gentry. Two admirals and four captains (including Edward and Thomas Howard, who served both positions) are known through records, as well as a few ship masters, pursers , master gunners and other specialists.

[ 58 ] Forensic science has been used by artists to create reconstructions of faces of eight crew members, and the results were publicised in May 2013. In addition, researchers have extracted DNA from remains in the hopes of identifying origins of crew, and potentially living descendants.

[ 59 ] Of the vast majority of the crewmen, soldiers, sailors and gunners alike, nothing has been recorded. The only source of information for these men has been through osteological analysis of the human bones found at the wrecksite. An approximate composition of some of the crew has been conjectured based on contemporary records. The Mary Rose would have carried a captain, a master responsible for navigation, and deck crew. There would also have been a purser responsible for handling payments, a boatswain , the captain's second in command, at least one carpenter, a pilot in charge of navigation, and a cook, all of whom had one or more assistants (mates). The ship was also staffed by a barber-surgeon who tended to the sick and wounded, along with an apprentice or mate and possibly also a junior surgeon.

[ 55 ] The only positively identified person who went down with the ship was Vice-Admiral George Carew . McKee, Stirland and several other authors have also named Roger Grenville, father of Richard Grenville of the Elizabethan-era Revenge , captain during the final battle, [ 57 ] although the accuracy of the sourcing for this has been disputed by maritime archaeologist Peter Marsden.

[ 56 ] Crew [ 60 ] Date Soldiers Mariners Gunners Others Total Summer 1512 411 206 120 22 759 October 1512 ?

120 20 20 160 1513 ?

200 ?

?

200 1513 ?

102 6 ?

108 1522 126 244 30 2 402 1524 185 200 20 ?

405 1545/46 [ 61 ] 185 200 30 ?

415 The bones of a total of 179 people were found during the excavations of the Mary Rose , including 92 "fairly complete skeletons", more or less complete collections of bones associated with specific individuals.

[ 62 ] Analysis of these has shown that crew members were all male, most of them young adults. Some were no more than 11–13 years old, and the majority (81%) under 30. They were mainly of English origin and, according to archaeologist Julie Gardiner, they most likely came from the West Country ; many following their aristocratic masters into maritime service.

[ 55 ] There were also a few people from continental Europe. An eyewitness testimony right after the sinking refers to a survivor who was a Fleming , and the pilot may very well have been French. Analysis of oxygen isotopes in teeth indicates that some were also of southern European origin.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] At least one crewmember was of North African ancestry.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] In general they were strong, well-fed men, but many of the bones also reveal tell-tale signs of childhood diseases and a life of grinding toil. The bones also showed traces of numerous healed fractures, probably the result of on-board accidents.

[ 67 ] There are no extant written records of the make-up of the broader categories of soldiers and sailors, but since the Mary Rose carried some 300 longbows and several thousand arrows there had to be a considerable proportion of longbow archers. Examination of the skeletal remains has found that there was a disproportionate number of men with a condition known as os acromiale , affecting their shoulder blades . This condition is known among modern elite archery athletes and is caused by placing considerable stress on the arm and shoulder muscles, particularly of the left arm that is used to hold the bow to brace against the pull on the bowstring. Among the men who died on the ship it was likely that some had practised using the longbow since childhood, and served on board as specialist archers.

[ 68 ] A group of six skeletons was found close to one of the 2-tonne bronze culverins on the main deck near the bow. Fusing of parts of the spine and ossification , the growth of new bone, on several vertebrae evidenced all but one of these crewmen to have been strong, well-muscled men who had been engaged in heavy pulling and pushing, the exception possibly being a " powder monkey " not involved in heavy work. These have been tentatively classified as members of a complete gun crew, all having died at their battle station.

[ 69 ] Military career [ edit ] First French war [ edit ] Main article: War of the League of Cambrai A contemporary illustration of Germain de Brie 's poem Chordigerae navis conflagratio depicting the Cordelière and Regent ablaze after the explosion on board the former The Mary Rose first saw battle in 1512, in a joint naval operation with the Spanish against the French. The English were to meet the French and Breton fleets in the English Channel while the Spanish attacked them in the Bay of Biscay and then attacked Gascony . The 35-year-old Sir Edward Howard was appointed Lord High Admiral in April and chose the Mary Rose as his flagship . His first mission was to clear the seas of French naval forces between England to the northern coast of Spain to allow for the landing of supporting troops near the French border at Fuenterrabia . The fleet consisted of 18 ships, among them the large ships the Regent and the Peter Pomegranate , carrying over 5,000 men. Howard's expedition led to the capture of twelve Breton ships and a four-day raiding tour of Brittany where English forces successfully fought against local forces and burned numerous settlements.

[ 60 ] The fleet returned to Southampton in June where it was visited by King Henry. In August the fleet sailed for Brest where it encountered a joint, but ill-coordinated, French-Breton fleet at the battle of St. Mathieu . The English with one of the great ships in the lead (according to Marsden the Mary Rose ) battered the French ships with heavy gunfire and forced them to retreat. The Breton flagship Cordelière put up a fight and was boarded by the 1,000-ton Regent . By accident or through the unwillingness of the Breton crew to surrender, the powder magazine of the Cordelière caught fire and blew up in a violent explosion, setting fire to the Regent and eventually sinking her. About 180 English crew members saved themselves by throwing themselves into the sea; a handful of Bretons survived, only to be captured. The captain of the Regent , 600 soldiers and sailors, [ 70 ] the High Admiral of France and the steward of the town of Morlaix were killed in the incident, making it the focal point of several contemporary chronicles and reports.

[ 71 ] On 11 August , the English burnt 27 French ships, captured another five and landed forces near Brest to raid and take prisoners, but storms forced the fleet back to Dartmouth in Devon and then to Southampton for repairs.

[ 72 ] Carracks , similar to the Mary Rose , attacked by highly manoeuvrable galleys ; engraving by Frans Huys after a design by Pieter Bruegel the Elder , c. 1561 In early 1513, the Mary Rose was once more chosen by Howard as the flagship for an expedition against the French. Before seeing action, she took part in a race against other ships where she was deemed to be one of the most nimble and the fastest of the great ships in the fleet (see details under " Sails and rigging "). On 11 April , Howard's force arrived off Brest only to see a small enemy force join with the larger force in the safety of Brest harbour and its fortifications.

[ 73 ] The French had recently been reinforced by a force of galleys from the Mediterranean, which sank one English ship and seriously damaged another. Howard landed forces near Brest, but made no headway against the town and was by now getting low on supplies. Attempting to force a victory, he took a small force of small oared vessels on a daring frontal attack on the French galleys on 25 April . Howard himself managed to reach the ship of French admiral, Prégent de Bidoux , and led a small party to board her. The French fought back fiercely and cut the cables that attached the two ships, separating Howard from his men. It left him at the mercy of the soldiers aboard the galley, who instantly killed him.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] Demoralised by the loss of its admiral and seriously short of food, the fleet returned to Plymouth .

Thomas Howard , elder brother of Edward, was assigned the new Lord Admiral, and was set to the task of arranging another attack on Brittany. The fleet was not able to mount the planned attack because of adverse winds and great difficulties in supplying the ships adequately and the Mary Rose took up winter quarters in Southampton. In August the Scots joined France in war against England, but were dealt a crushing defeat at the Battle of Flodden on 9 September 1513. A follow-up attack in early 1514 was supported by a naval force that included the Mary Rose , but without any known engagements.

[ 76 ] The French and English mounted raids on each other throughout that summer, but achieved little, and both sides were by then exhausted. By autumn the war was over and a peace treaty was sealed by the marriage of Henry's sister, Mary , to French king Louis XII .

[ 77 ] After the peace Mary Rose was placed in the reserves, "in ordinary". She was laid up for maintenance along with her sister ship the Peter Pomegranate in July 1514. In 1518 she received a routine repair and caulking , waterproofing with tar and oakum (old rope fibres) and was then assigned a small skeleton crew who lived on board the ship until 1522. She served briefly on a mission with other warships to "scour the seas" in preparation for Henry VIII's journey across the Channel to the summit with the French king Francis I at the Field of the Cloth of Gold in June 1520.

[ 54 ] Second French war [ edit ] Main article: Italian War of 1521–1526 In 1522, England was once again at war with France because of a treaty with the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V . The plan was for an attack on two fronts with an English thrust in northern France. The Mary Rose participated in the escort transport of troops in June 1522, and by 1 July the Breton port of Morlaix was captured. The fleet sailed home and the Mary Rose berthed for the winter in Dartmouth.

[ 78 ] The war raged on until 1525 and saw the Scots join the French side. Though Charles Brandon came close to capturing Paris in 1523, there was little gained either against France or Scotland throughout the war. With the defeat of the French army and capture of Francis I by Charles V's forces at the Battle of Pavia on 24 February 1525, the war was effectively over without any major gains or major victories for the English side.

[ 79 ] Maintenance and "in ordinary" [ edit ] The Mary Rose was kept in reserve from 1522 to 1545. She was once more caulked and repaired in 1527 in a newly dug dock at Portsmouth and her longboat was repaired and trimmed. Little documentation about the Mary Rose between 1528 and 1539 exists. A document written by Thomas Cromwell in 1536 specifies that the Mary Rose and six other ships were "made new" during his service under the king, though it is unclear which years he was referring to and what "made new" actually meant. A later document from January 1536 by an anonymous author states that the Mary Rose and other ships were "new made", and dating of timbers from the ship confirms some type of repair being done in 1535 or 1536. This would have coincided with the controversial dissolution of the monasteries that resulted in a major influx of funds into the royal treasury.

[ 80 ] The nature and extent of this repair is unknown. Many experts, including Margaret Rule , the project leader for the raising of the Mary Rose , wrongly presumed that it meant a complete rebuilding from clinker planking to carvel planking, and that it was only after 1536 that the ship took on the form that it had when it sank and that was eventually recovered in the 20th century. Marsden has speculated that it could even mean that the Mary Rose was originally built in a style that was closer to 15th-century ships, with a rounded, rather than square, stern and without the main deck gunports.

[ 81 ] Third French war [ edit ] Main article: Italian War of 1542–1546 Drawing of the French admiral, Claude d'Annebault , commander of the French naval force that launched the attack on the Isle of Wight; François Clouet , January 1535 Henry's complicated marital situation and his dissolution of the monasteries angered the Pope and Catholic rulers throughout Europe, which increased England's diplomatic isolation. In 1544 Henry had agreed to attack France together with Emperor Charles V, and English forces captured Boulogne at great cost in September, but soon England was left in the lurch after Charles had achieved his objectives and brokered a separate peace .

[ 82 ] In May 1545, the French had assembled a large fleet in the estuary of the Seine with the intent to land troops on English soil . The estimates of the size of the fleet varied considerably; between 123 and 300 vessels according to French sources; and up to 226 sailing ships and galleys according to the chronicler Edward Hall . In addition to the massive fleet, 50,000 troops were assembled at Havre de Grâce (modern-day Le Havre ). An English force of 160 ships and 12,000 troops under Viscount Lisle was ready at Portsmouth by early June, before the French were ready to set sail, and an ineffective pre-emptive strike was made in the middle of the month. In early July the huge French force under the command of Admiral Claude d'Annebault set sail for England and entered the Solent unopposed with 128 ships on 16 July . The English had around 80 ships with which to oppose the French, including the flagship Mary Rose . But since they had virtually no heavy galleys, the vessels that were at their best in sheltered waters like the Solent, the English fleet promptly retreated into Portsmouth harbour.

[ 83 ] Battle of the Solent [ edit ] Main article: Battle of the Solent The English were becalmed in port and unable to manoeuvre. On 19 July 1545, the French galleys advanced on the immobilised English fleet, and initially threatened to destroy a force of 13 small galleys, or "rowbarges", the only ships that were able to move against them without a wind. The wind picked up and the sailing ships were able to go on the offensive before the oared vessels were overwhelmed.

[ 84 ] Two of the largest ships, the Henry Grace à Dieu and the Mary Rose , led the attack on the French galleys in the Solent.

Oven & Cauldron Early in the battle something went wrong. While engaging the French galleys the Mary Rose suddenly heeled (leaned) heavily over to her starboard (right) side and water rushed in through the open gunports.

[ 85 ] The crew was powerless to correct the sudden imbalance, and could only scramble for the safety of the upper deck as the ship began to sink rapidly. As she leaned over, equipment, ammunition, supplies and storage containers shifted and came loose, adding to the general chaos. The massive port side brick oven in the galley collapsed completely and the huge 360-litre (90 gallon) copper cauldron was thrown onto the orlop deck above.

[ 86 ] Heavy guns came free and slammed into the opposite side, impeding escape or crushing men beneath them.

For those who were not injured or killed outright by moving objects, there was little time to reach safety, especially for the men who were manning the guns on the main deck or fetching ammunition and supplies in the hold. The companionways that connected the decks with one another would have become bottlenecks for fleeing men, something indicated by the positioning of many of the skeletons recovered from the wreck. What turned the sinking into a major tragedy was the anti-boarding netting that covered the upper decks in the waist (the midsection of the ship) and the sterncastle. With the exception of the men who were stationed in the tops in the masts, most of those who managed to get up from below deck were trapped under the netting; they would have been in view of the surface, and their colleagues above, but with little or no chance to break through, and were dragged down with the ship. Out of a crew of at least 400, fewer than 35 escaped, a casualty rate of over 90%.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] [ 89 ] The Cowdray Engraving , depicting the Battle of the Solent . The main and foremasts of the recently sunken Mary Rose are in the middle; bodies, debris and rigging float in the water and men are clinging to the fighting tops.

Southsea Castle is at centre left.

Causes of sinking [ edit ] Southsea Castle , from where Henry VIII witnessed the last battle and demise of the Mary Rose . The castle has been heavily altered since that time.

[ 90 ] Contemporary accounts [ edit ] Many accounts of the sinking have been preserved, but the only confirmed eyewitness account is the testimony of a surviving Flemish crewman written down by the Holy Roman Emperor's ambassador François van der Delft in a letter dated 24 July . According to the unnamed Fleming, the ship had fired all of her guns on one side and was turning to present the guns on the other side to the enemy ship, when she was caught in a strong gust of wind, heeled and took in water through the open gunports.

[ 91 ] In a letter to William Paget dated 23 July , former Lord High Admiral John Russel claimed that the ship had been lost because of "rechenes and great negligence".

[ 92 ] Three years after the sinking, Hall's Chronicle gave the reason for the sinking as being caused by "to[o] much foly ... for she was laden with much ordinaunce, and the portes left open, which were low, & the great ordinaunce unbreached, so that when the ship should turne, the water entered, and sodainly she sanke." [ 93 ] Later accounts repeat the explanation that the ship heeled over while going about and that the ship was brought down because of the open gunports. A biography of Peter Carew , brother of George Carew, written by John Hooker sometime after 1575, gives the same reason for the sinking, but adds that insubordination among the crew was to blame. The biography claims that George Carew noted that the Mary Rose showed signs of instability as soon as her sails were raised. George's uncle Gawen Carew had passed by with his own ship the Matthew Gonson during the battle to inquire about the situation of his nephew's ship. In reply he was told "that he had a sorte of knaves whom he could not rule".

[ 94 ] Contrary to all other accounts, Martin du Bellay , a French cavalry officer who was present at the battle, stated that the Mary Rose had been sunk by French guns.

[ 95 ] Modern theories [ edit ] The most common explanation for the sinking among modern historians is that the ship was unstable for a number of reasons. A strong gust of wind hit the sails at a critical moment and the open gunports proved fatal, causing the ship to flood and quickly founder.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] [ 98 ] Coates offered a variant of this hypothesis, which explains why a ship unexpectedly foundered after serving for several decades without sinking, even fighting in actions in the rough seas off Brittany: the ship had accumulated additional weight over the years in service and finally become unseaworthy.

[ 99 ] Marsden has questioned whether the ship was turning after firing all the guns on one side, after examination of guns recovered in  the 19th and 20th centuries; guns from both sides were found still loaded. This has been interpreted to mean that something else could have gone wrong, since it is assumed that an experienced crew would not have failed to secure the gunports before making a potentially risky turn.

[ 100 ] The most recent surveys of the ship indicate that she was modified late in her career, lending support to the idea that the Mary Rose was altered too much to be properly seaworthy. Marsden has suggested that the weight of additional heavy guns would have increased her draught so much that the waterline was less than one metre (c. 3 feet) from the gunports on the main deck.

[ 101 ] Peter Carew's claim of insubordination has been reinterpreted by James Watt, former Medical Director-General of the Royal Navy, based on records of an epidemic of dysentery in Portsmouth which could have rendered the crew incapable of handling the ship properly.

[ 102 ] Historian Richard Barker has suggested that the crew actually knew that the ship was an accident waiting to happen, at which they balked and refused to follow orders.

[ 103 ] Marsden has noted that the Carew biography is in some details inconsistent with the sequence of events reported by both French and English eyewitnesses. It also reports that there were 700 men on board, an unusually high number. The distance in time to the event it describes may mean that it was embellished to add a dramatic touch.

[ 104 ] The report of French galleys sinking the Mary Rose as stated by Martin du Bellay has been described as "the account of a courtesan" by naval historian Maurice de Brossard. Du Bellay and his two brothers were close to king Francis I and du Bellay had much to gain from portraying the sinking as a French victory. English sources, even if biased, would have nothing to gain from portraying the sinking as the result of crew incompetence rather than conceding a victory to the much-feared gun galleys.

[ 105 ] Dominic Fontana, a geographer at the University of Portsmouth, has voiced support for du Bellay's version of the sinking, based on the battle as it is depicted in the Cowdray Engraving and modern GIS analysis of the scene of the battle. By plotting the fleets and calculating the conjectured final manoeuvres of the Mary Rose , Fontana reached the conclusion that the ship had been hit low in the hull by the galleys and was destabilised after taking in water. He has interpreted the final heading of the ship straight due north as a failed attempt to reach the shallows at Spitbank only a few hundred metres away. This theory has been given partial support by Alexzandra Hildred, one of the experts who has worked with the Mary Rose , though she has suggested that the close proximity to Spitbank could also indicate that the sinking occurred while trying to make a hard turn to avoid running aground.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] Experiments [ edit ] In 2000, the Channel 4 television programme What Sank the Mary Rose?

attempted to investigate the causes suggested for her sinking by means of experiments with scale models of the ship and metal weights to simulate the presence of troops on the upper decks. Initial tests showed that the ship was able to make the turn described by eyewitnesses without capsizing. In later tests, a fan was used to create a breeze similar to the one reported to have suddenly sprung up on the day of the sinking as the Mary Rose went to make the turn. As the model made the turn, the breeze in the upper works forced it to heel more than at calm, forcing the main deck gun ports below the waterline and foundering the model within a few seconds. The sequence of events closely followed what eyewitnesses had reported, particularly the suddenness with which the ship sank.

[ 108 ] History as a shipwreck [ edit ] Charles Brandon , brother-in-law of King Henry VIII through marriage with Mary Tudor , who took charge of the failed salvage operation in 1545 A salvage attempt was ordered by Secretary of State William Paget only days after the sinking, and Charles Brandon , the king's brother-in-law, took charge of practical details. The operation followed the standard procedure for raising ships in shallow waters: strong cables were attached to the sunken ship and fastened to two empty ships, or hulks . At low tide, the ropes were pulled taut with capstans . When the high tide came in, the hulks rose and with them the wreck. It would then be towed into shallower water and the procedure repeated until the whole ship could be raised completely.

[ 109 ] A list of necessary equipment was compiled by 1 August and included, among other things, massive cables, capstans, pulleys , and 40 pounds of tallow for lubrication . The proposed salvage team comprised 30 Venetian mariners and a Venetian carpenter with 60 English sailors to serve them.

[ 110 ] The two ships to be used as hulks were Jesus of Lübeck and Samson , each of 700 tons burthen and similar in size to the Mary Rose . Brandon was so confident of success that he reassured the king that it would only be a matter of days before they could raise the Mary Rose . The optimism proved unfounded. Since the ship had settled at a 60-degree angle to starboard much of her was stuck deep into the clay of the seabed. This made it virtually impossible to pass cables under the hull and required far more lifting power than if the ship had settled on a hard seabed. An attempt to secure cables to the main mast appears only to have resulted in its being snapped off.

[ 111 ] Illustration from a treatise on salvaging from 1734, showing the traditional method of raising a wreck with the help of anchors and ships or hulks as pontoons , the same method that was attempted by the Tudor era salvors The project was successful only in raising rigging, some guns and other items. At least two other salvage teams in 1547 and 1549 received payment for raising more guns from the wreck.

[ 112 ] Despite the failure of the first salvage operation, there was still lingering belief in the possibility of retrieving the Mary Rose at least until 1546, when she was presented as part of the illustrated list of English warships called the Anthony Roll . When all hope of raising the complete ship was finally abandoned is not known. It could have been after Henry VIII's death in January 1547 or even as late as 1549, when the last guns were brought up.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] The Mary Rose was remembered well into the reign of Elizabeth I , and according to one of the queen's admirals, William Monson (1569–1643), the wreck was visible from the surface at low tide in the late 16th century.

[ 114 ] Deterioration [ edit ] After the sinking, the partially buried wreck created a barrier at a right angle against the currents of the Solent. Two scour pits, large underwater ditches, formed on either side of the wreck while silt and seaweed was deposited inside the ship. A deep but narrow pit formed on the upward tilting port side, while a shallower, broader pit formed on the starboard side, which had been mostly buried by the force of the impact. The abrasive actions of sand and silt carried by the currents and the activity of fungi, bacteria and wood-boring crustaceans and molluscs, such as the teredo "shipworm", began to break down the structure of the ship. Eventually the exposed wooden structure was weakened and gradually collapsed. The timbers and contents of the port side were either deposited in the scour pits and remaining ship structure or carried off by the currents. Following the collapse of the exposed parts of the ship, the site was levelled with the seabed and gradually covered by layers of sediment, concealing most of the remaining structure. During the 16th century, a hard layer of compacted clay and crushed shells formed over the ship, stabilising the site and sealing the Tudor-era deposits. Further layers of soft silt covered the site during the 18th and 19th centuries, but frequent changes in the tidal patterns and currents in the Solent occasionally exposed some of the timbers, leading to its accidental rediscovery in 1836 and aiding in locating the wreck in 1971.

[ 115 ] After the ship had been raised it was determined that about 40% of the original structure had survived.

[ 116 ] Rediscovery in 19th century [ edit ] In mid-1836, a group of five fishermen caught their nets on timbers protruding from the bottom of the Solent. They contacted a diver to help them remove the hindrance, and on 10 June , Henry Abbinett became the first person to see the Mary Rose in almost 300 years. Later, two other professional divers, John Deane and William Edwards, were employed. Using a recently invented rubber suit and metal diving helmet, Deane and Edwards began to examine the wreck and salvage items from it. Along with an assortment of timbers and wooden objects, including several longbows, they brought up several bronze and iron guns, which were sold to the Board of Ordnance for over £220. Initially, this caused a dispute between Deane (who had also brought in his brother Charles into the project), Abbinett and the fishermen who had hired them. The matter was eventually settled by allowing the fishermen a share of the proceeds from the sale of the first salvaged guns, while Deane received exclusive salvage rights at the expense of Abbinett. The wreck was soon identified as the Mary Rose from the inscriptions of one of the bronze guns manufactured in 1537.

[ 117 ] Watercolour painting of two perspectives of a sling, a wrought iron gun, complete with two-wheeled gun carriage (wheels missing) and part of another iron sling. The paintings were made to record some of the finds raised by the Deane brothers 1836–40.

The identification of the ship led to high public interest in the salvage operation and caused a great demand for the objects that were brought up. Though many of the objects could not be properly conserved at the time and subsequently deteriorated, many were documented with pencil sketches and watercolour drawings, which survive to this day. John Deane ceased working on the wreck in 1836, but returned in 1840 with new, more destructive methods. With the help of condemned bomb shells filled with gunpowder acquired from the Ordnance Board, he blasted his way into parts of the wreck. Fragments of bombs and traces of blasting craters were found during the modern excavations, but there was no evidence that Deane managed to penetrate the hard layer that had sealed off the Tudor levels. Deane reported retrieving a bilge pump and the lower part of the main mast, both of which would have been located inside the ship. The recovery of small wooden objects like longbows suggests that Deane did manage to penetrate the Tudor levels at some point, though this has been disputed by the excavation project leader Margaret Rule . Newspaper reports on Deane's diving operations in October 1840 report that the ship was clinker built, but since the sterncastle is the only part of the ship with this feature, an alternative explanation has been suggested: Deane did not penetrate the hard shelly layer that covered most of the ship, but managed only to get into remains of the sterncastle that today no longer exist. Despite the rough handling by Deane, the Mary Rose escaped the wholesale destruction by giant rakes and explosives that was the fate of other wrecks in the Solent (such as HMS Royal George ).

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] [ 120 ] Modern rediscovery [ edit ] The modern search for the Mary Rose was initiated by the Southsea branch of the British Sub-Aqua Club in 1965 as part of a project to locate shipwrecks in the Solent. The project was under the leadership of historian, journalist and amateur diver Alexander McKee . Another group led by Lieutenant-Commander Alan Bax of the Royal Navy, sponsored by the Committee for Nautical Archaeology in London, also formed a search team. Initially the two teams had differing views on where to find the wreck, but eventually joined forces. In February 1966 a chart from 1841 was found that marked the positions of the Mary Rose and several other wrecks. The charted position coincided with a trench (one of the scour pits) that had already been located by McKee's team, and a definite location was finally established at a position 3 km (1.9 mi) south of the entrance to Portsmouth Harbour ( 50°46′0″N 1°06′0″W ﻿ / ﻿ 50.76667°N 1.10000°W ﻿ / 50.76667; -1.10000 ) in water with a depth of 11 m (36 feet) at low tide.

[ 121 ] Diving on the site began in 1966 and a sonar scan by Harold Edgerton in 1967–68 revealed some type of buried feature. In 1970 a loose timber was located and on 5 May 1971, the first structural details of the buried hull were identified after they were partially uncovered by winter storms.

[ 122 ] A major problem for the team from the start was that wreck sites in the UK lacked any legal protection from plunderers and treasure hunters. Sunken ships, once being moving objects, were legally treated as chattel and were awarded to those who could first raise them. The Merchant Shipping Act 1894 also stipulated that any objects raised from a wreck should be auctioned off to finance the salvage operations, and there was nothing preventing anyone from "stealing" the wreck and making a profit. The problem was handled by forming an organisation, the Mary Rose Committee, aiming "to find, excavate, raise and preserve for all time such remains of the ship Mary Rose as may be of historical or archaeological interest".

[ 123 ] To keep intruders at bay, the committee arranged a lease of the seabed where the wreck lay from the Portsmouth authorities, thereby discouraging anyone from trespassing on the underwater property. In hindsight this was only a legalistic charade which had little chance of holding up in a court of law. In combination with secrecy as to the exact location of the wreck, it saved the project from interference. It was not until the passing of the Protection of Wrecks Act 1973 on 5 February 1973 that the Mary Rose was declared to be of national historic interest that enjoyed full legal protection from any disturbance by commercial salvage teams. Despite this, years after the passing of the 1973 act and the excavation of the ship, lingering conflicts with salvage legislation remained a threat to the Mary Rose project as "personal" finds such as chests, clothing and cooking utensils risked being confiscated and auctioned off.

[ 124 ] Survey and excavation [ edit ] Following the discovery of the wreck in 1971, the project became known to the general public and received increasing media attention. This helped bring in more donations and equipment, primarily from private sources. By 1974 the committee had representatives from the National Maritime Museum , the Royal Navy , the BBC and local organisations. In 1974 the project received royal patronage from Prince Charles , who participated in dives on the site. This attracted yet more publicity, and also more funding and assistance.

[ 125 ] The initial aims of the Mary Rose Committee were now more officially and definitely confirmed. The committee had become a registered charity in 1974, which made it easier to raise funds, and the application for excavation and raising of the ship had been officially approved by the UK government.

[ 126 ] By 1978 the initial excavation work had uncovered a complete and coherent site with an intact ship structure and the orientation of the hull had been positively identified as being on an almost straight northerly heading with a 60-degree heel to starboard and a slight downward tilt towards the bow. As no records of English shipbuilding techniques used in vessels like the Mary Rose survive, excavation of the ship would allow for a detailed survey of her design and shed new light on the construction of ships of the era.

[ 127 ] A full excavation also meant removing the protective layers of silt that prevented the remaining ship structure from being destroyed through biological decay and the scouring of the currents; the operation had to be completed within a predetermined timespan of a few years or it risked irreversible damage. It was also considered desirable to recover and preserve the remains of the hull if possible. For the first time, the project was faced with the practical difficulties of actually raising, conserving and preparing the hull for public display.

[ 128 ] To handle this new, considerably more complex and expensive task, it was decided that a new organisation was needed. The Mary Rose Trust , a limited charitable trust , [ 129 ] with representatives from many organisations would handle the need for a larger operation and a large infusion of funds. In 1979 a new diving vessel was purchased to replace the previous 12 m (39 ft) catamaran Roger Greenville which had been used from 1971. The choice fell on the salvage vessel Sleipner , the same craft that had been used as a platform for diving operations on the Vasa . The project went from a team of only twelve volunteers working four months a year to over 50 individuals working almost around the clock nine months a year. In addition, there were over 500 volunteer divers and a laboratory staff of about 70 that ran the shore base and conservation facilities.

[ 130 ] During the four diving seasons from 1979 to 1982 over 22,000 diving hours were spent on the site, an effort that amounted to 11.8 man-years.

[ 131 ] Raising the ship [ edit ] The final stages of the salvage of the Mary Rose on 11 October 1982. The lifting frame (the top of the salvage cage) can be seen just below the surface of the water, about to emerge.

The wreck of the Mary Rose clear of the water.

People viewing the salvage cage holding the Mary Rose .

Raising the Mary Rose meant overcoming delicate problems that had never been encountered before. The raising of the Swedish warship Vasa during 1959–61 was the only comparable precedent, but it had been a relatively straightforward operation since the hull was completely intact and rested upright on the seabed. It had been raised with basically the same methods as were in use in Tudor England: cables were slung under the hull and attached to two pontoons on either side of the ship which was then gradually raised and towed into shallower waters. Only one-third of the Mary Rose was intact and she lay deeply embedded in mud. If the hull were raised in the conventional way, there was no guarantee that it would have enough structural strength to hold together out of water. Many suggestions for raising the ship were discarded, including the construction of a cofferdam around the wreck site, filling the ship with small buoyant objects (such as ping-pong balls) or even pumping brine into the seabed and freezing it so that it would float and take the hull with it. After lengthy discussions it was decided in February 1980 that the hull would first be emptied of all its contents and strengthened with steel braces and frames. It would then be lifted to the surface with floating sheerlegs attached to nylon strops passing under the hull and transferred to a cradle. It was also decided that the ship would be recovered before the end of the diving season in 1982. If the wreck stayed uncovered any longer it risked irreversible damage from biological decay and tidal scouring.

[ 132 ] During the last year of the operation, the massive scope of full excavation and raising was beginning to take its toll on those closely involved in the project. In May 1981, Alexander McKee voiced concerns about the method chosen for raising the timbers and openly questioned Margaret Rule 's position as excavation leader. McKee felt ignored in what he viewed as a project where he had always played a central role, both as the initiator of the search for the Mary Rose and other ships in the Solent, and as an active member throughout the diving operations. He had several supporters who all pointed to the risk of the project's turning into an embarrassing failure if the ship were damaged during raising operations. To address these concerns it was suggested that the hull should be placed on top of a supporting steel cradle underwater. This would avoid the inherent risks of damaging the wooden structure if it were lifted out of the water without appropriate support. The idea of using nylon strops was also discarded in favour of drilling holes through the hull at 170 points and passing iron bolts through them to allow the attachment of wires connected to a lifting frame.

[ 133 ] In the spring of 1982, after three intense seasons of archaeological underwater work, preparations began for raising the ship. The operation soon ran into problems: early on there were difficulties with the custom-made lifting equipment; the method of lifting the hull had to be considerably altered as late as June.

[ 134 ] Divers from the Royal Engineers were brought in to do much of the underwater work.

[ 135 ] After the frame was properly attached to the hull, it was slowly jacked up on four legs to pull the ship off the seabed. The massive crane of the barge Tog Mor then moved the frame and hull, transferring them underwater to the specially designed cradle, which was padded with water-filled bags. On the morning of 11 October 1982, the final lift of the entire package of cradle, hull and lifting frame began. It was watched by the team, Prince Charles and other spectators in boats around the site. At 9:03 am, the first timbers of the Mary Rose broke the surface. A second set of bags under the hull was inflated with air, to cushion the waterlogged wood. Finally, the whole package was placed on a barge and taken to the shore. Though eventually successful, the operation was close to foundering on two occasions; first when one of the supporting legs of the lifting frame was bent and had to be removed and later when a corner of the frame, with "an unforgettable crunch", [ 134 ] slipped more than a metre (3 feet) and came close to crushing part of the hull.

[ 136 ] [ 137 ] Archaeology [ edit ] As one of the most ambitious and expensive projects in the history of maritime archaeology , the Mary Rose project broke new ground within this field in the UK.

[ 138 ] Besides becoming one of the first wrecks to be protected under the new Protection of Wrecks Act in 1973 it also created several new precedents. It was the first time that a British privately funded project was able to apply modern scientific standards fully and without having to auction off part of the findings to finance its activities; where previous projects often had to settle for just a partial recovery of finds, everything found in connection with the Mary Rose was recovered and recorded. The raising of the vessel made it possible to establish the first historic shipwreck museum in the UK to receive government accreditation and funding. The excavation of the Mary Rose wreck site proved that it was possible to achieve a level of exactness in underwater excavations comparable to those on dry land.

[ 139 ] Throughout the 1970s, the Mary Rose was meticulously surveyed, excavated and recorded with the latest methods within the field of maritime archaeology. Working in an underwater environment meant that principles of land-based archaeology did not always apply. Mechanical excavators, airlifts and suction dredges were used in the process of locating the wreck, but as soon as it began to be uncovered in earnest, more delicate techniques were employed.

[ 140 ] Many objects from the Mary Rose had been well preserved in form and shape, but many were quite delicate, requiring careful handling. Artefacts of all sizes were supported with soft packing material, such as old plastic ice cream containers, and some of the arrows that were "soft like cream cheese" had to be brought up in special styrofoam containers.

[ 141 ] The airlifts that sucked up clay, sand and dirt off-site or to the surface were still used, but with much greater precision since they could potentially disrupt the site. The many layers of sediment that had accumulated on the site could be used to date artefacts in which they were found, and had to be recorded properly. The various types of accretions and remnants of chemicals with artefacts were essential clues to objects that had long since broken down and disappeared, and needed to be treated with considerable care.

[ 142 ] The excavation and raising of the ship in the 1970s and early 1980s meant that diving operations ceased, even though modern scaffolding and part of the bow were left on the seabed. The pressure on conservators to treat tens of thousands of artefacts and the high costs of conserving, storing and displaying the finds and the ship meant that there were no funds available for diving. In 2002, the UK Ministry of Defence announced plans to build two new aircraft carriers . Because of the great size of the new vessels, the outlet from Portsmouth needed to be surveyed to make sure that they could sail no matter the tide. The planned route for the underwater channel ran close to the Mary Rose wrecksite, which meant that funding was supplied to survey and excavate the site once more. Even though the planned carriers were downsized enough not to require alteration of Portsmouth outlet, the excavations had already exposed timbers and were completed in 2005. Among the most important finds was the ten-metre (32 feet) stem , the forward continuation of the keel, which provided more exact details about the original profile of the ship.

[ 143 ] Finds [ edit ] A mallet , brace , plane , ruler, and various other carpentry tools, most of which were found in chests stowed in one of the main deck cabins.

One of the many rosaries found on the Mary Rose that once belonged to one of the lower-ranking crew members Over 26,000 artefacts and pieces of timber were raised along with remains of about half the crew members.

[ 144 ] The faces of some crew members have been reconstructed. Analysis of the crew skeletons shows many had suffered malnutrition , and had evidence of rickets , scurvy , and other deficiency diseases. Crew members also developed arthritis through the stresses on their joints from heavy lifting and maritime life generally, and suffered bone fractures .

[ 145 ] As the ship was intended to function as a floating, self-contained community, she was stocked with victuals (food and drink) that could sustain her inhabitants for extended periods of time. The casks used for storage on the Mary Rose have been compared with those from a Basque whale ship wrecked in Red Bay, Newfoundland and Labrador c.

1565 .

[ b ] and have revealed that they were of better quality, more robust and reliable, an indication that supplies for the Tudor navy were given high priority, and their requirements set a high standard for cask manufacturing at the time.

[ 147 ] A Ludus Anglicorum set (a predecessor of modern backgammon), owned by the master carpenter.

As a miniature society at sea, the wreck of the Mary Rose held personal objects belonging to individual crew members. This included clothing, games, various items for spiritual or recreational use, and objects related to mundane everyday tasks such as personal hygiene, fishing, and sewing.

[ 148 ] The master carpenter 's chest, for example, contained an early backgammon set, a book, three plates, a sundial , and a tankard , goods suggesting he was relatively wealthy.

[ 145 ] The ship carried several skilled craftsmen and was equipped for handling both routine maintenance and repairing extensive battle damage. In and around one of the cabins on the main deck under the sterncastle, archaeologists found a "collection of woodworking tools ... unprecedented in its range and size", consisting of eight chests of carpentry tools. Along with loose mallets and tar pots used for caulking, this variety of tools belonged to one or several of the carpenters employed on the Mary Rose .

[ 149 ] Many of the cannons and other weapons from the Mary Rose have provided invaluable physical evidence about 16th-century weapon technology. The surviving gunshields are almost all from the Mary Rose , and the four small cast iron hailshot pieces are the only known examples of this type of weapon.

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] Animal remains have been found in the wreck of the Mary Rose . These include the skeletons of a rat, a frog and a dog.

[ 152 ] The dog, an English Toy Terrier (Black & Tan) , was between eighteen months and two years in age, was found near the hatch to the ship's carpenter's cabin and is presumed to have been brought aboard as a ratter.

[ 153 ] Nine barrels have been found to contain bones of cattle, indicating that they contained pieces of beef butchered and stored as ship's rations.

[ 154 ] The bones of pigs and fish, stored in baskets, have also been found.

[ 154 ] Musical instruments [ edit ] Two fiddles , a bow, a still shawm or douçaine , three three-hole pipes , and a tabor drum with a drumstick were found throughout the wreck. These would have been used for the personal enjoyment of the crew and to provide a rhythm to work on the rigging and turning the capstans on the upper decks. The tabor drum is the earliest known example of its kind and the drumstick is of a previously unknown design. The tabor pipes are considerably longer than any known examples from the period. Their discovery proved that contemporary illustrations, previously viewed with some suspicion, were accurate depictions of the instruments. Before the discovery of the Mary Rose shawm, an early predecessor to the oboe , instrument historians had been puzzled by references to "still shawms", or "soft" shawms, that were said to have a sound that was less shrill than earlier shawms.

[ 155 ] The still shawm disappeared from the musical scene in the 16th century, and the instrument found on the Mary Rose is the only surviving example. A reproduction has been made and played. Combined with a pipe and tabor, it provides a "very effective bass part" that would have produced "rich and full sound, which would have provided excellent music for dancing on board ship".

[ 156 ] Only a few other fiddle-type instruments from the 16th century exist, but none of them of the type found on the Mary Rose . Reproductions of both fiddles have been made, though less is known of their design than the shawm since the neck and strings were missing.

[ 157 ] Navigation tools [ edit ] In the remains of a small cabin in the bow of the ship and in a few other locations around the wreck was found the earliest dated set of navigation instruments in Europe found so far: compasses, divider calipers , a stick used for charting, protractors , sounding leads , tide calculators and a logreel , an instrument for calculating speed. Several of these objects are not only unique in having such an early, definite dating, but also because they pre-date written records of their use; protractors would have reasonably been used to measure bearings and courses on maps, but sea charts are not known to have been used by English navigators during the first half of the 16th century, compasses were not depicted on English ships until the 1560s, and the first mention of a logreel is from 1574.

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] Barber-surgeon's cabin [ edit ] Along with the medical equipment were also personal items belonging to the barber-surgeon, including an expensive silk velvet coif identical to those worn by the members of the Worshipful Company of Barbers in this painting by Hans Holbein the Younger from 1540.

[ 160 ] The cabin located on the main deck underneath the sterncastle is thought to have belonged to the barber-surgeon . He was a trained professional who saw to the health and welfare of the crew and acted as the medical expert on board. The most important of these finds were found in an intact wooden chest which contained over 60 objects relating to the barber-surgeon's medical practice: the wooden handles of a complete set of surgical tools and several shaving razors (although none of the steel blades had survived), a copper syringe for wound irrigation and treatment of gonorrhoea , and even a skilfully crafted feeding bottle for feeding incapacitated patients. More objects were found around the cabin, such as earscoops, shaving bowls and combs. With this wide selection of tools and medicaments the barber-surgeon, along with one or more assistants, could set bone fractures, perform amputations and deal with other acute injuries, treat a number of diseases and provide crew members with a minimal standard of personal hygiene.

[ 161 ] Hatch [ edit ] One of the first scientifically confirmed ratters was a terrier and whippet dog crossbreed who spent his short life on the Mary Rose.

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] The dog, named Hatch by researchers, was discovered in 1981 during the underwater excavation of the ship.

[ 164 ] Hatch's main duty was to kill rats on board the ship.

[ 162 ] Based on the DNA work performed on Hatch's teeth, he was a young adult male, 18–24 months old, with a brown coat.

[ 162 ] [ 164 ] Hatch's skeleton is on display in the Mary Rose Museum in Portsmouth Historic Dockyard.

[ 162 ] Conservation [ edit ] The Mary Rose being sprayed with water at the facility in Portsmouth in March 1984. Between December 1984 and July 1985 the steel cradle was gradually rotated to stand with the keel in an almost upright position.

[ 165 ] Preservation of the Mary Rose and her contents was an essential part of the project from the start. Though many artefacts, especially those that were buried in silt, had been preserved, the long exposure to an underwater environment had rendered most of them sensitive to exposure to air after recovery. Archaeologists and conservators had to work in tandem from the start to prevent deterioration of the artefacts.

[ 166 ] After recovery, finds were placed in so-called passive storage, which would prevent any immediate deterioration before the active conservation which would allow them to be stored in an open-air environment. Passive storage depended on the type of material that the object was made of, and could vary considerably. Smaller objects from the most common material, wood, were sealed in polyethylene bags to preserve moisture. Timbers and other objects that were too large to be wrapped were stored in unsealed water tanks. Growth of fungi and microbes that could degrade wood were controlled by various techniques, including low-temperature storage, chemicals, and in the case of large objects, common pond snails that consumed wood-degrading organisms but not the wood itself.

[ 167 ] Other organic materials such as leather, skin and textiles were treated similarly, by keeping them moist in tanks or sealed plastic containers. Bone and ivory was desalinated to prevent damage from salt crystallisation, as were glass, ceramic and stone. Iron, copper and copper alloy objects were kept moist in a sodium sesquicarbonate solution to prevent oxidisation and reaction with the chlorides that had penetrated the surface. Alloys of lead and pewter are inherently stable in the atmosphere and generally require no special treatment. Silver and gold were the only materials that required no special passive storage.

[ 168 ] The hull of the Mary Rose being sprayed at the facility in Portsmouth while a technician services the system Conserving the hull of the Mary Rose was the most complicated and expensive task for the project. In 2002 a donation of £4.8 million from the Heritage Lottery Fund and equivalent monetary support from the Portsmouth City and Hampshire County Councils was needed to keep the work with conservation on schedule.

[ 169 ] During passive conservation, the ship structure could for practical reasons not be completely sealed, so instead it was regularly sprayed with filtered, recycled water that was kept at a temperature of 2 to 5 °C (36 to 41 °F) to keep it from drying out.

[ 170 ] Drying waterlogged wood that has been submerged for several centuries without appropriate conservation causes considerable shrinkage (20–50%) and leads to severe warping and cracking as water evaporates from the cellular structure of the wood. The substance polyethylene glycol (PEG) had been used before on archaeological wood, and was during the 1980s being used to conserve the Vasa . After almost ten years of small-scale trials on timbers, an active three-phase conservation programme of the hull of the Mary Rose began in 1994. During the first phase, which lasted from 1994 to 2003, the wood was sprayed with low-molecular-weight PEG to replace the water in the cellular structure of the wood. From 2003 to 2010, a higher-molecular-weight PEG was used to strengthen the mechanical properties of the outer surface layers. The third phase consisted of a controlled air drying ending in 2016.

[ 171 ] [ 172 ] Researchers are planning on using magnetic nanoparticles to remove iron in the ship's wood to reduce the production of harmful sulfuric acid that is causing deterioration.

[ 173 ] The wreck site is legally protected. Under the "Protection of Wrecks Act 1973" (1973 c. 33) any interference with the site requires a licence. The site is listed as being of "historical, archaeological or artistic importance" by Historic England .

[ 174 ] Display [ edit ] Main article: Mary Rose Museum Concept plan of the new Mary Rose Museum by Wilkinson Eyre Architects After the decision to raise the Mary Rose, discussions ensued as to where she would eventually go on permanent display. The east end of Portsea Island at Eastney emerged as an early alternative, but was rejected because of parking problems and the distance from the dockyard where she was originally built. Placing the ship next to the famous flagship of Horatio Nelson , HMS Victory , at Portsmouth Historic Dockyard was proposed in July 1981. A group called the Maritime Preservation Society even suggested Southsea Castle , where Henry VIII had witnessed the sinking, as a final resting place and there was widespread scepticism to the dockyard location. At one point a county councillor even threatened to withdraw promised funds if the dockyard site became more than an interim solution. As costs for the project mounted, there was a debate in the Council chamber and in the local paper The News as to whether the money could be spent more appropriately. Although author David Childs writes that in the early 1980s "the debate was as a fiery one", the project was never seriously threatened because of the great symbolic importance of the Mary Rose to the naval history of both Portsmouth and England.

[ 175 ] Since the mid-1980s, the hull of the Mary Rose has been kept in a covered dry dock while undergoing conservation. Although the hull has been open to the public for viewing, the need for keeping the ship saturated first with water and later a polyethylene glycol (PEG) solution meant that, before 2013, visitors were separated from the hull by a glass barrier. By 2007, the specially built ship hall had been visited by over seven million visitors since it first opened on 4 October 1983, just under a year after the wreck was successfully raised.

[ 176 ] [ 177 ] A separate Mary Rose Museum was housed in a structure called No. 5 Boathouse near the ship hall and was opened to the public on 9 July 1984, [ 178 ] containing displays explaining the history of the ship and a small number of conserved artefacts, from entire bronze cannons to household items. In September 2009 the temporary Mary Rose display hall was closed to visitors to facilitate construction of the new £35 million museum building, which opened to the public on 31 May 2013.

[ 179 ] The new Mary Rose Museum was designed by architects Wilkinson Eyre, Perkins+Will and built by construction firm Warings. The construction has been challenging because the museum has been built over the ship in the dry dock which is a listed monument. During construction of the museum, conservation of the hull continued inside a sealed "hotbox". In April 2013 the polyethylene glycol sprays were turned off and the process of controlled airdrying began. In 2016 the "hotbox" was removed and for the first time since 1545, the ship was revealed dry. This new museum displays most of the artefacts recovered from within the ship in context with the conserved hull. As of 2018, the new museum has been visited by over 1.8 million people, [ 180 ] and saw 189,702 visitors in 2019.

[ 181 ] Objects of the Mary Rose See also [ edit ] Archaeology of shipwrecks – Study of human activity through the analysis of shipwreck artifacts Batavia – Dutch East India Company flagship Kronan – Swedish Navy ship of the 1670s Mars – Swedish warship that was built between 1563 and 1564 HMS Gloucester – British frigate wrecked in 1682 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Vasa – 17th-century Swedish warship Explanatory notes [ edit ] ^ It was not until the 1590s that the word "broadside" in English was commonly used to refer to gunfire from the side of a ship rather than the ship's side itself; Rodger (1996) , pp. 312, 316 ^ This wreck is numbered 24M by its excavators, identified as the whaler San Juan . This ship had a large number of casks used to store whale oil and these have been extensively investigated.

[ 146 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Rodger (1997) , pp. 153–156.

^ Marsden (2003) , p. 1; Rodger (1997) , pp. 164–165 ^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 1–2; Rodger (1997) , pp. 165–166 ^ Rodger (1997) , p. 221.

^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 2–5.

^ See Maria Hayward, "The Flags, Fabric" in Knighton & Loades (2000) , pp. 31–33 for a more detailed account of the making of the flags.

^ Marsden (2003) , p. 51.

^ a b Damian Goodburn, "Woodworking Aspects of the Mary Rose " in Marsden (2009) , pp. 66–68, 71 ^ See for example McKee (1974) , p. 4; Rodger (1997) , p. 172; Rule (1983) , p. 15; Weightman (1957) , p. 286 ^ a b Childs (2007) , p. 17; David Loades, "The Mary Rose and Fighting Ships" in Marsden (2009) , p. 5; Peter Marsden, "Reconstruction of the Mary Rose : her Design and Use" in Marsden (2009) , p. 379 ^ Marsden (2003) , p. 90.

^ Adams (2013) , p. 179.

^ Barker, Loewen & Dobbs (2009) , p. 36.

^ a b See Marsden (2009) for details of the deck design and construction.

^ a b Rule (1983) , pp. 117–133.

^ Peter Marsden, "The Upper Deck" in Marsden (2009) , p. 216 ^ Hildred (2009) , pp. 340–341.

^ Peter Marsden, "Reconstruction of the Mary Rose : her Design and Use" in Marsden (2009) , pp. 371–378 ^ See for example Rule (1983) .

^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 94, 96.

^ Adams (2013) , pp. 73–78.

^ Adams (2013) , p. 76.

^ Adams (2013) , p. 187.

^ Adams (2013) , pp. 130–131.

^ Peter Marsden, "Propulsion, Masts and rigging" in Marsden (2009) , pp. 242–249 ^ Richard Endsor, "Propulsion, The rigging" in Marsden (2009) , p. 261 ^ Richard Endsor, "Propulsion, The rigging" in Marsden (2009) , p. 264 ^ Burningham (2001) gives a helpful account of sailing with this version of square rig, though this refers to a replica of a ship built around 85 years later than Mary Rose.

^ Adams (2013) , pp. 73, 76.

^ Palmer (2009) .

^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 7–8.

^ Marsden (2003) , p. 14.

^ Adams (2013) , p. 18.

^ Rodger (1997) , pp. 205–206.

^ Rodger (1997) , p. 207.

^ Rodger (1996) , p. 308, passim .

^ Rodger (1997) , pp. 206–208, 215.

^ Hildred (2009) , p. 297-303, 311-312.

^ Hildred (2009) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Hildred (2009) , pp. 313–316.

^ Based on tables in Marsden (2009) , pp. 318, 332, 338, 341 ^ a b The last record is the illustrated Anthony Roll , which was compiled after the sinking, when it was apparently still believed that the Mary Rose could be raised and restored.

^ a b Hildred (2009) , pp. 298–303.

^ Based on table in Marsden (2009) , p. 302 ^ Rule (1983) , pp. 149–168.

^ David. Loades, "II: The Ordnance" in Knighton & Loades (2000) , pp. 12–14; Alexzandra Hildred, "(ii) Munitions" in Knighton & Loades (2000) , pp. 16–19 ^ Hildred (2009) , pp. 311–312, 341.

^ Childs (2007) , p. 57.

^ "Sword from Mary Rose on display" .

BBC News . 26 July 2007.

^ Rule (1983) , p. 172; Stirland (2000) , p. 21 ^ Rule (1983) , pp. 181–182.

^ Hildred (2009) , pp. 324–325.

^ see also Balfour, Metcalf & North, " A Gun-Shield from the Armoury of Henry VIII:Decorative Oddity or Important Discovery?

Archived 20 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine " in V&A Online Journal No. 39 for more information.

^ a b Marsden (2003) , p. 13.

^ a b c Gardiner (2005) , pp. 11–12.

^ a b Marsden (2003) , pp. 9–10.

^ a b Stirland (2000) , pp. 53–54.

^ For a detailed list of officers and other named people who served on the ship 1513–1545, see Marsden (2003) , p. 9 ^ Richard Gray, "Living relatives of Mary Rose crew may be identified through DNA" , The Telegraph , 30 May 2013. Retrieved 27 April 2015 ^ a b Marsden (2003) , p. 10.

^ Dating uncertain since the Anthony Roll was made over a longer period of time that extended beyond the sinking of the Mary Rose .

^ Stirland (2000) , pp. 74–76.

^ Gardiner (2005) , p. 12.

^ Stirland (2000) , p. 149.

^ Morris, Steven (5 May 2021).

"Mary Rose ship had multi-ethnic crew, study shows" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 5 May 2021 .

^ Scorrer et al. (2021) .

^ Stirland (2000) , pp. 113–114.

^ Stirland (2000) , pp. 118–130.

^ Stirland (2000) , pp. 139–142.

^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 10–11.

^ Loades (1992) , p. 60.

^ Marsden (2003) , p. 11.

^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 11–12.

^ Loades (1992) , pp. 62–64.

^ Rodger (1997) , pp. 170–171.

^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 12–13.

^ Rodger (1997) , p. 172.

^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 13–15.

^ Rodger (1997) , pp. 174–175.

^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 15–16.

^ Marsden (2003) , p. 142; for examples of authors that have stated that the ship went through considerable alterations in 1536, see also p. 16.

^ Rodger (1997) , pp. 176–182.

^ Loades (1992) , pp. 131–132.

^ Loades (1992) , p. 133.

^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 18–19.

^ Dobbs (2009) , p. 133.

^ Gardiner (2005) , pp. 16–17.

^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 133–134.

^ For more discussion supporting the suddenness and violent nature of the sinking, see also Gardiner (2005) , pp. 16–17 and McKewan (2005) , p. 297 ^ Corney, Arthur (1968).

Southsea Castle . Portsmouth City Council.

^ Marsden (2003) , p. 19.

^ Marsden (2003) , p. 178.

^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 19, 179.

^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 20, 181–182.

^ For summaries and comments on the various accounts see Marsden (2003) , pp. 18–20, 130–134, 178–179; Rule (1983) , pp. 36–38; Stirland (2000) , pp. 22–23.

^ Rodger (1997) , p. 183, 210.

^ Rule (1983) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Stirland (2000) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Stirland (2000) , pp. 22–23.

^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 132–133.

^ Peter Marsden, "The Loss of the Mary Rose , 1545" in Marsden (2009) , pp. 391–392 ^ Watt (1983) , p. 17.

^ Barker (1992) , p. 439.

^ Marsden (2003) , p. 130.

^ de Brossard (1984) .

^ Hildred (2009) , pp. 307–308.

^ For a detailed account of Dominic Fontana's theory on the sinking see "The Cowdray engravings and the loss of the Mary Rose" .

^ Channel 4 , "What Sank the Mary Rose ?" , 2000.

^ For a detailed account of the raising operations, see Rule (1983) , pp. 39–41; Marsden (2003) , pp. 20; Peter Marsden, "Salvage, Saving and Surveying the Mary Rose " in Marsden (2009) , pp. 12–14.

^ State Papers Henry VIII , vol. 1, (1830), pp. 796–797 note, Suffolk to Paget, 1 August 1545: Letters & Papers, Henry VIII , vol. 20 part 2 (1907), nos. 2–3, 14, 16, 38–39, 81, abbreviated ^ Peter Marsden, "Salvage, Saving and Surveying the Mary Rose " in Marsden (2009) , pp. 12–14; see Marsden (2003) , p. 28 for a discussion of the possible salvage of part of the main mast during the 19th century salvage.

^ a b Marsden (2003) , p. 20.

^ Payne (2000) , p. 23.

^ Rule (1983) , p. 41.

^ Jones (2003) , pp. 12–24; Rule (1983) , pp. 69–71; see Marsden (2003) , pp. 76–86 for a detailed stratigraphy of the wrecksite.

^ Peter Marsden, "Understanding the Mary Rose " in Marsden (2009) , p. 20 ^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 21–25.

^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 26–29.

^ Rule (1983) , p. 47.

^ For a detailed account of the Deanes see John Bevan, The Infernal Diver: the lives of John and Charles Deane, their invention of the diving helmet, and its first application to salvage, treasure hunting, civil engineering and military uses . London: Submex. 1996.

ISBN 978-0-9508242-1-5 .

^ Wille (2005) , p. 388.

^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 30–34; Rule (1983) , pp. 47–56 ^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 32–33; quote from Rule (1983) , p. 54 ^ Rule (1983) , pp. 54–56.

^ Marsden (2003) , p. 35.

^ Rule (1983) , p. 67.

^ Rule (1983) , p. 108.

^ Rule (1983) , p. 72.

^ "The Mary Rose Trust, Charity no. 277503" .

Charity Commission for England and Wales . Retrieved 26 January 2025 .

^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 40–41; Rule (1983) , pp. 59, 73–76 ^ Rule (1983) , p. 220.

^ Lewis (2003) , pp. 51–53.

^ Childs (2007) , pp. 197–198.

^ a b Rule (1983) , p. 227 ^ McKnight, Hugh.

"Where were you in 82? Royal Engineers" .

maryrose.org . Mary Rose Trust . Retrieved 27 August 2024 .

^ Lewis (2003) , pp. 53–59.

^ Rule (1983) , pp. 206–227.

^ Marsden (2003) , p. 143.

^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 143–146.

^ Rule (1983) , p. 61.

^ Rule (1983) , p. 89.

^ Marsden (2003) , pp. 44–47.

^ Childs (2007) , pp. 208–210.

^ Marsden (2003) , p. xi.

^ a b "The Mary Rose: A Tudor ship's secrets revealed" , BBC ^ Loewen 2007b , pp. 5–46.

^ Rodrigues (2005) , p. 421.

^ Childs (2007) , pp. 79–88.

^ McKewan (2005) , p. 297.

^ Hildred (2009) , p. 313.

^ Weinstein, Gardiner & Wood (2005) , pp. 494–495.

^ Roseanna Cawthorne (5 October 2012).

"10 things you might not know about the Mary Rose" .

Current Archeology . Current Publishing . Retrieved 11 March 2013 .

^ "Mary Rose dog skeleton on show at Portsmouth museum" .

BBC News . 26 March 2010 . Retrieved 11 March 2013 .

^ a b Anonymous (n.d.).

"Life on Board the Mary Rose" .

The Mary Rose . Archived from the original on 8 March 2013 . Retrieved 11 March 2013 .

^ Montagu (2005) , pp. 226–230.

^ Foster (2005) , pp. 240–241.

^ Alburger (2005) , pp. 242–249.

^ Hicks (2005) , p. 264.

^ Stimson (2005) , pp. 267–281.

^ Buckland (2005) , pp. 35–37.

^ Castle & others (2005) .

^ a b c d MaryRose.org – Hatch the Mary Rose dog ^ YouTube: Hatch – Mary Rose ^ a b Science Daily: Mary Rose dog was a he, not a she ^ Harrison (2003) , p. 64.

^ Marsden (2003) , p. 145.

^ Jones (2003) , pp. 35–43.

^ Jones (2003) , pp. 47–49.

^ Childs (2007) , pp. 204–205.

^ Jones (2003) , pp. 40–41.

^ Jones (2003) , pp. 67–69.

^ "Mary Rose warship: Full view revealed after museum revamp" .

BBC News . 19 July 2016.

^ Kiona N. Smith (24 August 2018).

"Tiny magnets will escort ions out of rare material from a shipwreck" .

Ars Technica . Retrieved 25 August 2018 .

^ Historic England .

"Mary Rose (1000075)" .

National Heritage List for England . Retrieved 4 October 2021 .

^ Childs (2007) , p. 199.

^ Harrison (2003) , pp. 64–66.

^ Childs (2007) , p. 210.

^ Harrison (2003) , p. 66.

^ "A New Museum for the Mary Rose" . Mary Rose Trust. Archived from the original on 22 October 2012 . Retrieved 21 July 2013 .

^ "The Mary Rose heads into new territories" . Mary Rose Trust. Archived from the original on 3 November 2020.

^ "Latest visitor figures" .

www.alva.org.uk . ALVA – Association of Leading Visitor Attractions . Retrieved 9 November 2020 .

References [ edit ] Adams, Jonathan (2013).

A Maritime Archaeology of Ships: Innovation and Social Change in Late Medieval and Early Modern Europe . Oxford: Oxbow Books.

ISBN 978-1-84217-297-1 .

Barker, Richard (1992). "Shipshape for Discoveries, and Return".

Mariner's Mirror .

78 (4): 433– 447.

doi : 10.1080/00253359.1992.10656421 .

Burningham, Nick (April 2001). "Learning to Sail the Duyfken Replica".

International Journal of Nautical Archaeology .

30 (1): 74– 85.

Bibcode : 2001IJNAr..30...74B .

doi : 10.1111/j.1095-9270.2001.tb01357.x .

Childs, David (2007).

The Warship Mary Rose: The Life and Times of King Henry VIII's Flagship . London: Chatham Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-86176-267-2 .

de Brossard, M. (1984). "The French and English Versions of the Loss of the Mary Rose in 1545".

Mariner's Mirror .

70 : 387.

Gardiner, Julie, ed. (2005z).

Before the Mast: Life and Death aboard the Mary Rose . The Archaeology of the Mary Rose. Vol. 4. Portsmouth: The Mary Rose Trust.

ISBN 0-9544029-4-4 .

Gardiner, Julie (2005). "The 'Good Shippe' Mary Rose : an Introduction". In Gardiner (2005z) , pp. 1–18.

Buckland, Kirstie (2005). "Silk Hats to Woolly Socks: Clothing Remains from the Mary Rose , Silk caps or coifs". In Gardiner (2005z) , pp. 35–37.

Castle, Jo & others (2005). "Septicaemia, Scurvy and the Spanish Pox: Provisions for the Sickness and Injury at Sea". In Gardiner (2005z) , pp. 171–225.

Montagu, Jermy (2005). "Music on Board the Mary Rose ". In Gardiner (2005z) , pp. 226–230.

Foster, Charles (2005). "Wind Instruments". In Gardiner (2005z) , pp. 240–241.

Alburger, Mary Anne (2005). "Bowed String Instruments". In Gardiner (2005z) , pp. 242–249.

Hicks, Robert (2005). "Navigation and Ship's Communication". In Gardiner (2005z) , pp. 264.

Stimson, Alan (2005). "The Navigation Instruments". In Gardiner (2005z) , pp. 267–281.

McKewan, Colin (2005). "The Ships' Carpenters and Their Tools". In Gardiner (2005z) , pp. 293–318.

Rodrigues, Jen (2005). "Staved containers (casks)". In Gardiner (2005z) , pp. 409–421.

Weinstein, Rosemary; Gardiner, Julie; Wood, Robin (2005). "Official issue or personal possession?". In Gardiner (2005z) , pp. 489–495.

Jones, Mark, ed. (2003).

For Future Generations: Conservation of a Tudor Maritime Collection . The Archaeology of the Mary Rose. Vol. 5. Portsmouth: The Mary Rose Trust.

ISBN 0-9544029-5-2 .

Knighton, C.S.; Loades, David M., eds. (2000).

The Anthony Roll of Henry VIII's Navy: Pepys Library 2991 and British Library Additional MS 22047 with Related dDocuments . Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing.

ISBN 0-7546-0094-7 .

Payne, Ann. "An Artistic Survey". In Knighton & Loades (2000) .

Loades, David (1992).

The Tudor Navy: An Administrative, Political and Military History . Aldershot: Scolar Press.

ISBN 0-85967-922-5 .

Loewen, Brad (2007b). "Casks from the 24M Wreck". In Grenier, Robert; Bernier, Marc-Andre; Stevens, Willis (eds.).

The Underwater Archaeology of Red Bay. Vol. 2: Material Culture . Ottawa: Parks Canada.

ISBN 9780660196527 .

McKee, Alexander (1974).

King Henry VIII's Mary Rose . New York: Stein and Day.

Marsden, Peter (2003).

Sealed by Time: The Loss and Recovery of the Mary Rose . The Archaeology of the Mary Rose. Vol. 1. Portsmouth: The Mary Rose Trust.

ISBN 978-0-9544029-0-7 .

Lewis, Wendell. "Raising the Mary Rose ". In Marsden (2003) .

Harrison, Richard. "Creating the Mary Rose Tudor Ship Museum". In Marsden (2003) .

Marsden, Peter, ed. (2009).

Mary Rose – Your Noblest Shippe: Anatomy of a Tudor Warship . The Archaeology of the Mary Rose. Vol. 2. Portsmouth: Mary Rose Trust.

ISBN 978-0-9544029-2-1 .

Barker, Richard; Loewen, Brad; Dobbs, Christopher. "Hull Design of the Mary Rose ". In Marsden (2009) .

Dobbs, Christopher. "The Galley". In Marsden (2009) .

Hildred, Alexzandra. "The Fighting Ship". In Marsden (2009) , pp. 297–344.

Palmer, Colin (September 2009). "Windward Sailing Capabilities of Ancient Vessels".

International Journal of Nautical Archaeology .

38 (2): 314– 330.

Bibcode : 2009IJNAr..38..314P .

doi : 10.1111/j.1095-9270.2008.00208.x .

Rodger, N. A. M. (August 1996). "The Development of Broadside Gunnery, 1450–1650".

The Mariner's Mirror .

82 (3): 301– 324.

doi : 10.1080/00253359.1996.10656604 .

ISSN 0025-3359 .

Rodger, Nicholas A. M. (1997).

The Safeguard of the Sea: A Naval History of Britain 660–1649 . New York: W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 0-393-04579-X .

Rule, Margaret (1983).

The Mary Rose: The Excavation and Raising of Henry VIII's Flagship (2nd ed.). London: Conway Maritime Press.

ISBN 0-85177-289-7 .

Scorrer, Jessica; Faillace, Katie E.; Hildred, Alexzandra; Nederbragt, Alexandra J.; Andersen, Morten B.; Millet, Marc-Alban; Lamb, Angela L.; Madgwick, Richard (2021).

"Diversity aboard a Tudor warship: investigating the origins of the Mary Rose crew using multi-isotope analysis" .

Royal Society Open Science .

8 (5): 202106.

Bibcode : 2021RSOS....802106S .

doi : 10.1098/rsos.202106 .

PMC 8097207 .

PMID 34035946 .

Stirland, Ann J. (2000).

Raising the Dead: The Skeleton Crew of Henry VIII's Great Ship, the Mary Rose . Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 0-471-98485-X .

Watt, James (1983). "SURGEONS OF THE MARY ROSE: The practice of surgery in Tudor England".

The Mariner's Mirror .

69 (1): 3– 19.

doi : 10.1080/00253359.1983.10655897 .

PMID 11620231 .

Weightman, Alfred Edwin (1957).

Heraldry in the Royal Navy, Crests and Badges of H.M. Ships . Aldershot: Gale and Polden.

Wille, Peter C. (2005).

Sound images of the ocean in research and monitoring . Berlin: Springer.

ISBN 3-540-24122-1 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bradford, Ernle (1982).

The Story of the Mary Rose . Hamish Hamilton.

Hardy, Robert & Strickland, Matthew (2005).

The Great Warbow: From Hastings to the Mary Rose . Sutton.

Hildred, Alexzandra, ed. (2011).

Weapons of Warre: The Armaments of the Mary Rose . The Archaeology of the Mary Rose , Volume 3. Portsmouth, UK: Mary Rose Trust.

ISBN 978-0-9544029-3-8 .

Miller, Peter (May 1983). "Henry VIII's Lost Warship".

National Geographic . Vol. 163, no. 5. pp.

646– 675.

ISSN 0027-9358 .

OCLC 643483454 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mary Rose .

Official website " Mary Rose " entry in the National Heritage List for England v t e Ships and vessels on the UK National Register of Historic Vessels Sailing ships Albion Ardwina Bloodhound Britannia Cambria Centaur Cutty Sark Decima Discovery Earl of Pembroke Edith May Edme Ena Excelsior Garlandstone Glenlee Hathor Irene Ironsides Kathleen & May Kitty Lady Daphne Lady of the Lea Lynher Maud Mirosa Peggy Pudge Reaper Reminder Shamrock Thalatta Will Wyvenhoe Xylonite Steamships Amazon Bertha Cervia Duke of Lancaster Explorer Freshspring Gondola Great Britain John H Amos Kingswear Castle Knocker White Lydia Eva Maid of the Loch Medway Queen Nomadic Queen Mary Robin Ryde Shieldhall Tattershall Castle Waverley Wingfield Castle Motor vessels Aberdonia Arctic Corsair Balmoral Bluebird of Chelsea Bustardthorpe Calshot Devon Belle Edmund Gardner Havengore Karina Lady of the Lake Lady Wakefield Massey Shaw Mincarlo Pyronaut Raven Ross Revenge Ross Tiger Royal Iris SR.N1 Sundowner Tern The Second Snark Tower Belle Western Belle Canal vessels Bessie Birchills Diamond Kildare Peacock Perseverance IV President Stour Lifeboats Aguila Wren Forester’s Centenary H F Bailey III Helen Smitton Henry Ramey Upcher J C Madge Jesse Lumb Lucy Lavers The Manchester Unity of Oddfellows Thomas McCunn William and Kate Johnstone Zetland Lightships Light Vessel 12 Spurn Light Vessel 14 Spurn North Carr LV 14 Sula LV 78 Calshot Spit LV 91 Warships CMB 4 HMS Alliance HMS Belfast HMS Bronington HMS Caroline HMS Cavalier HMS Gannet HMS Gay Archer The Minesweeper HMS Ocelot HMS President HMS Trincomalee HMS Unicorn HMS Victory HMS Warrior HMS Wellington M33 LCT 7074 Mary Rose MTB 102 RML 497 Vessels of the National Historic Fleet Albion RNLB Alfred Corry HMS Alliance Balmoral HMS Belfast Bertha HMY Britannia HMS Bronington Calshot Cambria HMS Caroline Centaur Cervia HMS Cavalier CMB 4 Cutty Sark Discovery Edmund Gardner Excelsior HMS Gannet Garlandstone Glenlee Great Britain Hathor H F Bailey III HMS Holland 1 Ironsides Jesse Lumb John H Amos Kathleen and May Kingswear Castle Lady Daphne Light Vessel 16 Lynher Light Vessel 12 Spurn Lydia Eva M33 Maid of the Loch Mary Rose Massey Shaw Maud Mayflower Medway Queen Mirosa MTB 102 Nomadic North Carr Peacock Peggy President HMS President Prince Frederick's Barge Ryde Pyronaut Queen Mary Queen Mary's Shallop Raven (1871) Raven (1889) Reaper Reminder Result RML 497 Robin Steam Pinnace 199 Shieldhall Sir Walter Scott Sundowner Tern Thalatta HMS Trincomalee Turbinia HMS Unicorn HMS Victory HMS Warrior Waverley HQS Wellington Wingfield Castle Xylonite Zetland Vessels listed on the National Archive of Historic Vessels Overseas Watch List City of Adelaide HMAS Curlew Eppleton Hall Falls of Clyde HMS Elfin Keewatin HMS Portisham RMS Queen Mary SAS Somerset Viola Disposed vessels Lincoln Castle Manxman HMS Plymouth HMS Stalker Waterwitch v t e Surviving ships launched before 1919 operational ⛵ preserved ⚓ Pre-1800 Pesse canoe ⚓ (8040–7510 BC) Dufuna canoe ⚓ (6250 BC) Bibongho canoe ⚓ (6000 BC) Pirogues de Bercy ⚓ (4500 BC) Khufu ship ⚓ (2500 BC) Carnegie boat ⚓ (1870–1831 BC) Chicago boat ⚓ (1870–1831 BC) Red boat ⚓ (1870–1831 BC) White boat ⚓ (1870–1831 BC) Appleby logboat ⚓ (1500–1300 BC) Dover Bronze Age Boat ⚓ (1500 BC) Hanson Log Boat ⚓ (1500 BC) Hasholme Logboat ⚓ (c. 750-390 BC) Ma'agan Michael Ship ⚓ (c. 450 BC) Fiskerton log boat ⚓ (457–300 BC) Hjortspring boat ⚓ (c. 350 BC) Kyrenia ship ⚓ (c. 350 BC) Poole Logboat ⚓ (c. 300 BC) Sea of Galilee Boat ⚓ (c. 85 BC) Alkedo ⚓ (1st century AD) De Meern 1 ⚓ (148 AD) Arles Rhône 3 ⚓ (c. 150 AD) Bevaix boat ⚓ (c. 182 AD) Roman ship of Marausa ⚓ (3rd century AD) Nydam Boat ⚓ (c. 320 AD) Oseberg Ship ⚓ (820 AD) Gokstad ship ⚓ (900 AD) Tune ship ⚓ (900 AD) Utrecht ship ⚓ (997–1030 AD) Skuldelev ships ⚓ (1030–1042 AD) Quanzhou ship ⚓ (1272 AD) Bremen cog ⚓ (c. 1380 AD) Newport Ship ⚓ (1449) Mary Rose ⚓ (1509) Tarihi Kadırga ⚓ (c. 1600) Vasa ⚓ (1627) Sparrow Hawk ⚓ (1628) St. Nicholas ⚓ (1640) State Barge of Charles II ⚓ (1670) La Belle ⚓ (1684) Queen Mary's Shallop ⚓ (1689) Prince Frederick's Barge ⚓ (1732) Victory ⚓ (1765) Philadelphia ⚓ (1776) Peggy ⚓ (c. 1789) Constitution ⛵ (1797) 1800–1879 Zetland ⚓ (1802) Ticonderoga ⚓ (1814) Trincomalee ⚓ (1817) Unicorn ⚓ (1824) Charles W. Morgan ⛵ (1841) Dom Fernando II e Glória ⚓ (1843) Bertha ⚓ (1844) Great Britain ⚓ (1845) Brandtaucher ⚓ (1850) Radetzky ⚓ (1851) Snow Squall ⚓ (1851) Edwin Fox ⚓ (1853) Constellation ⚓ (1854) Tudor Vladimirescu ⛵ (1854) Santiago ⚓ (1856) Skibladner ⛵ (1856) Gondola ⛵ (1859) Jylland ⚓ (1860) Warrior ⚓ (1860) Cairo ⚓ (1861) Mayflower ⚓ (1861) Australia ⚓ (1862) Chattahoochee ⚓ (1863) Daring ⚓ (1863) H. L. Hunley ⚓ (1863) Intelligent Whale ⚓ (1863) Neuse ⚓ (1863) Star of India ⛵ (1863) Sub Marine Explorer ⚓️ (1863) City of Adelaide ⚓ (1864) Jackson ⚓ (1864) Strelets (1864) El Mahrousa ⛵ (1865) Huáscar ⚓ (1865) Adelaide ⛵ (1866) Bjoren ⛵ (1866) Emma C. Berry ⚓ (1866) Buffel ⚓ (1868) Enköping ⛵ (1868) Lone Star ⚓ (1868) Schorpioen ⚓ (1868) Cutty Sark ⚓ (1869) Katarina ⚓ (1869) Yavari ⚓ (1870) Leitha ⚓ (1871) Lewis R. French ⛵ (1871) Raven ⛵ (1871) Stephen Taber ⛵ (1871) Puno ⛵ (1872) Gjøa ⚓ (1872) Meiji Maru ⚓ (1873) Rap ⚓ (1873) Hero ⛵ (1874) James Craig ⛵ (1874) Juno ⛵ (1874) Uruguay ⚓ (1874) Amphibious / Akuna Amphibious ⛵️ (1875) Muñoz Gamero (1875) Sölve ⚓ (1875) Anna Karoline ⚓ (1876) Avoca ⚓ (1877) Bonaire ⚓ (1877) Elissa ⛵ (1877) Gem ⚓ (1877) Governor Stone ⛵ (1877) Lady of the Lake ⛵ (1877) Success ⚓ (1877) Decoy ⚓ (1878) Enterprise ⛵ (1878) Falls of Clyde ⚓ (1878) Gannet ⚓ (1878) Holland I ⚓ (1878) Lady Elizabeth ⚓ (1879) Vallejo ⛵️ (1879) 1880–1899 Annie ⚓ (1880) Fenian Ram ⚓ (1881) Mary D. Hume ⚓️ (1881) Rothbury ⛵️ (1881) George Smeed ⛵️ (1882) Grace Bailey ⛵ (1882) Joseph Conrad ⛵ (1882) Christeen ⚓ (1883) Nelcebee ⚓ (1883) Abdón Calderón ⚓ (1884) Little Jennie ⚓ (1884) Kuna ⛵ (1884) PW Mayflower ⛵ (1884) Amazon ⛵ (1885) Coronet ⚓ (1885) Pioneer ⛵ (1885) Polly Woodside ⚓ (1885) Wavertree ⚓ (1885) Balclutha ⚓ (1886) L'Almée ⚓ (1885) Segwun ⛵ (1887) Sigyn ⚓ (1887) Tyr ⚓ (1887) Akarana ⚓ (1888) af Chapman ⚓ (1888) Elf ⛵ (1888) Equator ⚓ (1888) Priscilla ⚓ (1888) Anna Kristina ⛵ (1889) Arthur Foss ⚓ (1889) Edna E Lockwood ⛵️ (1889) Peral ⚓ (1889) Raven ⛵ (1889) " Eureka " ⚓ (1890) Persistence ⛵️ (1890) Robin ⚓ (1890) Alma ⚓ (1891) Nellie ⚓ (1891) Ruby G. Ford ⛵️ (1891) Tern ⛵ (1891) Fram ⚓ (1892) Kestrel ⚓ (1892) Mirosa ⛵ (1892) Olympia ⚓ (1892) Rona ⚓️ (1892) Coya ⚓ (1893) El Primero ⛵ (1893) Lettie G. Howard ⛵ (1893) Maggie S. Myers ⛵ (1893) Result ⚓ (1893) Viking ⚓ (1893) Alfred Corry (ON 353) ⚓ (1894) Effie M. Morrissey ⛵ (1894) Henry Ramey Upcher ⚓ (1894) Turbinia ⚓ (1894) Vridni ⚓ (1894) Lagaren ⚓ (1894) Bessie ⛵ (1895) C.A. Thayer ⚓ (1895) Centaur ⛵ (1895) Gedser Rev ⚓ (1895) Hiawatha ⛵ (1895) Kitty ⛵ (1895) Belem ⛵ (1896) Daisy ⚓ (1896) Edna G ⚓ (1896) Genève ⚓ (1896) Glenlee ⚓ (1896) Meteor ⚓ (1896) Pyap ⛵ (1896) Rebecca T. Ruark ⚓ (1896) Rickmer Rickmers ⚓ (1896) La Dolce Vita ⛵ (1897) Keenora ⚓ (1897) Marion ⛵ (1897) Najaden ⚓ (1897) Presidente Sarmiento ⚓ (1897) Tarella ⚓ (1897) Wyvern ⛵ (1897) Carola ⚓ (1898) Marjorie ⛵ (1898) Niagara ⛵ (1898) Berkeley ⚓ (1898) Edme ⛵ (1898) Etona ⛵ (1898) Moyie ⚓ (1898) Niagara ⛵ (1898) Waimarie ⛵️ (1898) Wyvenhoe ⛵ (1898) Albatros ⛵ (1899) Decima ⛵ (1899) Maud ⛵ (1899) Stjernen I ⛵ (1899) William B. Tennison ⚓ (1899) 1900–1907 Aurora ⚓ (1900) Edward M. Cotter ⛵ (1900) Ena ⛵ (1900) Helen McAllister ⚓ (1900) Howard L. Shaw ⚓ (1900) Ironsides ⛵ (1900) Kathleen and May ⛵ (1900) Mikasa ⚓ (1900) Regina M.

⚓️ (1900) Västan ⛵ (1900) Victory Chimes ⛵ (1900) Cangarda ⛵ (1901) Discovery ⚓ (1901) Duchesse Anne ⚓ (1901) Elsworth ⚓ (1901) Gazela ⚓ (1901) Holland 1 ⚓ (1901) Kathryn ⚓ (1901) Reaper ⛵ (1901) Sigsbee ⛵ (1901) Tilikum ⚓ c. 1901 Urger ⛵ (1901) Basuto ⚓ (1902) Columbia ⚓ (1902) Jupiter ⚓ (1902) Madiz ⛵ (1902) Shenandoah ⛵ (1902) Solway Lass ⛵ (1902) Stanley Norman ⚓ (1902) Suomen Joutsen ⚓ (1902) Alma Doepel ⛵ (1903) Billie P. Hall ⛵️ (1903) Celtic ⚓ (1903) Finngrundet ⚓ (1903) Föri ⛵️ (1903) Light Vessel 72 ⛵ (1903) Maggie Lee ⛵ (1903) Normac ⚓ (1903) Pommern ⚓ (1903) Alose ⚓ (1904) Ariki ⚓ (1904) Barnegat ⚓ (1904) Black Jack ⛵ (1904) Fannie L. Daugherty ⛵ (1904) J C Madge ⚓ (1904) Maple Leaf ⛵️ (1904) Juniata ⚓ (1904) Medea ⚓ (1904) Moshulu ⚓ (1904) Sava ⚓ (1904) Swiftsure ⚓ (1904) Asgard ⚓ (1905) Fæmund II ⛵ (1905) Hathor ⛵ (1905) Hilda M. Willing ⛵ (1905) Ridgetown (1905) ⚓ (1905) Alexander von Humboldt ⛵ (1906) Baltimore ⚓ (1906) Blümlisalp ⛵ (1906) Cambria ⛵ (1906) Edith May ⛵ (1906) Ena (1906) ⚓️ (1906) Ida May ⛵ (1906) Minnehaha ⛵ (1906) Minnie V ⛵️ (1906) Östanå I ⛵ (1906) St. Marys Challenger ⛵ (1906) Thalatta ⛵ (1906) Ticonderoga ⚓ (1906) U-1 ⚓ (1906) Viola ⚓ (1906) Ambrose ⚓ (1907) Drazki ⚓ (1907) Canally ⚓ (1907) F. C. Lewis Jr.

⛵ (1907) Henrik Ibsen ⛵ (1907) Hercules ⚓ (1907) Irene ⛵ (1907) Keewatin ⚓ (1907) Nyanza ⚓ (1907) Rosa ⛵ (1907) Ruby ⚓ (1907) Tarmo ⚓ (1907) Viking ⚓ (1907) Yankee ⚓ (1907) 1908–1914 Circle Line XIV ⛵ (1908) Entiat Princess ⛵ (1908) Fehmarnbelt ⛵ (1908) Mohican II ⛵ (1908) Oscar W ⛵ (1908) Oster ⛵ (1908) Sabino ⛵ (1908) Speeder ⛵️ (1908) Storskär ⛵ (1908) Ardwina ⛵ (1909) Bigwin ⛵️ ( 1909) Dar Pomorza ⚓ (1909) Duwamish ⚓ (1909) Großherzogin Elisabeth ⛵ (1909) Lotus ⛵ (1909) President ⛵ (1909) Stadt Zürich ⛵ (1909) Steam Pinnace 199 ⛵ (1909) Gonca ⛵ (1909) E.C. Collier ⚓ (1910) Georgios Averof ⚓ (1910) Noorderlicht ⛵ (1910) Norrskär ⛵ (1910) Ste. Claire ⚓ (1910) Trillium ⛵ (1910) Suriname-Rivier ⚓ (1910) Europa ⛵ (1911) Eye of the Wind ⛵ (1911) Helen Smitton ⚓ (1911) Hestmanden ⚓ (1911) Industry ⛵ (1911) James M. Schoonmaker ⚓ (1911) McKeever Brothers ⚓ (1911) Nellie L. Byrd ⛵ (1911) Nomadic ⚓ (1911) Nusret ⚓ (1911) Passat ⚓ (1911) Peking ⚓ (1911) Pevensey ⛵ (1911) Tradewind ⛵ (1911) Wäiski ⚓ (1911) African Queen ⚓ (1912) Astoria ⛵️ (1912) Canberra ⛵ (1912) Cartela ⛵ (1912) Chacon ⚓ (1912) Earnslaw ⛵ (1912) Gustaf III ⛵ (1912) Gustafsberg VII ⛵ (1912) James Caird ⚓ (1912) J. L. Runeberg ⛵ (1912) Kwasind ⛵ (1912) Lady Denman ⚓ (1912) Margaret ⛵ (1912) Melbourne ⛵ (1912) Sundowner ⛵ (1912) Texas ⚓ (1912) Wendameen ⛵ (1912) Zhongshan ⚓ (1912) Miktat Kalkavan ⛵ (1912) Acadia ⚓ (1913) Adventuress ⛵ (1913) Benjamim Guimarães ⛵ (1913) Dredge No. 4 ⚓️ (1913) Jolie Brise ⛵ (1913) Kildare ⛵ (1913) Kommuna ⛵ (1913) Kyle ⚓ (1913) North Head ⚓ (1913) Rusinga ⚓️ (1913) Stord I ⛵ (1913) Suur Tõll ⛵ (1913) Usoga ⛵ (1913) Naramata ⚓ (1914) Sicamous ⚓ (1914) Stadt Rapperswil ⛵ (1914) World War I Belle of Louisville ⛵ (1914) Britannia ⛵️ (1914) Bustardthorpe ⛵ (1914) Caroline ⚓ (1914) Hercules ⛵ (1914) Horns Rev ⚓ (1914) Katahdin ⛵ (1914) Libby's No. 23 ⚓ (1914) Doulos Phos ⚓ (1914) Perth ⚓ (1914) Pilot ⛵ (1914) Statsraad Lehmkuhl ⛵ (1914) Zumbrota ⛵ (1914) Bradbury ⚓ (1915) Graf von Goetzen ⛵ (1915) Katie ⛵ (1915) Langer Heinrich ⛵ (1915) M33 ⚓ (1915) Mar-Sue ⛵ (1915) Miseford ⛵ (1915) Peacock ⛵ (1915) Sankt Erik ⛵ (1915) Wilhelm Carpelan ⚓ (1915) Coastal Motor Boat 4 ⚓ (1916) Krassin ⚓ (1916) Mariette ⛵️ (1916) Mercantile ⛵ (1916) Portsmouth ⚓ (1916) UB-46 ⚓ (1916) Carlisle II ⛵ (1917) ⚓ (1917) Carpentaria ⚓ (1917) Commander ⛵ (1917) L'Art de Vivre ⛵ (1917) Maud ⚓ (1917) St. Julien ⛵️ (1917) Valley Camp ⚓️ (1917) El Don ⛵️ (1918) Felipe Larrazabal ⚓ (1918) Kapitan Borchardt ⛵ (1918) Lotus ⛵ (1918) Oosterschelde ⛵ (1918) President ⚓ (1918) Surprise ⛵ (1918) W. P. Snyder Jr.

⚓ (1918) v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National United States France BnF data Norway Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐zf8gl
Cached time: 20250818132326
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.007 seconds
Real time usage: 2.517 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 21400/1000000
Revision size: 122826/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 765110/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19355/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 268489/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.058/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21685958/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1865.678      1 -total
 34.78%  648.854     38 Template:Navbox
 19.17%  357.655    132 Template:Sfnp
 15.63%  291.545      1 Template:National_Historic_Ships
 13.34%  248.833     67 Template:Ship
 12.68%  236.547      2 Template:Reflist
 12.26%  228.721      1 Template:Oldest_surviving_ships_(pre-1919)
  6.67%  124.404      6 Template:Annotated_link
  5.24%   97.779      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  5.20%   97.016     11 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:19679:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818132326 and revision id 1302142524. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mary_Rose&oldid=1302142524 " Categories : 1510 in England 1545 in England 16th-century maritime incidents 16th-century ships 1971 archaeological discoveries 1982 in England Henry VIII History of archery Individual sailing vessels Italian War of 1542–1546 Museum ships in the United Kingdom Protected wrecks of England Ships and vessels of the National Historic Fleet Ships built in Portsmouth Ships of the English navy Ships preserved in museums Shipwrecks in the Solent Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2025 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Featured articles Use British English from January 2019 Use dmy dates from April 2020 Coordinates on Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 16:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mary Rose 32 languages Add topic

