Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Purpose 2 Variations 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Benthic lander 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Platform for measurements on the seabed Two benthic landers are prepared for a deployment during the Five Deeps Expedition.

A benthic lander uses the eddy correlation technique to measure oxygen flux in a benthic environment.

A benthic lander is an autonomous observational platform that sits on the seabed or benthic zone to record physical, chemical or biological activity.

[ 1 ] Benthic landers have deployment durations from a few days (for biological studies) to several years (for physical oceanography studies). In these studies they conduct a variety of underwater measurements, and thus different lander configurations exist to meet differing needs for different measurements.

Purpose [ edit ] Samples that are brought up from the seabed undergo large changes in temperature and pressure , thus changing their physical and chemical composition and properties.

[ 2 ] This change in properties means that any measurements taken from samples brought to the surface do not provide accurate data.

[ 2 ] In order to avoid this, it is best that the measurements are taken directly at the seabed level, without moving the samples. Initially, to prevent altering samples, divers would go to the sea bed and carry out the experiments.

[ 2 ] However, divers have a very small range of depth and a short time under water and cause a large disturbance to the sea bed, thereby introducing more error into the measurements.

[ 2 ] These shortcomings are improved by using benthic landers as they have a much larger depth and time capacity than divers and can be designed to cause minimal disturbance to the sea floor.

[ 2 ] Some common uses for the collected seabed data include studying currents , tides , and microseismic and magnetic field activity and monitoring marine life .

[ 2 ] Variations [ edit ] Benthic landers come in a variety of shapes and sizes depending upon the instrumentation they carry, and are typically capable of working at any ocean depth.

[ 3 ] One type of instrumentation that is often used on benthic landers is an eddy correlation instrument that measures oxygen flux .

[ 2 ] Different types of landers are used depending on the length and nature of the mission. Longer duration mission landers are typically equipped with ultrasonic sensors , LiDAR , and cameras in order to intelligently navigate the seabed.

[ 3 ] Additionally, depending on what measurements the mission is intended to take, the lander can be configured to disrupt the environment in different ways enabling for higher precision of certain data sets at the tradeoff of others.

[ 3 ] New technologies are constantly being developed to improve lander data collection, one example being holography , which is meant to be utilized to take measurements of the seabed far from the lander.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Oceans portal Marine snow Mooring (oceanography) Bottom crawler References [ edit ] ^ Freiwald, André (2005-05-20).

Cold-Water Corals and Ecosystems . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-3-540-24136-2 .

^ a b c d e f g Tengberg, A.; De Bovee, F.; Hall, P.; Berelson, W.; Chadwick, D.; Ciceri, G.; Crassous, P.; Devol, A.; Emerson, S.; Gage, J.; Glud, R.; Graziottini, F.; Gundersen, J.; Hammond, D.; Helder, W. (January 1995).

"Benthic chamber and profiling landers in oceanography — A review of design, technical solutions and functioning" .

Progress in Oceanography .

35 (3): 253– 294.

Bibcode : 1995PrOce..35..253T .

doi : 10.1016/0079-6611(95)00009-6 .

ISSN 0079-6611 .

^ a b c d Viollier, E; Rabouille, C; Apitz, S.E; Breuer, E; Chaillou, G; Dedieu, K; Furukawa, Y; Grenz, C; Hall, P; Janssen, F; Morford, J.L; Poggiale, J.-C; Roberts, S; Shimmield, T; Taillefert, M (February 2003).

"Benthic biogeochemistry: state of the art technologies and guidelines for the future of in situ survey" .

Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology .

285– 286: 5– 31.

Bibcode : 2003JEMBE.285....5V .

doi : 10.1016/s0022-0981(02)00517-8 .

hdl : 21.11116/0000-0001-D24F-A .

ISSN 0022-0981 .

v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal This article needs additional or more specific categories .

Please help out by adding categories to it so that it can be listed with similar articles.

( October 2024 ) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Benthic_lander&oldid=1257866358 " Categories : Oceanographic instrumentation Physical oceanography Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional categories from October 2024 This page was last edited on 17 November 2024, at 00:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Benthic lander 1 language Add topic

