Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 1840s–1890s 2 1900s–1920s 3 1930s 4 1940s 5 1950s–1960s 6 1970s 7 1980s–1990s 8 2000s–present 9 Additional incidents 10 See also 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Anti-Mexican sentiment 5 languages Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Prejudice against Mexico The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( September 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( January 2025 ) "No Dogs, Negroes, Mexicans" was a policy enforced by the Lonestar Restaurant Association throughout Texas.

Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Part of a series on Chicanos and Mexican Americans Terms Identity Chola/o La Raza Pachuca Pachuco Pinta/o Xicanx Concepts Anti-Mexican sentiment History Early-American Period Josefa Segovia Las Gorras Blancas Mexican–American War Mutualista San Elizario Salt War Sonoratown Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo Pre-Chicano Movement 1917 Bath riots Bisbee Deportation Bloody Christmas Bracero program California agricultural strikes Cantaloupe strike of 1928 Citrus Strike of 1936 La Matanza Mexican Repatriation Operation Wetback Plan de San Diego Porvenir Massacre Sleepy Lagoon trial Zoot Suit Riots Chicano Movement Aztlán Black-brown unity Brown Berets Católicos por La Raza Tulare labor camps rent strike Delano grape strike Centro Cultural Chicanismo Chicano Moratorium Colegio César Chávez CFMN Conferencia de Mujeres CRP East L.A. walkouts Hijas de Cuauhtémoc Huelga schools Land grant struggle Las Adelitas de Aztlán Los Siete de la Raza Los Seis de Boulder MANA MAYO MEChA Occupation of Catalina Island PCUN Plan Espiritual de Aztlán Plan de Santa Bárbara Quinto Sol Raza Unida Party United Farm Workers Post-Chicano Period 1985–1987 cannery strike 1992 Drywall Strike 2019 El Paso shooting Abolish ICE Arizona SB 1070 Castro 2020 Chicano Art Exhibit DACA Great American Boycott IRCA Farah strike Justice for Janitors Murder of Selena Proposition 187 South Central Farm Culture Language Abrazos, no balazos Caló Chicano English Chicano names Órale Food New Mexican cuisine Tex-Mex cuisine Mexican-American cuisine Music Chicano rap Chicano rock Chicano soul Tejano music Symbols Cal-Style VW Homies Lowrider Lowrider bicycle Mexican-American folklore Pancho Claus Zoot suit Literature Literature Chicana literature Chicano literature Chicano poetry Autobiographical Always Running Living Up the Street Who Would Have Thought It?

Novels Bless Me, Ultima Caballero Desert Blood From This Wicked Patch of Dust Mexican WhiteBoy The Dirty Girls Social Club The House on Mango Street The Rain God The Revolt of the Cockroach People So Far from God Under the Feet of Jesus ...y no se lo tragó la tierra Poetry and Short Stories Emplumada I Am Joaquin Moment of Silence Pensamiento Serpentino The Moths Chicano studies Fields Chicana feminism Chicanafuturism Organizations MAS Programs, Tucson NACCS UCLA Chicano Studies Research Center Texts Borderlands/La Frontera: The New Mestiza Brown, Not White The Church in the Barrio This Bridge Called My Back Theory Barrioization Coyolxauhqui imperative Gringo justice Nahui Ollin Nepantla New tribalism Rasquachismo Spiritual activism Vergüenza Youth control complex Visual art Visual Art Chicana art Chicano art Chicano cinema Paño Tortilla art Art Collectives Asco Culture Clash East Los Streetscapers Los Four Mujeres Muralistas Teatro Campesino Royal Chicano Air Force Art organizations Centro de Arte Público Galería de la Raza Mission Cultural Center for Latino Arts Precita Eyes Self Help Graphics & Art Locations Balmy Alley Chicano Park Estrada Courts Great Wall of Los Angeles Law Supreme Court cases Botiller v. Dominguez Hernandez v. Texas San Antonio I.S.D. v. Rodriguez Espinoza v. Farah Manufacturing Co.

U.S. v. Brignoni-Ponce Plyler v. Doe Medellín v. Texas Flores-Figueroa v. U.S.

Leal Garcia v. Texas Mendez v. Westminster Bernal v. Fainter Perez v. Brownell DHS v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal.

Federal Court cases Madrigal v. Quilligan Population Population by City Arizona ( Tucson ) California ( Los Angeles ) Illinois ( Chicago ) Michigan ( Detroit ) Nebraska ( Omaha ) Texas Dallas–Fort Worth Houston Multiethnic Blaxicans Californios Nuevomexicanos Tejanos Indigenous Mexican Americans Punjabi Mexican Americans Lists Chicano films Chicano poets Chicano rappers Mexican Americans Writers Bibliography United States portal Category Index v t e Anti-Mexican sentiment is prejudice, fear, discrimination, xenophobia, racism, or hatred towards Mexico , its people , and their culture . It is most commonly seen in the United States .

Its origins in the United States date back to the Mexican and American Wars of Independence and the struggle over the disputed Southwestern territories. That struggle would eventually lead to the Mexican–American War in which the defeat of Mexico caused a great loss of territory. In the 20th century, anti-Mexican sentiment continued to grow after the Zimmermann Telegram , an incident between the Mexican government and the German Empire during World War I .

[ 1 ] Throughout US history, negative stereotypes have circulated regarding Mexicans [ 2 ] and often reflected in film and other media .

[ 3 ] 1840s–1890s [ edit ] The hanging of Josefa Segovia (Juanita) in Downieville 1851. In complete disregard of her identity, she came to be known as "Juanita" after her death, a stereotypical name for a Mexican woman.

Due to the result of the Texas Revolution (1835-1836) and Texas Annexation (1845), the U.S. inherited the Republic of Texas 's border disputes with Mexico, which led to the eruption of the Mexican–American War (1846–1848). After the defeat of Mexico, it was forced to sign the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo . The treaty required Mexico to cede almost half its land to the United States in exchange for 15 million dollars but also guaranteed that Mexican citizens living in ceded lands would retain full property rights and be granted American citizenship if they remained in the ceded lands for at least one year.

[ 4 ] The treaty and others led to the establishment in 1889 of the International Boundary and Water Commission , which was tasked with maintaining the border, allocating river waters between the two nations, and providing for flood control and water sanitation.

[ 5 ] The lynching of Mexican-Americans in the American Southwest has long been overlooked in U.S. history.

[ 6 ] That may be because the Tuskegee Institute files and reports, which contain the most comprehensive lynching records in the US, categorized Mexican, Chinese, and Native American lynching victims and white as well.

[ 7 ] Statistics of reported lynching in the United States indicate that between 1882 and 1951, 4,730 persons were lynched, 1,293 of whom were white and 3,437 black.

[ 8 ] The actual number of Mexicans lynched is unknown. William D. Carrigan and Clive Webb estimate that between 1848 and 1928, at least 597 Mexicans were lynched, [ 7 ] of which 64 in areas that lacked a formal judicial system.

[ 7 ] One particularly infamous lynching occurred on July 5, 1851, when a Mexican woman, Josefa Segovia , was lynched by a mob in Downieville, California . She was accused of killing a man who had attempted to assault her after he had broken into her home.

[ 9 ] Law enforcement conducted a considerable amount of these murders; therefore, the malefactors seldom stood trial for lynching Mexican people. Mexicans were lynched for various reasons such as job competition, speaking Spanish too loudly in a public setting, romantically advancing towards white women, acknowledging the Anglo system of cultural difference, and much more.

[ 10 ] During the California Gold Rush , right after California became a state of the United States, violence against Mexicans increased. White miners begrudged Mexican people.

[ 11 ] 1900s–1920s [ edit ] See also: 1917 Bath riots The Bisbee Deportation was the illegal deportation of about 1,300 striking mine workers, supporters, and citizen bystanders by 2,000 vigilantes on July 12, 1917. The workers and others were kidnapped in the town of Bisbee, Arizona , and held at a local baseball park. They were then loaded onto cattle cars and transported 200 miles (320 km) for 16 hours through the desert without food or water. The deportees were unloaded at Hermanas, New Mexico, without money or transportation and were warned not to return to Bisbee.

[ 12 ] See also: La Matanza (1910–1920) In 1911, a mob of over 100 people hanged a 14-year-old boy, Antonio Gómez, who while trying to escape from a mob that encircled him, killed a German man named Charles Zieschang; he was arrested  for murder. Rather than let him serve time in jail, townspeople lynched him and dragged his body through the streets of Thorndale, Texas .

Between 1910 and 1919, Texas Rangers were responsible for the deaths of hundreds to thousands of ethnic Mexicans in South Texas .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The violence continued through the Porvenir Massacre on January 28, 1918, when Texas Rangers summarily executed 15 Mexicans in Presidio County, Texas .

[ 13 ] This caused State Representative José Canales to head an investigation into systematic violence against Mexicans by the Texas Rangers, which tried to end the pattern of violence and led to the dismissal of five rangers involved in the massacre.

[ 15 ] 1930s [ edit ] The Mexican community (most having been on their land since before the Mex/American war and granted citizenship after the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo was signed) has been the subject of widespread immigration raids. During the Great Depression , the US government sponsored Mexican Repatriation programs, which were intended to pressure people to move to Mexico, but many were deported against their will. 355,000 to 500,000 individuals were repatriated or deported; 40 to 60% of them US citizens - overwhelmingly children.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] In 1936, Colorado even ordered all of its "Mexicans," in reality, anyone who spoke Spanish or seemed to be of Latin descent, to leave the state, and it blockaded its southern border to keep people from going back. Though no formal decree was ever issued by immigration authorities, Immigration and Naturalization Service officials helped the expulsions.

1940s [ edit ] See also: Mendez v. Westminster and Zoot Suit Riots The Zoot Suit Riots were a series of racial attacks in June 1943 in Los Angeles, California, between Mexican youths and European American servicemen stationed in Southern California.

According to the National World War II Museum , between 250,000 and 500,000 Mexicans served in the United States Armed Forces during World War II and comprised 2.3% to 4.7% of the Army. The exact number, however, is unknown as Hispanics were then classified as whites. Generally, Mexican World War II servicemen were integrated into regular military units. However, many Mexican War veterans were discriminated against and even denied medical services by the US Department of Veterans Affairs when they arrived home.

[ 20 ] In 1948, the war veteran Dr Hector P. Garcia founded the American GI Forum (AGIF) to address the concerns of Mexican veterans who were being discriminated. The AGIF's first campaign was on the behalf of Felix Longoria , a Mexican private who was killed in the Philippines in the line of duty. Upon the return of his body to his hometown of Three Rivers, Texas , he was denied funeral services because he was Mexican.

In the 1940s, imagery in newspapers and crime novels portrayed Mexican zoot suiters as disloyal foreigners or murderers attacking non-Hispanic white police officers and servicemen. Opposition to zoot suiters sparked a series of attacks on young Mexican males in Los Angeles, which became known as the Zoot Suit Riots . The worst of the riots occurred on June 9, 1943 during which 5,000 servicemen and residents gathered in Downtown Los Angeles and attacked Mexicans, only some of whom were zoot suiters.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] In Orange County, California , Mexican school children were subject to racial segregation in the public school system and forced to attend "Mexican schools." In 1947, Mendez v. Westminster was a ruling that declared that segregating children of "Mexican and Latin descent" in state-operated public schools in Orange County was unconstitutional. That helped lay the foundation for the landmark Brown v Board of Education , a case that ended racial segregation in the public schools.

[ 23 ] 1950s–1960s [ edit ] See also: Battle of Chavez Ravine , United Farm Workers , and East L.A. walkouts In many counties in the southwestern United States, Mexicans were not selected as jurors in court cases that involved Mexican defendants.

[ 24 ] In 1954, Pete Hernandez, an agricultural worker, was indicted of murder by a jury that was all non-Hispanic white in Jackson County, Texas . Hernandez believed that the jury could not be impartial unless members of other races were allowed on the jury-selecting committees and noted a Mexican had not been on a jury for more than 25 years in that particular county. Hernandez and his lawyers decided to take the case to the US Supreme Court. The Hernandez v. Texas ruling declared that illegal Mexicans and other cultural groups in the United States are entitled to equal protection under the Fourteenth Amendment of the US Constitution .

[ 25 ] Many organizations, businesses, and homeowners associations had official policies to exclude Mexicans. In many areas across the Southwest, Mexicans lived in separate residential areas because of laws and real estate company policies. The group of laws and policies, known as redlining , lasted until the 1950s and fell under the concept of official segregation.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] 1970s [ edit ] One of the most vicious cases occurred at the U.S.-Mexico border west of Douglas, Arizona , on August 18, 1976, when three Mexican campesinos who had crossed the border illegally, were attacked while they were crossing a ranch belonging to Douglas dairyman George Hanigan. The three were kidnapped, stripped, hogtied , and had their feet burned before they were cut loose and told to run back to Mexico. As the three men ran, the Hanigans shot birdshot into their backs. The three made it back across the border to Agua Prieta, Sonora , where the local police notified the Mexican consulate in Douglas , which lodged formal complaints against George Hanigan and his two sons.

[ 29 ] George Hanigan died of a heart attack at the age of 67 on March 22, 1977, one week before he and his sons were scheduled to go on trial.

[ 30 ] After three trials, one of the Hanigan sons was convicted in federal court and sentenced to three years, and the other was found not guilty.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] 1980s–1990s [ edit ] In 1994, California state voters approved Proposition 187 by a wide majority.

[ 33 ] The initiative made undocumented immigrants ineligible for public health (except for emergencies), public social services, and public education. It required public agencies to report anyone they believed to be undocumented to either the INS (now ICE) or the California attorney general. It made it a felony to print, sell, or use false citizenship documents.

[ 33 ] Many Mexicans opposed such measures as reminiscent of ethnic discrimination before the Civil Rights Era and denounced the actions as illegal under state and federal laws, as well as international law involving the rights of foreign nationals in other countries.

[ 33 ] The initiative was eventually declared unconstitutional by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in San Francisco .

[ 33 ] 2000s–present [ edit ] See also: H.R. 4437 As of July 2018, 37.0 million Americans, or 10.3% of the United States' population, identify themselves as being of full or partial Mexican ancestry ; [ 34 ] that was 61.9% of all Hispanics and Latinos in the United States.

[ 34 ] The US is home to the second-largest Mexican community in the world, second only to Mexico itself, and is over 24% of the entire Mexican-origin population of the world ( Canada is a distant third with a small Mexican Canadian population of 96,055 or 0.3% of the population as of 2011).

[ 35 ] In addition, approximately 7,000,000 Mexicans lived undocumented in the United States in 2008.

[ 36 ] In 2012, the United States admitted 145,326 Mexican immigrants, [ 37 ] and 1,323,978 Mexicans were waiting for a slot to open so that they could emigrate to the United States.

[ 38 ] A 2014 survey indicated that 34% of all Mexicans would immigrate to the United States if they could do so.

[ 39 ] Some private citizen groups have been established to apprehend immigrants crossing undocumented into the United States. Such groups, like the Minuteman Project and other anti-immigration organizations, have been accused of discrimination because of their aggressive and illegal tactics.

[ 40 ] As Mexicans make up most Latinos in the United States, when the non-Latino population is asked to comment on their perception of Latinos, it tends to think of stereotypes of Mexicans that are fueled by the media, which focus on undocumented immigration . In a 2012 survey conducted by the National Hispanic Media Coalition , one-third of non-Hispanics (Whites and Blacks) mistakenly believed that most of the nation's Hispanics were "illegal immigrants with large families and little education." [ 41 ] The report has been criticized on the grounds that it makes the same mistake as the media in aggregating all Latinos into a single group, which misses both the diversity of the situations of the different groups and the varying perceptions of those groups by the non-Latino population.

[ 41 ] From 2003 to 2007 in California, the state with the largest illegal Mexican population, the number of hate crimes against Mexicans almost doubled.

[ 42 ] Anti-Mexican feelings are sometimes directed also against other Latino nationalities even though anti-Mexican sentiment exists in some Caribbean and Latino groups.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] American president Donald Trump has made anti-Mexican and anti-immigrant remarks.

[ 45 ] Trump stated that Mexicans were criminals, drug dealers and rapists.

[ 46 ] In the 2019 El Paso Walmart shooting , a white man who was a White nationalist terrorist shot and killed 22 and injured 26 Latinos in a Walmart in El Paso with a WASR-10 rifle. The white demographic decline was believed to be his motive for attacking Mexicans.

[ 47 ] Trump also made anti-Mexican racist remarks about Vanessa Guillén .

[ 48 ] Additional incidents [ edit ] Main article: Madrigal v. Quilligan In July 2008, Luis Ramirez, a Mexican undocumented immigrant, was beaten to death by several white youths in Shenandoah, Pennsylvania , while he was walking home one evening. Witnesses reported that the assailants yelled racial epithets at Ramirez as they attacked him.

[ 49 ] His white fiancée and the mother of his two children, Crystal Dillman, was quoted as saying of the four teenagers, "I think they might get off, because Luis was an illegal Mexican and these are 'all-American boys' on the football team who get good grades, or whatever they're saying about them. They'll find some way to let them go." [ 50 ] Brandon Piekarsky, 17, and Derrick Donchak, 19, received sentences of 7 to 23 months for their roles in the murder of 25-year-old Mexican immigrant.

[ 51 ] Piekarsky and Donchak were later convicted of civil rights violations in federal court and sentenced to 9 years in federal prison.

[ 52 ] In 2008, Rodolfo Olmedo, a Mexican, was dragged down by a group of men shouting anti-Mexican epithets and bashed over the head with a wooden stick on the street outside his home, the first of 11 suspected attacks that year motivated by anti-Hispanic bias in the neighborhood of Port Richmond, Staten Island . The area is predominantly African American but has seen a large influx of Mexican immigrants.

[ 53 ] Four African-American teens, Rolston Hopson, William Marcano and Tyrone Goodman, all age 17, and Ethan Cave, age 15, were charged in the assault.

[ 54 ] They all took plea bargains : Hopson pleaded guilty  to second-degree robbery; Goodman and Marcano pleaded guilty to attempted third-degree robbery, and Cave pleaded guilty to third-degree robbery.

[ 55 ] Although the US Border Patrol is majority Latino (According to 2016 data, Latinos constitute slightly more than 50% of the Border Patrol), [ 56 ] In July 2019, more than 60 border patrol agents were investigated over their participation in a Facebook page that mocked migrants.

[ 57 ] Organizations including neo-Nazi , white supremacist , American nationalist , and nativist groups have all been recently known to intimidate , harass , and advocate the use of violence against Mexicans.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] A domestic terrorist attack/mass shooting occurred on August 3, 2019 at a Walmart store in El Paso, Texas , and resulted in 23 people dead and 23 injured, 18 of which were Hispanic Americans and/or Mexicans.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] The white gunman, Patrick Crusius, told El Paso Police that he was trying to kill as many Mexicans as possible.

[ 64 ] In a manifesto, The Inconvenient Truth , published on 8chan just before the attacks, Crusius had cited several white nationalist beliefs such as a supposed "Hispanic invasion of Texas " and The Great Replacement conspiracy theory ; stated that he was "simply trying to defend my country from cultural and ethnic replacement brought on by an invasion" ( white genocide conspiracy theory ), environmental degradation ; contempt towards corporations , and their use of automation to replace workers. Crusius said that he was inspired in part by the 2019 Christchurch mosque shootings .

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] Six people were shot; three fatally in Annapolis, Maryland on June 11, 2023; the victims consisted of people of Mexican and Central American origin; the perpetrator is Caucasian, and has been charged with murder, attempted murder, and hate crime enhancements to each violence-related charge.

See also [ edit ] History of Hispanic and Latino Americans in the United States History of Mexican Americans Nativism (politics) in the United States#Hispanic targets Racism in the United States#Hispanic and Latino Americans Anti-Chilean sentiment Anti-Venezuelan sentiment Hispanophobia Madrigal v. Quilligan Racial views of Donald Trump Migrant detentions under the Trump administration Deportation of illegal immigrants in the second presidency of Donald Trump Trump wall Donald Trump 2016 presidential campaign References [ edit ] ^ "Resources 4 Educators" . Education.texashistory.unt.edu. Archived from the original on May 3, 2017 . Retrieved September 28, 2013 .

^ Flores Niemann Yolanda, et al.

Black-Brown-Red Relations and Stereotypes (2003); Charles Ramírez Berg, Latino Images in Film: Stereotypes, Subversion, & Resistance (2002); Chad Richardson, Batos, Bolillos, Pochos, and Pelados: Class & Culture on the South Texas Border (1999) ^ Powers, Elizabeth.

"Life on the Texas-Mexico Border: Myth and reality as represented in Mainstream and Independent Western Cinema" Archived November 12, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Paper presented at the annual meeting of the International Communication Association, Marriott Hotel, San Diego, CA, May 27, 2003 ^ Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, Article 8 ^ Robert J. McCarthy, Executive Authority, Adaptive Treaty Interpretation, and the International Boundary and Water Commission, U.S.–Mexico, 14-2 U. Denv. Water L. Rev. 197(Spring 2011) (also available for free download at Robert John McCarthy (15 May 2011). Executive Authority, Adaptive Treaty Interpretation, and the International Boundary and Water Commission, U.S.–Mexico ) ^ "When Americans Lynched Mexicans" .

The New York Times . February 20, 2015.

^ a b c Carrigan, William D. and Clive Web.

"The lynching of persons of Mexican origin or descent in the United States, 1848 to 1928" Archived September 3, 2014, at the Wayback Machine The Journal of Social History 37:2 (Winter 2003): 413.

^ "lynching." Encyclopædia Britannica Online. December 22, 2009.

Lynching MOB VIOLENCE .

^ "Latinas: Area Studies Collections" .

memory.loc.gov .

^ Alfredo, Mirandé (2020).

Gringo Injustice : Insider Perspectives on Police, Gangs, and Law . Taylor & Francis Group. pp.

26– 28.

ISBN 9780367276058 .

^ "The Long History of Anti-Latino Discrimination in America" .

^ Remembering the Bisbee Deportation of 1917 - Special Collections ^ a b Carrigan, William D.; Webb, Clive (2013).

Forgotten Dead . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 65, 86– 87.

^ "Refusing to Forget: Monica Muñoz Martinez Uncovers America's History at the Border" .

The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation . November 15, 2018 . Retrieved December 7, 2018 .

^ E., OROZCO, CYNTHIA (June 15, 2010).

"PORVENIR MASSACRE" .

tshaonline.org . Retrieved March 19, 2017 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Gratton, Brian; Merchant, Emily (December 2013).

"Immigration, Repatriation, and Deportation: The Mexican-Origin Population in the United States, 1920-1950" (PDF) . Vol. 47, no. 4. The International migration review. pp.

944– 975.

^ 1930s Mexican Deportation: Educator brings attention to historic period and its effect on her family Archived October 5, 2006, at the Wayback Machine ^ Mexican Repatriation in the 1930s is Little Known Story Archived March 13, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ Chapter Fifteen Archived August 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ Williams, Rudi (December 5, 1998).

"Hispanics Lose Staunchest Trumpeter for Fairness, Equality" .

American Forces Press Service . Archived from the original on December 8, 2006.

^ Zoot Suit Riots Archived June 29, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ Chapter Sixteen Archived October 2, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ "LatinoLA - Hollywood :: Mendez v. Westminster" .

LatinoLA . Archived from the original on January 11, 2019 . Retrieved August 6, 2007 .

^ CARL, ALLSUP, V. (June 15, 2010).

"HERNANDEZ V. STATE OF TEXAS" .

www.tshaonline.org .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Hernandez v. Texas | The Oyez Project at IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law" . Oyez.org . Retrieved September 28, 2013 .

^ "RACE - History - Post-War Economic Boom and Racial Discrimination" .

www.understandingrace.org . Archived from the original on August 18, 2013 . Retrieved August 30, 2007 .

^ JS Online: Filmmaker explores practice of redlining in documentary Archived September 29, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ Pulido, Laura (December 17, 2005).

Black, Brown, Yellow, and Left: Radical Activism in Los Angeles - Laura Pulido - Google Boeken . University of California Press.

ISBN 9780520245204 . Retrieved September 28, 2013 .

^ "3 Illegal Aliens Survive Desert Torture, Shooting", Arizona Daily Star (Tucson, Arizona), August 21, 1977, p. 1 ^ "Hanigan Died Of Heart Attack", Arizona Sun (Flagstaff, Arizona), March 23, 1977, p. 3 ^ History News Network: "From Hanigan to SB 1070: How Arizona Got to Where It Is Today" by Geraldo Cadava August 22, 2010 ^ Miller, Tom.

On the Border: Portraits of America's Southwestern Frontier , p. 143-173.

^ a b c d García, Alma M. (2002).

The Mexican . Greenwood Publishing Group. p.

119 .

ISBN 9780313314995 . Retrieved June 12, 2015 .

mexican-americans oppose california prop 187.

^ a b "B03001 HISPANIC OR LATINO ORIGIN BY SPECIFIC ORIGIN - United States - 2018 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates" .

U.S. Census Bureau . July 1, 2018 . Retrieved November 25, 2019 .

^ "National Household Survey (NHS) Profile, 2011" . 2.statcan.gc.ca. May 8, 2013 . Retrieved March 24, 2014 .

^ Pew Hispanic Center: "A Portrait of Unauthorized Immigrants to the United States" Archived January 28, 2013, at the Wayback Machine April 11, 2009 ^ Department of Homeland Security: "2012 Yearbook of Immigration Statistics" 2012 ^ "U.S. State Department: "Annual Report of Immigrant Visa Applicants in the Family-sponsored and Employment-based preferences Registered at the National Visa Center as of November 1, 2014" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 10, 2017 . Retrieved June 24, 2017 .

^ Romo, Rafael (August 27, 2014).

"Third of Mexicans would migrate to U.S., survey finds" .

CNN . Retrieved February 22, 2019 .

^ "Vigilantes not welcome: A border town pushes back on anti-immigrant extremists" .

^ a b Torregrosa, Luisita Lopez (September 18, 2012).

"Media Feed Bias Against Latinos" .

The New York Times . Retrieved June 12, 2015 .

^ "FBI Statistics Show Anti-Latino Hate Crimes on the Rise" .

Democracy Now!

.

^ "Race and Ethnicity in California: Demographics Report Series- No. 5 (December 2001) Latino Communities of the Central Valley: Population, Families, and Households" (PDF) .

ccsre.stanford.edu . Archived from the original (PDF) on February 16, 2008.

^ Orlando Sentinel: "Hate Fuels Fight In Kissimmee - Puerto Rican Youth Is Beaten, 2 Men Are Charged In Attack" By Lenny Savino July 8, 1998. "'One of them [Crespo] said you're Mexican, talk to Mexican girls, not American girls,' Rosado said. 'He got out of the car. I didn't say anything. He punched me in my nose and eye.'" ^ "Anti-Immigrant and Anti-Mexican Attitudes And Policies during the First 18 Months Of the Trump Administration" .

^ "What Donald Trump has said about Mexico and vice versa" .

^ "Latinos & Racism in the Trump Era" .

^ "Trump: 'I Need the Kind of Generals That Hitler Had' " .

^ "Federal Grand Jury Indictment Alleges Hate Crime and Police Cover-Up in the Murder of Mexican Immigrant" . Blog.latinovations.com. December 16, 2009 . Retrieved September 28, 2013 .

^ Hamill, Sean D. (August 5, 2008).

"Mexican's Death Bares a Town's Ethnic Tension" .

The New York Times .

^ Rosario, Mariela (June 18, 2009).

"Teens Convicted of Murdering Luis Ramirez Sentenced to 7 Months in Jail" . Latina . Retrieved September 28, 2013 .

^ Black, Caroline (February 24, 2011).

"Deadly Pa. Hate Attack Brings 9 Years in Prison for Killers of Hispanic Immigrant" .

CBS News .

^ Fox News: "Attacks against Mexican immigrants in NYC's Staten Island inflame black-Hispanic tensions" August 16, 2010 ^ NY1: "Four Teens Charged With Alleged Staten Island Bias Attack" By Tetiana Anderson April 10, 2010 ^ Donelley, Frank (December 9, 2010).

"Four Staten Island teens cut plea deals in beating of Mexican immigrant" .

Staten Island Advance .

^ Mejia, Brittny (April 23, 2018).

"Many Latinos answer call of the Border Patrol in the age of Trump" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on June 24, 2018 . Retrieved June 24, 2018 .

^ Long, Colleen (July 15, 2019).

"62 Border Patrol Employees Under Internal Investigation Over 'Discriminatory' Facebook Posts" .

Time . Archived from the original on July 15, 2019 . Retrieved August 9, 2019 .

^ "New Immigrant Backlash: KKK Targets Mexicans" .

ABC News . January 8, 2009.

^ "SPLCenter.org: Anti-Latino Violence" . Archived from the original on February 3, 2010 . Retrieved January 30, 2010 .

^ Mead, Julia C. (June 15, 2006).

"4 Are Held in Attack on Mexican Immigrants" .

The New York Times .

^ Cranley, Ellen; Frias, Lauren (August 6, 2019).

"Full list of El Paso shooting victims: photos, stories, ages" .

Insider . Retrieved August 8, 2019 .

^ Jackson, Amanda; Grinberg, Emmanuel; Chavez, Nicole (August 4, 2019).

"These are the El Paso shooting victims" .

CNN . Retrieved August 9, 2019 .

^ "El Paso Shooting Victim Dies Months Later, Death Toll Now 23" .

The New York Times . April 26, 2020 . Retrieved April 26, 2020 .

^ "Police: El Paso shooting suspect said he targeted Mexicans" .

AP News . August 9, 2019.

^ "Minutes Before El Paso Killing, Hate-Filled Manifesto Appears Online" .

The New York Times . August 3, 2019 . Retrieved August 9, 2019 .

^ "What's inside the hate filled manifesto linked to the alleged El Paso shooter" .

Washington Post . August 4, 2019 . Retrieved August 9, 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Anti-Mexican sentiment at Wikimedia Commons v t e Racism Types of racism Aversive Colorism Covert Cultural Cyber Environmental Formal Gendered Institutional Internalized Patent Laissez-faire Linguistic Neocolonial Romantic Scientific Societal Substantive Symbolic Manifestations of racism Anti-miscegenation laws Apartheid Biological determinism Discrimination based on nationality Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic jokes Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Hate crime Hate speech Hate group Hypodescent / Hyperdescent Racial capitalism Racialization Racial hierarchy Racial nationalism Racial profiling Racial segregation Racism by region Global apartheid Africa South Africa Zimbabwe Asia China Japan North Korea South Korea Thailand Vietnam Arab world Libya Saudi Arabia Sudan Australia Europe Denmark France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Russia Soviet Union Spain Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Iran Israel Palestine Turkey North America Canada United States Mexico South America Argentina Brazil Chile Racism by target Arab Asians Chinese Chinese Americans Zainichi Chinese Japanese Japanese Americans Japanese Koreans Korean Zainichi Koreans Vietnamese Black African Americans Arab Women Mexican Native Americans Jewish Anti-racism Jewish Americans In Jewish communities LGBT Middle Eastern Muslim Romani Slavic Wine industry Racial supremacy Black supremacy White supremacy White Related topics Ableism Alt-right Anti-racism Casteism Ethnic plastic surgery Go back to where you came from Herrenvolk democracy Interminority racism in the United States Hispanics/Latinos Lynching Passing Perpetual foreigner Psychometrics of racism Race and sexuality Race card Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racial misrepresentation Racial figleaf Racial integration Racial quota Racism in sport in Australia Reverse racism Sociology of race and ethnic relations Xenophobia Category Commons Index v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred v t e Chicano and Mexican American topics Terms Chicano Indigenismo Mexican American La Raza Cholo Pachuco Pinto Blaxican Xicanx Pre-Chicano Movement 1917 Bath riots Bisbee Deportation Bracero program Korean War La Matanza Mexican Repatriation Operation Wetback Plan de San Diego Porvenir Massacre Sleepy Lagoon trial Zoot Suit Riots Chicano Movement Aztlán Católicos por La Raza Centro de Arte Público Chicanismo Chicana feminism Chicano Blowouts Chicano Moratorium Mission Cultural Center for Latino Arts PCUN Plan Espiritual de Aztlán Plan de Santa Bárbara Farm workers' rights campaign Land grant struggle Colegio César Chávez Los Siete de la Raza Los Seis de Boulder Occupation of Catalina Island Post-Chicano Movement Aztlán 1985–1987 Watsonville Cannery strike 1992 Drywall Strike 2019 El Paso Walmart shooting Abolish ICE Arizona SB 1070 Castro 2020 DACA Great American Boycott IRCA Justice for Janitors Killing of Adam Toledo Murder of Selena Party crews Proposition 187 Xicanx Culture Anti-Mexican sentiment Caló Chicano art Chicano cinema Chicano literature Chicano names Chicano poetry Chicano Park Chicano rock Chicano rap Cinco de Mayo Estrada Courts murals Lowrider Mexican-American cuisine Mexican-American folklore Mexican-American women's fashion Mexican muralism New Mexican cuisine New Mexico music Paño Regional Mexican Skull art Teatro Campesino Tejano music Tex-Mex cuisine Tortilla art Zoot suit Chicana/o Theory Barrioization Coyolxauhqui imperative Gringo justice Nepantla New tribalism Rasquachismo Spiritual activism Vergüenza Youth control complex Supreme Court cases Botiller v. Dominguez Hernandez v. Texas San Antonio I.S.D. v. Rodriguez Espinoza v. Farah Manufacturing Co.

U.S. v. Brignoni-Ponce Plyler v. Doe Medellín v. Texas Flores-Figueroa v. U.S.

Leal Garcia v. Texas Mendez v. Westminster Bernal v. Fainter DHS v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal.

By city and region Arizona Tucson California ( Californios • Los Angeles • San Francisco • San Diego ) Colorado Illinois ( Chicago ) Kansas Maryland ( Baltimore ) Michigan ( Detroit ) Nebraska ( Omaha ) New Mexico New York ( New York City ) Pennsylvania Philadelphia Texas Dallas–Fort Worth Houston Tejanos Utah Lists Chicano films Chicano poets U.S. communities with Hispanic majority Mexican Americans Writers List of Hispanic and Latino Americans Bibliography List of Mexican-American communities List of Mexican-American political organizations List of Chicano and Mexican monuments and memorials in California Category:Chicano Category:American people of Mexican descent Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Mexican_sentiment&oldid=1305284529 " Categories : Anti-Mexican sentiment Anti-Hispanic and Latin American sentiment Racism in the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from May 2017 Articles with limited geographic scope from September 2021 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles with excerpts Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 04:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Mexican sentiment 5 languages Add topic

