Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Musical career 2 Amnesia 3 Reports 4 See also Toggle See also subsection 4.1 Other neurological trauma/damage cases 4.2 Other areas 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Clive Wearing 9 languages Deutsch Español Íslenska Italiano עברית مصرى Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British conductor with severe amnesia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Clive Wearing" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs more reliable medical references for verification or relies too heavily on primary sources .

Please review the contents of the article and add the appropriate references if you can. Unsourced or poorly sourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Clive Wearing" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Clive Wearing Born ( 1938-05-11 ) 11 May 1938 (age 87) Genres Early music Occupation(s) Musicologist, conductor and keyboardist (until 1983) Musical artist Clive Wearing (born 11 May 1938) is a British former musicologist , conductor, tenor and pianist who developed chronic anterograde and retrograde amnesia in 1985. Since then, he has lacked the ability to form new memories and cannot recall aspects of his memories, frequently believing that he has only recently awoken from a comatose state.

Musical career [ edit ] Wearing is an accomplished musician who edited the works of Orlande de Lassus . Wearing sang at Westminster Cathedral as a tenor lay clerk for many years and also had a career as a chorus master, working as such at Covent Garden and with the London Sinfonietta Chorus.

In 1968, he founded the Europa Singers of London, an amateur choir specialising in music of the 17th, 18th and 20th centuries. It won critical approval, especially for performances of the Vespro della Beata Vergine . In 1977, it gave the first performance in the Russian Cathedral of Sir John Tavener 's setting of the Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom with Roderick Earle as bass soloist and subsequently made a recording (Ikon Records No. 9007). The Europa Singers also competed in the XXXII Concorso Polifonico Internazionale in Arezzo in 1984, and provided choruses for operas staged by the London Opera Centre , including Lully 's Alceste and Mozart 's Marriage of Figaro , which was performed at Sadler's Wells .

Wearing also organised The London Lassus Ensemble, designing and staging the 1982 London Lassus Festival to commemorate the composer's 450th Anniversary.

While he was working at the BBC , Wearing was responsible for much of the musical content of BBC Radio 3 on 29 July 1981, the day of the wedding of Prince Charles and Diana Spencer . For that occasion, he chose to recreate, with authentic instruments and meticulously researched scores, the Bavarian royal wedding that took place in Munich on 22 February 1568. The music by Lassus, Padovano, de'Bardi, Palestrina, Gabrieli, Tallis and others was performed by the Taverner Consort, Choir and Players and the Natural Trumpet Ensemble of the Schola Cantorum Basiliensis , conducted by Andrew Parrott .

Amnesia [ edit ] On 27 March 1985, Wearing, then an acknowledged expert in early music at the height of his career with BBC Radio 3, contracted herpesviral encephalitis , a herpes simplex virus that attacked his central nervous system .

[ 1 ] Since then, he has been unable to store new memories. He has also been unable to associate memories effectively or to control his emotions, exhibiting unstable moods.

Wearing developed a profound case of total amnesia as a result of his illness. Because of damage to the hippocampus (an area required to transfer memories from short-term to long-term memory ), he is completely unable to form lasting new memories. His memory for events lasts between seven and thirty seconds.

[ 2 ] He spends every day 'waking up' every 20 seconds or so, 'restarting' his consciousness once the timespan of his short-term memory has elapsed. During this time, he repeatedly questions why he has not seen a doctor, as he constantly believes that he has only recently awoken from a comatose state. If he is engaged in conversation, he is able to provide answers to questions, but he cannot stay in the flow of conversation for longer than a few sentences and is angered if he is asked about his current situation.

Wearing remembers little of his life before 1985. He knows, for example, that he has children from an earlier marriage, but he cannot remember their names. His love for his second wife, Deborah, whom he married the year before his illness began, is undiminished. He greets her joyously every time they meet, believing either that he has not seen her in years or that they have never met before, even though she may have just left the room momentarily. When he goes out dining with his wife, he can remember the names of food, but he cannot link them with taste, as he forgets what food he is eating by the time it has reached his mouth.

[ 3 ] [ full citation needed ] In a diary provided by his carers, Wearing was encouraged to record his thoughts. Page after page was filled with entries similar to the following: [ 4 ] 8:31 AM: Now I am really , completely awake. ( 1st Time ) 9:06 AM: Now I am perfectly , overwhelmingly awake. ( 1st Time ) 9:34 AM: Now I am superlatively , actually awake. ( 1st Time ) Earlier entries were usually partially crossed out, since he forgot having made an entry within minutes and dismissed the writings. He did not know how the entries were made or by whom, although he did recognise his own handwriting.

[ 5 ] Wishing to record 'waking up for the first time', he still wrote diary entries in 2007, more than 20 years after he started them.

Wearing can learn new procedures and even a  few facts, not from episodic memory or encoding , but by acquiring new procedural memories through repetition. For example, having watched a certain video recording multiple times on successive days, he never had any memory of ever seeing the video or knowing the content, but he was able to anticipate certain parts of the content without remembering how he learned them.

[ 6 ] Despite having no memory of specific musical pieces when they are mentioned by name, and an extremely limited recall of his previous musical knowledge, Wearing remains capable of playing complex piano and organ pieces, sight-reading and conducting a choir.

[ 7 ] In a documentary broadcast in 2005, Wearing was interviewed about the experience of his condition: You're the first human beings I've seen, the three of you. Two men and one lady. The first ... people I've seen since I've been ill. No difference between day and night. No thoughts at all. No dreams. Day and night, the same – blank. Precisely like death.

Is it very hard?

No. It's exactly the same as being dead, which is not difficult, is it? To be dead is easy. You don't do anything at all. You can't do anything, when you are dead. It's been the same. Exactly.

Do you miss your old life?

Yes. But I've never been conscious to think that. So I've never been bored or upset. I've never been anything at all, it's exactly the same as death. No dreams even. Day and night, the same.

When you miss your old life, you say, 'Yes, I miss my old life', what do you miss?

The fact that I was a musician. And in love.

[ 8 ] Reports [ edit ] Wearing's wife Deborah has written a book about her husband's case entitled Forever Today .

[ 9 ] His story was told in a 1986 documentary entitled Equinox: Prisoner of Consciousness , in which he was interviewed by Jonathan Miller . Neurologist Oliver Sacks mentions the documentary in his book The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat . An updated story was told in the 2005 ITV documentary The Man with the 7 Second Memory (although Wearing's short-term memory span can be up to 30 seconds).

He was also featured in the 1988 PBS series, The Mind , in Episode 1, In Search of the Mind.

[ 10 ] A follow-up episode was aired in 1998 on the second edition of The Mind as Life Without Memory: The Case of Clive Wearing.

He also appears in the 2006 documentary series Time , where his case is used to illustrate the effect of losing one's perception of time.

His story was also told in episode No. 304 – 'Memory and Forgetting' on the show Radio Lab on New York Public Radio, WNYC .

[ 11 ] He appears in Eric Kandel 's holiday lectures on the Howard Hughes Medical Institute .

[ 12 ] Sacks wrote about Wearing himself in a chapter in his 2007 book, Musicophilia: Tales of Music and the Brain , and an article in The New Yorker titled "The Abyss".

[ 7 ] Sam Kean also discussed Wearing's life in the twelfth chapter of his 2014 book, The Tale of the Dueling Neurosurgeons .

[ 13 ] Wearing's story was also featured on an episode of the TLC series Medical Incredible .

See also [ edit ] Other neurological trauma/damage cases [ edit ] Henry Molaison (Patient H.M.) Phineas Gage Kent Cochrane (Patient K.C) Scott Bolzan S.M. (patient) Other areas [ edit ] Anterograde amnesia Cognitive neuropsychology References [ edit ] ^ Wearing, Deborah (12 January 2005).

"The man who keeps falling in love with his wife" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 5 December 2008.

^ "Video on Demand – The Mind: Teaching Modules – Clive Wearing, Part 2: Living Without Memory" .

Annenberg Learner . Archived from the original on 16 March 2011 . Retrieved 22 May 2018 .

^ BBC ^ Wearing, Clive (13 January 1990).

"Diary entry" . Diaries of Note (published 8 January 2024) . Retrieved 23 December 2024 .

^ The Mind , BBC series, Part 1 ^ The Mind , BBC series, Part 2 ^ a b Sacks, Oliver (17 September 2007).

"The Abyss" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved 22 May 2018 .

^ Jane Treays (director) (19 September 2005).

The Man with the 7 Second Memory (Television documentary). ITV.

^ Wearing, Deborah (2006).

Forever Today: A Memoir of Love and Amnesia (Paperback) (Updated ed.). Corgi.

ISBN 0-552-77169-4 .

^ Johnson, George (2 October 1988).

"TELEVISION; Closing the Gap Between the Brain and the Mind" .

The New York Times . p. 31.

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 31 May 2021 .

^ "Radiolab | WNYC Studios | Podcasts" .

wnycstudios . Retrieved 22 May 2018 .

^ "Neuroscience | HHMI BioInteractive" .

www.hhmi.org . Archived from the original on 24 June 2013 . Retrieved 22 May 2018 .

^ MacGowan, James (27 May 2014).

"The Tale of the Dueling Neurosurgeons by Sam Kean: review" .

Toronto Star . Retrieved 28 April 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Article in The Observer magazine on Clive Wearing, January 2005 Article in The New Yorker , September 2007 The Man with the 7 Second Memory at IMDb The Man With The Seven Second Memory (Amnesia Documentary) on channel Real Stories on YouTube , posted Aug 13, 2016.

v t e Human memory Basic concepts Encoding Storage Recall Attention Consolidation Neuroanatomy Types Sensory Echoic Eidetic Eyewitness Haptic Iconic Motor learning Visual Short-term " The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two " Working memory Long-term Active recall Autobiographical Explicit Declarative Episodic Semantic Flashbulb Hyperthymesia Implicit Meaningful learning Personal-event Procedural Rote learning Selective retention Tip of the tongue Forgetting Amnesia anterograde childhood post-hypnotic post-traumatic dissociative (psychogenic) retrograde selective transient global Decay theory Forgetting curve Interference theory Memory erasure Memory inhibition Motivated forgetting avoidance repression suppression Repressed memory Retrieval-induced forgetting Weapon focus Memory errors Confabulation Cryptomnesia Hindsight bias Imagination inflation Memory biases Memory conformity Misattribution of memory Misinformation effect Source-monitoring error False memory Deese–Roediger–McDermott paradigm False memory syndrome Memory implantation Lost in the mall technique Recovered-memory therapy Research methods Exceptional memory Indirect tests of memory Memory disorder In groups Collective memory Politics of memory Cultural memory Memory and social interactions Memory conformity Transactive memory Other topics Aging Art of memory chunking encoding memorization mnemonic rehearsal repetition Effects of alcohol Effects of exercise Effects of stress Emotion Memory improvement Nutrition Sleep Trauma In society Memory sport World Memory Championships Shas Pollak Related Absent-mindedness Atkinson–Shiffrin memory model Context-dependent and state-dependent memory Childhood memory Exosomatic memory Free recall Intermediate-term memory Involuntary memory flashbacks Levels of Processing model Metamemory Muscle memory Priming intertrial Prospective and retrospective memory The Seven Sins of Memory People Researchers Richard C. Atkinson Robert A. Bjork Stephen J. Ceci Susan Clancy Hermann Ebbinghaus Sigmund Freud Patricia Goldman-Rakic Ivan Izquierdo Marcia K. Johnson Eric Kandel Elizabeth Loftus Geoffrey Loftus James McGaugh Eleanor Maguire George Armitage Miller Brenda Milner Lynn Nadel Henry L. Roediger III Daniel Schacter Richard Shiffrin Arthur P. Shimamura Larry Squire Susumu Tonegawa Anne Treisman Endel Tulving Robert Stickgold Patients HM KC NA Clive Wearing Other Jonathan Hancock Paul R. McHugh Dominic O'Brien Ben Pridmore Cosmos Rossellius Andriy Slyusarchuk Category Psychology portal Philosophy portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Netherlands Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Clive_Wearing&oldid=1292893753 " Categories : People with amnesia 1938 births Living people People with brain injuries English musicologists English tenors English conductors (music) British male conductors (music) English keyboardists English people with disabilities 21st-century British conductors (music) 21st-century British male singers Lassus scholars Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata BLP articles lacking sources from September 2024 All BLP articles lacking sources Articles needing additional medical references from November 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles requiring reliable medical sources Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from September 2014 Use British English from September 2022 Articles with hCards All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from September 2022 IMDb title ID different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 May 2025, at 12:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Clive Wearing 9 languages Add topic

