Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Common Analytes 2 Panel tests Toggle Panel tests subsection 2.1 Metabolic Panel 2.1.1 Basic Metabolic Panel 2.1.2 Comprehensive Metabolic Panel 3 Specimen Processing 4 Instruments 5 Specialties 6 See also 7 Notes and references 8 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Clinical chemistry 21 languages العربية Bosanski Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Română Suomi Svenska Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Area of clinical pathology that is generally concerned with analysis of bodily fluids For the medical journal, see Clinical Chemistry (journal) .

Not to be confused with medicinal chemistry .

This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Clinical chemistry" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2020 ) A clinical chemistry analyzer; hand shows size Clinical chemistry (also known as chemical pathology , clinical biochemistry or medical biochemistry ) is a division in pathology and medical laboratory sciences focusing on qualitative tests of important compounds, referred to as analytes or markers, in bodily fluids and tissues using analytical techniques and specialized instruments.

[ 1 ] This interdisciplinary field includes knowledge from medicine , biology , chemistry , biomedical engineering , informatics , and an applied form of biochemistry (not to be confused with medicinal chemistry , which involves basic research for drug development ).

[ citation needed ] The discipline originated in the late 19th century with the use of simple chemical reaction tests for various components of blood and urine . Many decades later, clinical chemists use automated analyzers in many clinical laboratories. These instruments perform experimental techniques ranging from pipetting specimens and specimen labelling to advanced measurement techniques such as spectrometry , chromatography , photometry , potentiometry , etc.

[ 2 ] These instruments provide different results that help identify uncommon analytes, changes in light and electronic voltage properties of naturally occurring analytes such as enzymes , ions , electrolytes , and their concentrations, all of which are important for diagnosing diseases.

Blood and urine are the most common test specimens clinical chemists or medical laboratory scientists collect for clinical routine tests, with a main focus on serum and plasma in blood.

[ 3 ] There are now many blood tests and clinical urine tests with extensive diagnostic capabilities. Some clinical tests require clinical chemists to process the specimen before testing. Clinical chemists and medical laboratory scientists serve as the interface between the laboratory side and the clinical practice, providing suggestions to physicians on which test panel to order and interpret any irregularities in test results that reflect on the patient's health status and organ system functionality.

[ 4 ] This allows healthcare providers to make more accurate evaluation of a patient's health and to diagnose disease, predicting the progression of a disease ( prognosis ), screening, and monitoring the treatment's efficiency in a timely manner. The type of test required dictates what type of sample is used.

Common Analytes [ edit ] Some common analytes that clinical chemistry tests analyze include: Electrolytes Sodium Potassium Chloride Bicarbonate Renal (kidney) function tests Creatinine Blood urea nitrogen Liver function tests Total protein (serum) Albumin Globulins A/G ratio (albumin-globulin) Protein electrophoresis Urine protein Bilirubin ; direct; indirect; total Aspartate transaminase (AST) Alanine transaminase (ALT) Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) Cardiac markers H-FABP Troponin Myoglobin CK-MB B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) Minerals Calcium Magnesium Phosphate Potassium Blood disorders Iron Transferrin TIBC Vitamin B12 Vitamin D Folic acid Miscellaneous Glucose C-reactive protein Glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) Uric acid Arterial blood gases ([H + ], P CO 2 , P O 2 ) Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) Toxicological screening and forensic toxicology ( drugs and toxins ) Neuron-specific enolase (NSE) fecal occult blood test (FOBT) Panel tests [ edit ] A physician may order many laboratory tests on one specimen, referred to as a test panel, when a single test cannot provide sufficient information to make a swift and accurate diagnosis and treatment plan. A test panel is a group of many tests a clinical chemists do on one sample to look for changes in many analytes that may be indicative of specific medical concerns or the health status of an organ system.

[ 5 ] Thus, panel tests provide a more extensive evaluation of a patient's health, have higher predictive values for confirming or disproving a disease, and are quick and cost-effective.

Metabolic Panel [ edit ] A Metabolic Panel (MP) is a routine group of blood tests commonly used for health screenings, disease detection, and monitoring vital signs of hospitalized patients with specific medical conditions. MP panel analyzes common analytes in the blood to assess the functions of the kidneys and liver, as well as electrolyte and acid-base balances . There are two types of MPs - Basic Metabolic Panel (BMP) or Comprehensive Metabolic Panel (CMP).

[ 6 ] Basic Metabolic Panel [ edit ] BMP is a panel of tests that measures eight analytes in the blood's fluid portion (plasma). The results of the BMP provide valuable information about a patient's kidney function, blood sugar level, electrolyte levels, and the acid-base balance. Abnormal changes in one or more of these analytes can be a sign of serious health issues: Sodium, Potassium, Chloride, and Carbon Dioxide: they are electrolytes that have electrical charges that manage the body’s water level, acid-base balance in the blood, and kidney function.

[ 7 ] Calcium : This charged electrolyte is essential for the proper functions of nerve, muscle, blood clotting , and bone health. Changes in the calcium level can be signs of bone disease , muscle cramps / spasms , thyroid disease , or other conditions.

[ 8 ] Glucose : This measures the blood sugar levels , which is a crucial energy for your body and brain. High glucose levels can be a sign of diabetes or insulin resistance .

[ 7 ] Urea and Creatinine : These are waste products that the kidney filters out from blood. Urea measurements are helpful in detecting and treating kidney failure and related metabolic disorders, whereas creatinine measurements give information on kidney’s health, tracking renal dialysis treatment, and monitor hospitalized patients that are on diuretics .

[ 7 ] Comprehensive Metabolic Panel [ edit ] Comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) - 14 tests - above BMP plus total protein, albumin , alkaline phosphatase (ALP), alanine amino transferase (ALT), aspartate amino transferase (AST), bilirubin .

Specimen Processing [ edit ] For blood tests, clinical chemists must process the specimen to obtain plasma and serum before testing for targeted analytes. This is most easily done by centrifugation , which packs the denser blood cells and platelets to the bottom of the centrifuge tube, leaving the liquid serum fraction resting above the packed cells. This initial step before analysis has recently been included in instruments that operate on the " integrated system " principle. Plasma is obtained by centrifugation before clotting occurs.

Instruments [ edit ] Most current medical laboratories now have highly automated analyzers to accommodate the high workload typical of a hospital laboratory, and accept samples for up to about 700 different kinds of tests.

[ 9 ] Even the largest of laboratories rarely do all these tests themselves, and some must be referred to other labs. Tests performed are closely monitored and quality controlled .

Specialties [ edit ] The large array of tests can be categorised into sub-specialities of: General or routine chemistry – commonly ordered blood chemistries (e.g., liver and kidney function tests).

Special chemistry – elaborate techniques such as electrophoresis , and manual testing methods.

Clinical endocrinology – the study of hormones , and diagnosis of endocrine disorders.

Toxicology – the study of drugs of abuse and other chemicals.

Therapeutic Drug Monitoring – measurement of therapeutic medication levels to optimize dosage.

Urinalysis – chemical analysis of urine for a wide array of diseases, along with other fluids such as CSF and effusions Fecal analysis – mostly for detection of gastrointestinal disorders .

See also [ edit ] Reference ranges for common blood tests Medical technologist Clinical Biochemistry (journal) Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Bishop, Michael L.; Fody, Edward P.; Schoeff, Fody (2020).

Clinical Chemistry: Principles, Techniques, Correlations. Enhanced Edition (8th ed.). Burlington: Jones & Bartlett Learning. pp.

76– 77.

ISBN 9781284510140 .

^ Burtis, Carl A.; Bruns, David E. (2014).

Tietz Fundamentals of Clinical Chemistry and Molecular Diagnostics (7th ed.). Missouri: Elsevier. pp.

674– 709.

ISBN 978-1-4557-4165-6 .

^ Science, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and.

"Medical Laboratory Scientist - Explore Health Care Careers - Mayo Clinic College of Medicine & Science" .

Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science . Retrieved 2023-04-02 .

^ Abisti, Gerard Evans.

"Chemical Pathology" .

The Association of Clinical Pathologists . Retrieved 2023-03-31 .

^ thrive (2020-05-10).

"Benefits of Lab Test Panels (Bundled Tests)" .

Test Smartly Labs . Retrieved 2023-04-15 .

^ "Basic Metabolic Panel (Blood) - Health Encyclopedia - University of Rochester Medical Center" .

www.urmc.rochester.edu . Retrieved 2023-04-15 .

^ a b c Rao, L. V.; Snyder, L. Michael (2020).

Wallach's Interpretation of Diagnostic Tests: Pathways to Arriving at a Clinical Diagnosis (11th ed.). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

ISBN 978-1-97-510558-7 .

^ MedlinePlus [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National Library of Medicine (US); Calcium Blood Test; [updated 2022 Jun 02; cited 2023 April 05]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://medlineplus.gov/lab-tests/calcium-blood-test/ ^ Armbruster DA, Overcash DR, Reyes J (August 2014).

"Clinical Chemistry Laboratory Automation in the 21st Century - Amat Victoria curam (Victory loves careful preparation)" .

The Clinical Biochemist Reviews .

35 (3): 143– 53.

PMC 4204236 .

PMID 25336760 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Burtis, Carl A.; Ashwood, Edward R.; Bruns, David E. (2006).

Tietz textbook of clinical chemistry (4th ed.). Saunders. p. 2448.

ISBN 978-0-7216-0189-2 .

External links [ edit ] American Association of Clinical Chemistry Association for Mass Spectrometry: Applications to the Clinical Lab (MSACL) v t e Pathology Principles of pathology Disease Infection Neoplasia Cause Pathogenesis Hemodynamics Ischemia Inflammation Cell damage Wound healing Cellular adaptation Atrophy Hypertrophy Hyperplasia Dysplasia Metaplasia Squamous Glandular Cell death Necrosis Coagulative necrosis Liquefactive necrosis Gangrenous necrosis Caseous necrosis Fat necrosis Fibrinoid necrosis Myocytolysis Programmed cell death Apoptosis Pyknosis Karyorrhexis Karyolysis Accumulations pigment Hemosiderin Lipochrome / Lipofuscin Melanin Steatosis Anatomical pathology Surgical pathology Cytopathology Autopsy Molecular pathology Forensic pathology Oral and maxillofacial pathology Gross processing Histopathology Immunohistochemistry Electron microscopy Immunofluorescence Fluorescence in situ hybridization Clinical pathology Clinical chemistry Hematopathology Transfusion medicine Medical microbiology Diagnostic immunology Immunopathology Enzyme assay Mass spectrometry Chromatography Flow cytometry Blood bank Microbiological culture Serology v t e Branches of chemistry Glossary of chemical formulae List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Analytical Calorimetry Characterization Chromatography GC HPLC Crystallography Electroanalytical methods Elemental analysis Instrumental chemistry Mass spectrometry EI ICP MALDI Separation process Spectroscopy IR Raman UV-Vis NMR Titration Wet chemistry Theoretical Computational chemistry Mathematical chemistry Molecular modelling Molecular mechanics Molecular dynamics Molecular geometry VSEPR theory Quantum chemistry Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Molecular physics Chemical thermodynamics Cryochemistry Electrochemistry Spectroelectrochemistry Photoelectrochemistry Equilibrium chemistry Femtochemistry Interface and colloid science Micromeritics Mechanochemistry Microwave chemistry Photochemistry Sonochemistry Spectroscopy Spin chemistry Structural chemistry Surface science Thermochemistry Inorganic Ceramic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Magnetochemistry Organometallic chemistry Organolanthanide chemistry Solid-state chemistry Organic Dynamic covalent chemistry Enantioselective synthesis Fullerene chemistry Organic reactions Organic synthesis Petrochemistry Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Retrosynthetic analysis Stereochemistry Alkane stereochemistry Total synthesis / Semisynthesis Biological Biochemistry Molecular biology Cell biology Bioinorganic chemistry Bioorganic chemistry Bioorganometallic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Bioorthogonal chemistry Clinical chemistry Medicinal chemistry Pharmacology Neurochemistry Interdisciplinarity Nuclear chemistry Radiochemistry Radiation chemistry Actinide chemistry Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry Geochemistry Biogeochemistry Photogeochemistry Environmental chemistry Atmospheric chemistry Ocean chemistry Clay chemistry Carbochemistry Food chemistry Carbohydrate chemistry Food physical chemistry Agricultural chemistry Soil chemistry Chemistry education Amateur chemistry General chemistry Clandestine chemistry Forensic chemistry Forensic toxicology Post-mortem chemistry Nanochemistry Supramolecular chemistry Chemical synthesis Green chemistry Click chemistry Combinatorial chemistry Biosynthesis Chemical engineering Stoichiometry Materials science Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science See also History of chemistry Nobel Prize in Chemistry Timeline of chemistry of element discoveries " The central science " Chemical reaction Catalysis Chemical element Chemical compound Atom Molecule Ion Chemical substance Chemical bond Alchemy Quantum mechanics Category Commons Portal WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Clinical_chemistry&oldid=1305375917 " Categories : Chemical pathology Clinical pathology Pathology Laboratory healthcare occupations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2020 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 18:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Clinical chemistry 21 languages Add topic

