Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Early years, 1548–1576 1.2 First years of wandering, 1576–1583 1.3 England, 1583–1585 1.4 Last years of wandering, 1585–1592 1.5 Imprisonment, trial and execution, 1593–1600 1.6 Physical appearance 2 Cosmology Toggle Cosmology subsection 2.1 Contemporary cosmological beliefs 2.2 Cosmological claims 3 Retrospective views Toggle Retrospective views subsection 3.1 Late Vatican position 3.2 A martyr of science 3.3 Theological heresy 4 Cultural legacy Toggle Cultural legacy subsection 4.1 In art 4.2 In poetry 4.3 In fiction 4.4 In music 4.5 In television 5 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 5.1 Giordano Bruno Foundation 5.2 Giordano Bruno Memorial Award 5.3 Astronomical objects named after Bruno 6 Works 7 Collections 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Citations 9.2 Works cited 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Giordano Bruno 110 languages Адыгэбзэ Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русский Саха тыла Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Volapük 文言 Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian Dominican friar, philosopher and mathematician (1548–1600) This article is about the Italian philosopher Giordano Bruno. For other uses, see Giordano Bruno (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Bruno Giordano .

Giordano Bruno Portrait from Opere di Giordano Bruno , published in 1830 Born Filippo Bruno January or February 1548 Nola , Kingdom of Naples Died 17 February 1600 (aged 51–52) Rome , Papal States Cause of death Execution by burning at the stake Philosophical work Era Renaissance School Renaissance humanism Neopythagoreanism Main interests Cosmology Notable ideas Cosmic pluralism Memory wheels Giordano Bruno ( / dʒ ɔːr ˈ d ɑː n oʊ ˈ b r uː n oʊ / jor- DAH -noh BROO -noh , Italian: [dʒorˈdaːno ˈbruːno] ; Latin : Iordanus Brunus Nolanus ; born Filippo Bruno ; January or February 1548 – 17 February 1600) was an Italian philosopher , poet , alchemist , astrologer , cosmological theorist, and esotericist .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] He is known for his cosmological theories, which conceptually extended to include the then-novel Copernican model . He practiced Hermeticism and gave a mystical stance to exploring the universe. He proposed that the stars were distant suns surrounded by their own planets ( exoplanets ), and he raised the possibility that these planets might foster life of their own, a cosmological position known as cosmic pluralism . He also insisted that the universe is infinite and could have no center.

Bruno was tried for heresy by the Roman Inquisition on charges of denial of several core Catholic doctrines, including eternal damnation , the Trinity , the deity of Christ , the virginity of Mary , and transubstantiation . Bruno's pantheism was not taken lightly by the church, [ 3 ] nor was his teaching of metempsychosis regarding the reincarnation of the soul . The Inquisition found him guilty, and he was burned at the stake in Rome's Campo de' Fiori in 1600. After his death, he gained considerable fame, being particularly celebrated by 19th- and early 20th-century commentators who regarded him as a martyr for science. Some historians are of the opinion his heresy trial was not a response to his cosmological views but rather a response to his religious and afterlife views, [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] while others find the main reason for Bruno's death was indeed his cosmological views.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Bruno's case is still considered a landmark in the history of free thought and the emerging sciences.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] In addition to cosmology, Bruno also wrote extensively on the art of memory , a loosely organized group of mnemonic techniques and principles. Historian Frances Yates argues that Bruno was deeply influenced by the presocratic Empedocles , Neoplatonism , Renaissance Hermeticism, and Book of Genesis –like legends surrounding the Hellenistic conception of Hermes Trismegistus .

[ 14 ] Other studies of Bruno have focused on his qualitative approach to mathematics and his application of the spatial concepts of geometry to language.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Life [ edit ] Part of a series on Hermeticism Hermes Trismegistus Hermetic writings Liber Hermetis (astrological) Definitions of Hermes Trismegistus Corpus Hermeticum Poimandres Asclepius Discourse on the Eighth and Ninth Prayer of Thanksgiving Korē kosmou Cyranides The Book of the Secrets of the Stars The Secret of Creation Emerald Tablet Kitāb al-Isṭamākhīs Liber Hermetis de alchemia Historical figures Ancient and medieval Zosimos of Panopolis Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (may be legendary) Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Ibn Umayl Maslama al-Qurṭubī Aḥmad al-Būnī Early modern Marsilio Ficino Lodovico Lazzarelli Giovanni da Correggio Pico della Mirandola Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa Paracelsus John Dee Giordano Bruno Jakob Böhme Robert Fludd Christian Rosenkreuz (legendary, see Rosicrucianism ) Modern offshoots As above, so below Bibliotheca Philosophica Hermetica Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn Hermetic Qabalah Rosicrucianism The Kybalion Hermetism and other religions v t e Early years, 1548–1576 [ edit ] Born Filippo  Bruno in Nola (a comune in the modern-day province of Naples , in the Southern Italian region of Campania , then part of the Kingdom of Naples ) in 1548, he was the son of Giovanni Bruno (1517 – c. 1592), a soldier, and Fraulissa Savolino (1520–?). In his youth he was sent to Naples to be educated. He was tutored privately at the Augustinian monastery there, and attended public lectures at the Studium Generale .

[ 17 ] At the age of 17, he entered the Dominican Order at the monastery of San Domenico Maggiore in Naples, taking the name Giordano, after Giordano Crispo, his metaphysics tutor. He continued his studies there, completing his novitiate , and ordained a priest in 1572 at age 24. During his time in Naples, he became known for his skill with the art of memory and on one occasion traveled to Rome to demonstrate his mnemonic system before Pope Pius V and Cardinal Rebiba . In his later years, Bruno claimed that the Pope accepted his dedication to him of the lost work On The Ark of Noah at this time.

[ 18 ] While Bruno was distinguished for outstanding ability, his taste for free thinking and forbidden books soon caused him difficulties. Given the controversy he caused in later life, it is surprising that he was able to remain within the monastic system for eleven years. In his testimony to Venetian inquisitors during his trial many years later, he says that proceedings were twice taken against him for having cast away images of the saints, retaining only a crucifix , and for having recommended controversial texts to a novice.

[ 19 ] Such behavior could perhaps be overlooked, but Bruno's situation became much more serious when he was reported to have defended the Arian heresy , and when a copy of the banned writings of Erasmus , annotated by him, was discovered hidden in the monastery latrine . When he learned that an indictment was being prepared against him in Naples he fled, shedding his religious habit , at least for a time.

[ 20 ] First years of wandering, 1576–1583 [ edit ] Bruno first went to the Genoese port of Noli , then to Savona , Turin and finally to Venice , where he published his lost work On the Signs of the Times with the permission (so he claimed at his trial) of the Dominican Remigio Nannini Fiorentino . From Venice he went to Padua , where he met fellow Dominicans who convinced him to wear his religious habit again. From Padua he went to Bergamo and then across the Alps to Chambéry and Lyon . His movements after this time are obscure.

[ 21 ] The earliest depiction of Bruno is an engraving published in 1715 in Germany, presumed based on a lost contemporary portrait.

[ 22 ] In 1579, Bruno arrived in Geneva . During his Venetian trial, he told inquisitors that while in Geneva he told the Marchese de Vico of Naples, who was notable for helping Italian refugees in Geneva, "I did not intend to adopt the religion of the city. I desired to stay there only that I might live at liberty and in security." [ 23 ] Bruno had a pair of breeches made for himself, and the Marchese and others apparently made Bruno a gift of a sword, hat, cape and other necessities for dressing himself; in such clothing Bruno could no longer be recognized as a priest. Things apparently went well for Bruno for a time, as he entered his name in the Rector's Book of the University of Geneva in May 1579.

[ 24 ] But in keeping with his personality he could not long remain silent. In August he published an attack on the work of Antoine de La Faye [ fr ] , a distinguished professor. Bruno and the printer, Jean Bergeon, were promptly arrested.

[ 25 ] Rather than apologizing, Bruno insisted on continuing to defend his publication. He was refused the right to take sacrament .

[ 26 ] Though this right was soon restored, he left Geneva.

[ 27 ] He went to France, arriving first in Lyon , and thereafter settling for a time (1580–1581) in Toulouse , where he took his doctorate in theology and was elected by students to lecture in philosophy.

[ 28 ] He also attempted at this time to return to Catholicism, but was denied absolution by the Jesuit priest he approached.

[ 29 ] When religious strife broke out in the summer of 1581, he moved to Paris.

[ 30 ] There he held a cycle of thirty lectures on theological topics and also began to gain fame for his prodigious memory.

[ 31 ] His talents attracted the benevolent attention of the king Henry III ; Bruno subsequently reported: "I got me such a name that King Henry III summoned me one day to discover from me if the memory which I possessed was natural or acquired by magic art. I satisfied him that it did not come from sorcery but from organized knowledge; and, following this, I got a book on memory printed, entitled The Shadows of Ideas , which I dedicated to His Majesty. Forthwith he gave me an Extraordinary Lectureship with a salary." [ 32 ] In Paris, Bruno enjoyed the protection of his powerful French patrons. During this period, he published several works on mnemonics, including De umbris idearum ( On the Shadows of Ideas , 1582), Ars memoriae [ it ] ( The Art of Memory , 1582), and Cantus circaeus ( Circe's Song , 1582; described at Circe in the arts § Reasoning beasts ). All of these were based on his mnemonic models of organized knowledge and experience, as opposed to the simplistic logic-based mnemonic techniques of Petrus Ramus then becoming popular.

[ citation needed ] Bruno also published a comedy summarizing some of his philosophical positions, titled Il Candelaio ( The Candlemaker , 1582). In the 16th century dedications were, as a rule, approved beforehand, and hence were a way of placing a work under the protection of an individual. Given that Bruno dedicated various works to the likes of King Henry III, Sir Philip Sidney , Michel de Castelnau (French Ambassador to England), and possibly Pope Pius V , it is apparent that this wanderer had risen sharply in status and moved in powerful circles.

[ citation needed ] England, 1583–1585 [ edit ] Woodcut illustration of one of Giordano Bruno's less complex mnemonic devices In April 1583, Bruno went to England with letters of recommendation from Henry III as a guest of the French ambassador, Michel de Castelnau . Bruno lived at the French embassy with the lexicographer John Florio . There he became acquainted with the poet Philip Sidney (to whom he dedicated two books) and other members of the Hermetic circle around John Dee , though there is no evidence that Bruno ever met Dee himself. He also lectured at Oxford , and unsuccessfully sought a teaching position there. His views were controversial, notably with John Underhill , Rector of Lincoln College and subsequently bishop of Oxford, and George Abbot , who later became Archbishop of Canterbury . Abbot mocked Bruno for supporting "the opinion of Copernicus that the earth did go round, and the heavens did stand still; whereas in truth it was his own head which rather did run round, and his brains did not stand still", [ 33 ] and found Bruno had both plagiarized and misrepresented Ficino 's work, leading Bruno to return to the continent.

[ 34 ] Nevertheless, his stay in England was fruitful. During that time Bruno completed and published some of his most important works, the six "Italian Dialogues", including the cosmological tracts La cena de le ceneri ( The Ash Wednesday Supper , 1584), De la causa, principio et uno ( On Cause, Principle and Unity , 1584), De l'infinito, universo et mondi ( On the Infinite, Universe and Worlds , 1584) as well as Lo spaccio de la bestia trionfante ( The Expulsion of the Triumphant Beast , 1584) and De gli eroici furori [ it ] ( On the Heroic Frenzies , 1585). Some of these were printed by John Charlewood . Some of the works that Bruno published in London, notably The Ash Wednesday Supper , appear to have given offense. Once again, Bruno's controversial views and tactless language lost him the support of his friends.

John Bossy has advanced the theory that, while staying in the French Embassy in London, Bruno was also spying on Catholic conspirators, under the pseudonym "Henry Fagot", for Sir Francis Walsingham , Queen Elizabeth 's Secretary of State.

[ 35 ] Bruno is sometimes cited as being the first to propose that the universe is infinite, which he did during his time in England, but an English scientist , Thomas Digges , put forth this idea in a published work in 1576, some eight years earlier than Bruno.

[ 36 ] An infinite universe and the possibility of alien life had also been earlier suggested by German Catholic Cardinal Nicholas of Cusa in "On Learned Ignorance" published in 1440 and Bruno attributed his understanding of multiple worlds to this earlier scholar, who he called "the divine Cusanus".

[ 37 ] Last years of wandering, 1585–1592 [ edit ] In October 1585, Castelnau was recalled to France, and Bruno went with him.

[ 38 ] In Paris, Bruno found a tense political situation. Moreover, his 120 theses against Aristotelian natural science soon put him in ill favor. In 1586, following a violent quarrel over these theses, he left France for Germany.

[ 39 ] Woodcut from "Articuli centum et sexaginta adversus huius tempestatis mathematicos atque philosophos", Prague 1588 In Germany he failed to obtain a teaching position at Marburg , but was granted permission to teach at Wittenberg , where he lectured on Aristotle for two years.

[ 40 ] However, with a change of intellectual climate there, he was no longer welcome, and went in 1588 to Prague , where he obtained 300 taler from Rudolf II , but no teaching position.

[ 41 ] He went on to serve briefly as a professor in Helmstedt , but had to flee again in 1590 when he was excommunicated by the Lutherans .

[ 42 ] During this period he produced several Latin works, dictated to his friend and secretary Girolamo Besler, including De Magia ( On Magic ), Theses De Magia ( Theses on Magic ) and De Vinculis in Genere ( A General Account of Bonding ). All these were apparently transcribed or recorded by Besler (or Bisler) between 1589 and 1590.

[ 43 ] He also published De Imaginum, Signorum, Et Idearum Compositione ( On the Composition of Images, Signs and Ideas , 1591).

In 1591 he was in Frankfurt , where he received an invitation from the Venetian patrician Giovanni Mocenigo , who wished to be instructed in the art of memory, [ 44 ] and also heard of a vacant chair in mathematics at the University of Padua . At the time the Inquisition seemed to be losing some of its strictness, and because the Republic of Venice was the most liberal state in the Italian Peninsula , Bruno was lulled into making the fatal mistake of returning to Italy.

[ 45 ] He went first to Padua , where he taught briefly, and applied unsuccessfully for the chair of mathematics, which was given instead to Galileo Galilei one year later. Bruno accepted Mocenigo's invitation and moved to Venice in March 1592.

[ 46 ] For about two months he served as an in-house tutor to Mocenigo, to whom he let slip some of his heterodox ideas.

[ 47 ] Mocenigo denounced him to the Venetian Inquisition , which had Bruno arrested on 22 May 1592.

[ 48 ] Among the numerous charges of blasphemy and heresy brought against him in Venice, based on Mocenigo's denunciation, was his belief in the plurality of worlds , as well as accusations of personal misconduct.

[ 49 ] Bruno defended himself skillfully, stressing the philosophical character of some of his positions, denying others and admitting that he had had doubts on some matters of dogma. The Roman Inquisition, however, asked for his transfer to Rome.

[ 50 ] After several months of argument, the Venetian authorities reluctantly consented and Bruno was sent to Rome in January 1593.

[ 51 ] Imprisonment, trial and execution, 1593–1600 [ edit ] During the seven years of his trial in Rome, Bruno was held in confinement, lastly in the Tower of Nona . Some important documents about the trial are lost, but others have been preserved, among them a summary of the proceedings that was rediscovered in 1940.

[ 52 ] The numerous charges against Bruno, based on some of his books as well as on witness accounts, included blasphemy, immoral conduct, and heresy in matters of dogmatic theology, and involved some of the basic doctrines of his philosophy and cosmology.

Luigi Firpo speculates the charges made against Bruno by the Roman Inquisition were: [ 53 ] holding opinions contrary to the Catholic faith and speaking against it and its ministers; holding opinions contrary to the Catholic faith about the Trinity , the deity of Christ , and the Incarnation ; holding opinions contrary to the Catholic faith pertaining to Jesus as the Christ ; holding opinions contrary to the Catholic faith regarding the virginity of Mary, mother of Jesus ; holding opinions contrary to the Catholic faith about both Transubstantiation and the Mass ; claiming the existence of a plurality of worlds and their eternity ; believing in metempsychosis and in the transmigration of the human soul into brutes; dealing in magics and divination.

The trial of Giordano Bruno by the Roman Inquisition; bronze relief by Ettore Ferrari, Campo de' Fiori , Rome Bruno defended himself as he had in Venice, insisting that he accepted the Church's dogmatic teachings, but trying to preserve the basis of his cosmological views. In particular, he held firm to his belief in the plurality of worlds, although he was admonished to abandon it. His trial was overseen by the Inquisitor Cardinal Bellarmine , who demanded a full recantation, which Bruno eventually refused. On 20 January 1600, Pope Clement VIII declared Bruno a heretic, and the Inquisition issued a sentence of death. According to the correspondence of Gaspar Schopp of Breslau , he is said to have made a threatening gesture towards his judges and to have replied: Maiori forsan cum timore sententiam in me fertis quam ego accipiam ("Perhaps you pronounce this sentence against me with greater fear than I receive it").

[ 54 ] He was turned over to the secular authorities. On 17 February 1600, in the Campo de' Fiori (a central Roman market square), naked, with his "tongue imprisoned because of his wicked words", he was burned alive at the stake .

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] His ashes were thrown into the Tiber river.

All of Bruno's works were placed on the Index Librorum Prohibitorum in 1603. The inquisition cardinals who judged Giordano Bruno were Cardinal Bellarmino (Bellarmine) , Cardinal Madruzzo (Madruzzi) , Camillo Cardinal Borghese (later Pope Paul V ), Domenico Cardinal Pinelli, Pompeio Cardinal Arrigoni, Cardinal Sfondrati , Pedro Cardinal De Deza Manuel and Cardinal Santorio (Archbishop of Santa Severina, Cardinal-Bishop of Palestrina).

[ 57 ] The measures taken to prevent Bruno continuing to speak have resulted in his becoming a symbol for free thought and free speech in present-day Rome, where an annual memorial service takes place close to the spot where he was executed.

[ 58 ] Physical appearance [ edit ] The earliest likeness of Bruno is an engraving published in 1715 [ 59 ] and cited by Salvestrini as "the only known portrait of Bruno". Salvestrini suggests that it is a re-engraving made from a now lost original.

[ 22 ] This engraving has provided the source for later images.

The records of Bruno's imprisonment by the Venetian inquisition in May 1592 describe him as a man "of average height, with a hazel-coloured beard and the appearance of being about forty years of age". Alternately, a passage in a work by George Abbot indicates that Bruno was of diminutive stature: "When that Italian Didapper, who intituled himself Philotheus Iordanus Brunus Nolanus, magis elaboratae Theologiae Doctor, &c. with a name longer than his body...".

[ 60 ] Cosmology [ edit ] Contemporary cosmological beliefs [ edit ] See also: Celestial spheres § History Illuminated illustration of the Ptolemaic geocentric conception of the universe. The outermost text reads "The heavenly empire, dwelling of God and all the elect." In the first half of the 15th century, Nicholas of Cusa challenged the then widely accepted philosophies of Aristotelianism , envisioning instead an infinite universe whose center was everywhere and circumference nowhere, and moreover teeming with countless stars.

[ 61 ] He also predicted that neither were the rotational orbits circular nor were their movements uniform.

[ 62 ] In the second half of the 16th century, the theories of Copernicus (1473–1543) began diffusing through Europe. Copernicus conserved the idea of planets fixed to solid spheres, but considered the apparent motion of the stars to be an illusion caused by the rotation of the Earth on its axis; he also preserved the notion of an immobile center, but it was the Sun rather than the Earth. Copernicus also argued the Earth was a planet orbiting the Sun once every year. However he maintained the Ptolemaic hypothesis that the orbits of the planets were composed of perfect circles— deferents and epicycles —and that the stars were fixed on a stationary outer sphere.

[ 63 ] Despite the widespread publication of Copernicus' work De revolutionibus orbium coelestium , during Bruno's time most educated Catholics subscribed to the Aristotelian geocentric view that the Earth was the center of the universe , and that all heavenly bodies revolved around it.

[ 64 ] The ultimate limit of the universe was the primum mobile , whose diurnal rotation was conferred upon it by a transcendental God, not part of the universe (although, as the kingdom of heaven , adjacent to it [ 65 ] ), a motionless prime mover and first cause . The fixed stars were part of this celestial sphere, all at the same fixed distance from the immobile Earth at the center of the sphere.

Ptolemy had numbered these at 1,022, grouped into 48 constellations . The planets were each fixed to a transparent sphere.

[ 66 ] Few astronomers of Bruno's time accepted Copernicus's heliocentric model . Among those who did were the Germans Michael Maestlin (1550–1631), Christoph Rothmann , Johannes Kepler (1571–1630); the Englishman Thomas Digges (c. 1546–1595), author of A Perfit Description of the Caelestial Orbes ; and the Italian Galileo Galilei (1564–1642).

Cosmological claims [ edit ] Main article: Heliocentrism In 1584, Bruno published two important philosophical dialogues ( La Cena de le Ceneri and De l'infinito universo et mondi ) in which he argued against the planetary spheres ( Christoph Rothmann did the same in 1586 as did Tycho Brahe in 1587) and affirmed the Copernican principle.

In particular, to support the Copernican view and oppose the objection according to which the motion of the Earth would be perceived by means of the motion of winds, clouds etc., in La Cena de le Ceneri Bruno anticipates some of the arguments of Galilei on the relativity principle.

[ 67 ] Note that he also uses the example now known as Galileo's ship .

Theophilus  – [...] air through which the clouds and winds move are parts of the Earth, [...] to mean under the name of Earth the whole machinery and the entire animated part, which consists of dissimilar parts; so that the rivers, the rocks, the seas, the whole vaporous and turbulent air, which is enclosed within the highest mountains, should belong to the Earth as its members, just as the air [does] in the lungs and in other cavities of animals by which they breathe, widen their arteries, and other similar effects necessary for life are performed. The clouds, too, move through accidents in the body of the Earth and are in its bowels as are the waters. [...] With the Earth move [...] all things that are on the Earth. If, therefore, from a point outside the Earth something were thrown upon the Earth, it would lose, because of the latter's motion, its straightness as would be seen on the ship [...] moving along a river, if someone on point C of the riverbank were to throw a stone along a straight line, and would see the stone miss its target by the amount of the velocity of the ship's motion.  But if someone were placed high on the mast of that ship, move as it may however fast, he would not miss his target at all, so that the stone or some other heavy thing thrown downward would not come along a straight line from the point E which is at the top of the mast, or cage, to the point D which is at the bottom of the mast, or at some point in the bowels and body of the ship. Thus, if from the point D to the point E someone who is inside the ship would throw a stone straight up, it would return to the bottom along the same line however far the ship moved, provided it was not subject to any pitch and roll." [ 68 ] Bruno's infinite universe was filled with a substance—a "pure air", aether , or spiritus —that offered no resistance to the heavenly bodies which, in Bruno's view, rather than being fixed, moved under their own impetus (momentum). Most dramatically, he completely abandoned the idea of a hierarchical universe.

The universe is then one, infinite, immobile... It is not capable of comprehension and therefore is endless and limitless, and to that extent infinite and indeterminable, and consequently immobile.

[ 69 ] Bruno's cosmology distinguishes between "suns" which produce their own light and heat, and have other bodies moving around them; and "earths" which move around suns and receive light and heat from them.

[ 70 ] Bruno suggested that some, if not all, of the objects classically known as fixed stars are in fact suns.

[ 70 ] According to astrophysicist Steven Soter , he was the first person to grasp that "stars are other suns with their own planets".

[ 71 ] Bruno wrote that other worlds "have no less virtue nor a nature different from that of our Earth" and, like Earth, "contain animals and inhabitants".

[ 72 ] During the late 16th century, and throughout the 17th century, Bruno's ideas were held up for ridicule, debate, or inspiration.

Margaret Cavendish , for example, wrote an entire series of poems against "atoms" and "infinite worlds" in Poems and Fancies in 1664. Bruno's true, if partial, vindication would have to wait for the implications and impact of Newtonian cosmology.

Bruno's overall contribution to the birth of modern science is still controversial. Some scholars follow Frances Yates in stressing the importance of Bruno's ideas about the universe being infinite and lacking geocentric structure as a crucial crossing point between the old and the new. Others see in Bruno's idea of multiple worlds instantiating the infinite possibilities of a pristine, indivisible One, [ 73 ] a forerunner of Everett 's many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics.

[ 74 ] While many academics note Bruno's theological position as pantheism , several have described it as pandeism , and some also as panentheism .

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Physicist and philosopher Max Bernhard Weinstein in his Welt- und Lebensanschauungen, Hervorgegangen aus Religion, Philosophie und Naturerkenntnis ("World and Life Views, Emerging From Religion, Philosophy and Nature"), wrote that the theological model of pandeism was strongly expressed in the teachings of Bruno, especially with respect to the vision of a deity for which "the concept of God is not separated from that of the universe".

[ 77 ] However, Otto Kern takes exception to what he considers Weinstein's overbroad assertions that Bruno, as well as other historical philosophers such as John Scotus Eriugena , Nicholas of Cusa , Mendelssohn , and Lessing , were pandeists or leaned towards pandeism.

[ 78 ] Discover editor Corey S. Powell also described Bruno's cosmology as pandeistic, writing that it was "a tool for advancing an animist or Pandeist theology", [ 79 ] and this assessment of Bruno as a pandeist was agreed with by science writer Michael Newton Keas, [ 80 ] and The Daily Beast writer David Sessions.

[ 81 ] Retrospective views [ edit ] The monument to Bruno in the place he was executed, Campo de' Fiori in Rome Monument to Giordano Bruno at Potsdamer Platz in Berlin, Germany, referencing his burning at the stake while tied upside down Late Vatican position [ edit ] The Vatican has published few official statements about Bruno's trial and execution. In 1942, Cardinal Giovanni Mercati , who discovered a number of lost documents relating to Bruno's trial, stated that the Church was perfectly justified in condemning him.

[ citation needed ] On the 400th anniversary of Bruno's death, in 2000, Cardinal Angelo Sodano declared Bruno's death to be a "sad episode" but, despite his regret, he defended Bruno's prosecutors, maintaining that the Inquisitors "had the desire to serve freedom and promote the common good and did everything possible to save his life".

[ 82 ] In the same year, Pope John Paul II made a general apology for "the use of violence that some have committed in the service of truth".

[ 83 ] A martyr of science [ edit ] See also: Conflict thesis Some authors have characterized Bruno as a "martyr of science", suggesting parallels with the Galileo affair which began around 1610.

[ 84 ] "It should not be supposed," writes A. M. Paterson of Bruno and his "heliocentric solar system", that he "reached his conclusions via some mystical revelation ... His work is an essential part of the scientific and philosophical developments that he initiated." [ 85 ] Paterson echoes Hegel in writing that Bruno "ushers in a modern theory of knowledge that understands all natural things in the universe to be known by the human mind through the mind's dialectical structure".

[ 86 ] Ingegno writes that Bruno embraced the philosophy of Lucretius , "aimed at liberating man from the fear of death and the gods".

[ 87 ] Characters in Bruno's Cause, Principle and Unity desire "to improve speculative science and knowledge of natural things," and to achieve a philosophy "which brings about the perfection of the human intellect most easily and eminently, and most closely corresponds to the truth of nature".

[ 88 ] Other scholars oppose such views, and claim Bruno's martyrdom to science to be exaggerated, or outright false. For Yates, while "nineteenth century liberals" were thrown "into ecstasies" over Bruno's Copernicanism, "Bruno pushes Copernicus' scientific work back into a prescientific stage, back into Hermeticism, interpreting the Copernican diagram as a hieroglyph of divine mysteries." [ 89 ] According to historian Mordechai Feingold, "Both admirers and critics of Giordano Bruno basically agree that he was pompous and arrogant, highly valuing his opinions and showing little patience with anyone who even mildly disagreed with him." Discussing Bruno's experience of rejection when he visited Oxford University, Feingold suggests that "it might have been Bruno's manner, his language and his self-assertiveness, rather than his ideas" that caused offence.

[ 90 ] Theological heresy [ edit ] In his Lectures on the History of Philosophy , Hegel writes that Bruno's life represented "a bold rejection of all Catholic beliefs resting on mere authority".

[ 91 ] Alfonso Ingegno states that Bruno's philosophy "challenges the developments of the Reformation, calls into question the truth-value of the whole of Christianity, and claims that Christ perpetrated a deceit on mankind ... Bruno suggests that we can now recognize the universal law which controls the perpetual becoming of all things in an infinite universe." [ 92 ] A. M. Paterson says that, while we no longer have a copy of the official papal condemnation of Bruno, his heresies included "the doctrine of the infinite universe and the innumerable worlds" and his beliefs "on the movement of the earth".

[ 93 ] Michael White notes that the Inquisition may have pursued Bruno early in his life on the basis of his opposition to Aristotle , interest in Arianism , reading of Erasmus , and possession of banned texts.

[ 94 ] White considers that Bruno's later heresy was "multifaceted" and may have rested on his conception of infinite worlds. "This was perhaps the most dangerous notion of all ... If other worlds existed with intelligent beings living there, did they too have their visitations? The idea was quite unthinkable." [ 94 ] Frances Yates rejects what she describes as the "legend that Bruno was prosecuted as a philosophical thinker, was burned for his daring views on innumerable worlds or on the movement of the earth." Yates however writes that "the Church was ... perfectly within its rights if it included philosophical points in its condemnation of Bruno's heresies" because "the philosophical points were quite inseparable from the heresies".

[ 95 ] According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , "in 1600 there was no official Catholic position on the Copernican system, and it was certainly not a heresy. When [...] Bruno [...] was burned at the stake as a heretic, it had nothing to do with his writings in support of Copernican cosmology." [ 96 ] The website of the Vatican Apostolic Archive , discussing a summary of legal proceedings against Bruno in Rome, states: In the same rooms where Giordano Bruno was questioned, for the same important reasons of the relationship between science and faith, at the dawning of the new astronomy and at the decline of Aristotle's philosophy, sixteen years later, Cardinal Bellarmino , who then contested Bruno's heretical theses, summoned Galileo Galilei, who also faced a famous inquisitorial trial, which, luckily for him, ended with a simple abjuration.

[ 97 ] Galileo ultimately recanted his views and agreed to house arrest and was spared from being burned at the stake, while Bruno held his positions until death.

[ 98 ] The concepts of exoplanets , the idea that the shape of the universe goes on infinitely , and the Solar System holding no cosmic importance or center, would later become major concepts in the field of cosmology , as well as philosophy.

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] Cultural legacy [ edit ] In art [ edit ] Following the 1870 Capture of Rome by the newly created Kingdom of Italy and the end of the Church's temporal power over the city, the erection of a monument to Bruno on the site of his execution became feasible. The monument was sharply opposed by the clerical party, but was finally erected by the Rome Municipality and inaugurated in 1889.

[ 101 ] The statue depicts a robed and hooded monk in mid-stride, a book held in his right hand against his left thigh. The inscription below reads: IX GIVGNO MDCCCLXXXIX ——— A BRVNO IL SECOLO DA LVI DIVINATO QVI DOVE IL ROGO ARSE 9 June 1889 ——— To Bruno From the age he divined Here Where the pyre burned Illustration of Bruno by German symbolist artist Fidus (1900), mixed media on paper, 60 x 50 cm, The Jack Daulton Collection [ 102 ] A statue of a stretched human figure standing on its head, designed by Alexander Polzin and depicting Bruno's death at the stake, was placed in Potsdamer Platz station in Berlin on 2 March 2008.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] Retrospective iconography of Bruno shows him with a Dominican cowl but not tonsured . Edward Gosselin has suggested that it is likely Bruno kept his tonsure at least until 1579, and it is possible that he wore it again thereafter.

[ 105 ] An idealized animated version of Bruno appears in the first episode of the 2014 television series Cosmos: A Spacetime Odyssey . In this depiction, Bruno is shown with a more modern look, without tonsure and wearing clerical robes and without his hood.

Cosmos presents Bruno as an impoverished philosopher who was ultimately executed due to his refusal to recant his belief in other worlds, a portrayal that was criticized by some as simplistic or historically inaccurate.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] [ 108 ] Corey S. Powell, of Discover magazine, says of Bruno, "A major reason he moved around so much is that he was argumentative, sarcastic, and drawn to controversy ... He was a brilliant, complicated, difficult man.

[ 106 ] In poetry [ edit ] Poems that refer to Bruno include: "The Monument of Giordano Bruno" (1889) by Algernon Charles Swinburne , written when the statue of Bruno was constructed in Rome.

[ 109 ] "Campo Dei Fiori" (1943) by Czesław Miłosz , which draws parallels between indifference to the fate of Bruno and indifference to the victims of the then-ongoing Occupation of Poland .

[ 110 ] "The Emancipators" (1958) by Randall Jarrell , which addresses Bruno, along with Galileo and Newton, as an originator of the modern scientific-industrial world.

[ 111 ] "What He Thought" (1994) by Heather McHugh , a (possibly autobiographical) poem about a group of American poets who visit Italy and are lectured about Bruno and the nature of poetry by a local arts administrator. The poem was published in the collection Hinge & Sign , a nominee for the National Book Award .

[ 112 ] In fiction [ edit ] Bruno and his theory of "the coincidence of contraries" ( coincidentia oppositorum ) play an important role in James Joyce 's 1939 novel Finnegans Wake . Joyce wrote in a letter to his patroness, Harriet Shaw Weaver , "His philosophy is a kind of dualism – every power in nature must evolve an opposite in order to realise itself and opposition brings reunion".

[ 113 ] Amongst his numerous allusions to Bruno in his novel, including his trial and torture, Joyce plays upon Bruno's notion of coincidentia oppositorum through applying his name to word puns such as "Browne and Nolan" (the name of Dublin printers) and '"brownesberrow in nolandsland".

[ 114 ] In 1973 the biographical drama Giordano Bruno was released, an Italian/French movie directed by Giuliano Montaldo , starring Gian Maria Volonté as Bruno.

[ 115 ] Bruno is a major character in the four-novel Aegypt sequence (1987–2007) by John Crowley . Historical episodes from Bruno's life are fictionalized in the novels, and his philosophical ideas are key to the novels’ themes.

[ 116 ] The Last Confession (2000) by Morris West is an unfinished, posthumously published fictional autobiography of Bruno, ostensibly written shortly before Bruno's execution.

[ 117 ] In the 2008 novel Children of God by Mary Doria Russell ,  several characters travel on an interstellar spaceship named Giordano Bruno .

[ 118 ] Bruno features as the hero of the Giordano Bruno series (2010–2023) of historical crime novels by S. J. Parris (a pseudonym of Stephanie Merritt ).

[ 119 ] In music [ edit ] Hans Werner Henze set his large scale cantata for orchestra, choir and four soloists, Novae de infinito laudes to Italian texts by Bruno, recorded in 1972 at the Salzburg Festival reissued on CD Orfeo C609 031B.

[ 120 ] The Italian composer Francesco Filidei wrote an opera, based on a libretto by Stefano Busellato, titled Giordano Bruno . The premiere took place on 12 September 2015 at the Casa da Música in Porto, Portugal.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] [ 123 ] [ 124 ] The 2016 song "Roman Sky" by heavy metal band Avenged Sevenfold focuses on the death of Bruno.

[ 125 ] Bruno is the central character in Roger Doyle 's Heresy – an electronic opera (2017).

[ 126 ] In television [ edit ] Chumlee tracking down a first edition copy of a book by Bruno in Rome is a part of a season 17 episode of the American TV series Pawn Stars .

[ 127 ] The Doctor Who serial The Ribos Operation (1978) features a character named "Binro the Heretic", who was ostracized by his people for claiming the stars were not ice crystals, but other suns. The BBC has explicitly drawn a connection between the two.

[ 128 ] Legacy [ edit ] Giordano Bruno Foundation [ edit ] Main article: Giordano Bruno Foundation The Giordano Bruno Foundation (German: Giordano-Bruno-Stiftung) is a non-profit foundation based in Germany that pursues the "Support of Evolutionary Humanism ". It was founded by entrepreneur Herbert Steffen in 2004. The Giordano Bruno Foundation is critical of religious fundamentalism and nationalism.

[ 129 ] Giordano Bruno Memorial Award [ edit ] The SETI League makes an annual award honoring the memory of Giordano Bruno to a deserving person or persons who have made a significant contribution to the practice of SETI (the search for extraterrestrial intelligence). The award was proposed by sociologist Donald Tarter in 1995 on the 395th anniversary of Bruno's death. The trophy presented is called a Bruno.

[ 130 ] Astronomical objects named after Bruno [ edit ] The 22 km impact crater Giordano Bruno on the far side of the Moon is named in his honor, as are the main belt Asteroids 5148 Giordano and 13223 Cenaceneri ; the latter is named after his philosophical dialogue La Cena de le Ceneri ("The Ash Wednesday Supper") (see above).

[ citation needed ] Works [ edit ] De umbris idearum ( On the Shadows of Ideas , Paris, 1582) Cantus circaeus ( The Incantation of Circe or Circe's Song , Paris, 1582) [ 131 ] Ars memoriae [ it ] ( The Art of Memory , Paris, 1582) De compendiosa architectura et complento artis Lulli ( A Compendium of Architecture and Lulli's Art , 1582) [ 132 ] Candelaio ( The Torchbearer or The Candle Bearer , 1582; play) Ars reminiscendi ( The Art of Memory , 1583) Explicatio triginta sigillorum ( Explanation of Thirty Seals , 1583) [ 133 ] Sigillus sigillorum ( The Seal of Seals , 1583) [ 134 ] La cena de le ceneri ( The Ash Wednesday Supper , 1584) De la causa, principio, et uno ( Concerning Cause, Principle, and Unity , 1584) On the Infinite Universe and Worlds [ it ] ( De l'infinito universo et mondi , 1584) Spaccio de la bestia trionfante ( The Expulsion of the Triumphant Beast , London, 1584) Cabala del cavallo Pegaseo ( Cabal of the Horse Pegasus , 1585) De gli eroici furori ( The Heroic Frenzies , 1585) [ 135 ] Figuratio Aristotelici Physici auditus ( Figures From Aristotle's Physics , 1585) Dialogi duo de Fabricii Mordentis Salernitani ( Two Dialogues of Fabricii Mordentis Salernitani , 1586) Idiota triumphans ( The Triumphant Idiot , 1586) De somni interpretatione ( Dream Interpretation , 1586) [ 136 ] Animadversiones circa lampadem lullianam ( Amendments regarding Lull's Lantern , 1586) [ 136 ] Lampas triginta statuarum ( The Lantern of Thirty Statues , 1586) [ 137 ] Centum et viginti articuli de natura et mundo adversus peripateticos ( One Hundred and Twenty Articles on Nature and the World Against the Peripatetics , 1586) [ 138 ] De Lampade combinatoria Lulliana ( The Lamp of Combinations according to Lull , 1587) [ 139 ] De progressu et lampade venatoria logicorum ( Progress and the Hunter's Lamp of Logical Methods , 1587) [ 140 ] Oratio valedictoria ( Valedictory Oration , 1588) [ 141 ] Camoeracensis Acrotismus ( The Pleasure of Dispute , 1588) [ 142 ] De specierum scrutinio (1588) Articuli centum et sexaginta adversus huius tempestatis mathematicos atque Philosophos ( One Hundred and Sixty Theses Against Mathematicians and Philosophers , 1588) [ 143 ] Oratio consolatoria ( Consolation Oration , 1589) [ 143 ] De vinculis in genere ( Of Bonds in General , 1591) [ 144 ] De triplici minimo et mensura ( On the Threefold Minimum and Measure , 1591) [ 145 ] De monade numero et figura ( On the Monad, Number, and Figure , Frankfurt, 1591) [ 146 ] De innumerabilibus, immenso, et infigurabili ( Of Innumerable Things, Vastness and the Unrepresentable , 1591) De imaginum, signorum et idearum compositione ( On the Composition of Images, Signs and Ideas , 1591) Summa terminorum metaphysicorum ( Handbook of Metaphysical Terms , 1595) [ 147 ] [ 148 ] Artificium perorandi ( The Art of Communicating , 1612) Collections [ edit ] Jordani Bruni Nolani opera latine conscripta ( Giordano Bruno the Nolan's Works Written in Latin ), Dritter Band (1962) / curantibus F. Tocco et H. Vitelli See also [ edit ] Fermi paradox List of Roman Catholic scientist-clerics References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Gatti 2002 , p. 1.

^ Pogge, Richard W. "The Folly of Giordano Bruno". Ohio State University Department of Astronomy. Updated February 24, 2014.

http://www.astronomy.ohio-state.edu/~pogge/Essays/Bruno.html ^ Birx 1997 ; Collinge 2012 , p.

188 .

^ Yates 1964 , p. 450.

^ Michael J. Crowe, The Extraterrestrial Life Debate 1750–1900 , Cambridge University Press, 1986, p. 10, "[Bruno's] sources... seem to have been more numerous than his followers, at least until the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century revival of interest in Bruno as a supposed 'martyr for science.' It is true that he was burned at the stake in Rome in 1600, but the church authorities guilty of this action were almost certainly more distressed at his denial of Christ's divinity and alleged diabolism than at his cosmological doctrines." ^ Adam Frank (2009).

The Constant Fire: Beyond the Science vs. Religion Debate , University of California Press, p. 24, "Though Bruno may have been a brilliant thinker whose work stands as a bridge between ancient and modern thought, his persecution cannot be seen solely in light of the war between science and religion ." ^ White 2002 , p. 7: "This was perhaps the most dangerous notion of all... If other worlds existed with intelligent beings living there, did they too have their visitations? The idea was quite unthinkable." ^ Shackelford, Joel (2009). "Myth 7 That Giordano Bruno was the first martyr of modern science". In Numbers, Ronald L.

(ed.).

Galileo goes to jail and other myths about science and religion . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. p. 66.

"Yet the fact remains that cosmological matters, notably the plurality of worlds, were an identifiable concern all along and appear in the summary document: Bruno was repeatedly questioned on these matters, and he apparently refused to recant them at the end.14 So, Bruno probably was burned alive for resolutely maintaining a series of heresies, among which his teaching of the plurality of worlds was prominent but by no means singular." ^ Gatti, Hilary (26 October 2012).

"Why Giordano Bruno's "Tranquil Universal Philosophy" Finished in a Fire" . In Lavery, Jonathan; Groarke, Louis; Sweet, William (eds.).

Ideas under Fire: Historical Studies of Philosophy and Science in Adversity . Fairleigh Dickinson. pp.

116– 118.

ISBN 978-1-61147-543-2 .

One of the first and most notable developments consisted in a growing awareness that earlier commentators had indeed been right to consider Bruno's trial as being closely linked to that of Galileo (...) Jean Seidengart underlined the particular emphasis to be found throughout the trial on Bruno's doctrine of a plurality of worlds." and "Bruno, however, by admitting so candidly his distance from the Catholic theology, was indirectly questioning such a system of law, which imposed on his conscience views different from his own. (...) he was doing it in the name of a principle of religious pluralism which derived directly from his cosmology.

^ Martínez, Alberto A. (2018).

Burned Alive: Giordano Bruno, Galileo and the Inquisition . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-1780238968 .

^ Koyré, Alexandre (1980).

Estudios galileanos (in Spanish). México D.F.: Siglo XXI Editores. pp.

159– 169.

ISBN 978-9682310355 .

^ Gatti 2002 , pp. 18–19: For Bruno was claiming for the philosopher a principle of free thought and inquiry which implied an entirely new concept of authority: that of the individual intellect in its serious and continuing pursuit of an autonomous inquiry… It is impossible to understand the issue involved and to evaluate justly the stand made by Bruno with his life without appreciating the question of free thought and liberty of expression. His insistence on placing this issue at the center of both his work and of his defense is why Bruno remains so much a figure of the modern world. If there is, as many have argued, an intrinsic link between science and liberty of inquiry, then Bruno was among those who guaranteed the future of the newly emerging sciences, as well as claiming in wider terms a general principle of free thought and expression." ^ Aquilecchia, Montano & Bertrando 2007 : "In Rome, Bruno was imprisoned for seven years and subjected to a difficult trial that analyzed, minutely, all his philosophical ideas. Bruno, who in Venice had been willing to recant some theses, became increasingly resolute and declared on 21 December 1599 that he 'did not wish to repent of having too little to repent, and in fact did not know what to repent.' Declared an unrepentant heretic and excommunicated, he was burned alive in the Campo dei Fiori in Rome on Ash Wednesday, 17 February 1600. On the stake, along with Bruno, burned the hopes of many, including philosophers and scientists of good faith like Galileo, who thought they could reconcile religious faith and scientific research, while belonging to an ecclesiastical organization declaring itself to be the custodian of absolute truth and maintaining a cultural militancy requiring continual commitment and suspicion." ^ The primary work on the relationship between Bruno and Hermeticism is Yates 1964 ; for an alternative assessment, placing more emphasis on the Kabbalah, and less on Hermeticism, see DeLeón-Jones 1997 ; for a return to emphasis on Bruno's role in the development of Science, and criticism of Yates' emphasis on magical and Hermetic themes, see Gatti 2002 .

^ Alessandro G. Farinella and Carole Preston, "Giordano Bruno: Neoplatonism and the Wheel of Memory in the 'De Umbris Idearum'", in Renaissance Quarterly , Vol. 55, No. 2, (Summer, 2002), pp. 596–624 ^ Saiber 2005 .

^ Singer 1968 .

^ This is recorded in the diary of one Guillaume Cotin, librarian of the Abbey of St. Victor, who recorded recollections of a number of personal conversations he had with Bruno. Bruno also mentions this dedication in the Dedicatory Epistle of The Cabala of Pegasus ( Cabala del Cavallo Pegaseo , 1585).

^ Aquilecchia, Montano & Bertrando 2007 , p. 11.

^ Gosselin has argued that Bruno's report that he returned to Dominican garb in Padua suggests that he kept his tonsure at least until his arrival in Geneva in 1579. He also suggests it is likely that Bruno kept the tonsure even after this point, showing a continued and deep religious attachment contrary to the way in which Bruno has been portrayed as a martyr for modern science. Instead, Gosselin argues, Bruno should be understood in the context of reformist Catholic dissenters. Edward A. Gosselin, "A Dominican Head in Layman's Garb? A Correction to the Scientific Iconography of Giordano Bruno", in The Sixteenth Century Journal , Vol. 27, No. 3 (Autumn, 1996), pp. 673–678.

^ Singer 1968 , p.

[ page needed ] : "Following the northern route back through Brescia, Bruno came to Bergamo where he resumed the monastic habit. He perhaps visited Milan, and then leaving Italy he crossed the Alps by the Mont Cenis pass, and came to Chambéry. He describes his hospitable reception there by the Dominican Convent, but again he received no encouragement to remain, and he journeyed on to Lyons. Bruno's next movements are obscure. In 1579 he reached Geneva." ^ a b Salvestrini, Virgilio (1958).

Bibliografia di Giordano Bruno (in Italian). Firenze.

^ Singer 1968 , p. 12.

^ Boulting 1914 , p. 42.

^ Boulting 1914 , pp. 44–45.

^ Boulting 1914 , pp. 46–47.

^ Boulting 1914 , p. 48–49.

^ Boulting 1914 , pp. 49–52.

^ Boulting 1914 , p. 51.

^ Boulting 1914 , p. 53.

^ Boulting 1914 , pp. 56–57.

^ Boulting 1914 , pp. 57–58.

^ Weiner, Andrew D. (1980). "Expelling the Beast: Bruno's Adventures in England".

Modern Philology .

78 (1): 1– 13.

doi : 10.1086/391002 .

JSTOR 437245 .

S2CID 161642786 .

^ Hannam, James.

God's Philosophers: How the Medieval World Laid the Foundations of Modern Science .

Icon Books Ltd, 2009, 312, ISBN 978-1848310704 ^ Bossy, John (1991).

Giordano Bruno and the Embassy Affair . New Haven: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-04993-0 .

^ John Gribbin (2009).

In Search of the Multiverse: Parallel Worlds, Hidden Dimensions, and the Ultimate Quest for the Frontiers of Reality , ISBN 978-0470613528 . p. 88 ^ Sgarbi, Marco (2022).

Encyclopedia of Renaissance Philosophy . New York: Springer International Publishing.

ISBN 978-3-319-141695 .

. p. 255 ^ Boulting 1914 , pp. 112–113.

^ Boulting 1914 , pp. 189–194.

^ Boulting 1914 , pp. 196–197.

^ Boulting 1914 , pp. 207–213.

^ Boulting 1914 , pp. 214–219.

^ Bruno 1998 , p. xxxvi.

^ Boulting 1914 , pp. 224–225.

^ "Giordano Bruno" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 8 May 2014 .

At the time such a move did not seem to be too much of a risk: Venice was by far the most liberal of the Italian states; the European tension had been temporarily eased after the death of the intransigent pope Sixtus V in 1590; the Protestant Henry of Bourbon was now on the throne of France, and a religious pacification seemed to be imminent.

^ Boulting 1914 , p. 249.

^ Boulting 1914 , pp. 253–257.

^ Boulting 1914 , pp. 257–258.

^ Boulting 1914 , p. 259.

^ Boulting 1914 , pp. 287–288.

^ Boulting 1914 , p. 292.

^ "II Sommario del Processo di Giordano Bruno, con appendice di Documenti sull'eresia e l'inquisizione a Modena nel secolo XVI", edited by Angelo Mercati, in Studi e Testi , vol. 101.

^ Firpo 1993 .

^ Singer 1968 , ch. 7: "A gloating account of the whole ritual is given in a letter written on the very day by a youth named Gaspar Schopp of Breslau, a recent convert to Catholicism to whom Pope Clement VIII had shown great favor, creating him Knight of St. Peter and Count of the Sacred Palace. Schopp was addressing Conrad Rittershausen. He recounts that because of his heresy Bruno had been publicly burned that day in the Square of Flowers in front of the Theatre of Pompey. He makes merry over the belief of the Italians that every heretic is a Lutheran. It is evident that he had been present at the interrogations, for he relates in detail the life of Bruno and the works and doctrines for which he had been arraigned, and he gives a vivid account of Bruno's final appearance before his judges on 8 February. To Schopp we owe the knowledge of Bruno's bearing under judgement. When the verdict had been declared, records Schopp, Bruno with a threatening gesture addressed his judges: "Perchance you who pronounce my sentence are in greater fear than I who receive it." Thus he was dismissed to the prison, gloats the convert, "and was given eight days to recant, but in vain. So today he was led to the funeral pyre. When the image of our Savior was shown to him before his death he angrily rejected it with averted face. Thus my dear Rittershausen is it our custom to proceed against such men or rather indeed such monsters." ^ Fitzgerald, Timothy (2007).

Discourse on Civility and Barbarity . Oxford University Press. p. 239.

ISBN 978-0-19-804103-0 . Retrieved 11 May 2017 .

^ "Il Sommario del Processo di Giordano Bruno, con appendice di Documenti sull'eresia e l'inquisizione a Modena nel secolo XVI", edited by Angelo Mercati, in Studi e Testi , vol. 101; the precise terminology for the tool used to silence Bruno before burning is recorded as una morsa di legno , or "a vise of wood", and not an iron spike as sometimes claimed by other sources.

^ Valentinuzzi, Max E. (4 October 2019).

"Giordano Bruno: Expander of the Copernican Universe" .

IEEE Pulse .

10 (5): 23– 27.

Bibcode : 2019IPuls..10e..23V .

doi : 10.1109/MPULS.2019.2937244 .

^ Rowland 2016 , p.

8 .

^ Edward A. Gosselin, "A Dominican Head in Layman's Garb? A Correction to the Scientific Iconography of Giordano Bruno", in The Sixteenth Century Journal , Vol. 27, No. 3 (Autumn, 1996), p. 674 ^ Robert McNulty, "Bruno at Oxford", in Renaissance News, 1960 (XIII), pp. 300–305 ^ Hopkins, Jasper (1985).

Nicholas of Cusa on learned ignorance : a translation and an appraisal of De docta ignorantia (2nd ed.). Minneapolis: A.J. Benning Press. pp.

89– 98.

ISBN 978-0938060307 .

OCLC 12781538 .

^ Certeau, Michel De; Porter, Catherine (1987). "The Gaze Nicholas of Cusa".

Diacritics .

17 (3): 15.

doi : 10.2307/464833 .

ISSN 0300-7162 .

JSTOR 464833 .

^ Koyré, Alexandre (1943). "NICOLAS COPERNICUS".

Bulletin of the Polish Institute of Arts and Sciences in America .

1 : 705– 730.

^ Blackwell, Richard (1991).

Galileo, Bellarmine, and the Bible . Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press. p. 25.

ISBN 978-0268010249 .

^ See e.g.

Cosmography by Peter Apian, Antwerp 1539 and its outer sphere ^ Russell, Henry Norris (1931). "Tidying Up the Constellations".

Scientific American .

144 (6): 380– 381.

Bibcode : 1931SciAm.144..380R .

doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican0631-380 .

ISSN 0036-8733 .

^ Alessandro De Angelis and Catarina Espirito Santo (2015), "The contribution of Giordano Bruno to the principle of relativity" (PDF) , Journal of Astronomical History and Heritage , 18 (3): 241– 248, arXiv : 1504.01604 , Bibcode : 2015JAHH...18..241D , doi : 10.3724/SP.J.1440-2807.2015.03.02 , S2CID 118420438 , archived from the original (PDF) on 26 January 2016 , retrieved 19 January 2016 ^ Giordano Bruno, Teofilo, in La Cena de le Ceneri, "Third Dialogue", (1584), ed. and trans. by S.L. Jaki (1975).

^ Giordano Bruno, Teofilo, in Cause, Principle, and Unity, "Fifth Dialogue", (1588), ed. and trans. by Jack Lindsay (1962).

^ a b Bruno, Giordano (1584).

"Third Dialogue" .

On the infinite universe and worlds . Archived from the original on 27 April 2012.

^ Soter, Steven (13 March 2014).

"The Cosmos of Giordano Bruno" .

Discover . Archived from the original on 25 June 2020 . Retrieved 26 July 2021 .

^ "Giordano Bruno: On the Infinite Universe and Worlds (De l'Infinito Universo et Mondi) Introductory Epistle: Argument of the Third Dialogue" . Archived from the original on 13 October 2014 . Retrieved 4 October 2014 .

^ Hetherington, Norriss S., ed. (2014) [1993].

Encyclopedia of Cosmology (Routledge Revivals): Historical, Philosophical, and Scientific Foundations of Modern Cosmology . Routledge. p. 419.

ISBN 978-1317677666 . Retrieved 29 March 2015 .

Bruno (from the mouth of his character Philotheo) in his De l'infinito universo et mondi (1584) claims that "innumerable celestial bodies, stars, globes, suns and earths may be sensibly perceived therein by us and an infinite number of them may be inferred by our own reason." ^ Max Tegmark , Parallel Universes , 2003 ^ Biernacki, Loriliai; Clayton, Philip (2014).

Panentheism Across the World's Traditions . OUP USA.

ISBN 9780199989898 .

^ Thielicke, Helmut (November 1990).

Modern Faith and Thought . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p.

120 .

ISBN 9780802826725 .

bruno panentheistic.

^ Max Bernhard Weinsten, Welt- und Lebensanschauungen, Hervorgegangen aus Religion, Philosophie und Naturerkenntnis ("World and Life Views, Emerging From Religion, Philosophy and Perception of Nature") (1910), p. 321: "Also darf man vielleicht glauben, daß das ganze System eine Erhebung des Physischen aus seiner Natur in das Göttliche ist oder eine Durchstrahlung des Physischen durch das Göttliche; beides eine Art Pandeismus. Und so zeigt sich auch der Begriff Gottes von dem des Universums nicht getrennt; Gott ist naturierende Natur, Weltseele, Weltkraft. Da Bruno durchaus ablehnt, gegen die Religion zu lehren, so hat man solche Angaben wohl umgekehrt zu verstehen: Weltkraft, Weltseele, naturierende Natur, Universum sind in Gott. Gott ist Kraft der Weltkraft, Seele der Weltseele, Natur der Natur, Eins des Universums. Bruno spricht ja auch von mehreren Teilen der universellen Vernunft, des Urvermögens und der Urwirklichkeit. Und damit hängt zusammen, daß für ihn die Welt unendlich ist und ohne Anfang und Ende; sie ist in demselben Sinne allumfassend wie Gott. Aber nicht ganz wie Gott. Gott sei in allem und im einzelnen allumfassend, die Welt jedoch wohl in allem, aber nicht im einzelnen, da sie ja Teile in sich zuläßt." ^ Review of Welt- und Lebensanschauungen, Hervorgegangen aus Religion, Philosophie und Naturerkenntnis ("World and Life Views, Emerging From Religion, Philosophy and Perception of Nature") in Emil Schürer , Adolf von Harnack , editors, Theologische Literaturzeitung ("Theological Literature Journal"), Volume 35, column 827 (1910): "Dem Verfasser hat anscheinend die Einteilung: religiöse, rationale und naturwissenschaftlich fundierte Weltanschauungen vorgeschwebt; er hat sie dann aber seinem Material gegenüber schwer durchführbar gefunden und durch die mitgeteilte ersetzt, die das Prinzip der Einteilung nur noch dunkel durchschimmern läßt. Damit hängt wohl auch das vom Verfasser gebildete unschöne griechisch-lateinische Mischwort des 'Pandeismus' zusammen. Nach S. 228 versteht er darunter im Unterschied von dem mehr metaphysisch gearteten Pantheismus einen 'gesteigerten und vereinheitlichten Animismus', also eine populäre Art religiöser Weltdeutung. Prhagt man lieh dies ein, so erstaunt man über die weite Ausdehnung, die dem Begriff in der Folge gegeben wird. Nach S. 284 ist Scotus Erigena ein ganzer, nach S. 300 Anselm von Canterbury ein 'halber Pandeist'; aber auch bei Nikolaus Cusanus und Giordano Bruno, ja selbst bei Mendelssohn und Lessing wird eine Art von Pandeismus gefunden (S. 306. 321. 346.)." Translation : "The author apparently intended to divide up religious, rational and scientifically based philosophies, but found his material overwhelming, resulting in an effort that can shine through the principle of classification only darkly. This probably is also the source of the unsightly Greek-Latin compound word, 'Pandeism.' At page 228, he understands the difference from the more metaphysical kind of pantheism, an enhanced unified animism that is a popular religious worldview. In remembering this borrowing, we were struck by the vast expanse given the term. According to page 284, Scotus Erigena is one entirely, at p. 300 Anselm of Canterbury is 'half Pandeist'; but also Nicholas of Cusa and Giordano Bruno, and even in Mendelssohn and Lessing a kind of Pandeism is found (p. 306 321 346.)".

^ Powell, Corey S. (13 March 2014).

"Defending Giordano Bruno: A Response from the Co-Writer of 'Cosmos' " .

Discover . Archived from the original on 16 November 2019.

Bruno imagines all planets and stars having souls (part of what he means by them all having the same "composition"), and he uses his cosmology as a tool for advancing an animist or Pandeist theology.

^ Michael Newton Keas (2019).

UNbelievable: 7 Myths About the History and Future of Science and Religion . pp.

149– 150.

^ David Sessions, " How 'Cosmos' Bungles the History of Religion and Science ", The Daily Beast , 03.23.14: "Bruno, for instance, was a 'pandeist', which is the belief that God had transformed himself into all matter and ceased to exist as a distinct entity in himself." ^ Seife, Charles (1 March 2000).

"Vatican Regrets Burning Cosmologist" .

Science Now . Archived from the original on 8 June 2013 . Retrieved 24 June 2012 .

^ Robinson, B A (7 March 2000), Apologies by Pope John Paul II , Ontario Consultants. Retrieved 27 December 2013 ^ "Giordano Bruno and Galileo Galilei," The Popular Science Monthly, Supplement, 1878.

^ Antoinette Mann Paterson (1970).

The Infinite Worlds of Giordano Bruno . Charles C. Thomas, Springfield, Illinois, 1970, p. 16.

^ Paterson, p. 61.

^ Bruno 1998 , "Introduction".

^ Bruno 1998 , p. 63.

^ Yates 1964 , p. 225.

^ Feingold, Mordechai; Vickers, Brian (1984).

Occult and scientific mentalities in the Renaissance . pp.

73– 94.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511572999.004 .

ISBN 978-0511572999 .

^ Hegel's lectures on the history of philosophy, translated by E. S. Haldane and F. H. Simson, in three volumes. Volume III, p. 119. The Humanities Press, 1974, New York.

^ Bruno 1998 , p. x.

^ Paterson, p. 198.

^ a b White 2002 , p. 7.

^ Yates 1964 , pp. 354–356.

^ Sheila Rabin, "Nicolaus Copernicus" in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (online. Retrieved 19 November 2005).

^ "Summary of the trial against Giordano Bruno: Rome, 1597" . Vatican Secret Archives. Archived from the original on 9 June 2010 . Retrieved 18 September 2010 .

^ Magazine, Smithsonian.

"378 Years Ago Today: Galileo Forced to Recant" .

Smithsonian Magazine .

^ Genet, Russell Merle (2003).

Giordano Bruno's cosmic hypothesis: The universe is infinite, evolving, and filled with planets, life and intelligence (Thesis).

OCLC 781725220 .

ProQuest 305216815 .

[ page needed ] ^ Birx, H. James; Milićević, Branko; Tenodi, Alexander V. (30 June 2018).

"Giordano Bruno: The Cosmic Perspective" .

Anthropologia Integra .

9 (1): 61– 74.

doi : 10.5817/AI2018-1-61 .

^ Findlen, Paula (10 September 2008).

"A hungry mind: Giordano Bruno, philosopher and heretic" .

The Nation . Archived from the original on 4 December 2008 . Retrieved 19 September 2008 .

Campo de' Fiori was festooned with flags bearing Masonic symbols. Fiery speeches were made by politicians, scholars and atheists about the importance of commemorating Bruno as one of the most original and oppressed freethinkers of his age.

^ "Web Site Name" .

www.symbolismus.com .

^ Bhattacharjee, Yudhiijit (13 March 2008). "Think About It".

Science .

319 (5869): 1467.

doi : 10.1126/science.319.5869.1467b .

S2CID 220094639 .

^ Schmidt-Salomon, Michael (26 February 2008).

"giordano bruno denkmal" .

^ Gosselin, Edward A. (1996). "A Dominican Head in Layman's Garb? A Correction to the Scientific Iconography of Giordano Bruno".

The Sixteenth Century Journal .

27 (3): 673– 678.

doi : 10.2307/2544011 .

JSTOR 2544011 .

^ a b Powell, Corey S. (10 March 2014).

"Did Cosmos Pick the Wrong Hero?" .

Discover .

Kalmbach Publishing . Archived from the original on 16 March 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .

^ Rosenau, Josh (18 March 2014).

"Why Did Cosmos Focus on Giordano Bruno?" . National Center for Science Education . Retrieved 14 April 2014 .

^ Sessions, David (3 March 2014).

"How 'Cosmos' Bungles the History of Religion and Science" .

The Daily Beast . Retrieved 8 May 2014 .

^ Swinburne, Algernon Charles .

"The Monument of Giordano Bruno" . Archived from the original on 23 April 2015 . Retrieved 13 July 2015 .

^ Milosz, Czeslaw .

"Campo Dei Fiori" . Retrieved 7 February 2017 .

^ Mordecai; Marcus, Erin (1 February 1958).

"26. Jarrell's the Emancipators" .

The Explicator .

16 (5): 65– 67.

doi : 10.1080/00144940.1958.11481973 .

ISSN 0014-4940 .

^ "Tom Hunley's "Epiphanic Structure in Heather McHugh's Ars Poetica, 'What He Thought'"" .

Voltage Poetry . 21 February 2013.

^ James Joyce, Letter to Harriet Shaw Weaver, 27 January 1925, Selected Letters , p. 307 ^ McHugh, Roland. Annotations to Finnegans Wake. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1980. Print, xv.

^ Bondanella, Peter E.

(2009).

A history of Italian cinema . Continuum International Publishing Group.

^ "Aegypt by John Crowley" .

Publishers Weekly . 1 March 1987 . Retrieved 4 July 2024 .

^ Margaret Jones, "Vale a reluctant heretic", critique of The Last Confession , Sydney Morning Herald , Spectrum, 5 August 2000.

^ "Children of God by Mary Doria Russell" .

Powell's Books . 13 September 2022 . Retrieved 23 August 2024 .

^ O'Connell, John (13 March 2010).

"Heresy by SJ Parris" .

The Guardian .

^ Kohn, Rachael (15 November 2006).

"Theosophy Today" .

The Spirit of Things (Transcript) "Erica Patient: She came into contact with theosophy through 2GB, Station 2GB when it was owned by the Theosophical Society. Rachael Kohn: GB stands for Giordano Bruno. Erica Patient: It does. Actually we wanted to have AB for Annie Besant, but it sounded too like ABC. So they said they wouldn't have it." . Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 12 January 2009 .

^ Giordano Bruno, Opéra de Francesco Filidei, Calendrier , accessed Dec. 20, 2023.

^ Giordano Bruno, Opéra de Francesco Filidei, Musique , accessed Dec. 20, 2023.

^ Giordano Bruno, Opéra de Francesco Filidei, Livret , accessed Dec. 20, 2023.

^ "A Selected Analytical Bibliography of Works for Saxophone by Composers Associated with the Darmstadt International Summer Courses for New Music: 1946-2021" , Christopher Mark DeLouis, DMA thesis, West Virginia University, 2021, doi : 10.33915/etd.10239 , pp. 105-106.

^ Nash, Lisa (5 December 2016).

"Avenged Sevenfold – The Stage (Album Review)" .

Cryptic Rock . Retrieved 23 December 2016 .

^ Maxwell, Luke (30 October 2019).

"The Curious Works of Roger Doyle, Reviewed" .

Dublin InQuirer . Retrieved 27 March 2024 .

^ Skopp, Sam (12 March 2021).

"The Rare Italian Book That Fetched Six Figures On Pawn Stars" .

Looper . Retrieved 14 April 2025 .

^ Guerrier, Simon (2015).

The Scientific Secrets of Doctor Who . London: Ebury Press. p. 26.

ISBN 9781849909389 .

^ Heinrich, Daniel (12 November 2018).

"Berlin human rights conference stands up to nationalism, religious fundamentalism" .

Deutsche Welle .

^ Shuch, H. Paul.

"The SETI League, Inc. Giordano Bruno Technical Award" .

setileague.org . Retrieved 25 February 2017 .

^ "Giordano Bruno: Cantus Circaeus ('The Incantation of Circe')" .

www.esotericarchives.com .

^ Mertens, Manuel (2009). "A Perspective on Bruno's "De Compendiosa Architectura et Complemento Artis Lullii" ".

Bruniana & Campanelliana .

15 (2): 513– 525.

JSTOR 24336760 .

^ "Thirty dangerous seals | Lines of thought" .

^ " 'Meanings of "contractio" in Giordano Bruno's Sigillus sigillorum' – Staff" . 30 March 2005.

^ "Giordano Bruno: The Heroic Frenzies ('De Gli Eroici Furori')" .

www.esotericarchives.com .

^ a b "All About Heaven - Sources returnpage" .

allaboutheaven.org .

^ Vassányi, Miklós (2010).

Anima Mundi: The Rise of the World Soul Theory in Modern German Philosophy . Springer.

ISBN 978-9048187966 .

^ Blum 2012 , p.

73 .

^ Blum 2012 , p.

19 .

^ "Progress and the Hunter's Lamp of Logical Methods" .

galileo . 24 June 2015.

^ Rowland, Ingrid D. (September 2009).

Giordano Bruno . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0226730240 .

^ "THE PLEASURE OF THE DISPUTE" – via Internet Archive.

^ a b Blum 2012 , p.

90 .

^ Couliano, Ioan P. (1987).

Eros and Magic in the Renaissance . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0226123165 .

^ "Giordano Bruno" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . 19 February 2024.

^ "De monade, numero et figura liber" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ Bruno, Giordano (1609).

"Summa Terminorum metaphysicorum" .

^ Blum 2012 , p.

79 .

Works cited [ edit ] Aquilecchia, Giovanni; Montano, Aniello; Bertrando, Spaventa (2007). Gargano, Antonio (ed.).

Le deposizioni davanti al tribunale dell'Inquisizione (in Italian). La Citta del Sol.

Birx, H. James (11 November 1997).

"Giordano Bruno" .

The Harbinger . Mobile, AL. Archived from the original on 16 May 2019.

Blum, Paul Richard (2012).

Giordano Bruno: An Introduction . Amsterdam/New York: Rodopi.

ISBN 978-90-420-3555-3 .

Boulting, William (1914).

Giordano Bruno: His Life, Thought, and Martyrdom . London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner.

Bruno, Giordano (1998).

Cause, Principle and Unity: And Essays on Magic . Translated by Robert de Lucca; Richard J. Blackwell. Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-59658-9 .

Collinge, William J. (2012).

Historical Dictionary of Catholicism .

Scarecrow Press .

ISBN 978-0-8108-5755-1 .

DeLeón-Jones, Karen Silvia (1997).

Giordano Bruno and the Kabbalah: Prophets, Magicians, and Rabbis . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-06807-8 .

Firpo, Luigi (1993).

Il processo di Giordano Bruno (in Italian). Salerno.

ISBN 978-88-8402-135-9 .

Gatti, Hilary (2002).

Giordano Bruno and Renaissance Science . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8014-8785-9 .

Rowland, Ingrid D. (2016).

Giordano Bruno: Philosopher/Heretic . Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

ISBN 978-1-4668-9584-3 .

Saiber, Arielle (2005).

Giordano Bruno and the Geometry of Language . Ashgate.

ISBN 978-0-7546-3321-1 .

Singer, Dorothea Waley (1968) [1950].

Giordano Bruno: His Life and Thought . New York: Greenwood Press, Publishers.

White, Michael (2002).

The Pope & the Heretic . New York: William Morrow.

ISBN 978-0-06-018626-5 .

Yates, Frances (1964).

Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition . London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

ISBN 978-0-7100-2337-7 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Further reading [ edit ] Adamson, Robert ; Mitchell, John Malcolm (1911).

"Bruno, Giordano" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 4 (11th ed.). pp.

686– 687.

Blum, Paul Richard (1999).

Giordano Bruno . Munich: Beck Verlag.

ISBN 978-3-406-41951-5 .

Blum, Paul Richard (2021).

"Giordano Bruno" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Bombassaro, Luiz Carlos (2002).

Im Schatten der Diana: Die Jagdmetapher im Werk von Giordano Bruno (in German). Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang Verlag.

Bruno, Giordano (2024). Gatti, Hilary (ed.).

The Expulsion of the Triumphant Beast: Spaccio Della Bestia Trionfante . University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 978-1-4875-5200-8 .

Culianu, Ioan P.

(1987).

Eros and Magic in the Renaissance . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-12315-8 .

Kessler, John (1900).

Giordano Bruno: The Forgotten Philosopher . Rationalist Association.

Knox, Dilwyn (2019).

"Giordano Bruno" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

McIntyre, J. Lewis (1997).

Giordano Bruno . Kessinger Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-56459-141-8 .

Mendoza, Ramon G. (1995).

The Acentric Labyrinth. Giordano Bruno's Prelude to Contemporary Cosmology . Element Books.

ISBN 978-1-85230-640-3 .

Michel, Paul Henri (1973).

The Cosmology of Giordano Bruno . Translated by R.E.W. Maddison. Paris: Hermann.

ISBN 0-8014-0509-2 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Giordano Bruno .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Giordano Bruno .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: Giordano Bruno Bruno's works : text, concordances and frequency list Writings of Giordano Bruno Giordano Bruno Library of the World's Best Literature Ancient and Modern Charles Dudley Warner Editor Bruno's Latin and Italian works online: Biblioteca Ideale di Giordano Bruno Complete works of Bruno as well as main biographies and studies available for free download in PDF format from the Warburg Institute and the Centro Internazionale di Studi Bruniani Giovanni Aquilecchia Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries High resolution images of works by and/or portraits of Giordano Bruno in .jpg and .tiff format.

Works by Giordano Bruno at Project Gutenberg Works by Giordano Bruno at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Works by or about Giordano Bruno at the Internet Archive Portals : Biography Catholicism Italy Astronomy Stars Outer space Books Philosophy Science Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia 2 Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet Artists ULAN MusicBrainz FID People Trove Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9b85n
Cached time: 20250817121642
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.794 seconds
Real time usage: 2.070 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13105/1000000
Revision size: 92242/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 242078/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12805/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 26/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 380332/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.233/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26672104/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1807.014      1 -total
 30.89%  558.267      1 Template:Reflist
 16.41%  296.452     42 Template:Cite_book
 10.24%  185.060      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
  8.21%  148.396     42 Template:Sfn
  6.95%  125.532     26 Template:Cite_web
  6.20%  111.946      1 Template:IPA
  6.11%  110.392      3 Template:Sister_project
  6.01%  108.529      3 Template:Side_box
  4.63%   83.719      1 Template:Hermeticism Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12963:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817121642 and revision id 1303558159. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Giordano_Bruno&oldid=1303558159 " Categories : Giordano Bruno 1548 births 1600 deaths 16th-century Italian Christian monks 16th-century Italian male writers 16th-century Italian philosophers 16th-century Italian poets 16th-century Italian scientists Academic staff of the University of Helmstedt Former Dominicans Galileo affair Hermeticists Italian astrologers Italian cosmologists Italian esotericists Italian alchemists Italian male non-fiction writers Italian male writers Italian occult writers Italian philosophers of religion Latin commentators on Aristotle Mystics Natural philosophers Nontrinitarian Christians Pantheists People excommunicated by the Catholic Church People from Nola 16th-century executions by Italian states Executed Italian people Executed philosophers Executed scientists Executed writers People executed by the Papal States by burning People executed by the Roman Inquisition People executed for heresy Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from June 2024 CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2025 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2019 Articles with hCards Pages with Italian IPA Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 CS1 errors: ISBN date Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 German-language sources (de) Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with Internet Archive links Date of birth unknown This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 18:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Giordano Bruno 110 languages Add topic

