Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Public record 2 England and Wales Toggle England and Wales subsection 2.1 Conveyancing searches 2.2 Search providers 3 Scotland 4 Australia 5 United States 6 See also 7 Notes Toggle the table of contents Conveyancing 3 languages Deutsch Bahasa Indonesia Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Transfer of legal title of property For other uses, see Conveyance (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with common law and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( January 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Conveyancing" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Property law Part of the common law series Types Personal property Community property Real property Unowned property Acquisition Gift Adverse possession Deed Conquest Discovery Accession Lost, mislaid, and abandoned property Treasure trove Bailment License Alienation Estates in land Allodial title Fee simple Fee tail Life estate Defeasible estate Future interest remainder Concurrent estate Leasehold estate Condominiums Real estate Land tenure Conveyancing Bona fide purchaser Torrens title Strata title Deeds registration Estoppel by deed Quitclaim deed Mortgage Equitable conversion Action to quiet title Escheat Future use control Restraint on alienation Rule against perpetuities Rule in Shelley's Case Doctrine of worthier title Nonpossessory interest Lien Easement Profit Usufruct Covenant Equitable servitude Related topics Fixtures Waste Partition Practicing without a license Property rights Mineral rights Water rights prior appropriation riparian Lateral and subjacent support Assignment Nemo dat Quicquid plantatur Conflict of property laws Blackacre Security deposit Other common law areas Contract law Tort law Wills , trusts and estates Criminal law Evidence Higher category: Law and Common law v t e In law, conveyancing is the transfer of legal title of real property from one person to another, or the granting of an encumbrance such as a mortgage or a lien .

[ 1 ] A typical conveyancing transaction has two major phases: the exchange of contracts (when equitable interests are created) and completion (also called settlement, when legal title passes and equitable rights merge with the legal title).  The electronic execution of conveyancing processes and documents is known as e-conveyancing .

[ 2 ] The sale of land is governed by the laws and practices of the jurisdiction in which the land is located. It is a legal requirement in all jurisdictions that contracts for the sale of land be in writing.

[ citation needed ] An exchange of contracts involves two copies of a contract of sale being signed, one copy of which is retained by each party. When the parties are together, both would usually sign both copies, one copy of which being retained by each party, sometimes with a formal handing over of a copy from one party to the other. However, it is usually sufficient that only the copy retained by each party be signed by the other party only — hence contracts are "exchanged". This rule enables contracts to be "exchanged" by mail. Both copies of the contract of sale become binding only after each party is in possession of a copy of the contract signed by the other party—i.e., the exchange is said to be "complete". An exchange by electronic means is generally insufficient for an exchange, unless the laws of the jurisdiction expressly validate such signatures.

It is the responsibility of the buyer of real property to ensure that he or she obtains a good and marketable title to the land—i.e., that the seller is the owner, has the right to sell the property, and there is no factor which would impede a mortgage or re-sale. Some jurisdictions have legislated some protections for the buyer, besides the ability for the buyer to do searches relating to the property.

A system of conveyancing is usually designed to ensure that the buyer secures title to the land together with all the rights that run with the land, and is notified of any restrictions in advance of purchase. Many jurisdictions have adopted a system of land registration to facilitate conveyancing and encourage reliance on public records and assure purchasers of land that they are taking good title.

[ 3 ] Public record [ edit ] In the Roman tradition, private rights to land were enforceable even if secret; this tradition remained to some extent in Europe up through the 19th century, but modern systems no longer allow for such secrecy.

[ 4 ] In many civil law countries, the real estate transfers are usually supervised by notaries who, after a due diligence verification, execute the deed of sale and send it to the Public Registers .  The involvement of civil law notaries , qualified legal experts delegated by the State (they must have a University Degree in Law), represents - besides an assistance for the involved parties in the property transfer process - also a gatekeeping for the soundness of the economic system and the protection of vulnerable parties.

[ 5 ] England and Wales [ edit ] In England and Wales , conveyancing is usually done by a solicitor or a licensed conveyancer ; either may employ or supervise an unqualified conveyancer . What is being conveyed, or transferred, is a piece of land or property, that historically (especially in England) may or may not include the " messuage ", [ 6 ] that would be the principal dwelling, and might include an orchard, any outbuildings, and curtilage [ 7 ] if present.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] The domestic conveyancing market is price competitive, with a high number of firms of solicitors and conveyancing companies offering a similar service. It is possible for someone to carry out their own conveyancing, but it is labour-intensive. If the transaction involves a mortgage, it is almost certain that the lender will insist that a solicitor is used for the conveyancing.

[ citation needed ] It is a common myth that conveyancing has to be carried out by a local solicitor or conveyancer. This is no longer the case, with many conveyancers and solicitors conducting transactions from a distance using email and online technology.

[ 11 ] However, the Law Society warns solicitors to be wary of clients instructing their firm with no geographic connection to them for risk of money laundering.

[ 12 ] There were approximately 5,357 firms operating in the conveyancing market in 2015, but this number has fallen from 5,871 the year before. The number of firms in the market is almost a third lower than the 7,779 firms recording transactions in 2005, [ 13 ] following a severe conveyancing shortage during the recession.

[ 14 ] Under English law , agreements are not legally binding until contracts are exchanged. This affords both the advantage of freedom before contract, but also the disadvantage of wasted time and expense in the event the deal is not done. The Law Commission recognised in 2018 that electronic exchange of documents and electronic signatures are legally valid in relation to land transactions.

[ 2 ] The normal practice is for the buyer to negotiate an agreed price with the seller then organise a survey and have the solicitor (or conveyancer) carry out their searches and pre-contract enquiries. The seller's solicitor or conveyancer will prepare the draft contract to be approved by the buyer's solicitor. The seller's solicitor will also collect and prepare property information to be provided to the buyer's solicitors, in line with the Law Society 's National Protocol for domestic conveyancing. When undertaking property transactions, the conveyancer's role is to carry out due diligence by submitting queries – known as conveyancing searches – about the transacted property. These are designed to uncover factors the estate agent or surveyor may not know about, which could impact the buyer's enjoyment of the property.

[ 15 ] It takes on average 10–12 weeks to complete a conveyancing transaction, but while some transactions are quicker, many take longer. The timescale is determined by a host of factors – legal, personal, social and financial. During this period prior to exchange of contracts (exchange being the point at which the transaction becomes legally binding) either party can pull out of the transaction at any time and for any reason, with no legal obligation to the other. This gives rise to a risk of gazumping and its converse, gazundering . Conveyancing is a component of the cost of moving house in the United Kingdom .

Conveyancing searches [ edit ] The conveyancer ’s role is to carry out due diligence by submitting queries – known as searches [ 16 ] – about the transacted property. These are designed to uncover factors that the estate agent or surveyor may not know about, which could impact the buyer’s enjoyment of the property. Conveyancing searches include: Land Registry search – to confirm ownership and boundaries by checking the ‘title register’ and ‘title plan’.

Local authority search – to reveal any charges or restrictions of use on the property.

Water authority search – to find out if any public drains on the property might affect extensions or building works.

Flood risk search – to discover potential hazards from coastal, river or surface water flooding.

Chancel repair liability search – to ensure there are no potential leftover medieval liabilities on the property to help pay for church repairs.

Environmental search – to provide information about contaminated land , landfill sites, former and current industry, radon gas hazard, ground stability issues, and other related information at or around the property.

Optional and location specific searches – sometimes extra searches are required or recommended depending on the location or type of property or due to particular concerns raised by the buyer. These could include: Tin mining searches in Cornwall .

Mining searches in various parts of the UK.

Cheshire brine searches.

Additional local authority searches for potential issues such as: Pipelines, noise abatement zones , common land , etc.

[ 17 ] Search providers [ edit ] Local authority searches, according to the Law Society, are a ‘vital part of the conveyancing process and give buyers important information about matters affecting a property that is registered or recorded with the local authority.

[ 18 ] However, over the years, delays with local authority searches [ 19 ] have prompted lawyers to order a ‘personal’ search, carried out by a third party or a search provider, who visits the council office and inspects and records the information kept by the local authority [ 20 ] on behalf of the conveyancer or solicitor.

Private search companies and ordering platforms have been integrating Land Registry's data to speed up the process of search ordering, improve accuracy and reduce the chances of human error . One example is the use of Land Registry's National Spatial Dataset [ 21 ] to display boundary maps on-screen using a live data link to help validate property locations.

[ 22 ] Scotland [ edit ] Main article: Missives of Sale (Scots law) In Scots law, conveyancing is carried out as a second stage in the voluntary transfer of land after the completion of the contractual stage. The position in Scotland under Scots law is that the contract is generally concluded at a much earlier stage than in the English & Welsh and common law jurisdictions . The contractual stage of the transfer is called the missives of sale between the buyer, or buyer's agent, and seller, or seller's agent. Missives are letters the body of which contain the contract of sale is formed. Once all the contractual terms are agreed, the missives are said to be concluded, and these serve as a binding contract for the sale of the property. Normally the contract is conditional upon matters such as the sellers being able, before completion of the transaction, to prove that they have good title to the property and to exhibit clear searches from the land registers and the local authority.

[ 23 ] From 1 December 2008 properties for sale are marketed with a 'Home Information Report.

[ 24 ] This consists of: a Single Survey, an Energy Report and a Property Questionnaire. The Home Report is available on request to prospective buyers of the property.  The date of final settlement is in Scotland known as the "date of entry", the date on which the Buyer is able to take possession of the property. The transfer of ownership itself only completes after the completion of the registration of the disposition document in the Land Register of Scotland .

Solicitors, advocates and licensed conveyancing practitioners are the only individuals legally permitted to conduct conveyancing for a fee in Scotland, and as such enjoy a conveyancing monopoly, under the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980 section 32 which creates a criminal offence for any unlicensed person preparing conveyancing documents in the expectation of a fee.

[ 25 ] Having said that, there is no legal requirement in Scotland to use the services of a solicitor, advocate or licensed conveyancing practitioner to transfer property ownership/land title. A willing buyer and seller can submit all the necessary completed documents to the Land Register of Scotland themselves.

Australia [ edit ] Most privately owned land in Australia is now regulated under the Torrens system of land registration , introduced between 1857 and 1875. Some parcels of land are still unregistered and commonly referred to as general law land. Property law in Australia is derived from English common law.

[ 26 ] Conveyancing in Australia (also called a transfer) is usually carried out by a solicitor or a licensed conveyancer . Kits are available for the buyer to complete the process themselves, but due to the complexity of varying state and council laws and processes, this is usually not recommended.

Queensland and New South Wales have a 5 days "cooling off" period for residential contracts.

Victoria has a 3 business day cooling off period on private sales and South Australia has 2 days. During this time the purchaser may reconsider the purchase and, if they so wish, cancel the contract, in which case the purchaser may be legally bound to pay 0.25% of the purchasing price to the seller (0.2% in Victoria). Not all contracts have a cooling off period such as when the property is purchased at auction or if the purchaser expedites the process.

[ 27 ] A common conveyance by a solicitor or a licensed conveyancer usually takes 4 to 6 weeks. Most firms offer fixed price services which normally include costs for searches , legal advice and other outlays. In most states and territories a typical conveyance includes, but is not limited to, the following: checking for encumbrances and restrictions on the property ensuring special conditions mentioned in the contract are met making sure rates , land tax and water consumption charges are paid by the appropriate party arranging for the payment of fees and charges and government duties preparation of legal documents for the purchaser, liaising with the financiers of the purchaser to satisfy their requirements before settlement for the vendor, liaising with the financiers of the vendor to arrange settlement and obtain discharge of mortgages on the title arranging and attending final settlement.

Searches tend to take up the bulk of the conveyance. Due to the three level system of government (federal, state and local), it must be made sure that the vendor is entitled to all rights and title. Most information is retrieved from state or local (council) authorities. Conveyancing processes, legal documentation, contract requirements, and search requirements vary between each state and territory.

Requirements, searches and costs can vary between jurisdictions, depending on local property legislation and regulations. Depending on the circumstances of each case, and depending on the jurisdiction, a title search may also involve: registered plan search or building units/group titles plan search company search contaminated land search council property search full council inspection of records search land tax search main roads search.

With the introduction of the Electronic Conveyancing National Law in 2012, [ 28 ] all Australian states are in the process of transitioning to electronic conveyancing in accordance with state-based mandates.

United States [ edit ] The conveyancing process in the United States varies from state to state depending on local legal requirements and historical practice. In rare situations, the parties will engage in a formal "closing". In a formal closing three attorneys will be involved in the process: one each to represent the buyer, seller, and mortgage holder; frequently all three will sit around a table with the buyer and seller and literally "pass papers" to effect the transaction.

Much more commonly, the transaction is closed by use of an escrow .  ( See also Escrow § Real estate .) Practice varies from state to state as to who conducts the title search to make sure the seller has or can convey clear title, including what liens must be paid, and as to who acts as the escrow holder. In many states attorneys still act as the escrow agent and title inspector. In many others those functions are conducted by licensed escrow agents who often are affiliated with or even employed by a title insurance company. Some use a mix, such as having an attorney conduct the escrow while the title investigation is handled by the title insurance company or its agent.

In order to protect themselves from defects in the title, buyers will frequently purchase title insurance at this time for themselves. They will almost always be required to purchase title insurance for their lender as a condition of the loan.

In most states, a prospective buyer's offer to purchase is made in the form of a written contract and bound with a deposit on the purchase price. The offer will set out conditions (such as appraisal, title clearance, inspection , occupancy, and financing) under which the buyer may withdraw the offer without forfeiting the deposit. Once the conditions have been met (or waived), the buyer has " equitable title " and conveyancing proceeds or may be compelled by court order . There may be other last-minute conditions to closing, such as "broom clean" premises, evictions, and repairs.

Typical papers at a conveyancing include: deed(s), certified checks , promissory note, mortgage, certificate of liens, pro rata property taxes, title insurance binder, and fire insurance binder. There may also be side agreements (e.g., holdover tenants, delivery contracts, payment holdback for unacceptable repairs), seller's right of first refusal for resale, declaration of trust, or other entity formation or consolidation (incorporation, limited partnership investors, etc.). Where " time is of the essence ", there have been cases where the entire deposit is forfeited (as liquidated damages ) if the conveyancing is delayed beyond the time limits of the buyer's contingencies, even if the purchase is completed.

Words used to indicate conveyance, or words of conveyance include grant, devise, give, and sell.

See also [ edit ] List of real estate topics Real estate appraisal Transfer of equity Verification and validation Notes [ edit ] ^ Black's Law Dictionary (7th ed. 1999) ^ a b Gill, C., Electronic signatures and e-conveyancing: Where are we now?

, Walker Morris , published on 15 October 2018, accessed on 18 June 2025 ^ Dukeminier et al., Property 559 (6th ed. 2006) ^ Arruñada B. (2011).

Property titling and conveyancing Archived 26 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine . Chapter 12 in Kenneth Ayotte and Henry E. Smith, eds.,Research Handbook on the Economics of Property Law.

^ European Xtramile Center (2020).

Real Property Transfers and Civil Law Notaries: Legal Empowerment is a Key Factor at Global Level, Especially in Developing Economies of Africa, Asia and Latin America Archived 28 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine . EXCAS working paper WP/20/079 .

^ Definition of messuage -A Digest of the Laws of England Respecting Real Property, Volume 4, p 321 #42, Retrieved 2016-05-14 ^ example of messuage Archived 5 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine - p 35-36, Retrieved 2016-05-15 ^ Bouvier, John (1870) [1st pub. 1839].

A Law Dictionary, Adapted to the Constitution and Laws of the United States of America, and of the Several States of the American Union: With References to the Civil and Other Systems of Foreign Law . Vol. II (Fourth ed.). Philadelphia: G.W. Childs. p. 176 . Retrieved 6 December 2012 .

^ Sheets v. Selden's Lessee , 69 U.S.

177, 187 (1864) ^ Benjamin Lynde Oliver, R. Day (1827).

Practical Conveyancing . Glazier & Company. p. 250.

^ "Do I have to use a local solicitor for my conveyancing" .

The First Time Buyer . 2 March 2015.

Archived from the original on 19 April 2017 . Retrieved 19 November 2016 .

^ "Warning signs of money laundering" .

www.lawsociety.org.uk .

Archived from the original on 8 May 2023 . Retrieved 8 May 2023 .

^ Monidipa Fouzder (February 15, 2016) 'Conveyancers – ‘no room for complacency’ Archived 6 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine Law Society Gazette. Retrieved July 11, 2016.

^ Hayley Kirton (June 13, 2016) 'Why conveyancing is where it's at for legal eagles' Archived 5 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine City AM. Retrieved July 11, 2016.

^ Conveyancing Process Explained for buyers Archived 13 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine Home Owners Alliance.

^ What Property Searches are done when Buying a House?

Archived 2023-08-10 at the Wayback Machine QLAW.

^ Russell, Hewitson; Silverman, Frances (2011).

Conveyancing searches and enquiries (4th ed.). Bristol: Jordan Pub.

ISBN 9781846612350 .

OCLC 644654265 .

^ The CON 29 and CON 29O consultation Archived 2017-03-06 at the Wayback Machine Law Society (June 23, 2016) ^ Emma Tyrrell (Dec 7, 2002) 'Can't they get a move on' Archived 25 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine Guardian. Retrieved July 11, 2016.

^ Rob Hailstone (June 4, 2014) 'Conveyancing - Personal searches vs Official Searches' Estate Agent Today. Retrieved July 11, 2016.

^ "National Polygon Service - GOV.UK" .

www.gov.uk .

Archived from the original on 2 April 2018 . Retrieved 1 April 2018 .

^ Ryan Bembridge (January 8, 2016) 'Search provider integrates land registry data' Archived 17 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine Mortgage Introducer. Retrieved July 11, 2016.

^ "Scottish Standard Clauses" .

Law Society of Scotland .

Archived from the original on 12 November 2020 . Retrieved 26 April 2020 .

^ Housing (Scotland) Act 2006 ^ "Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980" .

www.legislation.gov.uk .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 26 April 2020 .

^ ISSN 2200-9698 (2013).

Land and Property Information - Old System Information and Search Guide Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine ^ "The Conveyancing Process | Simplified | Teddington Legal" .

teddingtonlegal.com.au .

Archived from the original on 2 October 2018 . Retrieved 2 October 2018 .

^ "Electronic Conveyancing National Law" .

Archived from the original on 27 January 2019 . Retrieved 27 January 2019 .

v t e Real estate Property Tertiary sector By location Bangladesh Canada China Indonesia Italy Turkey Kenya Pakistan Panama Puerto Rico Russia Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates United Kingdom Types Commercial property Commercial building Corporate Real Estate Extraterrestrial real estate International real estate Lease administration Niche real estate Garden real estate Healthcare real estate Vacation property Arable land Golf property Luxury real estate Off-plan property Private equity real estate Real estate owned Residential property Sectors Property management Real estate development Real estate investing Real estate flipping Relocation Law and regulation Adverse possession Chain of title Closing Concurrent estate Conditional sale Conveyancing Deed Eminent domain Encumbrance Foreclosure Just cause eviction Land law Land registration Leasehold estate Lease Property abstract Real estate transaction Real estate contract Real property Rent regulation Severance Torrens title Zoning Economics, financing and valuation Asset-based lending Capitalization rate Cash out refinancing Effective gross income Gross rent multiplier Hard money loan Highest and best use Home equity Home equity investments Home equity loan Home equity line of credit Investment rating for real estate Mortgage insurance Mortgage loan Negative equity Real estate derivative Real estate economics Real estate bubble Real estate valuation Remortgage Rental value Reverse mortgage Parties Appraiser Buyer agent Buyer broker Chartered Surveyor Exclusive buyer agent Land banking Landlord Moving company Property manager Real estate broker Real estate investment club Real estate investment trust Real property administrator Tenant Other Companies Eviction Filtering Gentrification Graduate real estate education Green belt Indices Industry trade groups Investment firms Land banking People Property cycle Real estate trends Undergraduate real estate programs Urban decay Urban planning List of housing markets by real estate prices Category Commons List of topics Authority control databases National Germany Other NARA NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐wqtw4
Cached time: 20250814233650
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.437 seconds
Real time usage: 0.544 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2358/1000000
Revision size: 27667/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 95703/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10489/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 77325/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.266/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8027519/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  452.417      1 -total
 30.95%  140.006      1 Template:Reflist
 15.71%   71.082      1 Template:Property_law
 15.43%   69.820      3 Template:Cite_book
 15.42%   69.757      1 Template:Sidebar
 14.11%   63.844      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 12.51%   56.602      1 Template:Short_description
  9.67%   43.746      2 Template:Ambox
  7.65%   34.613      1 Template:Globalize
  7.55%   34.143      7 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:230699:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814233650 and revision id 1296149911. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conveyancing&oldid=1296149911 " Categories : Real property law Law of the United Kingdom State law in the United States Australian property law Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles with limited geographic scope from January 2011 Pages in non-existent country centric categories Articles needing additional references from May 2009 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 This page was last edited on 18 June 2025, at 04:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conveyancing 3 languages Add topic

