Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Gameplay Toggle Gameplay subsection 1.1 Variants 2 Analysis 3 Proof of Colon Principle 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Hackenbush 5 languages Español Français Polski Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mathematical pen-and-paper game For the Groucho Marx character, Hugo Z. Hackenbush, see A Day at the Races (film) .

A starting setup for the game of Hackenbush Hackenbush is a two-player game invented by mathematician John Horton Conway .

[ 1 ] It may be played on any configuration of line segments connected to one another by their endpoints and to a "ground" line. Other versions of the game use differently colored lines.

Gameplay [ edit ] The game starts with the players drawing a "ground" line (conventionally, but not necessarily, a horizontal line at the bottom of the paper or other playing area) and several line segments such that each line segment is connected to the ground, either directly at an endpoint, or indirectly, via a chain of other segments connected by endpoints.  Any number of segments may meet at a point and thus there may be multiple paths to ground.

On their turn, a player "cuts" (erases) any line segment of their choice. Every line segment no longer connected to the ground by any path "falls" (i.e., gets erased). According to the normal play convention of combinatorial game theory, the first player who is unable to move loses.

Hackenbush boards can consist of finitely many (in the case of a "finite board") or infinitely many (in the case of an "infinite board") line segments, insofar as the configuration does not violate the game theory assumption that the game can be finished in a finite amount of time.  On an infinite board, instead, the game can continue on forever, assuming there are infinitely many segments touching the ground.

Variants [ edit ] A blue-red Hackenbush girl, introduced in the book Winning Ways for your Mathematical Plays In the original folklore version of Hackenbush, any player is allowed to cut any edge: as this is an impartial game it is comparatively straightforward to give a complete analysis using the Sprague–Grundy theorem . Thus the versions of Hackenbush of interest in combinatorial game theory are more complex partisan games , meaning that the options (moves) available to one player would not necessarily be the ones available to the other player if it were their turn to move given the same position. This is achieved in one of two ways: Original Hackenbush: All line segments are the same color and may be cut by either player. This means payoffs are symmetric and each player has the same operations based on position on board (in this case structure of drawing). This is also called Green Hackenbush.

[ 2 ] Blue-Red Hackenbush :  Each line segment is colored either red or blue.  One player (usually the first, or left, player) is only allowed to cut blue line segments, while the other player (usually the second, or right, player) is only allowed to cut red line segments.

Blue-Red-Green Hackenbush :  Each line segment is colored red, blue, or green.  The rules are the same as for Blue-Red Hackenbush, with the additional stipulation that green line segments can be cut by either player.

Blue-Red Hackenbush is merely a special case of Blue-Red-Green Hackenbush, but it is worth noting separately, as its analysis is often much simpler.  This is because Blue-Red Hackenbush is a so-called cold game , which means, essentially, that it can never be an advantage to have the first move.

Analysis [ edit ] Hackenbush has often been used as an example game for demonstrating the definitions and concepts in combinatorial game theory , beginning with its use in the books On Numbers and Games and Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays by some of the founders of the field.  In particular Blue-Red Hackenbush can be used to construct surreal numbers :  finite Blue-Red Hackenbush boards can construct dyadic rational numbers , while the values of infinite Blue-Red Hackenbush boards account for real numbers and, in the transfinite case, ordinals , and many more general values that are neither.  Blue-Red-Green Hackenbush allows for the construction of additional games whose values are not real numbers, such as star and all other nimbers .

Further analysis of the game can be made using graph theory by considering the board as a collection of vertices and edges and examining the paths to each vertex that lies on the ground (which should be considered as a distinguished vertex — it does no harm to identify all the ground points together — rather than as a line on the graph).

In the impartial version of Hackenbush (the one without player specified colors), it can be thought of using nim heaps by breaking the game up into several cases: vertical, convergent, and divergent. Played exclusively with vertical stacks of line segments, also referred to as bamboo stalks, the game directly becomes Nim and can be directly analyzed as such. Divergent segments, or trees, add an additional wrinkle to the game and require use of the colon principle stating that when branches come together at a vertex, one may replace the branches by a non-branching stalk of length equal to their nim sum . This principle changes the representation of the game to the more basic version of the bamboo stalks. The last possible set of graphs that can be made are convergent ones, also known as arbitrarily rooted graphs. By using the fusion principle, we can state that all vertices on any cycle may be fused together without changing the value of the graph.

[ 3 ] Therefore, any convergent graph can also be interpreted as a simple bamboo stalk graph. By combining all three types of graphs we can add complexity to the game, without ever changing the nim sum of the game, thereby allowing the game to take the strategies of Nim.

Proof of Colon Principle [ edit ] The Colon Principle states that when branches come together at a vertex, one may replace the branches by a non-branching stalk of length equal to their nim sum. Consider a fixed but arbitrary graph, G , and select an arbitrary vertex, x , in G . Let H 1 and H 2 be arbitrary trees (or graphs) that have the same Sprague-Grundy value. Consider the two graphs G 1 = G x : H 1 and G 2 = G x : H 2 , where G x : H i represents the graph constructed by attaching the tree H i to the vertex x of the graph G . The colon principle states that the two graphs G1 and G2 have the same Sprague-Grundy value. Consider the sum of the two games.  The claim that G 1 and G 2 have the same Sprague-Grundy value is equivalent to the claim that the sum of the two games has Sprague-Grundy value 0. In other words, we are to show that the sum G 1 + G 2 is a P-position. A player is guaranteed to win if they are the second player to move in G 1 + G 2 . If the first player moves by chopping one of the edges in G in one of the games, then the second player chops the same edge in G in the other game. (Such a pair of moves may delete H 1 and H 2 from the games, but otherwise H 1 and H 2 are not disturbed.) If the first player moves by chopping an edge in H 1 or H 2 , then the Sprague-Grundy values of H 1 and H 2 are no longer equal, so that there exists a move in H 1 or H 2 that keeps the Sprague-Grundy values the same. In this way you will always have a reply to every move he may make. This means you will make the last move and so win.

[ 4 ] An instance in which the game can be reduced using the Colon Principle References [ edit ] ^ Davis, Tom.

"What is Hackenbush?" .

geometer.org . Retrieved 2023-02-12 .

^ Guy, Richard K. (1996).

"Impartial games" . In Nowakowski, Richard J. (ed.).

Games of No Chance: Papers from the Combinatorial Games Workshop held in Berkeley, CA, July 11–21, 1994 . Mathematical Sciences Research Institute Publications. Vol. 29. Cambridge University Press. pp.

61– 78.

ISBN 0-521-57411-0 .

MR 1427953 .

^ R., Berlekamp, Elwyn (2001–2004).

Winning ways for your mathematical plays . Conway, John H. (John Horton), Guy, Richard K. (2nd ed.). Natick, Mass.: A.K. Peters.

ISBN 9781568811420 .

OCLC 45102937 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Ferguson, Thomas S.

(Fall 2000).

"Game Theory" (PDF) .

John H. Conway, On Numbers and Games , 2nd edition, A K Peters, 2000.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hackenbush game .

Hackenstrings, and 0.999... vs. 1 Hackenbush on Pencil and Paper Games Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hackenbush&oldid=1284082948 " Categories : Mathematical games Abstract strategy games Combinatorial game theory Paper-and-pencil games John Horton Conway Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 April 2025, at 13:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hackenbush 5 languages Add topic

