Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nomenclature 2 Appointment 3 Duties and functions Toggle Duties and functions subsection 3.1 Administrative 3.2 Incident command 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Fire chief 5 languages Dansk Español 한국어 日本語 Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Top executive rank or commanding officer in a fire department This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Fire chief" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A fire chief or fire commissioner is a top executive rank or commanding officer in a fire department .

Nomenclature [ edit ] Various official English-language titles for a fire chief include fire chief , chief fire officer and fire commissioner . The latter can refer to a fire chief or to an overseer who works for the local government. " Chief fire officer " is the usual title in the United Kingdom. Traditionally, a fire chief in Scotland was known as a "fire master", but this was changed in 2006.

The definition of the term fire officer varies by country, but generally refers to all firefighting personnel who have some command duties. This is comparable to the usage of "officer" in the military , rather than the term police officer . In fire departments of the United States, fire officers who are part of an engine company or other unit (lieutenants and captains) are company officers and those ranked higher (e.g.

battalion chiefs ) are chief officers .

Appointment [ edit ] A fire chief is usually appointed by the authority who oversees the running of the fire department, such as the mayor for a municipal fire department.

It varies among countries as to whether it is the norm or not for fire chiefs to be former frontline firefighters. This is the case in the United States.

[ 1 ] It is also the norm in the United Kingdom, though in recent years there have been exceptions.

[ 2 ] By contrast, in France, fire officers and frontline firefighters are recruited separately in a similar way to the military.

[ 3 ] Duties and functions [ edit ] A fire chief's role varies considerably depending on the size of the department. Some countries have a single national fire service, such as Israel, New Zealand, and the Philippines. Conversely, some countries, like the United States and Germany, have autonomous fire departments even in small towns. Others organize their fire services based on subdivisions such as regions, counties, provinces or sub-national states.

The larger the fire department, the more ranks will exist in between the chief and regular firefighters, such as assistants or deputy chiefs.

[ 4 ] The chief of a small volunteer fire department is likely to be the main incident commander for the majority of their call-outs and is nearly always a volunteer as well. However, the chief of a large fire department is employed in a mostly administrative role, and will only be called out to the largest incidents.

Administrative [ edit ] The fire chief is responsible for carrying out the day-to-day tasks of running a firefighting organization. Such tasks include supervising other officers and firefighters at an emergency scene and recruiting, training, and equipping them for their respective duties.

[ 5 ] Depending upon local needs and organization, the chief may also be involved in fire prevention , fire inspection , disaster preparedness , emergency medical services , and related disciplines, as well as administrative duties such as budgets and personnel issues, research into safety and regulations, and liaison with other agencies.

[ 6 ] The chief is answerable to the local or national government that oversees the fire service. As well as the position of chief of scheduling.

Incident command [ edit ] During an emergency incident, the first fire officer on the scene must "establish command", which can then be transferred to more senior officers such as the chief. The chief may delegate some statutory powers to qualified officers, such as the ability to enter or use private property as reasonably necessary to stop a fire, or to order people or property seized as may be essential to preserving safety or investigating the cause of an incident.

A fire chief's vehicle is not only a means of transport, but can act as an incident command post and a contact point for media reporters.

See also [ edit ] Chief justice Chief of police Deputy governor Deputy president Deputy prime minister Firefighting Government Governor Incident commander President Prime minister References [ edit ] ^ chit Fire Chief: Description, Duties and Requirements ^ "Kent appoints first female Chief Fire Officer - FIRE" .

FIRE . Archived from the original on 2018-09-26 . Retrieved 2018-09-26 .

^ https://www.wafa.asn.au/wh/6807/images/Churchill-Report-Version-2-April-17.docx [ permanent dead link ] ^ Krystan Krailler (2007).

"Fire department celebrates 20 years" . Cincinnati Community Press . Retrieved September 22, 2007 .

^ Eddie Burns Sr. (2007).

"Fire Chief's Message" . Dallas Fire-Rescue - City of Dallas, Texas. Archived from the original on October 28, 2007 . Retrieved September 22, 2007 .

^ The Canadian Press (2007).

"Fire trucks too heavy for highways, chief finds" . The Globe and Mail . Retrieved September 22, 2007 .

External links [ edit ] Official website of the National Fire Protection Association Official website of the International Association of Fire Chiefs Fire Chief magazine for fire protection officials v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fire_chief&oldid=1276421124 " Category : Firefighter ranks Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2023 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 18 February 2025, at 19:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fire chief 5 languages Add topic

