Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions 2 Use in fantasy fiction 3 Contrasting genres and trends 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Grimdark 5 languages Español فارسی Français Polski Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subgenre of speculative fiction The term "grimdark" was inspired by Warhammer 40,000 Fantasy Media Anime Art Artists Authors Comics Films Podcasts Literature Magazines Manga Publishers Light novels Television Webcomics Genre studies Creatures History Early history Magic Magic item Magic system Magician Mythopoeia‎ Tropes Fantasy worlds Campaign settings Subgenres Bangsian Children's Comedic Contemporary Dark‎ Fairy tale ‎ Parody ‎ Fantastique Of manners Folklore Gaslamp Ghost story ‎ Grimdark Hard High ‎ Historical ‎ Isekai LitRPG Lovecraftian horror Low Magical girl‎ Mythpunk Occult detective fiction‎ Progression Romantic‎ Science ‎ Shenmo fiction‎ Splatterpunk Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Tokusatsu‎ Urban‎ Weird West‎ern Wuxia‎ Xianxia Fandom Dragon Ball fandom Harry Potter fandom Lovecraft fandom Shrek fandom Tolkien fandom My Little Pony fandom Categories Fantasy Awards Subgenres Television Tropes Portal v t e Grimdark is a subgenre of speculative fiction with a tone , style, or setting that is particularly dystopian , amoral , and violent. The term is inspired by the tagline of the tabletop strategy game Warhammer 40,000 : "In the grim darkness of the far future there is only war." [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Definitions [ edit ] Several attempts to define the neologism [ 3 ] grimdark have been made: Adam Roberts described it as fiction "where nobody is honourable and Might is Right ", and as "the standard way of referring to fantasies that turn their backs on the more uplifting, Pre-Raphaelite visions of idealized medievaliana [ clarification needed ] , and instead stress how nasty, brutish, short and, er, dark life back then 'really' was". But he noted that grimdark has little to do with re-imagining an actual historic reality and more with conveying the sense that our own world is a "cynical, disillusioned, ultraviolent place".

[ 1 ] Genevieve Valentine called grimdark a "shorthand for a subgenre of fantasy fiction that claims to trade on the psychology of those sword-toting heroes, and the dark realism behind all those kingdom politics".

[ 4 ] In the view of Jared Shurin , grimdark fantasy has three key components: a grim and dark tone, a sense of realism (for example, monarchs are useless and heroes are flawed), and the agency of the protagonists: whereas in high fantasy everything is predestined and the tension revolves around how the heroes defeat the Dark Lord , grimdark is "fantasy protestantism ": characters have to choose between good and evil, and are "just as lost as we are".

[ 5 ] Liz Bourke considered grimdark's defining characteristic to be "a retreat into the valorisation of darkness for darkness's sake, into a kind of nihilism that portrays right action ... as either impossible or futile". This, according to her, has the effect of absolving the protagonists as well as the reader from moral responsibility.

[ 6 ] Helen Young equates grimdark to gritty fantasy , as exemplified by George R. R. Martin 's A Song of Ice and Fire series.

[ 7 ] Whether grimdark is a genre in its own right or an unhelpful label has also been discussed. Valentine noted that while some writers have embraced the term, others see it as "a dismissive term for fantasy that's dismantling tropes , a stamp unfairly applied".

[ 4 ] Use in fantasy fiction [ edit ] According to Adam Roberts, grimdark is an "anti- Tolkien " approach to fantasy writing. George R. R. Martin's popular grimdark fantasy series A Song of Ice and Fire is characterized, in Roberts' view, by its reaction to Tolkien's idealism, even though it owes much to Tolkien.

[ 1 ] According to Jon Garrad, grimdark is associated with the gothic movement of the 1990s and its negativity and emphasis on loss.

[ 8 ] Writing in The Guardian in 2016, Damien Walter summarized what he considered grimdark's "domination" of the fantasy genre as "bigger swords, more fighting, bloodier blood, more fighting, axes, more fighting", and a "commercial imperative to win adolescent, male readers". He saw this trend as being in opposition to "a truly epic and more emotionally nuanced kind of fantasy" that delivered storytelling.

[ 9 ] Grimdark fantasy has been written since the 1980s by authors including Michael Moorcock , Glen Cook , [ 10 ] George R. R. Martin, Joe Abercrombie , [ 4 ] [ 11 ] Richard K. Morgan , [ 4 ] Paul Kearney , [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Mark Lawrence [ 5 ] [ 11 ] and Anna Smith Spark .

[ 14 ] In a broader sense, the "pervasively gritty, bleak, pessimistic, or nihilistic view of the world" [ 15 ] characteristic of grimdark fiction is found in much popular fiction from the 2000s, including Batman comics, the television series Breaking Bad , and the media franchise The Walking Dead .

[ 15 ] Contrasting genres and trends [ edit ] In 2017, the writer Alexandra Rowland proposed that the "opposite of grimdark" is " hopepunk ", a trend that emphasizes what grimdark rejects: the importance of hope and the sense that ideals are worth fighting for despite adversity.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] The novelist Derek B. Miller defined hopepunk as "stories that free the soul from darkness. That necessitates situating the characters and action in a dark world and then directing the drama and activity towards the light. Whether they reach it or not is part of the story." [ 17 ] Another style proposed to provide a contrast to grimdark is "noblebright", which takes as its premise that not only are there good fights worth fighting, but that they are also winnable and result in a happy ending .

[ 15 ] In 2022, the speculative fiction writer Charlie Jane Anders proposed the term "sweetweird", in contrast to grimdark, to describe a trend in storytelling of 2010s and 2020s exemplified by popular shows like Steven Universe or Star Trek: Lower Decks , the movie Everything, Everywhere, All at Once , and books like Light from Uncommon Stars or The Invisible Life of Addie LaRue . She describes sweetweird as: "stories that feature lovable characters and a focus on supportive chosen family , set against worlds that are, shall we say, somewhat tarnished and bizarre." and "Wherever surrealism and kindness join in a beautifully unholy union, there you will find sweetweird." [ 18 ] [ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Dark fantasy References [ edit ] ^ a b c Roberts, Adam (2014).

Get Started in: Writing Science Fiction and Fantasy . Hachette UK. p. 42.

ISBN 9781444795660 .

^ Moser, Marcel (2019).

"Hope as the Main Driving Force of Humanity in the Grimdark Universe of Warhammer 40,000" (PDF) .

Kick (2).

ISSN 2623-9558 .

^ Ayres, Jackson (20 February 2016).

"When Were Superheroes Grim and Gritty?" .

Los Angeles Review of Books . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ a b c d Valentine, Genevieve (25 January 2015).

"For A Taste Of Grimdark, Visit The 'Land Fit For Heroes' " .

NPR Books . Retrieved 31 January 2015 .

^ a b Shurin, Jared (28 January 2015).

"NEW RELEASES: THE GOBLIN EMPEROR BY KATHERINE ADDISON" .

Pornokitsch . Retrieved 31 January 2015 .

^ Bourke, Liz (17 April 2015).

"The Dark Defiles by Richard Morgan" .

Strange Horizons . Retrieved 7 March 2019 .

^ Young, Helen Victoria (2015).

Fantasy and Science Fiction Medievalisms . Cambria Press. p. 5.

ISBN 9781604978964 .

^ Garrad, Jon (2017).

"Endless Nineties: the perennial aesthetic of'grimdark'games" .

Gothic Styles, Gothic Substance .

^ Walter, Damien (1 January 2016).

"Science fiction and fantasy look ahead to a diverse 2016" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 1 January 2016 .

^ Cordova, Savannah (1 March 2019).

"Grimdark Books" .

Reedsy . Retrieved 7 March 2019 .

^ a b Mike Gelprin; Mark Lawrence; Gerri Leen; Adrian Tchaikovsky; Nick Wisseman (1 October 2014).

Grimdark Magazine Issue #1 . Grimdark Magazine. pp.

15– 16.

ISBN 978-0-9941659-1-6 .

^ "INTERVIEW: IGOR LJUBUNCIC, AUTHOR OF THE LOST WORDS" . 27 June 2014.

^ Burke, Cheresse (11 November 2014).

"Review: Riding the Unicorn by Paul Kearney" .

^ Mauro, John (7 March 2024).

"ANNA SMITH SPARK: WHERE TO START READING" .

Grimdark Magazine . Retrieved 9 July 2024 .

^ a b c d Romano, Aja (27 December 2018).

"In the era of Trump and apocalyptic change, Hopepunk is weaponizing optimism" .

Vox . Retrieved 29 December 2018 .

^ Kehe, Jason (16 September 2021).

"Is Becky Chambers the Ultimate Hope for Science Fiction?" .

Wired . Retrieved 12 October 2021 .

^ "Radio Life: Interview With Author Derek B. Miller" .

SciFiNow . 21 January 2021.

^ "The Sweetweird Manifesto" .

buttondown.com . Archived from the original on 16 January 2025 . Retrieved 25 June 2025 .

^ Valens, Ana.

"Is it Time For a 'Sweetweird' Revolution?" .

The Mary Sue . Retrieved 25 June 2025 .

Look up grimdark in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Accidental travel Action-adventure Lost world Sword and sorcery Wuxia Alternate history Chuanyue Contemporary Children's fantasy Comedy Bangsian Dark fantasy Grimdark Fairy tale parodies Fairytale fantasy Fantastique Fantasy of manners Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai LitRPG Low fantasy Magical girl Mythic Mythpunk Mythopoeia Omegaverse Progression Romantic Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Shenmo Urban fantasy Occult detective fiction Paranormal romance Weird fiction New weird Weird West Fantasy Western Xianxia Media Film and television Anime Films highest-grossing S&S Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels A–H I–R S–Z List of story collections Publishers Magazines Fantastic Fantastic Adventures Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Other Dungeons & Dragons Féeries Podcasts Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Saturn Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Fandom Art Fanspeak Filk music Harry Potter fandom The Inklings Lovecraft fandom Mythopoeic Society Tolkien fandom Tolkien's influence Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Devils Ghouls Elementals Faeries Familiars Fire-breathing monsters Chimera Dragons Gargoyles Imps Jinn Nymphs Shapeshifters Werecats Werewolves Skin-walkers Spirits Talking animals Undead Death Ghosts Liches Mummies Skeletons Vampires Zombies Unicorns Yōkai Characters Barbarian Caveman Damsel in distress Dark lord Donor Dragonslayer Fairy godmother Heroes Magicians Occult detective list Wild man Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / neutral / light Ceremonial Love Moon Magic item Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Runes Wand Schools Alchemy Demonology Divination Egregore Evocation Incantation Necromancy Runecraft Shamanism Shapeshifting Thaumaturgy Theurgy Witchcraft Fantasy races Centaurs Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Kobolds Leprechauns Merfolk Mermaids Mermen Ogres Oni Orcs Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Maps Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Magic school Related Allegory Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Ghost stories Gothic fiction Horror fiction LGBT themes in speculative fiction Mecha Mythology Science fiction Supernatural fiction Superhero Tokusatsu Kaiju Urban legend Outline Category v t e Horror fiction Speculative fiction Media Anime Comics Creepypasta List Films History Magazines Podcasts Television programs Video games List Types Analog Art Black Body Cannibal Christmas Comedy Zombie Creepypasta Cosmic Dark fantasy Dark Romanticism Faustian Grimdark Splatterpunk Erotic Guro Monster erotica Zombie pornography Folk Found footage Ghost Giallo List of films Gothic American Southern Southern Ontario Suburban Tasmanian Urban Japanese Korean Lovecraftian Monsters Jiangshi Vampire Werewolf Occult detective Organ transplantation Penny dreadful Postmodern horror Psychological Survival Techno Weird fiction New weird Weird menace Weird West Zombie apocalypse Monsters Demons Devils Ghouls Div Evil clowns Extraterrestrials Fire-breathing monsters Chimera Dragons Gargoyles Kaiju Killer toy Mutants Ogres Sea monster Piranha Therianthropes Werecats Werewolves Undead Death Ghosts Mummies Skeletons Vampires Zombies Witches Related genres Black comedy Fantastique Fantasy fiction Mystery Paranormal Science fiction Shenmo Supernatural Thriller Tokusatsu Urban legend Other Conventions Deathrock Grand Guignol Horror host Horror punk Horrorcore Macabre LGBTQ themes characters Vulgar auteurism Writers Related Bram Stoker Award Internet Speculative Fiction Database Pulp magazine Video nasties Category Portal v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal v t e Warhammer 40,000 Rule books Rogue Trader Codex: Imperial Guard Imperial Armour Codex (Warhammer 40,000) Datasheet Spin-offs Adeptus Titanicus Aeronautica Imperialis Battlefleet Gothic Dark Millennium Epic Gorkamorka Horus Heresy Inquisitor Necromunda Space Crusade Space Hulk Warhammer 40,000 Collectible Card Game Video games Space Crusade Space Hulk (1993) Vengeance of the Blood Angels Final Liberation Chaos Gate Rites of War Gorkamorka (cancelled) Fire Warrior Dawn of War Winter Assault Dark Crusade Soulstorm Glory in Death Squad Command Dawn of War II Chaos Rising Retribution Kill Team Space Marine Dark Millennium (cancelled) Space Hulk (2013) Storm of Vengeance Carnage Space Wolf Space Hulk: Ascension Armageddon Deathwatch Regicide Eisenhorn: Xenos Battlefleet Gothic: Armada Eternal Crusade Space Hulk: Deathwing Sanctus Reach Dawn of War III Inquisitor – Martyr Gladius – Relics of War Space Hulk: Tactics Mechanicus Battlefleet Gothic: Armada 2 Necromunda: Underhive Wars Necromunda: Hired Gun Battlesector Chaos Gate - Daemonhunters Tacticus Shootas, Blood and Teef Darktide Boltgun Rogue Trader Space Marine 2 Boltgun 2 Mechanicus II Roleplay Dark Heresy Rogue Trader Deathwatch Black Crusade Print media White Dwarf Warhammer 40,000 novels Eisenhorn First and Only Gaunt's Ghosts The Horus Heresy Warhammer 40,000 comics Blood and Thunder Damnation Crusade Hard Choices The Redeemer Warhammer Monthly Animation Ultramarines: A Warhammer 40,000 Movie Hammer and Bolter Secret Level Other Grimdark Grimdark Future Symbol of Chaos Space Marine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Grimdark&oldid=1304157705 " Categories : Fantasy genres Science fiction genres Speculative fiction Warhammer 40,000 Dark fiction Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2025 Use dmy dates from February 2024 This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 09:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Grimdark 5 languages Add topic

