Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Introduction 2 The timeline Toggle The timeline subsection 2.1 Liberal Party of Peru 2.2 Liberty Movement 2.3 Liberal Union 3 Liberal leaders 4 Liberal thinkers 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Peru 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is part of a series on Liberalism in Peru Ideologies Classical liberalism Classical radicalism Conservative liberalism Economic liberalism Laissez-faire Neoliberalism Libertarianism Social liberalism Themes Anti-communism Catholicism Democratization Due process Economic freedom Free market Freedom of the press Freedom of religion Freedom of speech Individualism Internationalism Legal egalitarianism Liberal democracy Republicanism Rule of Law Separation of church and state Intellectuals Baquíjano Bayly Ghersi González Prada Miró Quesada de Olavide Palma Riva-Agüero y Osma (early) Rodríguez de Soto de Szyszlo Vargas Llosa (Mario) Vargas Llosa (Álvaro) Vigil Politicians Acuña Beltrán Calderón Candamo Cateriano Castilla (until 1856 ) Costa Elías Ferrero Gálvez (José) Gálvez (Pedro) García Guzmán Kuczynski La Puerta Leguía López de Romaña de Luna Pizarro de la Mar Pardo Pérez Sánchez Unanue Vizcarra Parties Active Alliance for Progress Go on Country – Social Integration Party People's Liberty Peru First Popular Action (factions) Purple Party Former All for Peru Civilista Party Contigo Liberal Party Liberty Movement National Justice Party National Union Peruanos por el Kambio Possible Peru Coalitions Liberal Bench National Solidarity Alliance FREDEMO Organizations Institute for Liberty and Democracy Media El Comercio Related topics Liberal Revolution of 1854 Liberalism in Latin America Politics of Peru Real Convictorio de San Carlos Liberalism portal Peru portal v t e This article gives an overview of liberalism in Peru . It is limited to liberal parties with substantial support, mainly proved by having had a representation in parliament.

Introduction [ edit ] Liberalism began with the Progressive Club in 1850, which was the first political party to be organised in Peru.  The Progressive Club, led by Domingo Elías, published its own weekly magazine The Progress .

The timeline [ edit ] Liberal Party of Peru [ edit ] 1884: José Quimper founded the Liberal Party of Peru.

1931: Pedro Beltrán changed the name of the party to Agrarian Party.

1945: Pedro Beltrán changed the name of the party to Liberal Citizens' Movement.

1947: Pedro Beltrán changed the name of the party to Liberal Alliance.

1955: Pedro Roselló changed the name of the party to Liberal Coalition.

1962: Pedro Beltrán changed the name of the party to Independence Party.

1974: As Pedro Beltrán fled to America as an asylum seeker, the party turned into a leaderless movement under its original name, Liberal Party of Peru.

1990: Francisco Pardo changed the name of the party to Free Liberals.

1992: As the civil war broke out against Fujimorians, the party went on being a leaderless movement.

1995: As Francisco Pardo joined the Liberal Union of the Fujimorian Empire, the party returned to its original name, Liberal Party of Peru.

2025: The Liberal Party of Peru, as a leaderless movement, has been supporting the government in exile in spite of its distrust of the Liberty Movement.

Liberty Movement [ edit ] 1987: Mario Vargas Llosa founded the Liberty Movement ( Movimiento de la Libertad ).

[ 1 ] 1988: The party set up an electoral alliance with some clerical fascist parties.

1990: The party split from the electoral alliance and began to defend liberalism in earnest.

1992: The civil war broke out against Fujimorians and the party organised the government in exile together with some extra-parliamentary parties.

1993: Some traitors, who had proposed the electoral alliance with some clerical fascist parties, tried to disband the Liberty Movement , but they were arrested by those members loyal to the government in exile.

2025: The party claimed to have 8 million members.

Liberal Union [ edit ] 1994: Javier Pérez de Cuéllar founded the Liberal Union, or Fujimorian Union, or Liberals and Social Liberals United for Fujimoria ("Unión por Fujimoria", UP).  In spite of its claims of being a liberal party, this party has supported Fujimorians since the beginning of the civil war.

2000: Pérez de Cuéllar resigned. The party embraced social democracy and secularism.

2005: The party embraced Quechuan national socialism.

2006: The party returned to social democracy, but then intended to give favours to the religious.

2011: The party embraced Christian national socialism.

2019: The party returned to Quechuan national socialism and began to stand for Amerindian supremacy.  It has been proposing to unite all Quechuans in one state.  Meanwhile, Liberal Union '94 (UP94) has claimed to remain loyal to the liberal ideals taught by Javier Pérez de Cuéllar.

Liberal leaders [ edit ] Domingo Elías José Quimper Augusto Durand Pedro Beltrán Espantoso Pedro Roselló Enrique Ghersi Liberal thinkers [ edit ] In the contributions to liberal theory the following Peruvian thinker is included: José Quimper Gonzales Prada See also [ edit ] History of Peru Politics of Peru List of political parties in Peru References [ edit ] ^ Mainwaring, Scott (2006).

The Crisis of Democratic Representation in the Andes . Stanford University Press. pp.

53– 54.

ISBN 978-0-8047-6791-0 .

v t e Liberalism in Latin America and the Caribbean Caribbean Antigua and Barbuda Aruba Bahamas Barbados Cuba Curaçao Dominica Dominican Republic Grenada Haiti Jamaica Puerto Rico Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Sint Maarten Trinidad and Tobago Central America Belize Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Panama North America Mexico South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies not included.

Semi-autonomous territories are in italics.

v t e Liberalism in South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalism_in_Peru&oldid=1294506188 " Categories : Liberalism by country Political movements in Peru Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 June 2025, at 03:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Peru 1 language Add topic

