Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Planning 2 Tent City of Persepolis 3 Festivities 4 Security 5 Criticism 6 List of guests Toggle List of guests subsection 6.1 Royalty and viceroys 6.2 Presidents, Vice Presidents, Prime Ministers and others 7 Film 8 Legacy 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents 2,500-year celebration of the Persian Empire 24 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Русский Suomi Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 29°56′04″N 52°53′29″E ﻿ / ﻿ 29.93444°N 52.89139°E ﻿ / 29.93444; 52.89139 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1971 national event in Iran Celebration of the 2,500th Anniversary of the Founding of the Persian Empire The Cyrus Cylinder , which was framed by the Iranian king Mohammad Reza Pahlavi as the event's official logo, owing to his claim that it was the " first charter of human rights " in history.

Persepolis Location of Persepolis , which was the ceremonial capital city of the Achaemenid Empire , and which therefore served as the event's primary venue.

Native name جشن‌های ۲۵۰۰ ساله شاهنشاهی ایران Date 12–16 October 1971 ( 1971-10-12 – 1971-10-16 ) Location Imperial State of Iran Coordinates 29°56′04″N 52°53′29″E ﻿ / ﻿ 29.93444°N 52.89139°E ﻿ / 29.93444; 52.89139 Also known as 2,500-year celebration of the Persian Empire Motive Honouring the legacy of ancient Iran under the Achaemenid dynasty and showcasing the progress of modern Iran under the Pahlavi dynasty The 2,500-year celebration of the Persian Empire , [ 1 ] officially known as the 2,500-year celebration of the Empire of Iran ( Persian : جشن‌های ۲۵۰۰ ساله شاهنشاهی ایران , romanized : Jašn-hây-e 2500 sale’ šâhanšâhi Irân ), was hosted by the Pahlavi dynasty in the Imperial State of Iran in October 1971. Concentrated at Persepolis , it consisted of an elaborate set of grand festivities that sought to honour the legacy of the Achaemenid Empire , which was founded by Cyrus the Great in 550 BC.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The event was aimed at highlighting ancient Iranian history and also showcasing the country's contemporary advances under Mohammad Reza Pahlavi , who had been reigning as the Shah of Iran since 1941.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The site brought sixty members of royalty and heads of state from abroad.

[ 6 ] Some historians take the view that its role in massive display of seemingly unlimited royal wealth contributed to the Iranian populace's growing frustration with the Pahlavi dynasty, while others argue that the extravagance of the proceedings was exaggerated during the Islamic Revolution to discredit the Shah's regime.

[ 5 ] As a result, some accounts have overstated the event's costs and luxuries.

Planning [ edit ] The Tomb of Cyrus the Great , located at Pasargadae , where the festivities began on 12 October 1971.

The military parade in Persepolis during the celebrations.

Persian Immortals , as portrayed during the parade.

The planning for the party took a year, according to the 2016 BBC Storyville documentary Decadence and Downfall: The Shah of Iran's Ultimate Party . The filmmakers interviewed people tasked by the Shah to organize the party.

Asadollah Alam , minister of the Royal Court, was named to head the organizing committee. The Cyrus Cylinder appeared in the official logo as the symbol for the event. With the decision to hold the main event at the ancient city of Persepolis , near Shiraz , the local infrastructure had to be improved, including the Shiraz International Airport and a highway to Persepolis. While the press and supporting staff would be housed in Shiraz, the main festivities were planned for Persepolis. An elaborate tent city was planned to house attendees. The area around Persepolis was cleared of snakes and other vermin.

[ 7 ] Trees and flowers were planted, and 50,000 song birds were imported from Europe.

[ 4 ] Other events were scheduled for Pasargadae , the site of the Tomb of Cyrus , as well as Tehran .

Tent City of Persepolis [ edit ] Tent City of Persepolis.

Tent in Persepolis.

The Tent City (also called Golden City) was planned by the Parisian interior-design firm of Maison Jansen on 160 acres (0.65 km 2 ). They referred to the meeting between Francis I of France and Henry VIII of England at the Field of the Cloth of Gold in 1520.

[ 7 ] Fifty 'tents' (prefabricated luxury apartments with traditional Persian tent-cloth surrounds) were arranged in a star pattern around a central fountain. Numerous trees were planted around them in the desert, to recreate how ancient Persepolis would have looked. Each tent was provided with direct telephone and telex connections for attendees to their respective countries. The entire celebration was televised to the world by way of a satellite connection from the site.

The large 'Tent of Honor' was designed for the reception of the dignitaries. The 'Banqueting Hall' was the largest structure, and measured 68 by 24 metres (223 ft × 79 ft). The tent site was surrounded by gardens of trees and other plants flown in from France and adjacent to the ruins of Persepolis. Catering services were provided by Maxim's de Paris , [ 8 ] which closed its restaurant in Paris for almost two weeks to provide for the glittering celebrations. Legendary hotelier Max Blouet came out of retirement to supervise the banquet.

Lanvin designed the uniforms of the Imperial Household. 250 red Mercedes-Benz 600 limousines were used to chauffeur guests from the airport and back. The dinnerware was created using Limoges porcelain and linen by D. Porthault .

Festivities [ edit ] 2,500-year celebration of the Persian Empire in the tomb of Cyrus the Great Dinner ceremony during the 2,500-year celebration of the Persian Empire The day after the festivities ended, the Shah inaugurated the Aryamehr Stadium , part of a larger complex designed for the 1974 Asian Games hosted by Pahlavi Iran.

The festivities were opened on 12 October 1971, when the Shah and the Shahbanu paid homage to Cyrus the Great at his mausoleum at Pasargadae. For the next two days, the Shah and his wife greeted arriving guests, often directly at Shiraz's airport. On 14 October, a grand gala dinner took place in the Banqueting Hall in celebration of the birthday of the Shahbanu. Sixty members of royal families and heads of state were assembled at the single large serpentine table in the Banqueting Hall. They dined off a special dinner service of 10,000 plates commissioned from the English china manufacturer Spode, each plate decorated in turquoise and gold, with the Shah's coat of arms. The official toast was raised with a Dom Perignon Rosé 1959.

Six hundred guests dined over five and a half hours, thus making for the longest and most lavish official banquet in modern history as recorded in successive editions of the Guinness Book of World Records . A son et lumière show, the Polytope of Persepolis designed by Iannis Xenakis and accompanied by the specially-commissioned electronic music piece Persepolis , [ 9 ] concluded the evening. The next day saw a huge military parade of armies of different Iranian empires covering two and half millennia by 1,724 soldiers of the Iranian armed forces, all in period costume, followed by representatives of the Imperial Armed Forces, with a large military band , composed of military musicians and providing the music for the parade, split into two—the modern band playing in Western instruments and a traditional band wearing uniforms from different eras of Iranian history. In the evening, a less formal "traditional Persian party" was held in the Banqueting Hall as the concluding event at Persepolis.

[ 10 ] The inauguration of the Shahyad Tower On the final day, the Shah inaugurated the Shahyad Tower (later renamed the Azadi Tower after the Iranian Revolution ) in Tehran to commemorate the event. The tower was also home to the Museum of Persian History. In it was displayed the Cyrus Cylinder , which the Shah promoted as "the first human rights charter in history".

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The cylinder was also the official symbol of the celebrations, and the Shah's first speech at Cyrus' tomb praised the freedom that it had proclaimed, two and a half millennia previously. The festivities were concluded with the Shah paying homage to his father, Reza Shah Pahlavi , at his mausoleum .

[ 10 ] The event brought together the rulers of two of the three oldest extant monarchies, the Shah and Emperor Haile Selassie I of Ethiopia . Emperor Hirohito of Japan was represented by his youngest brother, Prince Mikasa . By the end of the decade, both the Ethiopian and Iranian monarchies had ceased to exist.

Security [ edit ] Security was a major concern. Persepolis was a favoured site for the festivities as it was isolated and thus could be tightly guarded, a very important consideration when many of the world's leaders were gathered there. Iran's security services, SAVAK , captured and took into "preventive custody" anyone that it suspected of being a potential threat.

Criticism [ edit ] The Ministry of the Court placed the cost at US$ 17 million (at that time); Ansari, one of the organizers, puts it at US$22 million (at that time).

[ 7 ] The actual figure is difficult to calculate exactly and is a partisan issue.

The New York Times reported several months before the event, "The enormous expense of the celebration is hardly likely to strain the treasury, which is enriched by oil and many other resources. But there is muted criticism here of such conspicuous expenditure in the face of widespread poverty and back wardness  [ sic ] in this largely rural country of almost 30 million people." [ 13 ] According to the BBC documentary Decadence and Downfall , the celebrations cost about 120 million United States dollars. However, this claim has been described as having no real basis. In addition, the documentary claims the approximately 50,000 birds the Shah imported died within a few days due to the desert climate. Historian Robert Steele has described this claim as infeasible, arguing that the October climate in Persepolis is more mild than reported and so the birds would have been accustomed to the local weather.

[ 14 ] Many accounts from journalists and historians exaggerate cost estimates and claim the regime wanted to spend whatever was necessary. However, the Shah only approved the celebration plans after the scope was reduced to one-quarter of the original plan in order to reduce costs.

[ 15 ] List of guests [ edit ] Commemorative set of 9 gold and silver coins, minted in Iran Commemorative silver coins from a set minted on the occasion of the celebrations Obverse of the medal for the 2,500th anniversary of the Persian Empire.

Reverse of the medal for the 2,500th anniversary of the Persian Empire Queen Elizabeth II had been advised not to attend, with security being an issue.

[ 7 ] The Duke of Edinburgh and Princess Anne represented her instead.

[ 16 ] Other major leaders who did not attend were Richard Nixon and Georges Pompidou . Nixon had initially planned to attend but later changed his mind and sent Spiro Agnew instead.

[ 7 ] Some materials [ 17 ] say that the attendee on China’s behalf was Guo Moruo . According to his daughter, Guo was originally planned to attend, but he fell ill in transit and then- Chinese Ambassador to Pakistan Zhang Tong attended instead.

[ 18 ] Some of the guests who were invited include: Royalty and viceroys [ edit ] Title Guest Country Emperor Haile Selassie [ 16 ] Ethiopia Princess Sara Gizaw [ 16 ] King Frederik IX Denmark Queen Ingrid King Baudouin Belgium Queen Fabiola King Hussein Jordan Princess Muna Princess Basma King Mahendra Nepal Queen Ratna King Olav V Norway Emir Sheikh Isa bin Salman Al Khalifa Bahrain Emir Sheikh Ahmad bin Ali Al Thani Qatar Emir Sheikh Sabah III Al-Salim Al-Sabah Kuwait King Constantine II Greece Queen Anne-Marie Prince Michael Princess Marina Sultan Qaboos bin Said Oman Princess Bilqis Begum Afghanistan Sardar Abdul Wali Khan King Moshoeshoe II Lesotho Yang di-Pertuan Agong Tunku Abdul Halim Malaysia Raja Permaisuri Agong Bahiyah Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan Abu Dhabi Prince Franz Josef II Liechtenstein Princess Gina Prince Rainier III Monaco Princess Grace Grand Duke Jean Luxembourg Grand Duchess Joséphine-Charlotte Princess Marie Astrid Prince Bernhard Netherlands Prince Consort Philip United Kingdom and Commonwealth realms Princess Anne Prince Aga Khan IV Nizari Imamate Princess Begum Om Habibeh Aga Khan Crown Prince Carl Gustaf Sweden Prince Juan Carlos Spain Princess Sofia Prince Victor Emmanuel Italy Princess Marina Prince Takahito Japan Princess Yuriko Prince Bhanubandhu Yugala Thailand Prince Moulay Abdallah Morocco Princess Lalla Lamia Prince Makhosini Dlamini Swaziland Governor General Roland Michener Canada Governor-General Sir Paul Hasluck Australia Presidents, Vice Presidents, Prime Ministers and others [ edit ] Title Guest Country President Franz Jonas Austria First Lady Jovanka Broz Yugoslavia President Josip Broz Tito Chairman of the Presidium Nikolai Podgorny Soviet Union Chairman of the State Council Todor Zhivkov Bulgaria President Urho Kekkonen Finland President V. V. Giri India Vice President Gopal Swarup Pathak President of the Presidential Council Pál Losonczi Hungary President Cevdet Sunay Turkey President Suharto Indonesia President Ludvík Svoboda Czechoslovakia President Suleiman Frangieh Lebanon President Yahya Khan Pakistan State President Jacobus Johannes Fouché South Africa President Léopold Sédar Senghor Senegal President Moktar Ould Daddah Mauritania President Hubert Maga Dahomey President Nicolae Ceaușescu Romania [ 16 ] First Lady Elena Ceaușescu President Mobutu Sese Seko Zaire Prime Minister Jacques Chaban-Delmas France Prime Minister Kim Jong-pil South Korea Prime Minister Emilio Colombo Italy Deputy Chairman of the Council of State Mieczysław Klimaszewski Poland Vice President Spiro Agnew United States Second Lady Judy Agnew Vice President Hussein el-Shafei Egypt Chief Earl Old Person Blackfeet Nation President of the Federal Senate Petrônio Portella Nunes Brazil President of the Bundestag Kai-Uwe von Hassel West Germany Foreign Minister Rui Patrício Portugal First Lady Imelda Marcos Philippines Former President Friedrich Wahlen Switzerland Cardinal Maximilian von Fürstenberg Holy See Minister of Foreign Affairs Arístides Calvani [ es ] Venezuela Ambassador to Pakistan Zhang Tong China Film [ edit ] Flames of Persia ( 1 : 00 : 01 ) Problems playing this file? See media help .

Iran's National Film Board produced a documentary of the celebrations, titled Forugh-e Javidan ( فروغ جاویدان , lit.

' Eternal Light ' ) in Persian and Flames of Persia in English. Farrokh Golestan directed, and Orson Welles , who had said of the event "This was no party of the year, it was the celebration of 25 centuries!", [ 7 ] agreed to narrate the English text, written by Macdonald Hastings , in return for the Shah's brother-in-law funding Welles's own film, The Other Side of the Wind (which eventually went into development hell but was eventually posthumously released by Netflix in 2018).

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] The film was aimed at a Western audience.

[ 21 ] Despite a requirement to show the film in 60 cinemas in Tehran, its "overheated rhetoric" and popular resentment at the extravagance of the event meant it did poorly at the domestic box office.

[ 22 ] In the Review of Middle East Studies in 1980, Ellen-Fairbanks Bodman referred to "a Cecil B. DeMille -type parade — a sequence of Iranian dynasties and peoples in orderly array: no conquests, no struggles, no internal conflicts, no Arabs , no Mongols ." She also notes only a single reference to Islam and that "the Shah waves to happy peasantry and smiles at the idyllic bucolic revelries of his admiring people. Only two chadors are in fleeting evidence among the crowds, and the camera prefers girls dancing in tight corduroy pants. Attention is paid to modern housing developments and technology, none to land reform or agriculture ." [ 23 ] Legacy [ edit ] Persepolis tent city ruins in 2007 Persepolis remains a major tourist attraction in Iran. In 2005, reports suggested that the Islamic regime of Iran intended to reconstruct the tent city created for the 1971 celebration.

[ 16 ] In 2005, it was visited by nearly 35,000 people during the Nowruz holiday.

[ 16 ] The tent city continued operating for private and government rent until 1979, when it was looted in the aftermath of the Iranian Revolution and the departure of the Shah. The iron rods for the tents and roads built for the festival area still remain and are open to the public, but there are no markers indicating what they were originally for.

[ 24 ] The dedicated Shahyad Tower remains as a major landmark in Tehran , although it was renamed Azadi Tower in 1979.

See also [ edit ] History portal Iran portal Iranian Art Museum Garden Monarchism in Iran List of monarchs of Persia References [ edit ] ^ "Celebration of the 2,500th Anniversary of the Founding of the Persian Empire" . Ministry of Information. 14 September 1971 . Retrieved 9 May 2022 .

^ Amuzegar, The Dynamics of the Iranian Revolution , (1991), pp. 4, 9–12 ^ Narrative of Awakening : A Look at Imam Khomeini's Ideal, Scientific and Political Biography from Birth to Ascension by Hamid Ansari, Institute for Compilation and Publication of the Works of Imam Khomeini, International Affairs Division, [no date], p. 163 ^ a b Nina Adler (14 February 2017).

"Als der Schah zur größten Party auf Erden lud" (in German).

Der Spiegel . Retrieved 14 February 2017 .

^ a b Steele, Robert.

The Shah's Imperial Celebrations of 1971 AD .

^ "2,500 year celebration of the Persian Empire" .

The Pahlavi Dynasty . Retrieved 10 January 2025 .

^ a b c d e f Kadivar C (25 January 2002).

"We are awake. 2,500-year celebrations revisited" . Archived from the original on 8 November 2002 . Retrieved 23 October 2006 .

^ Van Kemenade, Willem (November 2009).

"Iran's relations with China and the West" (PDF) .

Clingendael . Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 October 2021 . Retrieved 9 August 2013 .

^ Karkowski, Z.; Harley, J.; Szymanksi, F.; Gable, B. (2002). "Liner Notes".

Iannis Xenakis: Persepolis + Remixes . San Francisco: Asphodel LTD.

^ a b "The Persepolis Celebrations" . Retrieved 23 October 2006 .

^ British Museum explanatory notes, "Cyrus Cylinder": "For almost 100 years the cylinder was regarded as ancient Mesopotamian propaganda. This changed in 1971 when the Shah of Iran used it as a central image in his own propaganda celebrating 2500 years of Iranian monarchy. In Iran, the cylinder has appeared on coins, banknotes and stamps. Despite being a Babylonian document it has become part of Iran's cultural identity." ^ Neil MacGregor, "The whole world in our hands", in Art and Cultural Heritage: Law, Policy, and Practice , p. 383–4, ed. Barbara T. Hoffman. Cambridge University Press, 2006.

ISBN 0-521-85764-3 ^ Browne, Malcolm W. (27 July 1971).

"A Spectacle in Fall to Mark Persia's 2,500 Years" .

New York Times . The New York Times Company . Retrieved 8 January 2024 .

^ Steele (2020) , p. 5.

^ Steele (2020) , p. 144.

^ a b c d e f Tait, Robert (22 September 2005).

"Iran to rebuild spectacular tent city at Persepolis" .

The Guardian . Persepolis . Retrieved 8 August 2013 .

^ [1] , spelt as "Kuo Mo-jo" ^ 庶英, 郭 (24 August 2004).

"忆父亲郭沫若" .

Guangming Online . Archived from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 3 June 2017 .

^ Naficy, Hamid (2003).

"Iranian Cinema" . In Oliver Leaman (ed.).

Companion Encyclopedia of Middle Eastern and North African Film . Routledge. p. 140.

ISBN 9781134662524 .

^ Welles, Orson (1998).

This is Orson Welles . Perseus Books Group. p. xxvii.

ISBN 9780306808340 .

^ Watson, James A.F. (March 2015).

"Stop, look, and listen: orientalism, modernity, and the Shah's quest for the West's imagination" (PDF) .

The UBC Journal of Political Studies .

17 . Vancouver: Department of Political Science at the University of British Columbia: 22–36: 26–28. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 February 2016 . Retrieved 15 February 2016 .

^ Naficy, Hamid (2011).

A Social History of Iranian Cinema, Volume 2: The Industrializing Years, 1941–1978 . Duke University Press. p. 139.

ISBN 9780822347743 .

^ Bodman, Ellen-Fairbanks (22 July 1980).

"1971 - 55 Minutes - in Color. Produced by National Iranian Film Board. Script by MacDonald Hastings. Narrated by Orson Welles" .

Review of Middle East Studies .

14 (1): 74– 74.

doi : 10.1017/S0026318400008269 – via Cambridge University Press.

^ Iran Daily (23 June 2007).

"Team Named For Renovating Persepolis" . Archived from the original on 2 July 2007 . Retrieved 9 March 2008 .

Steele, Robert (2020).

The Shah's Imperial Celebrations of 1971 AD_ Nationalism, Culture and Politics in Late Pahlavi Iran . Bloomsbury Academic _ I.B. Tauris.

ISBN 9781838604196 .

Further reading [ edit ] Steele, Robert (2021).

The Shah's Imperial Celebrations of 1971: Nationalism, Culture and Politics in Late Pahlavi Iran . London: I.B. Tauris .

ISBN 978-1-8386-0417-2 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to 2500 year celebration of the Persian Empire .

1971 Celebration of the Shah of Persia in Persepolis at the Wayback Machine (archived 2014-04-20) (ARTE Documentary Film) Persepolis 2,500 year celebration of the Persian Empire on Facebook Decadence and Downfall: The World's Most Expensive Party on YouTube by Best Documentary on Facebook Decadence and Downfall In Iran: The Greatest Party In History on YouTube by Real Stories How Iran threw the World's Greatest Party in a Desert on YouTube by SideNote v t e Achaemenid Empire History Family tree Timeline History of democracy Art Achaemenid Persian Lion Rhyton Oxus Treasure Achaemenid coinage Apadana hoard Danake Daric Architecture Persepolis Apadana Gate of All Nations Tachara Palace of Darius in Susa Tomb of Cyrus Persian column Naqsh-e Rostam Ka'ba-ye Zartosht Mausoleum at Halicarnassus Tombs at Xanthos Harpy Tomb Nereid Monument Tomb of Payava Culture Achaemenid music Old Persian cuneiform Old Persian Behistun Inscription Xerxes I's inscription at Van Ganjnameh Cyrus Cylinder Warfare Persian Revolt Battle of Hyrba Battle of the Persian Border Lydian-Persian Wars Battle of Pteria Battle of Thymbra Siege of Sardis (547 BC) Battle of Opis Fall of Babylon Conquest of the Indus Valley First conquest of Egypt Battle of Pelusium Scythian campaign of Darius I Greco-Persian Wars Ionian Revolt Siege of Naxos (499 BC) Battle of Lade Siege of Eretria Battle of Marathon Battle of Thermopylae Battle of Artemisium Destruction of Athens Battle of Salamis Battle of Plataea Battle of Mycale Babylonian revolts Wars of the Delian League Battle of the Eurymedon Peloponnesian War Battle of Cyzicus Battle of Cunaxa Corinthian War Battle of Cnidus Great Satraps' Revolt Second conquest of Egypt Wars of Alexander the Great Battle of the Granicus Siege of Miletus Siege of Halicarnassus Battle of Issus Siege of Tyre (332 BC) Siege of Gaza Battle of Gaugamela Battle of the Persian Gate Diplomacy Earth and water Peace of Callias Peace of Antalcidas Administration Capitals Pasargadae Ecbatana Babylon Susa Satrapies Armenia Districts of the Empire Persepolis Administrative Archives Royal Road Chapar Khaneh Angarium Angarum Dynasties Achaemenid Pharnacid Mithridatic Pontus Ariarathid Cappadocia Lygdamid Caria Orontid Armenia Seven Achaemenid clans Related 2,500-year celebration of the Persian Empire Xanthian Obelisk Cappadocian calendar v t e Persepolis Palace Tachara Gate of All Nations Apadana Other sections Tomb of Artaxerxes III Builders Darius the Great Xerxes I Artaxerxes I Researchers Heidemarie Koch Erich Schmidt Alireza Shapour Shahbazi Related Foreign Visitors Graffiti at Persepolis Tangeh Bolaghi 2,500-year celebration of the Persian Empire Sivand Dam Persepolis Administrative Archives Waterskin Achaemenid architecture Category:Persepolis v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=2,500-year_celebration_of_the_Persian_Empire&oldid=1305353756 " Categories : 1971 festivals October 1971 in Asia Jubilees 1971 in Iran Historiography of Iran Mohammad Reza Pahlavi Achaemenid Empire Persepolis Pahlavi Iran Diplomatic visits by destination Lists of diplomatic trips Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2023 Use Oxford spelling from April 2021 Articles containing Persian-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Articles with hAudio microformats Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Facebook ID not in Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 15:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents 2,500-year celebration of the Persian Empire 24 languages Add topic

