Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Affiliations 3 Influence on the civil rights movement Toggle Influence on the civil rights movement subsection 3.1 March on Washington 3.2 New York City school boycott 3.3 From protest to politics 3.4 Labor movement: Unions and social democracy 3.5 Foreign policy 3.6 Soviet Jewry movement 3.7 Criticisms 3.8 Gay rights 4 Death and beliefs 5 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 5.1 1990s and 2000s 5.2 2010s and beyond 6 Publications 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Bayard Rustin 21 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Latviešu Lietuvių مصرى پښتو Polski Português Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American civil rights activist (1912–1987) Bayard Rustin Rustin at a news briefing on the March on Washington in Washington, D.C., on August 27, 1963 Born ( 1912-03-17 ) March 17, 1912 West Chester, Pennsylvania , U.S.

Died August 24, 1987 (1987-08-24) (aged 75) New York City, U.S.

Education Wilberforce University Cheyney University City College of New York Organization(s) Fellowship of Reconciliation Congress of Racial Equality War Resisters League Southern Christian Leadership Conference Social Democrats, USA (National Chairman) A. Philip Randolph Institute (President) Committee on the Present Danger Omega Psi Phi Movement Civil Rights Movement , Peace Movement , Socialism , Gay Rights Movement , Neoconservatism Partner(s) Davis Platt (1940s) Walter Naegle (1977–1987; Rustin's death) Awards Presidential Medal of Freedom This article is part of a series on Socialism in the United States History Utopian socialism Bishop Hill Commune Brook Farm Icarians Jonestown Looking Backward New Harmony Oneida Community Progressive Era 1877 St. Louis general strike Christian socialism in Utah 1912 Lawrence textile strike Catholic Worker Movement Green Corn Rebellion Labor unionization Haymarket affair May Day Women's suffrage Red Scare American Defense Society American Protective League Communist Party USA and African Americans Communist Party USA in the labor movement 1919–1937 1937–1957 Espionage Act of 1917 First Red Scare John Birch Society McCarthyism Seattle General Strike Smith Act Smith Act trials Anti-war and civil rights movements Black power movement COINTELPRO " I Have a Dream " March on Washington New Left Poor People's Campaign Contemporary 1999 Seattle WTO protests 2008 financial crisis Occupy movement Activists Alston Balagoon Berkman Day Dixon Du Bois Ehrenreich Ervin Flynn Goldman Grace Guthrie Hampton Hay Haywood (Bill) Haywood (Harry) Hill Hoffman Jones Keller King Labadie Lovestone Marcy Mitchell Morello Newton Ochs Parsons (Albert) Parsons (Lucy) Reed (John) Robbins Rocha Rustin Sacco and Vanzetti Seale Seeger Shakur Tankian Zinn Commentators Brooks Bruenig (Elizabeth) Bruenig (Matt) Cockburn Hedges Harrington Jameson Kochinski Magdoff Moore Parenti Piker Robinson (Nathan) Roediger Sinclair Sunkara Sweezy West Intellectuals Albert Andrews Avrich Bellamy (Edward) Bellamy (Francis) Bookchin Brisbane Butler Cabet Cannon Cantor Carmichael Chomsky Clark Cleaver Davis (Angela) Davis (Mike) Dean Dennis Dreiser Einstein Fearing Feinberg Flemm Foster Gilmore Graeber Greene Hahnel Hammett Heywood (Angela) Heywood (Ezra) Hillquit Kelley London Lum Most Noyes Piven Reed (Adolph) Ripley Robinson (Cedric) Rocker Sandburg Shachtman Smith Stone Wolff Wood Wright Zerzan Politicians Abern Berger Bowman Bush Casar Debs De Leon De la Cruz Dellums Ford Foster Gitlow Hall Hawkins Hillquit Hoan La Guardia London Mamdani Marcantonio McReynolds Mitchell Ocasio-Cortez Panken Randolph Ruthenberg Sanders Sawant Seidel Thomas Tlaib Turner Zeidler Organizations Active American Communist Party Antifa Black Riders Liberation Party Black Socialists in America Communist Party USA Democratic Socialists of America Freedom Party of New York Freedom Road Socialist Organization Freedom Socialist Party Green Mountain Peace and Justice Party Green Party of the United States Industrial Workers of the World Legal Marijuana Now Party New Afrikan Black Panther Party Party for Socialism and Liberation Peace and Freedom Party Progressive Dane Progressive Labor Party Revolutionary Communist Party, USA Socialist Action Socialist Alternative South Carolina Workers Party Social Democrats, USA Socialist Equality Party Socialist Party USA Socialist Rifle Association Socialist Workers Party Solidarity Spark Spartacist League Working Families Party Workers World Party Working Class Party World Socialist Party of the United States Defunct American Indian Movement American Labor Party American Union of Associationists American Workers Party Black Panther Party Citizens Party Communist League of America Communist League of Struggle Communist Workers' Party Democratic Socialist Federation Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee Farmer–Labor Party Human Rights Party Independent Socialist League International Socialists International Socialist Organization International Workingmen's Association Justice Party Labor Party of the United States Labor Party Maoist Internationalist Movement Red Guards Red Guard Party New American Movement New Party Nonpartisan League Patriot Party People's Party Proletarian Party of America Raza Unida Party Redneck Revolt Revolutionary Socialist League Revolutionary Youth Movement Social Democracy of America Social Democratic Federation Social Democratic Party of America Socialist Labor Party of America Socialist Party of America SDS Weather Underground White Panther Party Workers Party of the United States Young Lords Young Patriots Organization Literature Appeal to Reason Current Affairs Daily Worker Dissent International Socialist Review Jacobin The Jungle Looking Backward Monopoly Capital Monthly Review The Other America A People's History of the United States Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat Voluntary Socialism Why Socialism?

ZNetwork Related topics American Left Anarchism in the United States individualist Labor history Labor laws Labor unions Minimum wage Progressivism in the United States Socialism portal United States portal v t e Bayard Rustin ( / ˈ b aɪ .

ər d / BY -ərd ; March 17, 1912 – August 24, 1987) was an American political activist and prominent leader in social movements for civil rights , socialism , nonviolence , and gay rights . Rustin was the principal organizer of the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom in 1963.

[ 1 ] Rustin worked in 1941 with A. Philip Randolph on the March on Washington Movement to press for an end to racial discrimination in the military and defense employment. Rustin later organized Freedom Rides , and helped to organize the Southern Christian Leadership Conference to strengthen Martin Luther King Jr.

's leadership; he taught King about non-violence. Rustin worked alongside Ella Baker , a co-director of the Crusade for Citizenship , in 1954; and before the Montgomery bus boycott , he helped organize a group called "In Friendship" to provide material and legal assistance to people threatened with eviction from their tenant farms and homes.

[ 2 ] Rustin became the head of the AFL–CIO 's A. Philip Randolph Institute , which promoted the integration of formerly all-white unions and promoted the unionization of African Americans. During the 1970s and 1980s, Rustin served on many humanitarian missions, such as aiding refugees from Vietnam and Cambodia.

Rustin was a gay man and, due to criticism over his sexuality, usually advised other civil rights leaders from behind the scenes. During the 1980s, he became a public advocate on behalf of gay causes, speaking at events as an activist and supporter of human rights.

[ 3 ] Later in life, while still devoted to securing workers' rights, Rustin joined other union leaders in aligning with ideological neoconservatism , [ 4 ] [ 5 ] earning posthumous praise from President Ronald Reagan .

[ 6 ] On November 20, 2013, President Barack Obama posthumously awarded Rustin the Presidential Medal of Freedom .

[ 7 ] Rustin was a member of the executive committee of the Writers and Artists for Peace in the Middle East, a pro-Israel group.

[ 8 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Rustin was born in 1912 in West Chester, Pennsylvania , to Florence Rustin and Archie Hopkins, who were unmarried. As Florence was a single mother, Rustin was raised by his maternal grandparents, Julia (Davis) and Janifer Rustin, wealthy local caterers, as the ninth of their twelve children; growing up he believed his biological mother was his older sister.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Julia Rustin was a Quaker , although she attended her husband's African Methodist Episcopal Church . She was also a member of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). NAACP leaders such as W. E. B. Du Bois and James Weldon Johnson were frequent guests in the Rustin home. With these influences in his early life, in his youth Rustin campaigned against racially discriminatory Jim Crow laws .

[ 12 ] One of the first documented realizations Rustin had of his sexuality was when he mentioned to his grandmother that he preferred to spend time with males rather than females. She responded, "I suppose that's what you need to do".

[ 13 ] In 1932, Rustin entered Wilberforce University , a historically black college in Ohio operated by the AME Church.

[ 14 ] Rustin was active in a number of campus organizations, including the Omega Psi Phi fraternity.

[ 15 ] He was expelled from Wilberforce in 1936 after organizing a strike, [ 16 ] and later attended Cheyney State Teachers College (now Cheyney University of Pennsylvania ). Cheyney honored Rustin with a posthumous Doctor of Humane Letters degree at its 2013 commencement.

[ 17 ] After completing an activist training program conducted by the American Friends Service Committee (AFSC), Rustin moved to Harlem in 1937 and began studying at City College of New York . There he became involved in efforts to defend and free the Scottsboro Boys , nine young black men in Alabama accused of raping two white women. He was part of the Young Communist League from 1936 to 1941, leaving after  the Communist Party USA reversed its anti-war policy in response to Nazi Germany 's invasion of the USSR . This conflicted with Rustin's anti-war stance.

[ 18 ] Soon after arriving in New York City, he became a member of Fifteenth Street Meeting of the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers).

[ citation needed ] Rustin was an accomplished tenor vocalist, an asset that earned him admission to both Wilberforce University and Cheyney State Teachers College with music scholarships.

[ 19 ] In 1939, he was in the chorus of short-lived Broadway musical John Henry .

Fellow cast member and blues singer Josh White later invited Rustin to join his gospel and vocal harmony group Josh White and the Carolinians, with whom he made several recordings. With this opportunity, Rustin became a regular performer at the Café Society nightclub in Greenwich Village .

[ 20 ] A few albums on Fellowship Records featuring his singing, such as Bayard Rustin Sings a Program of Spirituals , were produced from the 1950s through the 1970s.

Affiliations [ edit ] During the 1930s, at the direction of the Soviet Union , the Communist Party USA (CPUSA) and its members, including Rustin, were active in the early civil rights movement .

[ 21 ] Following Joseph Stalin 's "theory of nationalism", they favored the creation of a separate nation for African Americans in the Southeastern United States .

[ 22 ] However, in 1941, after Nazi Germany's invasion of the Soviet Union , Communist International ordered the CPUSA to abandon its civil rights work and focus instead on supporting U.S. entry into World War II .

[ 23 ] Disillusioned, Rustin began working instead with members of Norman Thomas 's Socialist Party of America , particularly A. Philip Randolph and pacifist A. J. Muste , leader of the Fellowship of Reconciliation (FOR), who hired Rustin as a race relations secretary in the summer of 1941, [ 24 ] considering him to be a man of oratorical ability and intelligence who would sacrifice himself repeatedly for a good cause.

[ 25 ] Muste, Randolph, and Rustin proposed a march on Washington, D.C., in 1941 to protest racial segregation in the armed forces and widespread employment discrimination . After meeting with President Franklin Roosevelt in the Oval Office , Randolph told President Roosevelt that African Americans would march in the capital unless desegregation occurred. To prove their good faith, the organizers canceled the planned march after Roosevelt issued Executive Order 8802 (the Fair Employment Act ), which banned discrimination in defense industries and federal agencies.

According to Daniel Levinson, Rustin had an "infinite capacity for compassion." In 1944, while imprisoned in North Carolina, Rustin displayed nonviolent tactics, allowing himself to get beaten repeatedly by a white inmate until he gave up. Rustin defied segregation during that time and practiced his tactic while incarcerated.

[ 26 ] Randolph's decision as leader of the organizers to cancel the march was made against Rustin's advice.

[ 24 ] The armed forces, in which Black troops typically had white commanding officers, [ 27 ] remained racially segregated until 1948, when President Harry S. Truman issued an Executive Order.

Randolph felt that FOR had succeeded in their goal and wanted to dissolve the committee.

[ when?

] Again, Rustin disagreed with him and voiced his differing opinion in a national press conference, which he later said he regretted.

[ 24 ] Rustin traveled to California [ when?

] to help protect the property of the more than 120,000 Japanese-Americans (most of whom were U.S.-born citizens) who had been imprisoned in internment camps . In the 6–3 Korematsu decision , the Supreme Court upheld the forcible internment. Impressed with Rustin's organizational skills, A. J. Muste appointed him as FOR's secretary for student and general affairs.

Rustin was also a pioneer in the movement to desegregate interstate bus travel. In 1942, he boarded a bus in Louisville , bound for Nashville , and sat in the second row. A number of drivers asked him to move to the back, according to Southern practice of Jim Crow , but Rustin refused. The bus was stopped by police 13 miles north of Nashville and Rustin was arrested. He was beaten and taken to a police station but was released uncharged.

[ 28 ] He spoke about his decision to be arrested, and how that moment also clarified his witness as a gay person, in an interview with the Washington Blade in the 1980s: As I was going by the second seat to go to the rear, a white child reached out for the ring necktie I was wearing and pulled it, whereupon its mother said, "Don't touch a nigger." If I go and sit quietly at the back of that bus now, that child, who was so innocent of race relations that it was going to play with me, will have seen so many blacks go in the back and sit down quietly that it's going to end up saying, "They like it back there, I've never seen anybody protest against it." I owe it to that child, not only to my own dignity, I owe it to that child, that it should be educated to know that blacks do not want to sit in the back, and therefore I should get arrested, letting all these white people in the bus know that I do not accept that.

It occurred to me shortly after that that it was an absolute necessity for me to declare homosexuality because if I didn't I was a part of the prejudice. I was aiding and abetting the prejudice that was a part of the effort to destroy me.

[ 29 ] In 1942, Rustin assisted FOR staffers George Houser and James Farmer , as well as activist Bernice Fisher , in forming the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), which was conceived as a pacifist organization based on the writings of Mohandas Gandhi , who used non-violent resistance against British rule in India .

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] As declared conscientious objectors who refused induction into the military, Rustin, Houser, and other members of FOR and CORE were convicted of violating the Selective Service Act . From 1944 to 1946, Rustin was imprisoned in Ashland Federal Prison in Kentucky, and later the Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary , in Pennsylvania. At both, he organized protests against racially segregated housing and dining facilities. During his incarceration, he also organized FOR's Free India Committee . After his release from prison, he was frequently arrested for protesting against British colonial rule, in both India and Africa.

Just before a trip to Africa while college secretary of the FOR, Rustin recorded a 10-inch LP , Elizabethan Songs and Negro Spirituals, for the Fellowship Records label. He sang spirituals and Elizabethan songs, accompanied on the harpsichord by Margaret Davison.

[ 32 ] Influence on the civil rights movement [ edit ] Further information: Civil Rights Movement In 1947, Rustin and Houser organized the Journey of Reconciliation . This was the first of the Freedom Rides to test the 1946 Supreme Court ruling in Morgan v. Commonwealth of Virginia banning racial discrimination in interstate travel as unconstitutional. Rustin and CORE executive secretary George Houser recruited a team of fourteen men, divided equally by race, to ride in pairs through Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Kentucky.

[ 33 ] The NAACP opposed CORE's Gandhian tactics as too meek. Participants in the Journey of Reconciliation were arrested several times. Arrested with Igal Roodenko and Joe Felmet , Rustin served twenty-two days on a chain gang in North Carolina for violating state Jim Crow laws regarding segregated seating on public transportation.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] On June 17, 2022, Chapel Hill Superior Court Judge Allen Baddour, with full consent of the state, dismissed the 1947 North Carolina charges against the four Freedom Riders.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] In 1948, Rustin traveled to India to learn techniques of nonviolent civil resistance directly from the leaders of the Gandhian movement. The conference had been organized before Gandhi 's assassination earlier that year. Between 1947 and 1952, Rustin also met with leaders of independence movements in Ghana and Nigeria . In 1951, he formed the committee to Support South African Resistance, which later became the American Committee on Africa .

Rustin was arrested in Pasadena, California , in January 1953 for sexual activity in a parked car with two men in their 20s.

[ 29 ] Originally charged with vagrancy and lewd conduct, he pleaded guilty to a single, lesser charge of "sex perversion" (as sodomy was officially referred to in California at the time, even if consensual) and served 60 days in jail. The Pasadena arrest was the first time that Rustin's homosexuality had come to public attention. He had been and remained candid in private about his sexuality, although homosexual activity was still criminalized throughout the United States.

[ 38 ] Rustin resigned from the Fellowship of Reconciliation (FOR) because of his convictions. They also greatly affected Rustin's relationship with A. J. Muste , the director of the FOR. Muste had already tried to change Rustin's sexuality earlier in their relationship with no success. Later in Rustin's life, they continued their relationship with more tension than they had previously.

[ 39 ] Rustin became the executive secretary of the War Resisters League . An American Legion chapter in Montana used Rustin's Pasadena conviction to try to cancel his lectures in the state.

[ 38 ] Rustin served as an unidentified member of the American Friends Service Committee 's task force to write " Speak Truth to Power: A Quaker Search for an Alternative to Violence ", [ 40 ] published in 1955. This was one of the most influential and widely commented upon pacifist essays in the United States. Rustin had wanted to keep his participation quiet, as he believed that his known sexual orientation would be used by critics as an excuse to compromise the 71-page pamphlet when it was published. It analyzed the Cold War and the American response to it, and recommended non-violent solutions.

Rustin took leave from the War Resisters League in 1956 to advise minister Martin Luther King Jr.

of the Baptist Church on Gandhian tactics. King was organizing the Montgomery bus boycott . According to Rustin, "I think it's fair to say that Dr. King's view of non-violent tactics was almost non-existent when the boycott began. In other words, Dr. King was permitting himself and his children and his home to be protected by guns." Rustin convinced King to abandon the armed protection, including a personal handgun.

[ 41 ] In a 1964 interview with Robert Penn Warren for the book Who Speaks for the Negro?

, Rustin also reflected that his integrative ideology began to differ from King's. He believed a social movement "has to be based on the collective needs of people at this time, regardless of color, creed, race." [ 42 ] The following year, Rustin and King began organizing the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). Many African-American leaders were concerned that Rustin's sexual orientation and past Communist membership would undermine support for the civil rights movement. After the organization of the SCLC, Rustin and King planned a civil rights march adjacent to the 1960 Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles. This did not sit well with U.S. Representative Adam Clayton Powell Jr.

, who threatened to leak to the press rumors of a fake affair between Rustin and King. King canceled the march, and Rustin left his position in the SCLC. King received criticism for this action from Harper's magazine, which wrote about him: "Lost much moral credit ... in the eyes of the young." Although Rustin was open about his sexual orientation and his convictions were a matter of public record, the events had not been discussed widely beyond the civil rights leadership. Rustin did not let this setback change his direction in the movement.

[ 13 ] Leaders of the March on Washington posing in front of the statue of Abraham Lincoln on August 28, 1963 March on Washington [ edit ] Main article: March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom Rustin and Cleveland Robinson of the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom on August 7, 1963 Despite shunning from some civil rights leaders, [w]hen the moment came for an unprecedented mass gathering in Washington, Randolph pushed Rustin forward as the logical choice to organize it.

[ 43 ] A few weeks before the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom in August 1963, South Carolina Senator Strom Thurmond railed against Rustin as a "Communist, draft-dodger, and homosexual", and had his entire Pasadena arrest file entered in the record.

[ 43 ] Thurmond also produced a Federal Bureau of Investigation photograph of Rustin talking to King while King was bathing to imply that there was a same-sex relationship between the two, which both men denied.

[ 13 ] External videos "Eyes on the Prize; America, They Loved You Madly; Interview with Bayard Rustin" conducted in 1979 for the America, They Loved You Madly , a precursor to the Eyes on the Prize documentary in which he discusses the Brown decision, the reasons for increased civil rights activism after World War II, and his work to organize the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom .

Rustin became involved in the March on Washington in 1962 when he was recruited by A. Philip Randolph. The march was planned to be a commemoration of the Emancipation Proclamation one hundred years earlier.

[ 13 ] Rustin was instrumental in organizing the march. Aided by Eleanor Holmes Norton and Rachelle Horowitz, [ 43 ] he drilled off-duty police officers as marshals, bus captains to direct traffic, and scheduled the podium speakers. Despite King's support, NAACP chairman Roy Wilkins did not want Rustin to receive any public credit for his role in planning the march.

[ 44 ] Wilkins said, "This march is of such importance that we must not put a person of his liabilities at the head." Because of this conflict, Randolph served as the director of the march and Rustin as his deputy. During the planning of the march, Rustin feared his previous legal issues would pose a threat to the march. Nevertheless, on September 6, 1963, a photograph of Rustin and Randolph appeared on the cover of Life magazine, identifying them as "the leaders" of the March.

[ 44 ] Rustin stated his thoughts on the march and said it "made Americans feel for the first time that we were capable of being truly a nation, that we were capable of moving beyond division and bigotry".

[ 25 ] New York City school boycott [ edit ] Further information: New York City school boycott In early 1964, Reverend Milton Galamison and other Harlem community leaders invited Rustin to coordinate a citywide boycott of public schools to protest their de facto segregation . Prior to the boycott, the organizers asked the United Federation of Teachers Executive Board to join the boycott or ask teachers to join the picket lines. The union declined, promising only to protect from reprisals any teachers who participated. More than 400,000 New Yorkers participated in a one-day February 3, 1964, boycott demanding complete integration of the city's schools.

[ 45 ] Historian Daniel Perlstein notes that "newspapers were astounded both by the numbers of black and Puerto Rican parents and children who boycotted and by the complete absence of violence or disorder from the protesters." [ 45 ] It was, Rustin stated, and newspapers reported, "the largest civil rights demonstration" in American history. Rustin said that "the movement to integrate the schools will create far-reaching benefits" for teachers as well as students.

[ 45 ] Rustin organized a May March 18 which called for "maximum possible" integration. Perlstein recounts: "The UFT and other white moderates endorsed the May rally, yet only four thousand protesters showed up, and the Board of Education was no more responsive to the conciliatory May demonstration than to the earlier, more confrontational boycott." [ 45 ] When Rustin was invited to speak at the University of Virginia in 1964 , school administrators tried to ban him, out of fear that he would organize a school boycott there.

From protest to politics [ edit ] In the spring of 1964, Martin Luther King was considering hiring Rustin as executive director of SCLC but was advised against it by Stanley Levison , a longtime activist friend of Rustin's. He opposed the hire because of what he considered Rustin's growing devotion to the political theorist Max Shachtman . Other SCLC leaders opposed Rustin due to his sexuality.

[ 46 ] At the 1964 Democratic National Convention , which followed Freedom Summer in Mississippi, Rustin became an adviser to the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP); they were trying to gain recognition as the legitimate, non– Jim Crow delegation from their state, where blacks had been officially disenfranchised since the turn of the century (as they were generally throughout the South) and excluded from the official political system. DNC leaders Lyndon Johnson and Hubert Humphrey offered only two non-voting seats to the MFDP, with the official seating going to the regular segregationist Mississippi delegation. Rustin and the AFL–CIO leaders urged the MFDP to take the offer. MFDP leaders, including Fannie Lou Hamer and Bob Moses , angrily rejected the arrangement; many of their supporters became highly suspicious of Rustin. Rustin's attempt to compromise appealed to the Democratic Party leadership.

[ 45 ] Rustin, 1965 After the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , Rustin advocated closer ties between the civil rights movement and the Democratic Party , specifically the party's base among the white working class, many of whom still had strong union affiliations. With Tom Kahn , Rustin wrote an influential article in 1964 called "From Protest to Politics", published in Commentary magazine; it analyzed the changing economy and its implications for African Americans. Rustin wrote presciently that the rise of automation would reduce the demand for low-skill high-paying jobs, which would jeopardize the position of the urban African-American working class, particularly in northern states. He believed that the working class had to collaborate across racial lines for common economic goals. His prophecy has been proven right in the dislocation and loss of jobs for many urban African Americans due to the restructuring of industry in the coming decades.
Rustin believed that the African-American community needed to change its political strategy, building and strengthening a political alliance with predominately white unions and other organizations (churches, synagogues, etc.) to pursue a common economic agenda. He wrote that it was time to move from protest to politics. Rustin's analysis of the economic problems of the Black community was widely influential.

[ 47 ] Rustin argued that since black people could now legally sit in the restaurant after the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, they needed to be able to afford service financially. He believed that a coalition of progressive forces to move the Democratic Party forward was needed to change the economic structure.

[ 48 ] He also argued that the African-American community was threatened by the appeal of identity politics , particularly the rise of " Black power ". He thought this position was a fantasy of middle-class black people that repeated the political and moral errors of previous black nationalists , while alienating the white allies needed by the African-American community.

Nation editor and Harvard Law Professor Randall Kennedy noted later that, while Rustin had a general "disdain of nationalism", he had a "very different attitude toward Jewish nationalism" and was "unflaggingly supportive of Zionism ".

[ 49 ] Commentary editor-in-chief Norman Podhoretz had commissioned the article from Rustin, and the two men remained intellectually and personally aligned for the next 20 years.

[ citation needed ] Podhoretz and the magazine promoted the neoconservative movement, which had implications for civil rights initiatives as well as other economic aspects of the society. In 1985, Rustin publicly praised Podhoretz for his refusal to "pander to minority groups" and for opposing affirmative action quotas in hiring as well as black studies programs in colleges.

[ 50 ] Because of these positions, Rustin was criticized as a "sell-out" by many of his former colleagues in the civil rights movement, especially those connected to grassroots organizing .

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] They charged that he was lured by the material comforts that came with a less radical and more professional type of activism.

[ citation needed ] Biographer John D'Emilio rejects these characterizations, and "portrays the final third of Rustin's life as one in which his reputation among his former allies was routinely questioned. After decades of working outside the system, they simply could not accept working within the system." [ 48 ] However, Randall Kennedy wrote in a 2003 article that descriptions of Rustin as "a bought man" are "at least partly true", noting that his sponsorship by the AFL–CIO brought him some financial stability but imposed boundaries on his politics.

[ 49 ] Kennedy notes that despite Rustin's conservative turn in the mid-1960s, he remained a lifelong socialist, [ 49 ] and D'Emilio argues that in the final phase of his life, Rustin remained on the left: "D'Emilio explains, even as Rustin was taking what appeared to be a more "conservative" turn, he remained committed to social justice. Rustin was making radical and ambitious demands for a basic redistribution of wealth in American society, including universal healthcare, the abolition of poverty, and full employment." [ 48 ] Labor movement: Unions and social democracy [ edit ] Rustin increasingly worked to strengthen the labor movement, which he saw as the champion of empowerment for the African American community and for economic justice for all Americans. He contributed to the labor movement's two sides, economic and political, through the support of labor unions and social-democratic politics.
He was the founder and became the Director of the A. Philip Randolph Institute , which coordinated the AFL-CIO's work on civil rights and economic justice. He became a regular columnist for the AFL-CIO newspaper.

On the political side of the labor movement, Rustin increased his visibility as a leader of the American movement for social democracy . In early 1972, he became a national co-chairman of the Socialist Party of America. In December 1972, when the Socialist Party changed its name to Social Democrats, USA (SDUSA) by a vote of 73–34, Rustin continued to serve as national co-chairman, along with Charles S. Zimmerman .

[ 53 ] In his opening speech to the December 1972 Convention, Co-Chairman Rustin called for SDUSA to organize against the "reactionary policies of the Nixon Administration"; Rustin also criticized the "irresponsibility and élitism of the 'New Politics' liberals".

[ 53 ] In later years, Rustin served as the national chairman of SDUSA.

During the 1960s, Rustin was a member [ 54 ] of the League for Industrial Democracy .

[ 55 ] He would remain a member for years, and became vice president during the 1980s.

[ 56 ] Foreign policy [ edit ] Like many liberals and some socialists, Rustin supported President Lyndon B. Johnson 's containment policy against communism , though criticizing specific conduct of the policy. In particular, to maintain independent labor unions and political opposition in Vietnam , Rustin and others gave critical support to U.S. military intervention in the Vietnam War , while calling for a negotiated peace treaty and democratic elections. Rustin criticized the specific conduct of the war, however, arguing in a fundraising letter sent to War Resisters League supporters in 1964 that he was "angered and humiliated by the kind of war being waged, a war of torture, a war in which civilians are being machine-gunned from the air, and in which American napalm bombs are being dropped on the villages." [ 57 ] Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, Rustin worked as a human rights and election monitor for Freedom House .

[ 58 ] In 1970, Rustin called for the U.S. to send military jets to aid Israel against Arab states in the War of Attrition ; referring to a New York Times article he wrote, Rustin wrote to Prime Minister Golda Meir "...I hope that the ad will also have an effect on a serious domestic question: namely, the relations between the Jewish and the Negro communities in America." Rustin was concerned about unity between two groups that he argued faced discrimination in America and abroad, and also believed that Israel's democratic ideals were proof that justice and equality would prevail in the Arab territories despite the atrocities of war. His former colleagues in the peace movement considered it to be a profound betrayal of Rustin's nonviolent ideals.

[ 59 ] Rustin maintained his strongly anti-Soviet and anti-communist views later in his life, especially with regard to Africa. Rustin co-wrote with Carl Gershman (a former director of Social Democrats, USA and future Ronald Reagan appointee) an essay entitled "Africa, Soviet Imperialism & the Retreat of American Power", in which he decried Russian and Cuban involvement in the Angolan Civil War and defended the military intervention by apartheid South Africa on behalf of the National Liberation Front of Angola (FNLA) and National Union for the Total Independence of Angola ( UNITA ). "And if a South African force did intervene at the urging of black leaders and on the side of the forces that clearly represent the black majority in Angola, to counter a non-African army of Cubans ten times its size, by what standard of political judgment is this immoral?" Rustin accused the Soviet Union of a classic imperialist agenda in Africa in pursuit of economic resources and vital sea lanes, and called the Carter Administration "hypocritical" for claiming to be committed to the welfare of blacks while doing too little to thwart Russian and Cuban expansion throughout Africa.

[ 60 ] In 1976, Rustin joined the anti-communist Committee on the Present Danger (CPD), which promoted Team B 's controversial intelligence claims about Soviet foreign policy, using them as an argument against arms control agreements such as SALT II .

[ 61 ] Soviet Jewry movement [ edit ] Main article: Soviet Jewry Movement The plight of Jews in the Soviet Union reminded Rustin of the struggles faced by African Americans in the United States. Soviet Jews faced many of the same forms of discrimination in employment, education, and housing, while also being denied the chance to emigrate by Soviet authorities.

[ 62 ] [ page needed ] After seeing the injustice that Soviet Jews faced, Rustin became a leading voice in advocating for the movement of Jews from the Soviet Union to Israel. In 1966 he chaired the Ad hoc Commission on Rights of Soviet Jews organized by the Conference on the Status of Soviet Jews, leading a panel of six jurors in the commission's public tribunal on Jewish life in the Soviet Union.

[ 63 ] The commission collected testimonies from Soviet Jews and compiled them into a report that was delivered to the secretary-general of the United Nations. The report urged the international community to demand that the Soviet authorities allow Jews to practice their religion, preserve their culture, and emigrate from the USSR at their will.

[ 63 ] Through the 1970s and 1980s Rustin wrote several articles on the subject of Soviet Jewry and appeared at Soviet Jewry movement rallies, demonstrations, vigils, and conferences, in the United States and abroad.

[ 64 ] He co-sponsored the National Interreligious Task Force on Soviet Jewry. Rustin worked closely with Senator Henry Jackson on the Jackson–Vanik amendment , vital legislation that restricted United States trade with the Soviet Union in relation to its treatment of Jews.

[ 65 ] Criticisms [ edit ] Rustin was at the forefront of the freedom struggle for African Americans but parted ways from the activists in 1968. He was considered an “ Uncle Tom ” by some as he started to fight for equality for all and not just blacks. An incident in the summer of 1964 in which a police officer killed a black child led to violence. “When he urged blacks to resist with non-violence, they spat at him and shot back “Uncle Tom! Uncle Tom!”. Rustin’s views of the protest were to “urge them not to behave with desperation but politically and rationally.” He would later switch from radicalism to collaboration. Rustin wanted blacks to align themselves with whites to see progression.

[ 66 ] Gay rights [ edit ] Rustin's relationships were mainly with men, both black and white.

[ 26 ] Davis Platt, Rustin's partner from the 1940s, [ 67 ] said "I never had any sense at all that Bayard felt any shame or guilt about his homosexuality. That was rare in those days. Rare." [ 38 ] His sexual orientation was openly accepted by his family.

[ 26 ] Rustin did not engage in any gay rights activism until the 1980s. He was urged to do so by his partner, Walter Naegle , who said that "I think that if I hadn't been in the office at that time, when these invitations [from gay organizations] came in, he probably wouldn't have done them." [ 68 ] He was an advocate for people with HIV/AIDS , and because of his public works, he may have “came out” to the public. Rustin no longer hid his sexual orientation from others.

[ 69 ] Because same-sex marriage was not officially recognized at the time, Rustin and Naegle undertook to solidify their partnership and protect their union legally through adoption: in 1982 Rustin adopted Naegle, 30 years old at the time. Naegle explained that Bayard: [ 70 ] ... was concerned about protecting my rights, because gay people had no protection. At that time, marriage between a same-sex couple was inconceivable. And so he adopted me, legally adopted me, in 1982.

That was the only thing we could do to kind of legalize our relationship. We actually had to go through a process as if Bayard was adopting a small child. My biological mother had to sign a legal paper, a paper disowning me. They had to send a social worker to our home. When the social worker arrived, she had to sit us down to talk to us to make sure that this was a fit home.

Rustin testified in favor of the New York City Gay Rights Bill . In 1986, he gave a speech titled "The New Niggers Are Gays", in which he asserted: [ 71 ] Today, blacks are no longer the litmus paper or the barometer of social change. Blacks are in every segment of society and there are laws that help to protect them from racial discrimination. The new "niggers" are gays... It is in this sense that gay people are the new barometer for social change... The question of social change should be framed with the most vulnerable group in mind: gay people.

Also in 1986, Rustin was invited to contribute to the book In the Life: A Black Gay Anthology . He declined, explaining: [ 72 ] I was not involved in the struggle for gay rights as a youth ... I did not "come out of the closet" voluntarily—circumstances forced me out. While I have no problem with being publicly identified as homosexual, it would be dishonest of me to present myself as one who was in the forefront of the struggle for gay rights ... I fundamentally consider sexual orientation to be a private matter. As such, it has not been a factor which has greatly influenced my role as an activist.

Death and beliefs [ edit ] Rustin speaks with civil rights activists before a demonstration, 1964.

Rustin died aged 75 at 12:02 A.M. on August 24, 1987 at Lenox Hill Hospital from a cardiac arrest after undergoing surgery for peritonitis and a perforated appendix .

[ 73 ] He was survived by Walter Naegle, his partner of ten years.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] President Ronald Reagan issued a statement upon Rustin's death, praising his work for civil rights and "for human rights throughout the world".

[ 6 ] Rustin's personal philosophy is said to have been inspired by combining Quaker pacifism with socialism, and the theory of non-violent protest popularized by Mahatma Gandhi .

[ 10 ] Legacy [ edit ] External videos Rustin and Eugene Reed Vietnam: A Television History; Homefront USA; Interview with Bayard Rustin, 1982 , 39:32, WGBH-TV [ 76 ] The Bayard Rustin Papers , 1:05:32, Library of Congress [ 77 ] According to journalist Steve Hendrix, Rustin "faded from the shortlist of well-known civil rights lions", in part because he was active behind the scenes, and also because of public discomfort with his sexual orientation and former communist membership.

[ 43 ] In addition, Rustin's tilt toward neo-conservatism in the late 1960s led him into a disagreement with most civil rights leaders. But, the 2003 documentary film Brother Outsider: The Life of Bayard Rustin , a Sundance Festival Grand Jury Prize nominee, [ 78 ] and the March 2012 centennial of Rustin's birth have contributed to renewed recognition of his extensive contributions.

Rustin served as chairman of Social Democrats, USA , which, The Washington Post wrote in 2013, "was a breeding ground for many neoconservatives ".

[ 79 ] French historian Justin Vaïsse classifies him as a "right-wing socialist" and "second age neoconservative", citing his role as vice-chair of the Coalition for a Democratic Majority , which was involved in the second incarnation of the Committee on the Present Danger .

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] According to Daniel Richman , former clerk for United States Supreme Court justice Thurgood Marshall , Marshall's friendship with Rustin, who was open about his homosexuality, played a significant role in Marshall's dissent from the court's 5–4 decision upholding the constitutionality of state sodomy laws in the later overturned 1986 case Bowers v. Hardwick .

[ 82 ] Several buildings have been named in honor of Rustin, including the Bayard Rustin Educational Complex located in Chelsea, Manhattan ; [ 83 ] Bayard Rustin High School near his hometown of West Chester, Pennsylvania ; Bayard Rustin Library at the Affirmations Gay/Lesbian Community Center in Ferndale, Michigan ; the Bayard Rustin Social Justice Center in Conway, Arkansas , and the Bayard Rustin Center for Social Justice in Princeton, New Jersey ; the Bayard Rustin Room at Friends House , London, UK.

[ 84 ] Rustin is one of two men who have both participated in the Penn Relays and had a school, West Chester Rustin High School , named in his honor that participates in the relays.

[ 85 ] In 1968, two months after the King assassination, Montclair State University gave Rustin an honorary Doctor of Letters degree.

[ 86 ] In 1985, Haverford College awarded Rustin an honorary doctorate in law .

[ 87 ] 1990s and 2000s [ edit ] In 1995, a Pennsylvania State Historical Marker was placed on the grounds of Henderson High School , which he attended.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] A 1998 anthology movie, Out of the Past , featured letters and archival footage of Rustin.

[ 90 ] The West Chester Area School District voted in 2002 to approve the creation of Bayard Rustin High School , [ 91 ] which opened four years later in 2006.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] In July 2007, a group of San Francisco Bay Area Black LGBT community leaders officially formed the Bayard Rustin Coalition (BRC), which promoted greater Black participation in the electoral process, advances civil and human rights issues, and promotes the legacy of Rustin.

[ 94 ] 2010s and beyond [ edit ] Bayard Rustin Center for Social Justice Chief Activist Robt Martin Seda-Schreiber & Board Member Emeritus Walter Naegle with Bayard Rustin's Medal of Freedom @ BRCSJ HQ!

partner Walter Naegle (left) holding the posthumous Medal of Freedom In 2011, Guilford College rededicated its Queer and Allied Resource Center as the Bayard Rustin Center for LGBTQA Activism, Awareness, and Reconciliation.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] In 2012, Rustin was inducted into the Legacy Walk , an outdoor public display in Chicago, Illinois celebrating LGBTQ history and people.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] In 2013, Rustin was selected as an honoree in the United States Department of Labor Hall of Honor .

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] On August 8, 2013, President Barack Obama posthumously awarded Rustin the Presidential Medal of Freedom , the highest civilian award of the United States. The citation in the press release stated, Bayard Rustin was an unyielding activist for civil rights, dignity, and equality for all. An advisor to the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., he promoted nonviolent resistance, participated in one of the first Freedom Rides, organized the 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, and fought tirelessly for marginalized communities at home and abroad. As an openly gay African American, Mr. Rustin stood at the intersection of several of the fights for equal rights.

[ 101 ] At the White House ceremony on November 20, 2013, President Obama presented Rustin's award to Walter Naegle, his partner of ten years at the time of Rustin's death.

[ 7 ] In 2014, Rustin was one of the inaugural honorees in the Rainbow Honor Walk , a walk of fame in San Francisco noting LGBTQ people who have "made significant contributions in their fields".

[ 102 ] In April 2018, the Montgomery County Board of Education in Maryland voted to name the Bayard Rustin Elementary School after Rustin.

Canadian writer Steven Elliott Jackson wrote a play that stages an imaginary meeting and one-night-stand between Rustin and Walter Jenkins of the Johnson administration called The Seat Next to the King . The play won the award for Best Play at the 2017 Toronto Fringe Festival .

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] A full-length play with music, written by Steve H. Broadnax III, Bayard Rustin Inside Ashland , dramatizing Rustin's World War II prison experience and its central role in his lifetime of activism, had its world premiere on May 22, 2022, at People's Light and Theatre Company in Malvern, Pennsylvania .

[ 105 ] In 2018, the Bayard Rustin Center for Social Justice was established in Princeton, New Jersey , with Naegle acting as Board Member Emeritus, [ 106 ] serving as a community activist center and safe space for LGBTQ kids, intersectional families, and marginalized people.

[ 107 ] Rustin was one of fifty inaugural American "pioneers, trailblazers, and heroes" inducted in June 2019 to the National LGBTQ Wall of Honor , within the Stonewall National Monument (SNM), the first U.S. national monument dedicated to LGBTQ rights and queer history , [ 108 ] in New York City's Stonewall Inn .

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] In January 2020, California State Senator Scott Wiener , chair of the California Legislative LGBT Caucus , and Assemblywoman Shirley Weber , chair of the California Legislative Black Caucus , called for Governor Gavin Newsom to issue a pardon for Rustin's 1953 Pasadena arrest, citing Rustin's legacy as a civil rights icon.

[ 111 ] Newsom issued the pardon on February 5 while also announcing a new process for fast-tracking pardons for those convicted under historical laws criminalizing homosexuality.

[ 112 ] On June 5, 2023, the Pasadena City Council adopted a resolution declaring that the "City of Pasadena celebrates and concurs in the Governor's 2020 pardon of Bayard Rustin".

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] In 2021, Higher Ground Productions , founded by Michelle and Barack Obama , announced production of Rustin , a biographical film directed by George C. Wolfe and starring Colman Domingo in the title role.

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] The film premiered at the Telluride Film Festival on August 31, 2023, and was screened at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 13, 2023. It received a limited theatrical release on November 3, 2023, followed by a Netflix release on November 17. Reviews were generally positive, with Domingo's performance garnering numerous accolades including Best Actor nominations for the Academy Award, BAFTA Award, and Golden Globe Award.

A street in Nyack, New York , was renamed "Bayard Rustin Way" in 2022 to honor Rustin's memory.

[ 117 ] Publications [ edit ] Interracial Primer , New York: Fellowship of Reconciliation, 1943 Interracial Workshop: Progress Report , New York: Sponsored by Congress of Racial Equality and Fellowship of Reconciliation, 1947 Journey of Reconciliation: Report , New York: Fellowship of Reconciliation, Congress of Racial Equality, 1947 We challenged Jim Crow! a report on the journey of reconciliation, April 9–23, 1947 , New York: Fellowship of Reconciliation, Congress of Racial Equality, 1947 "In apprehension how like a god!" , Philadelphia: Young Friends Movement 1948 The Revolution in the South , Cambridge, Massachusetts.: Peace Education Section, American Friends Service Committee, 1950s Report on Montgomery, Alabama , New York: War Resisters League, 1956 A report and action suggestions on non-violence in the South , New York: War Resisters League, 1957 Civil Rights: The True Frontier , New York: Donald Press, 1963 From Protest to Politics: The Future of the Civil Rights Movement , New York: League for Industrial Democracy, 1965 The City in Crisis (introduction), New York: A. Philip Randolph Educational Fund, 1965 "Black Power" and Coalition Politics , New York, American Jewish Committee, 1966 Which way?

(with Daniel Patrick Moynihan ), New York: American Press, 1966 The Watts "Manifesto" & the McCone report ., New York, League for Industrial Democracy, 1966 Fear, frustration, backlash: the new crisis in civil rights , New York: Jewish Labor Committee, 1966 The Lessons of the Long Hot Summer , New York: American Jewish Committee, 1967 The Negro Community: frustration politics, sociology and economics , Detroit: UAW Citizenship-Legislative Department, 1967 A Way Out of the Exploding Ghetto , New York: League for Industrial Democracy, 1967 The alienated: the young rebels today and why they're different , Washington, D.C.: International Labor Press Association, 1967 "Right to work" laws: a trap for America's minorities , New York: A. Philip Randolph Institute, 1967 Civil rights: the movement re-examined (contributor), New York: A. Philip Randolph Educational Fund, 1967 Separatism or integration, which way for America?: a dialogue (with Robert Browne), New York: A. Philip Randolph Educational Fund, 1968 The Report of the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders, an analysis , New York: American Jewish Committee, 1968 The labor-Negro Coalition, a new beginning , Washington, D.C.: American Federationist?, 1968 The anatomy of frustration , New York: Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, 1968 Morals Concerning Minorities, Mental Health and Identity , New York: A. Philip Randolph Institute, 1969 Black Studies: Myths & Realities (contributor), New York: A. Philip Randolph Educational Fund, 1969 Conflict or Coalition?: the civil rights struggle and the trade union movement today , New York: A. Philip Randolph Institute, 1969 Three Essays , New York: A. Philip Randolph Institute, 1969 Black Rage, White Fear: The Full Employment Answer: An Address , Washington, D.C.: Bricklayers, Masons & Plasterers International Union, 1970 A Word to Black Students , New York: A. Philip Randolph Institute, 1970 The Failure of Black Separatism , New York: A. Philip Randolph Institute, 1970 The Blacks and the Unions (contributor), New York: A. Philip Randolph Educational Fund, 1971 Down the line; the collected writings of Bayard Rustin , Chicago: Quadrangle Books , 1971 Affirmative action in an economy of scarcity (with Norman Hill ), New York: A. Philip Randolph Institute, 1974 Seniority and racial progress (with Norman Hill), New York: A. Philip Randolph Institute, 1975 Have we reached the end of the second reconstruction?

, Bloomington, Indiana: The Poynter Center, 1976 Strategies for freedom: the changing patterns of Black protest , New York: Columbia University Press, 1976 Africa, Soviet imperialism and the retreat of American power , New York: Social Democrats, USA (reprint), 1978 South Africa: is peaceful change possible? a report (contributor), New York: New York Friends Group, 1984 Time on two crosses: the collected writings of Bayard Rustin , San Francisco: Cleis Press , 2003 I Must Resist: Bayard Rustin's Life in Letters : City Lights , 2012 See also [ edit ] List of civil rights leaders Timeline of the civil rights movement Rustin , a 2023 American biographical drama film directed by George C. Wolfe about Bayard Rustin.

Portals : Organized labour Society United States LGBTQ Biography References [ edit ] ^ "Bayard Rustin" . National Park Service.

Archived from the original on September 29, 2019 . Retrieved June 27, 2016 .

^ "Documenting the American South: Oral Histories of the American South" .

docsouth.unc.edu .

Archived from the original on December 22, 2019 . Retrieved February 9, 2020 .

^ Morgan, Thad (June 1, 2018).

"Why MLK's Right-Hand Man Was Nearly Written Out of History" .

HISTORY .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2023 . Retrieved February 9, 2020 .

^ Vaïsse, Justin, Neoconservatism: The Biography of a Movement , Harvard University Press, 2010, pp. 71–75.

Archived September 13, 2016, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Table: The Three Ages of Neoconservatism" , Neoconservatism: Biography of Movement by Justin Vaisse, official website.

Archived March 20, 2016, at the Wayback Machine .

^ a b "Reagan Praises Deceased Civil Rights Leader" .

AP NEWS .

Archived from the original on July 3, 2022 . Retrieved May 29, 2025 .

^ a b Snow, Justin (November 20, 2013).

"Obama honors Bayard Rustin and Sally Ride with Medal of Freedom" . metroweekly.com.

Archived from the original on April 15, 2019 . Retrieved November 21, 2013 .

^ "Gop Platform Committee Urged to Give Support to Israel" .

Jewish Telegraphic Agency . Retrieved May 23, 2025 .

^ Carol, George (2006). "Bayard Rustin".

Encyclopedia of African-American Culture and History . Detroit: Gale. pp.

1993– 1994.

ISBN 978-0-02-865816-2 .

^ a b "Bayard Rustin: The Civil Rights Activist Portrayed in 'Rustin' " .

Biography . November 17, 2023 . Retrieved May 29, 2025 .

^ Dixon, Mark E. (October 2013).

"Bayard Rustin's Civil Rights Legacy Began with Grandmother Julia Rustin" .

Main Line Today . Archived from the original on October 22, 2018 . Retrieved June 28, 2020 .

^ "Bayard Rustin Biography" . Spartacus Educational. Archived from the original on April 19, 2014.

^ a b c d Gates, Henry Louis Jr.

(January 20, 2013).

"Bayard Rustin, the Gay Civil Rights Leader Who Organized the March on Washington | African American History Blog" .

The African Americans: Many Rivers to Cross .

PBS .

Archived from the original on September 29, 2019 . Retrieved May 26, 2019 .

^ Watson, Warren.

"LibGuides: History of Wilberforce University: Bayard Rustin" .

wilberforcepayne.libguides.com .

Archived from the original on October 30, 2020 . Retrieved January 1, 2021 .

^ "Notable Omegas – Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, Inc" .

Archived from the original on April 20, 2020 . Retrieved January 1, 2021 .

^ Mann, Leslie (February 1, 2012).

"Not-so-secret life of gay civil rights leader Bayard Rustin" .

Chicago Tribune .

Archived from the original on February 20, 2016.

^ Johnstone, Malcolm (May 30, 2024).

"Brandywine Stories: Bayard Rustin, A Renaissance Man" .

County Lines Magazine .

Archived from the original on June 19, 2024 . Retrieved October 3, 2024 .

^ "Bayard Rustin | AFL-CIO" .

aflcio.org . Retrieved September 3, 2023 .

^ D'Emilio 2003, pp. 21, 24.

^ D'Emilio 2003, pp. 31–32.

^ Kazin, Michael (August 21, 2011).

The Concise Princeton Encyclopedia of American Political History . Princeton University Press. p. 112.

ISBN 978-1-4008-3946-9 . Retrieved November 6, 2011 .

^ August Meier and Elliot Rudwick.

Black Detroit and the Rise of the UAW .

^ Browder, Earl (1941).

"The Communist" (PDF) .

^ a b c Smith, Eric Ledell (2010). "Bayard Rustin".

Encyclopedia of African American History . Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO. pp.

1002– 1004.

ISBN 978-1-85109-769-2 .

^ a b Berman, Paul (April 21, 1997).

"The Prince of Protest" .

New Republic . pp.

34– 39.

^ a b c O’Connell, Jeffrey; O’Connell, Thomas E. (December 2002).

"Belle Moskowitz: An early female powerhouse" .

Gender Issues .

20 (1): 76– 83.

doi : 10.1007/s12147-002-0008-2 .

ISSN 1098-092X .

^ BUILDING THE ALASKA HIGHWAY Race and the Army During World War II , WGBH-TV . Retrieved July 26, 2022.

^ Rustin, Bayard (July 1942). "Non-Violence vs. Jim Crow".

Fellowship .

reprinted in Carson, Clayborne ; Garrow, David J.

; Kovach, Bill (2003).

Reporting Civil Rights: American journalism, 1941–1963 . Library of America. pp.

15– 18.

ISBN 9781931082280 . Retrieved September 13, 2011 .

^ a b Martin, Michel; Emma Bowman (January 6, 2019).

"In Newly Found Audio, A Forgotten Civil Rights Leader Says Coming Out 'Was An Absolute Necessity' " . NPR.

Archived from the original on September 20, 2019 . Retrieved January 7, 2019 .

; "Lecturer Sentenced to Jail on Morals Charge", Los Angeles Times , January 23, 1953, 23.

^ Hardiman, David (2003).

Gandhi in His Time and Ours: The Global Legacy of His Ideas . C. Hurst & Co. Publishers. p. 256.

ISBN 978-1-85065-712-5 .

^ Nishani, Frazier (2017).

Harambee City : the Congress of Racial Equality in Cleveland and the rise of Black Power populism . Fayetteville: University of Arkansas Press. pp.

3– 26.

ISBN 9781610756013 .

OCLC 973832475 .

^ From liner notes, Fellowship Records 102.

^ Podair 2009, pp. 27.

^ Peck, James (September 1947). "Not So Deep Are the Roots".

The Crisis .

reprinted in Carson, Clayborne; Garrow, David J.; Kovach, Bill (2003).

Reporting Civil Rights: American journalism, 1941–1963 . Library of America. pp.

92– 97.

ISBN 9781931082280 . Retrieved September 13, 2011 .

^ Nishani, Frazier (2017).

Harambee City : the Congress of Racial Equality in Cleveland and the rise of Black Power populism . Fayetteville: University of Arkansas Press. pp. 43, 124.

ISBN 9781610756013 .

OCLC 973832475 .

^ Foreman, Tom Jr. (June 17, 2022).

"Freedom Riders' 1947 Convictions Vacated in North Carolina" .

U.S. News & World Report . Associated Press.

Archived from the original on June 18, 2022 . Retrieved June 18, 2022 .

^ Pequeño, Sara (June 18, 2022).

"75 years later, a niece sees justice through for a Freedom Rider in NC" .

Charlotte Observer . Retrieved June 18, 2022 .

^ a b c D'Emilio, John (March 2006). "Remembering Bayard Rustin".

Magazine of History .

20 (2): 12– 14.

doi : 10.1093/maghis/20.2.12 .

^ Eason, Leigh (June 25, 2012).

"Gay, Black, and Quaker: History Catches Up with Bayard Rustin" .

Religion Dispatches . Retrieved May 26, 2019 .

^ "Available online from" . AFSC. March 2, 1955. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013 . Retrieved November 1, 2013 .

^ "Bayard Rustin – Who Is This Man" , State of the Reunion radio show, aired February 2011 on NPR, 1:40–2:10. Retrieved March 16, 2011.

Archived May 16, 2013, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Robert Penn Warren Center for the Humanities.

"Bayard Rustin" .

Robert Penn Warren's Who Speaks for the Negro? Archive .

Archived from the original on February 11, 2015 . Retrieved February 11, 2015 .

^ a b c d Hendrix, Steve (August 21, 2011).

"Bayard Rustin, organizer of the March on Washington, was crucial to the movement" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on August 22, 2011 . Retrieved August 22, 2011 .

^ a b Life Magazine , September 6, 1963.

Archived November 5, 2009, at the Wayback Machine .

^ a b c d e Perlstein, Daniel, "The dead end of despair: Bayard Rustin, the 1968 New York school crisis, and the struggle for racial justice" , New York City government.

Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Branch, Taylor , Pillar of Fire: America in the King Years 1963–1965 (Simon & Schuster, 1999), pp. 292–293.

Archived April 6, 2016, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Staughton Lynd , another civil rights activist, responded with an article entitled "Coalition Politics or Nonviolent Revolution?" ^ a b c Chandra, Mridu (January 1, 2004).

"Bayard Rustin's Life in Struggle" .

The Brooklyn Rail .

Archived from the original on April 17, 2020 . Retrieved February 9, 2020 .

^ a b c Randall Kennedy, "From Protest to Patronage" , The Nation , September 11, 2003.

Archived January 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Goodman, Walter , "Podhoretz on 25 Years at Commentary" , The New York Times, January 31, 1985.

Archived March 5, 2016, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Crabb, Kenneth (March 24, 2012).

"Bayard Rustin at 100" .

The Indypendent . Retrieved June 5, 2020 .

^ Podair, Jerald (December 16, 2008).

Bayard Rustin: American Dreamer . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. pp. 64, 77.

ISBN 9780742564800 .

^ a b "Socialist Party Now the Social Democrats, U.S.A." The New York Times . December 31, 1972.

Archived from the original on September 29, 2019 . Retrieved February 8, 2010 .

(limited free access).

^ Forman, James (1972).

The Making of Black Revolutionaries . University of Washington Press. p. 220.

^ Carson, Clayborne (1981).

In Struggle: SNCC and the Black Awakening of the 1960s .

Harvard University Press. pp.

29 .

ISBN 9780674447264 .

^ Karatnycky, Adrian; Motyl, Alexander J.; Sturmthal, Adolf (1980).

Workers' rights, East and West : a comparative study of trade union and workers' rights in Western democracies and Eastern Europe . Transaction Publishing / League for Industrial Democracy . p. 150.

ISBN 9780878558674 .

^ Rustin 2012, pp. 291–292.

^ "Freedom House: A History" . Archived from the original on August 23, 2011.

^ Arlyck, Matthew, "Review of I Must Resist: Letters of Bayard Rustin" , Fellowship of Reconciliation website.

Archived April 19, 2016, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Rustin, Bayard; Carl Gershman (October 1977).

"Africa, Soviet Imperialism & The Retreat Of American Power" (PDF) . Social Democrats, U.S.A . Retrieved November 1, 2013 .

^ John Ehrman, The Rise of Neoconservatism: Intellectuals and Foreign Affairs , 1945-1994 (Yale University Press, 1996), pp. 107–114.

Archived June 10, 2016, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Podair, Jerald E. (2009), "Bayard Rustin: American Dreamer" (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield).

ISBN 074254513X .

^ a b "Commission to Present Findings on Soviet Jewry to U.N." Jewish Telegraphic Agency . December 5, 1966 . Retrieved July 15, 2016 .

^ Shneier, Marc (2008).

Shared Dreams: Martin Luther King, Jr. & the Jewish Community . New York: Jewish Lights. p. 117.

ISBN 978-1580232739 .

^ Podair 2009, p. 99.

^ Perlstein, Daniel (April 15, 2011), "The Dead End of Despair" , Civil Rights in New York City , Fordham University Press, pp.

118– 140, doi : 10.2307/j.ctt13wzxr4.10 , ISBN 978-0-8232-3746-3 , retrieved April 17, 2024 ^ Drayton, Robert (January 18, 2016).

"The Personal Life of Bayard Rustin" .

Out .

Archived from the original on November 21, 2018 . Retrieved January 19, 2016 .

^ d'Emilio, John (October 16, 2015).

Lost Prophet: The Life and Times of Bayard Rustin - John D'Emilio - Google Книги . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 9780684827803 . Archived from the original on October 16, 2015 . Retrieved October 22, 2018 .

^ Carbado, Devon W. (July 5, 2017), "Black Rights, Gay Rights, Civil Rights" , Sexuality and Equality Law , Routledge, pp.

305– 328, doi : 10.4324/9781315088051-10 , ISBN 978-1-315-08805-1 , retrieved April 17, 2024 ^ "Long Before Same-Sex Marriage, 'Adopted Son' Could Mean 'Life Partner' " .

Weekend Edition Sunday . NPR.org.

Archived from the original on September 29, 2019 . Retrieved November 16, 2015 .

^ Sekou, Osagyefo Uhuru (June 26, 2009).

"Gays Are the New Niggers" .

Killing the Buddha .

Archived from the original on June 30, 2009 . Retrieved July 2, 2009 .

^ Yasmin Nair, "Bayard Rustin: A complex legacy" , Windy City Times , March 3, 2012.

Archived April 14, 2016, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Pace, Eric (August 25, 1987).

"Bayard Rustin Is Dead at 75; Pacifist and a Rights Activist" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on October 14, 2016 . Retrieved May 29, 2025 .

^ "Brother Outsider — A Closer Look at Bayard Rustin, by Walter Naegle" . Rustin.org. Archived from the original on November 2, 2013 . Retrieved November 1, 2013 .

^ Warren, Patricia Nell (February 15, 2009).

"Bayard Rustin: Offensive lineman for freedom" . Outsports.com . Retrieved November 14, 2013 .

^ "Vietnam: A Television History; Homefront USA; Interview with Bayard Rustin, 1982" .

WGBH-TV . October 7, 1982.

Archived from the original on July 24, 2017 . Retrieved June 4, 2017 .

^ "The Bayard Rustin Papers" .

Library of Congress . August 28, 2013.

Archived from the original on May 19, 2017 . Retrieved June 4, 2017 .

^ "Brother Outsider – Home" .

Archived from the original on February 16, 2003 . Retrieved February 2, 2012 .

^ Dylan Matthews, "Meet Bayard Rustin" Archived June 10, 2015, at the Wayback Machine , Washingtonpost.com, August 28, 2013.

^ Vaïsse (2010), Neoconservatism: The Biography of a Movement , p. 91.

Archived September 13, 2016, at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Coalition for a Democratic Majority" , Right Web, Institute for Policy Studies.

Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Murdoch, Joyce; Price, Deb (May 8, 2002).

Courting Justice: Gay Men and Lesbians v. The Supreme Court . Basic Books. p. 292.

ISBN 978-0-465-01514-6 . Retrieved October 13, 2011 .

^ "H.S. 440 Bayard Rustin Educational Complex" at InsideSchools.org.

Archived April 1, 2016, at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Meeting Rooms" .

Friends House .

Archived from the original on March 20, 2025 . Retrieved January 3, 2023 .

^ Hoover, Brett (2016).

"What's in a name" .

The Penn Relays . 63rd school listed on page. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved February 29, 2016 .

^ "Honorary Degrees" . Montclair.edu . Retrieved October 22, 2024 .

^ "Honorary Degree Recipients" (PDF) . Haverford.edu . Retrieved June 1, 2022 .

^ "Bayard Rustin Marker" .

HMdb.org . Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved September 13, 2011 .

^ Shuey, Karen (August 26, 2019).

"Sites to visit on your #400yearsPA tour honoring African American contributions" .

The Mercury .

Archived from the original on February 11, 2022 . Retrieved February 11, 2022 .

^ Johnson, G. Allen (August 26, 1998).

"Gay teen club subject of film" .

The San Francisco Examiner . Retrieved February 12, 2022 – via Newspapers.com.

^ Lowe, Benjamin Y. (December 17, 2002).

"Vote for Rustin ends name debate" .

The Philadelphia Inquirer . No. 174 #200. p. A01 . Retrieved February 12, 2022 – via Newspapers.com.

^ "Bayard Rustin High School – Mission Statement" .

wcasd.net . West Chester Area School District. Archived from the original on September 21, 2019 . Retrieved December 31, 2019 .

^ "Rustin's soccer team notches win in debut" .

The Philadelphia Inquirer . No. 178 #99. September 7, 2006. p. D07.

Archived from the original on February 12, 2022 . Retrieved February 12, 2022 – via Newspapers.com.

^ Bajko, Matthew (May 14, 2008).

"Gay Black Political Group Forms" .

Bay Area Reporter . San Francisco.

Archived from the original on November 10, 2021 . Retrieved June 4, 2022 .

^ "The Bayard Rustin Center for Lgbtqa Activism, Education and Reconciliation – Community – Greensboro" . Facebook. September 21, 2011.

Archived from the original on January 4, 2016 . Retrieved June 8, 2014 .

^ "New Bayard Rustin Center opens at Guilford College" .

QnotesCarolinas . March 16, 2011.

Archived from the original on February 8, 2022 . Retrieved February 8, 2022 .

^ "2012 Inductees" . The Legacy Project.

Archived from the original on April 4, 2023 . Retrieved October 12, 2014 .

^ Olito, Frank (June 17, 2021).

"I toured LGBTQ-friendly neighborhoods in 3 cities during Pride Month and found they all honor LGBTQ people in unique ways" .

Insider . Retrieved February 9, 2022 .

^ "Hall of Honor Inductee, Bayard Rustin" .

The Department of Labor's Hall of Honor . United States Department of Labor. Archived from the original on October 17, 2014 . Retrieved October 12, 2014 .

^ Wang, Hansi Lo (May 10, 2014).

"Descendants Of Chinese Laborers Reclaim Railroad's History" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on May 12, 2023 . Retrieved February 9, 2022 .

^ "President Obama Names Presidential Medal of Freedom Recipients" . Office of the Press Secretary, The White House. August 8, 2013.

Archived from the original on January 29, 2017 . Retrieved August 8, 2013 .

^ Barmann, Jay (September 2, 2014).

"Castro's Rainbow Honor Walk Dedicated Today" .

SFist . Archived from the original on August 10, 2019 . Retrieved August 13, 2019 .

^ "Toronto Fridge Festival Awards and Contests" .

Toronto Fringe Festival . May 11, 2017. Archived from the original on February 18, 2019.

^ Campbell, Trevor (September 22, 2017).

"The Seat Next To The King mixes race, politics and forbidden sexuality" .

NOW Magazine . Archived from the original on February 9, 2022 . Retrieved February 9, 2022 .

^ Rabinowitz, Chloe (April 13, 2022).

"People's Light to Present World Premiere of BAYARD RUSTIN INSIDE ASHLAND" .

Broadway World . Wisdom Digital Media.

Archived from the original on July 6, 2022 . Retrieved July 6, 2022 .

^ "Bayard Rustin Center for Social Justice" .

Bayard Rustin Center for Social Justice .

Archived from the original on April 23, 2023 . Retrieved December 25, 2019 .

^ Silberstein, Jodi (May 10, 2019).

"Bayard Rustin Center for Social Justice" .

Out In Jersey .

Archived from the original on February 5, 2023 . Retrieved February 11, 2022 .

^ Laird, Cynthia.

"Groups seek names for Stonewall 50 honor wall" .

The Bay Area Reporter / B.A.R. Inc .

Archived from the original on May 24, 2019 . Retrieved May 24, 2019 .

^ Glasses-Baker, Becca (June 27, 2019).

"National LGBTQ Wall of Honor unveiled at Stonewall Inn" .

www.metro.us .

Archived from the original on June 28, 2019 . Retrieved June 28, 2019 .

^ Rawles, Timothy (June 19, 2019).

"National LGBTQ Wall of Honor to be unveiled at historic Stonewall Inn" .

San Diego Gay and Lesbian News .

Archived from the original on June 21, 2019 . Retrieved June 21, 2019 .

^ Asmelash, Leah (January 23, 2020).

"Gay civil rights leader may finally be pardoned 67 years after he was arrested for having sex with men" .

CNN . Retrieved January 23, 2020 .

^ Thompson, Don (February 5, 2020).

"California pardons gay civil rights leader in new initiative" .

AP News . Retrieved February 8, 2022 .

^ "City of Pasadena City Council Minutes" (PDF) .

City of Pasadena . June 5, 2023 . Retrieved December 27, 2023 .

^ "Council Passes Resolution Supporting Postal Stamp Honoring Martin Luther King Confidante Once Arrested in Pasadena – Pasadena Now" .

www.pasadenanow.com . Retrieved December 27, 2023 .

^ Reid, Jada (December 17, 2021).

"Jeffrey Wright Joins Cast Of Barack & Michelle Obama's Netflix Movie" .

ScreenRant . Retrieved February 8, 2022 .

^ Axelrod, Joshua (August 17, 2021).

"Netflix movie 'Rustin,' from Obamas' production company, to film in Pittsburgh" .

Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . Archived from the original on November 11, 2021 . Retrieved February 8, 2022 .

^ Cutler, Nancy (June 10, 2022).

"Bayard Rustin Way: Nyack street named for 'out and proud' civil rights legacy" .

Rockland/Westchester Journal News . Yahoo News . Retrieved July 6, 2022 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Anderson, Jervis.

Bayard Rustin: Troubles I've Seen (New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1997).

Bennett, Scott H.

Radical Pacifism: The War Resisters League and Gandhian Nonviolence in America, 1915–1963 (Syracuse Univ. Press, 2003).

ISBN 0-8156-3028-X .

Branch, Taylor.

Parting the Waters: America in the King Years, 1954–63 (New York: Touchstone, 1989).

Carbado, Devon W. and Donald Weise, editors.

Time on Two Crosses: The Collected Writings of Bayard Rustin (San Francisco: Cleis Press, 2003).

ISBN 1-57344-174-0 D'Emilio, John.

Lost Prophet: Bayard Rustin and the Quest for Peace and Justice in America (New York: The Free Press, 2003).

D'Emilio, John.

Lost Prophet: The Life and Times of Bayard Rustin (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2004).

ISBN 0-226-14269-8 Frazier, Nishani (2017).

Harambee City: Congress of Racial Equality in Cleveland and the Rise of Black Power Populism . University of Arkansas Press.

ISBN 1682260186 .

Haskins, James.

Bayard Rustin: Behind the Scenes of the Civil Rights Movement (New York: Hyperion, 1997).

Hirschfelder, Nicole.

Oppression as Process: The Case of Bayard Rustin (Heidelberg: Universitätsverlag Winter, 2014).

ISBN 3825363902 Kates, Nancy and Bennett Singer (dirs.) Brother Outsider: The Life of Bayard Rustin (2003) King, Martin Luther Jr.; Carson, Clayborne; Luker, Ralph & Penny A. Russell The Papers of Martin Luther King, Jr.: Volume IV: Symbol of the Movement, January 1957 – December 1958 . University of California Press, 2000.

ISBN 0-520-22231-8 Le Blanc, Paul and Michael Yates, A Freedom Budget for All Americans: Recapturing the Promise of the Civil Rights Movement in the Struggle for Economic Justice Today (New York: Monthly Review Press, 2013).

Podair, Jerald E. "Bayard Rustin: American Dreamer" (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Pub., 2009).

ISBN 978-0-7425-4513-7 Levine, Daniel (2000).

Bayard Rustin and the civil rights movement . New Jersey: Rutgers University Press. p. 352.

ISBN 0-8135-2718-X .

Lewis, David L.

King: A Biography . (University of Illinois Press, 1978).

ISBN 0-252-00680-1 .

Rustin, Bayard.

Down the Line: The Collected Writings of Bayard Rustin (Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1971).

Rustin, Bayard; Bond, Julian (2012).

I Must Resist: Bayard Rustin's Life in Letters . City Lights Books.

ISBN 978-0-87286-578-5 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Bayard Rustin .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bayard Rustin .

SNCC Digital Gateway: Bayard Rustin , Documentary website created by the SNCC Legacy Project and Duke University, telling the story of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee & grassroots organizing from the inside-out Bayard Rustin – Who Is This Man?

Rund Abdelfatah (February 25, 2021).

"Remembering Bayard Rustin: The Man Behind the March on Washington" .

Throughline (Podcast).

NPR . Retrieved August 14, 2021 .

FBI file on Bayard Rustin Buzz Haughton, "Bayard Rustin, Civil Rights Leader" , from Quakerinfo.org, February 1, 1999 Brother Outsider: The Life of Bayard Rustin , a documentary on Rustin Guide to the Papers of Bayard Rustin at the American Jewish Historical Society .

Bayard Rustin at the Internet Broadway Database Bayard Rustin Collected Papers finding aid at the Swarthmore College Peace Collection v t e Civil rights movement (1954–1968) Events ( timeline ) Prior to 1954 Journey of Reconciliation Executive Order 9981 Murders of Harry and Harriette Moore Sweatt v. Painter (1950) McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents (1950) Baton Rouge bus boycott 1954–1959 Brown v. Board of Education Bolling v. Sharpe Briggs v. Elliott Davis v. Prince Edward County Gebhart v. Belton Sarah Keys v. Carolina Coach Company Read's Drug Store sit-in Emmett Till Montgomery bus boycott Browder v. Gayle Tallahassee bus boycott Mansfield school desegregation 1957 Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom " Give Us the Ballot " Royal Ice Cream sit-in Little Rock Nine Cooper v. Aaron Civil Rights Act of 1957 Ministers' Manifesto Dockum Drug Store sit-in Katz Drug Store sit-in Kissing Case Biloxi wade-ins 1960–1963 New Year's Day March Sit-in movement Greensboro sit-ins Nashville sit-ins Sibley Commission Atlanta sit-ins Savannah Protest Movement Greenville Eight Civil Rights Act of 1960 Ax Handle Saturday New Orleans school desegregation Gomillion v. Lightfoot Boynton v. Virginia University of Georgia desegregation riot Rock Hill sit-ins Robert F. Kennedy's Law Day Address Freedom Rides Anniston and Birmingham bus attacks Garner v. Louisiana Albany Movement Cambridge movement University of Chicago sit-ins " Second Emancipation Proclamation " Meredith enrollment, Ole Miss riot Atlanta's Berlin Wall "Segregation now, segregation forever" Stand in the Schoolhouse Door 1963 Birmingham campaign Letter from Birmingham Jail Children's Crusade Birmingham riot 16th Street Baptist Church bombing John F. Kennedy's speech to the nation on Civil Rights Detroit Walk to Freedom March on Washington "I Have a Dream" Big Six St. Augustine movement 1964–1968 Twenty-fourth Amendment Chester school protests Bloody Tuesday 1964 Monson Motor Lodge protests Freedom Summer workers' murders Civil Rights Act of 1964 Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States Katzenbach v. McClung 1964–1965 Scripto strike 1965 Selma to Montgomery marches " How Long, Not Long " SCOPE Project Voting Rights Act of 1965 Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections March Against Fear White House Conference on Civil Rights Chicago Freedom Movement/Chicago open housing movement Loving v. Virginia Memphis sanitation strike King assassination funeral riots Civil Rights Act of 1968 Poor People's Campaign Green v. County School Board of New Kent County Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co.

1968 Olympics Black Power salute Activist groups Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights American Friends Service Committee Atlanta Negro Voters League Atlanta Student Movement Black Panther Party Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) Committee for Freedom Now Committee on Appeal for Human Rights An Appeal for Human Rights Council for United Civil Rights Leadership Council of Federated Organizations Dallas County Voters League Deacons for Defense and Justice Georgia Council on Human Relations Highlander Folk School Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights Lowndes County Freedom Organization Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party Montgomery Improvement Association NAACP Youth Council Nashville Student Movement Nation of Islam Northern Student Movement National Council of Negro Women National Urban League Operation Breadbasket Regional Council of Negro Leadership Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) Southern Regional Council Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) The Freedom Singers United Auto Workers (UAW) Wednesdays in Mississippi Women's Political Council Activists Juanita Abernathy Ralph Abernathy Victoria Gray Adams Zev Aelony Mathew Ahmann Muhammad Ali William G. Anderson Gwendolyn Armstrong Arnold Aronson Ella Baker James Baldwin Marion Barry Daisy Bates Harry Belafonte James Bevel Claude Black Gloria Blackwell Randolph Blackwell Unita Blackwell Ezell Blair Jr.

Joanne Bland Julian Bond Joseph E. Boone William Holmes Borders Amelia Boynton Bruce Boynton Raylawni Branch Stanley Branche Ruby Bridges Aurelia Browder H. Rap Brown Ralph Bunche John H. Calhoun Guy Carawan Stokely Carmichael Johnnie Carr James Chaney J. L. Chestnut Shirley Chisholm Colia Lafayette Clark Ramsey Clark Septima Clark Xernona Clayton Eldridge Cleaver Kathleen Cleaver Josephine Dobbs Clement Charles E. Cobb Jr.

Annie Lee Cooper Dorothy Cotton Claudette Colvin Vernon Dahmer Jonathan Daniels Abraham Lincoln Davis Angela Davis Joseph DeLaine Dave Dennis Annie Bell Robinson Devine John Wesley Dobbs Patricia Stephens Due Joseph Ellwanger Charles Evers Medgar Evers Myrlie Evers-Williams Chuck Fager James Farmer Walter Fauntroy James Forman Marie Foster Golden Frinks Andrew Goodman Robert Graetz Fred Gray Jack Greenberg Dick Gregory Lawrence Guyot Prathia Hall Fannie Lou Hamer Fred Hampton William E. Harbour Vincent Harding Dorothy Height Audrey Faye Hendricks Lola Hendricks Aaron Henry Oliver Hill Donald L. Hollowell James Hood Myles Horton Zilphia Horton T. R. M. Howard Ruby Hurley Cecil Ivory Jesse Jackson Jimmie Lee Jackson Richie Jean Jackson T. J. Jemison Esau Jenkins Barbara Rose Johns Vernon Johns Frank Minis Johnson Clarence Jones J. Charles Jones Matthew Jones Vernon Jordan Tom Kahn Clyde Kennard A. D. King C.B. King Coretta Scott King Martin Luther King Jr.

Martin Luther King Sr.

Bernard Lafayette James Lawson Bernard Lee Sanford R. Leigh Jim Letherer Stanley Levison John Lewis Viola Liuzzo Z. Alexander Looby Joseph Lowery Clara Luper Danny Lyon Malcolm X Mae Mallory Vivian Malone Bob Mants Thurgood Marshall Benjamin Mays Franklin McCain Charles McDew Ralph McGill Floyd McKissick Joseph McNeil James Meredith William Ming Jack Minnis Amzie Moore Cecil B. Moore Douglas E. Moore Harriette Moore Harry T. Moore Queen Mother Moore William Lewis Moore Irene Morgan Bob Moses William Moyer Elijah Muhammad Diane Nash Charles Neblett Huey P. Newton Edgar Nixon Jack O'Dell James Orange Rosa Parks James Peck Charles Person Homer Plessy Adam Clayton Powell Jr.

Fay Bellamy Powell Rodney N. Powell Al Raby Lincoln Ragsdale A. Philip Randolph George Raymond George Raymond Jr.

Bernice Johnson Reagon Cordell Reagon James Reeb Frederick D. Reese Walter Reuther Gloria Richardson David Richmond Bernice Robinson Jo Ann Robinson Angela Russell Bayard Rustin Bernie Sanders Michael Schwerner Bobby Seale Pete Seeger Cleveland Sellers Charles Sherrod Alexander D. Shimkin Fred Shuttlesworth Modjeska Monteith Simkins Glenn E. Smiley A. Maceo Smith Kelly Miller Smith Mary Louise Smith Maxine Smith Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson Charles Kenzie Steele Hank Thomas Dorothy Tillman A. P. Tureaud Hartman Turnbow Albert Turner C. T. Vivian A. T. Walden Wyatt Tee Walker Hollis Watkins Walter Francis White Roy Wilkins Hosea Williams Kale Williams Robert F. Williams Q. V. Williamson Andrew Young Whitney Young Sammy Younge Jr.

Bob Zellner James Zwerg By region Omaha, Nebraska South Carolina Movement songs "Ain't Gonna Let Nobody Turn Me 'Round" "If You Miss Me at the Back of the Bus" "Kumbaya" "Keep Your Eyes on the Prize" "Oh, Freedom" "This Little Light of Mine" "We Shall Not Be Moved" "We Shall Overcome" "Woke Up This Morning (With My Mind Stayed On Freedom)" Influences Nonviolence Padayatra Sermon on the Mount Mahatma Gandhi Ahimsa Satyagraha The Kingdom of God Is Within You Frederick Douglass W. E. B. Du Bois Mary McLeod Bethune Related Lyndon B. Johnson Jim Crow laws Lynching in the United States Plessy v. Ferguson Separate but equal Buchanan v. Warley Hocutt v. Wilson Powell v. Alabama Smith v. Allwright Hernandez v. Texas Loving v. Virginia African-American women in the movement Jews in the civil rights movement Fifth Circuit Four 16th Street Baptist Church Kelly Ingram Park A.G. Gaston Motel Bethel Baptist Church Brown Chapel Dexter Avenue Baptist Church Holt Street Baptist Church Edmund Pettus Bridge March on Washington Movement African-American churches attacked List of lynching victims in the United States Freedom Schools Freedom songs Spring Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam " Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence " Voter Education Project 1960s counterculture African American founding fathers of the United States Eyes on the Prize Legacy In popular culture Birmingham Civil Rights Institute Birmingham Civil Rights National Monument Civil Rights Memorial Civil Rights Movement Archive Emmett Till and Mamie Till-Mobley National Monument Medgar and Myrlie Evers Home National Monument Freedom Rides Museum Freedom Riders National Monument King Center for Nonviolent Social Change Martin Luther King Jr. Day Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial other King memorials Mississippi Civil Rights Museum National Civil Rights Museum National Voting Rights Museum St. Augustine Foot Soldiers Monument Olympic Black Power Statue Noted historians Taylor Branch Clayborne Carson John Dittmer Michael Eric Dyson Jonathan Eig Chuck Fager Adam Fairclough David Garrow David Halberstam Vincent Harding Steven F. Lawson Doug McAdam Diane McWhorter Charles M. Payne Thomas E. Ricks Timothy Tyson Akinyele Umoja Movement photographers Civil rights movement portal v t e VH1 Trailblazer Honors 2014 Orange Is the New Black cast Roberta Kaplan John Abdallah Wambere Edith Windsor 2015 Marsha Aizumi Connor Franta Sheila Lopez Arsham Parsi Bayard Rustin Dennis Shepard Judy Shepard 2016 The Advocate Harvey Fierstein Marsha P. Johnson Billie Jean King Subhi Nahas Sylvia Rivera 2017 Alvin Ailey Jason Collins Cleve Jones David Kohan Cyndi Lauper Max Mutchnick 2018 American Civil Liberties Union James Baldwin Sybrina Fulton Tracy Martin Ryan Murphy 2019 Margaret Atwood Tarana Burke Ava DuVernay Nancy Pelosi v t e Martin Luther King Jr.

Speeches, writings, movements, and protests Speeches " Give Us the Ballot " (1957) " I Have a Dream " (1963) " How Long, Not Long " (1965) " Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence " (1967) " I've Been to the Mountaintop " (1968) Writings Stride Toward Freedom (1958) " What Is Man?

" (1959) " Second Emancipation Proclamation " Strength to Love (1963) " Letter from Birmingham Jail " (1963) Why We Can't Wait (1964) Conscience for Change (1967) Where Do We Go from Here: Chaos or Community?

(1967) Movements and protests Montgomery bus boycott (1955–1956) Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom (1957) Albany Movement (1961–1962) Birmingham campaign (1963) March on Washington (1963) St. Augustine movement (1963–1964) Selma to Montgomery marches (1965) Chicago Freedom Movement (1966) Mississippi March Against Fear (1966) Anti-Vietnam War movement (1967) Memphis sanitation strike (1968) Poor People's Campaign (1968) Organizations Montgomery Improvement Association Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) People Family Coretta Scott King (wife) Yolanda King (daughter) Martin Luther King III (son) Dexter King (son) Bernice King (daughter) Martin Luther King Sr.

(father) Alberta Williams King (mother) Christine King Farris (sister) A. D. King (brother) James Albert King (grandfather) Alveda King (niece) Other leaders Ralph Abernathy (mentor, colleague) Ella Baker (colleague) James Bevel (strategist / colleague) Dorothy Cotton (colleague) Jesse Jackson (protégé) Bernard Lafayette (colleague) James Lawson (colleague) John Lewis (colleague) Joseph Lowery (colleague) Benjamin Mays (mentor) Diane Nash (colleague) James Orange (colleague) Bayard Rustin (advisor) Fred Shuttlesworth (colleague) C. T. Vivian (colleague) Wyatt Walker (colleague) Hosea Williams (colleague) Andrew Young (colleague) Assassination Lorraine Motel (now National Civil Rights Museum) Riots Funeral James Earl Ray Jack Kershaw U.S. House Select Committee on Assassinations (HSCA) Martin Luther King Jr. Records Collection Act Loyd Jowers Trial Conspiracy theories Executive Order 14176 Media Film King: A Filmed Record... Montgomery to Memphis (1970 documentary) Our Friend, Martin (1999 animated) Boycott (2001 film) The Witness: From the Balcony of Room 306 (2008 documentary) Selma (2014 film) All the Way (2016 film) King in the Wilderness (2018 documentary) MLK/FBI (2020 documentary) Rustin (2023 film) Television King (1978 miniseries) " The First Store " ( The Jeffersons , 1980) "Great X-Pectations" ( A Different World , 1993) "The Promised Land" ( New York Undercover , 1997) Selma, Lord, Selma (1999) "Return of the King" ( The Boondocks , 2006) Alpha Man: The Brotherhood of MLK (2011 documentary) Genius ( MLK/X , 2024) Plays The Meeting (1987) The Mountaintop (2009) I Dream (2010) All the Way (2012) Books Bearing the Cross (1986) America in the King Years (1988, 1998, 2006) King: A Life (2023) Illustrated Martin Luther King and the Montgomery Story (1957 comic book) Music " Abraham, Martin and John " ( Dion ) " March! For Martin Luther King " ( John Fahey ) " Martin Luther King's Dream " ( Strawbs ) " Happy Birthday " ( Stevie Wonder ) " Pride (In the Name of Love) " ( U2 ) " MLK " (U2) " King Holiday " ( King Dream Chorus and Holiday Crew ) "By the Time I Get to Arizona" ( Public Enemy ) " Shed a Little Light " ( James Taylor ) " Up to the Mountain " ( Patti Griffin ) "Never Alone Martin" ( Jason Upton ) "Symphony of Brotherhood" ( Miri Ben-Ari ) Joseph Schwantner: New Morning for the World; Nicolas Flagello: The Passion of Martin Luther King (1995 album) " A Dream " ( Common featuring will.i.am ) "Glory" (Common and John Legend ) Related Civil rights movement in popular culture Estate of Martin Luther King, Jr., Inc. v. CBS, Inc.

King v. Trustees of Boston Univ.

Related topics Memorials and eponymous locations Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial National Historical Park King Center for Nonviolent Social Change Dexter Avenue Baptist Church National Civil Rights Museum U.S. Capitol Rotunda sculpture Oval Office bust Homage to King sculpture, Atlanta Hope Moving Forward statue, Atlanta Safe House Black History Museum Statues of Martin Luther King Jr.

Atlanta Boston Denver Houston Jersey City Milwaukee Mexico City Newark Pueblo, Colorado Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial, San Francisco Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial (Compton) Landmark for Peace Memorial , Indianapolis The Dream sculpture, Portland, Oregon Kennedy–King College Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Library, Washington, D.C.

Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Library, San Jose Paris park Memorials to Martin Luther King Jr.

King County, Washington Eponymous streets Other topics Martin Luther King Jr. Day passage Big Six African American founding fathers of the United States Authorship issues FBI–King suicide letter Martin Luther King Jr., A Current Analysis Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity Season for Nonviolence Civil rights movement in popular culture Lee–Jackson–King Day Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Poland Israel Catalonia People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC 2 Yale LUX https://www.netflix.com/title/81111528 NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐pck9p
Cached time: 20250817142111
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.510 seconds
Real time usage: 1.778 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11123/1000000
Revision size: 102478/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 451008/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14599/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 433864/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.898/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12198846/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1385.578      1 -total
 50.45%  698.969      1 Template:Reflist
 23.37%  323.827     48 Template:Cite_web
 10.66%  147.757     24 Template:Cite_news
  9.18%  127.218      1 Template:Infobox_person
  6.89%   95.527     15 Template:Cite_book
  6.21%   86.084      1 Template:Socialism_US
  6.07%   84.088      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  3.76%   52.040      4 Template:Br_separated_entries
  3.46%   47.951      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:172875:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817142111 and revision id 1306396303. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bayard_Rustin&oldid=1306396303 " Categories : 1912 births 1987 deaths 20th-century American LGBTQ people 20th-century Quakers Activists for African-American civil rights Political activists from Pennsylvania African American–Jewish relations African-American activists African-American Christians African-American founders American founders African-American LGBTQ people African-American Quakers American anti-communists American anti–Vietnam War activists American Christian pacifists American Christian socialists American Christian Zionists American democratic socialists American LGBTQ rights activists American nonviolence advocates American Quakers American social democrats Cheyney University of Pennsylvania alumni Community organizing Converts to Quakerism Freedom Riders LGBTQ conservatism in the United States LGBTQ people from Pennsylvania LGBTQ Quakers LGBTQ socialism Members of Social Democrats USA Members of the Socialist Party of America Members of the Socialist Party of America from New York (state) People from West Chester, Pennsylvania People who have received posthumous pardons Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients Quaker socialists Soviet Jewry movement activists War Resisters League activists Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from October 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from November 2023 Pages using infobox person with multiple organizations Pages using infobox person with multiple partners Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from December 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata IBDB name template using Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 14:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bayard Rustin 21 languages Add topic

