Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Legal procedure 2 European history and concepts Toggle European history and concepts subsection 2.1 Procedural law and substantive law in various languages 2.2 Substance of procedural law/substantive law in Europe 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Procedural law 38 languages Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia עברית Latviešu Lietuvių မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sum of the legal norms in court procedures This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( October 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Procedural law , adjective law , in some jurisdictions referred to as remedial law , or rules of court , comprises the rules by which a court hears and determines what happens in civil , lawsuit , criminal or administrative proceedings .  The rules are designed to ensure a fair and consistent application of due process (in the U.S.) or fundamental justice (in other common law countries) to all cases that come before a court.

[ 1 ] Substantive law , which refers to the actual claim and defense whose validity is tested through the procedures of procedural law, is different from procedural law. In the context of procedural law, procedural rights may also refer not exhaustively to rights to information , access to justice , and right to counsel , rights to public participation , and right to confront accusers , as well as the basic presumption of innocence (meaning the prosecution regularly must meet the burden of proof , although different jurisdictions have various exceptions), with those rights encompassing general civil and political rights. In environmental law , these procedural rights have been reflected within the UNECE Convention on "Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters" known as the Aarhus Convention (1998).

Legal procedure [ edit ] Although different legal processes aim to resolve many kinds of legal disputes, the legal procedures share some common features. All legal procedure, for example, is concerned with due process . Absent very special conditions, a court can not impose a penalty — civil or criminal — against an individual who has not received notice of a lawsuit being brought against them, or who has not received a fair opportunity to present evidence for themselves.

[ 2 ] The standardization for the means by which cases are brought, parties are informed, evidence is presented, and facts are determined is intended to maximize the fairness of any proceeding. Nevertheless, strict procedural rules have certain drawbacks. For example, they impose specific time limitations upon the parties that may either hasten or (more frequently) slow down the pace of proceedings. Furthermore, a party who is unfamiliar with procedural rules may run afoul of guidelines that have nothing to do with the merits of the case, and yet the failure to follow these guidelines may severely damage the party's chances. Procedural systems are constantly torn between arguments that judges should have greater discretion in order to avoid the rigidity of the rules, and arguments that judges should have less discretion in order to avoid an outcome based more on the personal preferences of the judge than on the law or the facts.

Legal procedure, in a larger sense, is also designed to affect the best distribution of judicial resources. For example, in most courts of general jurisdiction in the United States , criminal cases are given priority over civil cases, because criminal defendants stand to lose their freedom, and should therefore be accorded the first opportunity to have their case heard.

European history and concepts [ edit ] Procedural law and substantive law in various languages [ edit ] "Procedural law" in contrast to " substantive law " is a concept available in various legal systems and languages. Similar to the English expressions are the Spanish words derecho adjetivo and derecho material or derecho sustantivo , as well as the Portuguese terms for them, direito adjetivo and direito substantivo . Other ideas are behind the German expressions formelles Recht (or Verfahrensrecht ) and materielles Recht as well as the French droit formel/droit matériel , the Italian diritto formale/diritto materiale and the Swedish formell rätt/materiell rätt ; all of which, taken literally, mean "formal" and "material" law.

The same opposition can be found in the Russian legal vocabulary, with материальное право for substantive law and процессуальное право for procedural. Similar to Russian, in Bulgarian "материално право" means substantive law and процесуално право is used for procedural. In Chinese, "procedural law" and "substantive law" are represented by these characters: "程序法" and "实体法". In Germany, the expressions formelles Recht and materielles Recht were developed in the 19th century, because only during that time was the Roman actio split into procedural and substantive components.

Substance of procedural law/substantive law in Europe [ edit ] In the European legal systems the Roman law had been of great influence. In ancient times the Roman civil procedure applied to many countries. One of the main issues of the procedure has been the actio (similar to the English word "act"). In the procedure of the legis actiones the actio included both procedural and substantive elements.

[ 3 ] Because during this procedure the praetor had granted, or denied, litigation by granting or denying, respectively, an actio . By granting the actio the praetor in the end has created claims. I.e. a procedural act caused substantive claims to exist. Such priority (procedure over substance) is contrary to what we think of the relationship nowadays. But it has not only been an issue of priority and whether the one serves the other. Since the actio had been composed of elements of procedure and substance it was difficult to separate both parts again.

Even the scientific handling of law, which developed during medieval times in the new universities in Italy (in particular in Bologna, Mantua), did not come to a full and clear separation. The English system of "writs" in the Middle Ages had a similar problem to the Roman tradition with the actio . In Germany, the unity of procedure and substance in the actio definitely was brought to an end with the codification of the Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch (BGB) which came into force on January 1, 1900. The expression Anspruch (§ 194 of BGB) - meaning "claim" - has been "cleared" from procedural elements. And this was the time for "founding" the terms formelles / materielles Recht . However, after World War II the expression formelles Recht was found to be "contaminated" and to a broad extent has been replaced by Prozessrecht , narrowing the idea behind it to "law of litigation" (thereby excluding e.g. the law of other procedures and the law on competences).

See also [ edit ] Civil procedure Criminal procedure Hearing (law) Legal technicality Vyavahara References [ edit ] ^ "procedural law" .

LII / Legal Information Institute . Retrieved 12 December 2023 .

^ "Current Rules of Practice & Procedure | United States Courts" .

www.uscourts.gov . Retrieved 12 December 2023 .

^ "LacusCurtius • Roman Law — Actio (Smith's Dictionary, 1875)" .

penelope.uchicago.edu . Retrieved 12 December 2023 .

Further reading [ edit ] Andreas Kollmann: Begriffs- und Problemgeschichte des Verhältnisses von formellem und materiellem Recht , edition: Duncker & Humblot, Berlin, Schriften zur Rechtsgeschichte no. 68, 1996.

Cardozo, Benjamin N. (1998).

The Nature of the Judicial Process . New Haven: Yale University Press.

Frank, Jerome (1985).

Law and the Modern Mind . Birmingham, AL: Legal Classics Library.

Levi, Edward H. (1949) An Introduction to Legal Reasoning . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Marshall, Thurgood (2001).

Thurgood Marshall: His Speeches, Writings, Arguments, Opinions and Reminiscences . Chicago: Lawrence Hill Books.

Miller, Arthur S. (1985).

Politics, Democracy and the Supreme Court: Essays on the Future of Constitutional Theory . Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.

Tribe, Laurence (1985).

God Save This Honorable Court: How the Choice of Supreme Court Justices Shapes Our History . New York: Random House.

Zelermyer, William (1977).

The Legal System in Operation . St. Paul, MN: West Publishing.

Max Planck Institute Luxembourg for Procedural Law External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Legal procedure .

US Federal Court Rules v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Spain Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Procedural_law&oldid=1258315488 " Category : Legal procedure Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from October 2023 All articles lacking in-text citations Use dmy dates from March 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 November 2024, at 01:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Procedural law 38 languages Add topic

