Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 United States Toggle United States subsection 1.1 Subcategorization 1.2 Water-related diseases and contaminants in public water systems 2 Canada 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Public water system 3 languages Deutsch ಕನ್ನಡ Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Organization providing drinking water for public use Water towers are used to store water at a height sufficient to pressurize a water supply distribution system Public water system is a regulatory term used in the United States and Canada, referring to specific utilities and organizations providing drinking water .

United States [ edit ] The US Safe Drinking Water Act and derivative legislation define a "public water system" as an entity that provides " water for human consumption through pipes or other constructed conveyances to at least 15 service connections or serves an average of at least 25 people for at least 60 days a year." [ 1 ] The term "public" in "public water system" refers to the people drinking the water, not to the ownership of the system.

Some US states (e.g.

New York ) have varying definitions.

Over 286 million Americans get their tap water from a community water system. Eight percent of the community water systems—large municipal water systems—provide water to 82 percent of the US population.

[ 2 ] Subcategorization [ edit ] The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has defined three types of public water systems: Community Water System (CWS). A public water system that supplies water to the same population year-round.

Non-Transient Non-Community Water System (NTNCWS). A public water system that regularly supplies water to at least 25 of the same people at least six months per year. Some examples are schools, factories, office buildings, and hospitals , which have water systems.

Transient Non-Community Water System (TNCWS). A public water system that provides water in a place such as a gas station or campground where people only remain for a short period.

There are over 148,000 public water systems.

[ 3 ] Approximately 52,000 CWS serve the majority of the U.S. population Approximately 85,000 NTNCWS Approximately 18,000 TNCWS.

[ 1 ] EPA also classifies water systems according to the number of people they serve: Very Small water systems serve 25-500 people Small water systems serve 501-3,300 people Medium water systems serve 3,301-10,000 people Large water systems serve 10,001-100,000 people Very Large water systems serve over 100,000 people.

[ 4 ] Water systems may be categorized by their source of water: Groundwater , generally from wells Surface water and groundwater "under the influence" of surface water Purchase of water from another Public Water System.

Water-related diseases and contaminants in public water systems [ edit ] Sources of drinking water are subject to contamination and require appropriate treatment to remove disease-causing contaminants. Contamination of drinking water supplies can occur in the source water and the distribution system after water treatment has already occurred. There are many sources of water contamination, including naturally occurring chemicals and minerals (for example, arsenic , radon , uranium ), local land use practices (application of fertilizers and pesticides ; concentrated animal feeding operations ), manufacturing processes, and sewer overflows or wastewater releases.

The presence of contaminants in water can lead to adverse health effects, including gastrointestinal illness, reproductive problems, and neurological disorders. Infants, young children, pregnant women, the elderly, and people whose immune systems are compromised because of AIDS, chemotherapy, or transplant medications may be especially susceptible to illness from some contaminants.

[ 5 ] The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention publishes a list of the leading causes of waterborne outbreaks in public water systems.

[ 2 ] Canada [ edit ] The Canadian provinces of Manitoba and Nova Scotia also use this definition.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Water supply Drinking water quality in the United States Water supply and sanitation in Canada References [ edit ] ^ a b "Background on Drinking Water Standards in the Safe Drinking Water Act" . Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2021-02-16.

^ a b "Public Water Systems" .

Drinking Water . Atlanta, GA: U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2021-03-30.

^ "Information about Public Water Systems" .

Drinking Water Requirements for States and Public Water Systems . EPA. 2021-11-10.

^ "Drinking Water Dashboard Help" .

Enforcement and Compliance History Online . EPA. 2021-05-17.

^ "Water-related Diseases and Contaminants in Public Water Systems" .

Drinking Water . CDC. 2014-04-07.

^ Province of Manitoba (2017-11-10).

"The Drinking Water Safety Act" . Winnipeg, MB.

^ Province of Nova Scotia (2005-09-30).

"Water and Wastewater Facilities and Public Drinking Water Supplies Regulations" . Halifax, NS. Amended 2017-04-28.

v t e Public services Municipalization Nationalization Progressive tax Concepts Common good Free-culture movement Free newspaper Product sample Public administration Public bad Public domain Public good (economics) Public health Public interest Public land Public ownership Public policy Public rights Public sphere Public procurement Public trust Public value Universal access to education Universal basic services Basic services Civil service Fire department Housing First Law enforcement Postal service Savings system Public broadcasting Public transport Universal basic services Public utility Electric utility Oil & gas Telecommunication Municipal broadband Public infrastructure Public water system Waste management Public works Drinking fountain Drug checking Free clinic Free education Infrastructure Needle and syringe programmes Public art Public bank Public bookcase Public computer Public hospital Public library Public open space Public school Public space Public toilet Public university Reagent testing Supervised injection site Urban park Social services Publicly funded health care Public housing Job creation Job guarantee Single-payer health care National health insurance Social insurance Social pension Social security Youth services See also Commons Free public transport Government auction Public float Public holiday Public offering Public sector Public security Public use Public viewing area Category Commons Authority control databases NARA Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Public_water_system&oldid=1299009051 " Categories : Water industry Water and society Public sphere Water supply and sanitation in Canada Water supply and sanitation in the United States Drinking water regulation Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 01:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Public water system 3 languages Add topic

