Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work 2 Legal positivism 3 Criticism 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents John Austin (legal philosopher) 28 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Lietuvių مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English legal philosopher (1790–1859) For the 20th-century linguistic philosopher, see J. L. Austin .

John Austin Born ( 1790-03-03 ) 3 March 1790 Creeting Mill, Suffolk , England Died 1 December 1859 (1859-12-01) (aged 69) Weybridge, Surrey , England Philosophical work Era 19th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Legal positivism Institutions UCL Faculty of Laws Main interests Legal philosophy Notable ideas Criticism of natural law John Austin (3 March 1790 – 1 December 1859) was an English legal theorist who posthumously influenced British and American law with an analytical approach to jurisprudence and a theory of legal positivism .

[ 1 ] Austin opposed traditional approaches of " natural law ", arguing against any need for connections between law and morality. Human legal systems, he claimed, can and should be studied in an empirical, value-free way.

Life and work [ edit ] Austin was born on 3 March 1790 at Creeting St Mary in today's district of Mid Suffolk , as the eldest son of a well-to-do miller.

After spending five years in the army during the Napoleonic Wars, Austin turned to law, and spent seven unhappy years practicing at the Chancery bar. In 1819, he married Sarah Taylor and became neighbours and close friends with Jeremy Bentham , James Mill , and John Stuart Mill . Mainly through Bentham's influence, Austin was appointed Professor of Jurisprudence at the newly-founded University College London in July 1827.

[ 2 ] However, Austin's lectures were not well-attended and he resigned his university post in 1834.

[ citation needed ] Thereafter, aside from two stints on government commissions, Austin lived largely on his wife Sarah Austin 's earnings as a writer and translator. Plagued by ill health, depression and self-doubt, Austin wrote little after the publication of his major work, The Province of Jurisprudence Determined (1832).

[ 3 ] This work was largely ignored in Austin's lifetime, but became influential after his death, when his widow published a second edition in 1861. A second book, Lectures on Jurisprudence , was put together by her from Austin's notes and published in 1863.

[ 4 ] In 1833, Austin was appointed to the Royal Commission on the Criminal Law 1833 , a royal commission to consolidate existing statutes of criminal law into an English Criminal Code .

[ 5 ] There were conflicting interests between Charles Henry Bellenden Ker and Austin on the Commission. Austin's interest in codification was heavily influenced by his mentor, Bentham, whereas Ker's interest came from concerns about the quality of statutes and the difficulty drafting legislation [ 6 ] Finding the work congenial and little support in his opinions, in 1836, Austin resigned after signing two reports and was replaced by barrister David Jardine .

[ 1 ] John Austin died on 1 December 1859 in Weybridge . His only child, Lucie , later became Lady Duff-Gordon.

Legal positivism [ edit ] Austin's goal was to transform law into a true science. To do this, he believed it was necessary to purge human law of all moralistic notions and to define key legal concepts in strictly empirical terms. Law, according to Austin, is a social fact and reflects relations of power and obedience. This twofold view, that (1) law and morality are separate and (2) that all human-made ("positive") laws can be traced back to human lawmakers, is known as legal positivism. Drawing heavily on the thought of Jeremy Bentham, Austin was the first legal thinker to work out a fully developed positivistic theory of law.

Austin argues that laws are rules, which he defines as a type of command. More precisely, laws are general commands issued by a sovereign to members of an independent political society, and backed up by credible threats of punishment or other adverse consequences ("sanctions") in the event of non-compliance. The sovereign in any legal system is the person or group of persons habitually obeyed by the bulk of the population, which does not habitually obey anyone else. A command is a declared wish that something should be done, issued by a superior, and accompanied by threats in the event of non-compliance. Such commands give rise to legal duties to obey. Note that all the key concepts in this account (law, sovereign, command, sanction, duty) are defined in terms of empirically verifiable social facts. No moral judgment, according to Austin, is ever necessary to determine what the law is—though morality must be consulted in determining what the law should be. Austin, as a utilitarian, believed that laws should promote the greatest happiness of society.

Criticism [ edit ] Though Austin's brand of legal positivism was greatly influential in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, [ 7 ] it is widely seen as overly simplistic today.

[ 8 ] Critics such as H. L. A. Hart have charged that Austin's account fails to recognize that: Law-making powers are dispersed in many modern societies and it is difficult to identify a "sovereign" in Austin's sense.

Most legal systems include rules that do not impose sanctions, but empower officials or citizens to do certain things (such as drawing up wills), or specify ways that legal rules may be identified or changed.

Those threats do not give rise to obligations. If they did, there would be no essential difference between a gunman's threat ("Your money or your life") and an ordinary piece of legislation.

[ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Markby, William (1911).

"Austin, John" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 02 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

938– 940.

^ Harte, Negley; North, John (2004).

The World of UCL 1828–2004 (3rd ed.). London: UCL Press. p. 60.

ISBN 1-84472-068-3 .

^ His last published work was A Plea for the Constitution (2nd ed.). London: John Murray. 1859 . Retrieved 5 September 2019 – via Internet Archive.

^ H. L. A. Hart, "Introduction," in John Austin, The Province of Jurisprudence Determined , H. L. A. Hart (ed.), New York: The Noonday Press, 1954, pp. vii-ix.

^ Ilbert, Courtenay (1901).

Legislative methods and forms . Oxford: Clarendon Press . pp.

51– 52 . Retrieved 9 September 2024 .

^ Lobban, Michael (2000).

"How Benthamic Was the Criminal Law Commission?" .

Law and History Review .

18 (2): 427– 432.

doi : 10.2307/744301 .

ISSN 0738-2480 .

JSTOR 744301 .

^ W. L. Morison, John Austin . Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1982, pp. 148–177.

^ Andrew Altman, Arguing about Law: An Introduction to Legal Philosophy , 2nd ed., Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2001, pp. 69–70.

^ H. L. A. Hart, "Positivism and the Separation of Law and Morality", Harvard Law Review , 71: 593–629 (1958).

Further reading [ edit ] Hart, H. L. A. (2012).

The Concept of Law, 3rd ed . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Morison, W. L. (1982).

John Austin . Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Rumble, Wilfred E. (1985).

The Thought of John Austin: Jurisprudence, Colonial Reform, and the British Constitution . London: Athlone Press.

External links [ edit ] Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"John Austin" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Works by or about John Austin at Wikisource Quotations related to John Austin (legal philosopher) at Wikiquote Spencer about Austin's system: https://web.archive.org/web/20140202205618/http://www.constitution.org/hs/manvssta.txt a short way into essay #4 Works by or about John Austin at the Internet Archive v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Austin_(legal_philosopher)&oldid=1292293290 " Categories : 19th-century English philosophers 1790 births 1859 deaths British philosophers of law Academics of University College London English legal scholars Consequentialists Utilitarians English legal writers People from Creeting St Mary Members of the Inner Temple 19th-century English writers Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 06:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Austin (legal philosopher) 28 languages Add topic

