Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Unary operations Toggle Unary operations subsection 1.1 Elementary operations 1.2 Advanced operations 2 Binary operations 3 Notes Toggle the table of contents Graph operations 8 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Magyar Português Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Procedures for constructing new graphs in graph theory In the mathematical field of graph theory , graph operations are operations which produce new graphs from initial ones. They include both unary (one input) and binary (two input) operations.

Unary operations [ edit ] Unary operations create a new graph from a single initial graph.

Elementary operations [ edit ] Elementary operations or editing operations, which are also known as graph edit operations, create a new graph from one initial one by a simple local change, such as addition or deletion of a vertex or of an edge, merging and splitting of vertices, edge contraction , etc.
The graph edit distance between a pair of graphs is the minimum number of elementary operations required to transform one graph into the other.

Advanced operations [ edit ] Advanced operations create a new graph from an initial one by a complex change, such as: transpose graph ; complement graph ; line graph ; graph minor ; graph rewriting ; power of graph ; dual graph ; medial graph ; quotient graph ; YΔ- and ΔY-transformation ; Mycielskian .

Binary operations [ edit ] Binary operations create a new graph from two initial graphs G 1 = ( V 1 , E 1 ) and G 2 = ( V 2 , E 2 ) , such as: graph union: G 1 ∪ G 2 .  There are two definitions.  In the most common one, the disjoint union of graphs , the union is assumed to be disjoint.  Less commonly (though more consistent with the general definition of union in mathematics) the union of two graphs is defined as the graph ( V 1 ∪ V 2 , E 1 ∪ E 2 ) .

graph intersection: G 1 ∩ G 2 = ( V 1 ∩ V 2 , E 1 ∩ E 2 ) ; [ 1 ] graph join: G 1 ∇ ∇ G 2 {\displaystyle G_{1}\nabla G_{2}} . Graph with all the edges that connect the vertices of the first graph with the vertices of the second graph. It is a commutative operation (for unlabelled graphs); [ 2 ] graph products based on the cartesian product of the vertex sets: cartesian graph product : it is a commutative and associative operation (for unlabelled graphs), [ 2 ] lexicographic graph product (or graph composition): it is an associative (for unlabelled graphs) and non-commutative operation, [ 2 ] strong graph product : it is a commutative and associative operation (for unlabelled graphs), tensor graph product (or direct graph product, categorical graph product, cardinal graph product, Kronecker graph product): it is a commutative and associative operation (for unlabelled graphs), replacement product , zig-zag graph product ; [ 3 ] graph product based on other products: rooted graph product : it is an associative operation (for unlabelled but rooted graphs), corona graph product : it is a non-commutative operation; [ 4 ] series–parallel graph composition : parallel graph composition: it is a commutative operation (for unlabelled graphs), series graph composition: it is a non-commutative operation, source graph composition: it is a commutative operation (for unlabelled graphs); Hajós construction .

Notes [ edit ] ^ Bondy, J. A.; Murty, U. S. R. (2008).

Graph Theory . Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer. p. 29.

ISBN 978-1-84628-969-9 .

^ a b c Harary, F .

Graph Theory . Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1994.

^ Reingold, O.; Vadhan, S.; Wigderson, A. (2002). "Entropy waves, the zig-zag graph product, and new constant-degree expanders".

Annals of Mathematics .

155 (1): 157– 187.

arXiv : math/0406038 .

doi : 10.2307/3062153 .

JSTOR 3062153 .

MR 1888797 .

^ Frucht, Robert ; Harary, Frank (1970). "On the corona of two graphs".

Aequationes Mathematicae .

4 : 322– 324.

doi : 10.1007/bf01844162 .

hdl : 2027.42/44326 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Graph_operations&oldid=1303679387 " Category : Graph operations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 12:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Graph operations 8 languages Add topic

