Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Equivalence to other units of length 2 Other uses 3 Unicode symbols 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Centimetre 103 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Galego 贛語 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lombard Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Walon Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Kumoring Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Unit of length centimetre A carpenter's ruler with centimetre divisions General information Unit system SI Unit of length Symbol cm Conversions 1 cm in ...

... is equal to ...

millimetres 10 mm imperial & US system ~0.3937 in Look up centimetre in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

For broader coverage of this topic, see metre .

Different lengths as in respect to the electromagnetic spectrum , measured by the metre and its derived scales. The microwave is in-between 1 meter to 1 millimeter.

A centimetre (International spelling) or centimeter ( American English ), with SI symbol cm , is a unit of length in the International System of Units (SI) equal to one hundredth of a metre , centi- being the SI prefix for a factor of ⁠ 1 / 100 ⁠ .

[ 1 ] Equivalently, there are 100 centimetres in 1 metre. The centimetre was the base unit of length in the now deprecated centimetre–gram–second (CGS) system of units.

Though for many physical quantities, SI prefixes for factors of 10 3 —like milli- and kilo- —are often preferred by technicians, the centimetre remains a practical unit of length for many everyday measurements; for instance, human height is commonly measured in centimetres.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] A centimetre is approximately the width of the fingernail of an average adult person.

Equivalence to other units of length [ edit ] 1 centimetre = 10 millimetres = 0.01 metres = 0.3937 inches (There are exactly 2.54 centimetres in one inch.) One millilitre is defined as one cubic centimetre, under the SI system of units.

Other uses [ edit ] In addition to its use in the measurement of length , the centimetre is used: sometimes, to report the level of rainfall as measured by a rain gauge [ 4 ] in the CGS system , the centimetre is used to measure capacitance , where 1 cm of capacitance = 1.113 × 10 −12 farads [ 5 ] in  maps, centimetres are used to make conversions from map scale to real world scale (kilometres) to represent second moment of areas (cm 4 ) as the inverse of the Kayser , a CGS unit, and thus a non-SI metric unit of wavenumber :  1 kayser = 1 wave per centimetre; or, more generally, (wavenumber in kaysers) = 1/( wavelength in centimetres). The SI unit of wavenumber is the inverse metre, m −1 .

Unicode symbols [ edit ] For the purposes of compatibility with Chinese , Japanese and Korean ( CJK ) characters, Unicode has symbols for: [ 6 ] centimetre – U+339D ㎝ SQUARE CM square centimetre – U+33A0 ㎠ SQUARE CM SQUARED cubic centimetre – U+33A4 ㎤ SQUARE CM CUBED These characters are each equal in size to one Chinese character and are typically used only with East Asian, fixed-width CJK fonts.

See also [ edit ] Conversion of units Orders of magnitude (length) Reciprocal length References [ edit ] ^ "Decimal multiples and submultiples of SI units" . Bureau International des Poids et Mesures. 2014 . Retrieved 5 July 2015 .

^ "Using the BMI-for-Age Growth Charts" .

cdc.gov .

Centers for Disease Control . Archived from the original on 30 January 2014 . Retrieved 5 July 2014 .

^ Price, Beth; et al. (2009).

MathsWorld Year 8 VELS Edition . Australia: MacMillan . p. 626.

ISBN 978-0-7329-9251-4 .

^ "Rain Measurement" .

www.weathershack.com .

^ Weisstein, Eric W.

"Capacitance -- from Eric Weisstein's World of Physics" .

scienceworld.wolfram.com .

^ CJK Compatibility excerpt from The Unicode Standard, Version 10.0.

External links [ edit ] CM to Inch Converter v t e Metric units of length (by order of magnitude ) From smallest to largest (left to right). Commonly used units shown in bold italics .

quectometre (qm=10 −30 m) rontometre (rm) yoctometre (ym) zeptometre (zm) attometre (am) femtometre/fermi (fm) picometre (pm) nanometre ( nm =10 −9 m) micrometre ( μm =10 −6 m) millimetre ( mm =10 −3 m) centimetre ( cm = ⁠ 1 / 100 ⁠ m) decimetre (dm= ⁠ 1 / 10 ⁠ m) metre ( m ) decametre (dam=10 m) hectometre (hm=100 m) kilometre ( km =1000 m) megametre (Mm=10 6 m) gigametre (Gm) terametre (Tm) petametre (Pm) exametre (Em) zettametre (Zm) yottametre (Ym) ronnametre (Rm) quettametre (Qm=10 30 m) v t e CGS units Base units centimetre gram second Derived non EM units barye dyne erg gal kelvin poise kayser phot stilb Derived EMU units abampere ( biot ) abcoulomb abhenry abmho abohm abvolt gauss gilbert maxwell oersted Derived ESU units statampere statcoulomb statmho statohm statvolt Authority control databases International FAST National United States Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Centimetre&oldid=1298104704 " Categories : Metre Orders of magnitude (length) Centimetre–gram–second system of units SI units 100 (number) Units of length Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from February 2023 Pages using gadget Calculator This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 14:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Centimetre 103 languages Add topic

