Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Organizations 2 Types of awards 3 Criticism 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Literary award 23 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Frysk 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Kurdî Magyar 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Română Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Award for authors and literary associations A literary award or literary prize is an award presented in recognition of a particularly lauded literary piece or body of work. It is normally presented to an author .

Organizations [ edit ] Most literary awards come with a corresponding award ceremony . Many awards are structured with one organization (usually a non-profit organization) as the presenter and public face of the award, and another organization as the financial sponsor or backer, who pays the prize remuneration and the cost of the ceremony and public relations, typically a corporate sponsor who may sometimes attach their name to the award (such as the Orange Prize ).

Types of awards [ edit ] There are awards for various writing formats including poetry and novels . Many awards are also dedicated to a certain genre of fiction or non-fiction writing (such as science fiction or politics ). There are also awards dedicated to works in individual languages, such as the Miguel de Cervantes Prize ( Spanish ); [ 1 ] the Camões Prize ( Portuguese ); [ 2 ] the Booker Prize , [ 3 ] The Writers' Prize , [ 4 ] the Pulitzer Prize and the Hugo Award ( English ).

[ 5 ] Other international literary prizes include the Nobel Prize in Literature , the Franz Kafka Prize , and the Jerusalem Prize . The International Dublin Literary Award is given to writers, as well as to the translator(s) if the book chosen was written in a language other than English. The Astrid Lindgren Memorial Award is given annually to a person or organisation for their outstanding contribution to children’s and young adult literature.

Spoof awards include: The Literary Review Bad Sex in Fiction Award , the Bookseller /Diagram Prize for Oddest Title of the Year , and the Bulwer-Lytton Fiction and Lyttle Lytton Contests , given to deliberately bad grammar There are also literary awards targeted specifically to encourage the writing from African American origin and authors of African descent. Two of these awards are Ernest J. Gaines Award for Literary Excellence , which was established in 2007 by the Baton Rouge Area Foundation , and Hurston/Wright Legacy Award , which is a given by the National Community of Black Writers.

Criticism [ edit ] Australian author Richard Flanagan wrote a critique of literary awards, saying "National prizes are often a barometer of bourgeois bad taste." He says juries can be influenced by vendettas, paybacks and payoffs, "most judges are fair-minded people. But hate, conceit and jealousy are no less human attributes than wisdom, judgment and knowledge." [ 6 ] Book prizes will sometimes compete with one another, and these goals do not always coincide with anointing the best winner. Sometimes juries can not decide between two contentious books so they will compromise with a third inoffensive bland book. He says there are now so many awards and prizes it has diluted the prestige of being a prize-winning book. Flanagan clarifies he is not against literary awards, but believes they should not be taken too seriously as a form of support for literary culture.

See also [ edit ] Books portal Literature portal List of literary awards List of poetry awards List of the world's richest literary prizes Literary festival Vanity award References [ edit ] ^ "Miguel de Cervantes Prize at Spain is culture" .

www.spainisculture.com .

Archived from the original on 2021-09-16 . Retrieved 2021-06-02 .

^ Santos, Nina (29 March 2017).

"A Brief History of the Camões Prize" .

Culture Trip .

Archived from the original on 2021-06-02 . Retrieved 2021-06-02 .

^ "Booker Prize | British literary award" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 2021-06-20 . Retrieved 2021-06-02 .

^ "The Rathbones Folio Prize | The Rathbones Folio Prize" . Archived from the original on 2021-05-26 . Retrieved 2021-06-02 .

^ "Hugo Awards" .

DisCon III .

Archived from the original on 2021-06-01 . Retrieved 2021-06-02 .

^ Richard Flanagan (June 16, 2012).

"A loss for words" .

The Sydney Morning Herald .

Archived from the original on July 3, 2012 . Retrieved June 16, 2012 .

External links [ edit ] Book Prize Information : database of literary awards Author Ranking by Literary Awards : ranked lists of authors that received prominent literary award honors Best books of: 2008 , 2009 , 2000-2009 , 2010 , Year-end "Best Books" lists aggregated at Largehearted Boy .

"The Art of Prize-Fighting" , by Tom Chatfield in Prospect Magazine , January 2009. Essay on the history and merit of modern literary prizes.

"75 Notes For An Unwritten Essay on Literary Prizes" , by Matthew Hunte, at " The Busy Signal " November 27, 2010. Essay-notes on the history of literary prizes.

v t e Books Production Binding Covers dust jackets Design Editing Illustration Illuminated manuscripts Printing edition history incunabula instant book limited edition Publishing advance copy hardcover paperback Size Typesetting Volume (bibliography) Collection (publishing) Book series Consumption Awards Bestsellers list Bibliography Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) Bibliophilia Bibliotherapy Bookmarks Bookselling blurbs book towns history used Censorship Clubs Collecting Digitizing Bookworm (insect) Furniture bookcases bookends Library Print culture Reading literacy Reviews By country Brazil China France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Pakistan Spain United Kingdom United States Other Genres non-fiction novel imaginary miniature pop-up textbook Grimoire Formats audiobooks Ebooks Folio Coffee table book Related Banned books Book burning incidents Nazi Book curses Book packaging Book swapping Book tour Conservation and restoration Dog ears History of books scroll codex Intellectual property ISBN Outline Preservation The Philobiblon World Book Day World Book Capital Outline Category Portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Literary_award&oldid=1275599561 " Category : Literary awards Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 February 2025, at 23:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Literary award 23 languages Add topic

