Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 1960s 1.2 1970s–1980s 1.3 1990s 1.4 2000s 1.5 2010s 1.5.1 Early 2010s 1.5.2 Mid-2010s 1.5.3 Late 2010s 1.6 2020s 2 Structure Toggle Structure subsection 2.1 Notable national sections 2.2 Charitable status 3 Principles 4 Objectives Toggle Objectives subsection 4.1 Country focus 5 Funding 6 Criticism and controversies Toggle Criticism and controversies subsection 6.1 Internal controversies 6.1.1 2019 report on workplace bullying 6.1.2 2019 budgetary crisis 6.1.3 2020 secret payout 6.1.4 2021 accusation of systemic bias 6.1.5 2022 report on systemic racism 6.2 Nayirah testimony 6.3 Israel 6.4 Russia 6.5 United Kingdom and the Commonwealth 6.5.1 2010 CAGE controversy 6.5.2 2011 Irene Khan payout 6.5.3 2019 Kurdish hunger strike 6.6 Ukraine 7 Awards and honours 8 Cultural impact Toggle Cultural impact subsection 8.1 Human rights concerts 8.2 The Amnesty Candle 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Notes 10.2 Citations 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Amnesty International 94 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Piemontèis Polski Português Română Rumantsch Русский Саха тыла Sardu Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia International non-governmental organization Amnesty International Founded July 1961 ; 64 years ago ( 1961-07 ) United Kingdom Founders Peter Benenson Eric Baker Seán MacBride Type Nonprofit INGO Headquarters London , WC1 United Kingdom Location Global Services Protecting human rights Fields Media attention, direct-appeal campaigns, research, lobbying Members More than ten million members and supporters [ 3 ] Secretary-General Agnès Callamard [ 2 ] Employees 3,600 [ 1 ] Website www .amnesty .org Amnesty International (also referred to as Amnesty or AI ) is an international non-governmental organization focused on human rights , with its headquarters in the United Kingdom. The organization says that it has more than ten million members and supporters around the world.

[ 3 ] The stated mission of the organization is to campaign for "a world in which every person enjoys all of the human rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international human rights instruments ".

[ 4 ] The organization has played a notable role on human rights issues due to its frequent citation in media and by world leaders.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] AI was founded in London in 1961 by the lawyer Peter Benenson .

[ 7 ] In what he called "The Forgotten Prisoners" and "An Appeal for Amnesty", which appeared on the front page of the British newspaper The Observer , Benenson wrote about two students who toasted to freedom in Portugal and four other people who had been jailed in other nations because of their beliefs. AI's original focus was prisoners of conscience , with its remit widening in the 1970s, under the leadership of Seán MacBride and Martin Ennals , to include miscarriages of justice and torture . In 1977, it was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize . In the 1980s, its secretary general was Thomas Hammarberg , succeeded in the 1990s by Pierre Sané . In the 2000s, it was led by Irene Khan .

Amnesty draws attention to human rights abuses and campaigns for compliance with international laws and standards. It works to mobilize public opinion to generate pressure on governments where abuse takes place.

[ 8 ] History 1960s Amnesty International was founded in London in July 1961 by English barrister Peter Benenson , who had previously been a founding member of the UK law reform organization JUSTICE.

[ 9 ] Benenson was influenced by his friend Louis Blom-Cooper , who led a political prisoners' campaign.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] According to Benenson's own account, he was travelling on the London Underground on 19 November 1960 when he read that two Portuguese students from Coimbra had been sentenced to seven years of imprisonment in Portugal for allegedly "having drunk a toast to liberty".

[ a ] [ 12 ] Researchers have never traced the alleged newspaper article in question.

[ a ] In 1960, Portugal was ruled by the Estado Novo government of António de Oliveira Salazar .

[ 13 ] The government was authoritarian in nature and strongly anti-communist , suppressing enemies of the state as anti-Portuguese. In his significant newspaper article " The Forgotten Prisoners ", Benenson later described his reaction as follows: Open your newspaper any day of the week and you will find a story from somewhere of someone being imprisoned, tortured or executed because his opinions or religion are unacceptable to his government... The newspaper reader feels a sickening sense of impotence. Yet if these feelings of disgust could be united into common action, something effective could be done.

[ 7 ] Benenson worked with his friend Eric Baker – a member of the Religious Society of Friends who had been involved in funding the British Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament as well as becoming  head of Quaker Peace and Social Witness . In his memoirs, Benenson described him as "a partner in the launching of the project".

[ 14 ] In consultation with other writers, academics and lawyers and, in particular, Alec Digges, they wrote via Louis Blom-Cooper to David Astor , editor of The Observer newspaper, who, on 28 May 1961, published Benenson's article "The Forgotten Prisoners". The article brought the reader's attention to those "imprisoned, tortured or executed because his opinions or religion are unacceptable to his government" [ 7 ] or, put another way, to violations, by governments, of articles 18 and 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR). The article described these violations occurring, on a global scale, in the context of restrictions to press freedom, to political oppositions, to timely public trial before impartial courts, and to asylum. It marked the launch of "Appeal for Amnesty, 1961", the aim of which was to mobilize public opinion, quickly and widely, in defence of these individuals, whom Benenson named "Prisoners of Conscience".

[ 15 ] The "Appeal for Amnesty" was reprinted by a large number of international newspapers. In the same year, Benenson had a book published, Persecution 1961 , which detailed the cases of nine prisoners of conscience investigated and compiled by Benenson and Baker (Maurice Audin, Ashton Jones , Agostinho Neto , Patrick Duncan , Olga Ivinskaya , Luis Taruc , Constantin Noica , Antonio Amat and Hu Feng ).

[ 15 ] In July 1961, the leadership had decided that the appeal would form the basis of a permanent organization, Amnesty, with the first meeting taking place in London. Benenson ensured that all three major political parties were represented, enlisting members of parliament from the Labour Party , the Conservative Party , and the Liberal Party .

[ 16 ] On 30 September 1962, it was officially named "Amnesty International". Between the "Appeal for Amnesty, 1961" and September 1962 the organization had been known simply as "Amnesty".

[ 17 ] By the mid-1960s, Amnesty International's global presence was growing and an International Secretariat and International Executive Committee were established to manage Amnesty International's national organizations, called "Sections", which had appeared in several countries. They were secretly supported by the British government at the time.

[ 18 ] The international movement was starting to agree on its core principles and techniques. For example, the issue of whether or not to adopt prisoners who had advocated violence, like Nelson Mandela , brought unanimous agreement that it could not give the name of "Prisoner of Conscience" to such prisoners. Aside from the work of the library and groups, Amnesty International's activities were expanding to helping prisoners' families, sending observers to trials, making representations to governments, and finding asylum or overseas employment for prisoners. Its activity and influence were also increasing within intergovernmental organizations; it would be awarded consultative status by the United Nations, the Council of Europe and UNESCO before the decade ended.

[ 19 ] In 1966, Benenson suspected that the British government in collusion with some Amnesty employees had suppressed a report on British atrocities in Aden.

[ 20 ] He began to suspect that many of his colleagues were part of a British intelligence conspiracy to subvert Amnesty, but he could not convince anybody else at AI.

[ 21 ] Later in the same year, there were further allegations, when the US government reported that Seán MacBride , the former Irish foreign minister and Amnesty's first chairman, had been involved with a Central Intelligence Agency funding operation.

[ 20 ] MacBride denied knowledge of the funding, but Benenson became convinced that MacBride was a member of a CIA network.

[ 21 ] Benenson resigned as Amnesty's president on the grounds that it was bugged and infiltrated by the secret services, and said that he could no longer live in a country where such activities were tolerated.

[ 18 ] (See Relationship with the British Government ) 1970s–1980s Amnesty International's membership increased from 15,000 in 1969 [ 22 ] to 200,000 by 1979.

[ 23 ] At the intergovernmental level Amnesty International pressed for the application of the UN's Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and of existing humanitarian conventions; to secure ratifications of the two UN Covenants on Human Rights in 1976, and was instrumental in obtaining additional instruments and provisions forbidding the practice of maltreatment. Consultative status was granted at the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in 1972.

[ 24 ] Amnesty International established its Japan chapter in 1970, in part a response to the Republic of China (Taiwan)'s arrest and prosecution of Chen Yu-hsi, whom the Taiwan Garrison Command had alleged committed sedition by reading communist literature while studying in the United States.

[ 25 ] : 101–104 In 1976, Amnesty's British Section started a series of fund-raising events that came to be known as The Secret Policeman's Balls series. They were staged in London initially as comedy galas featuring what The Daily Telegraph called "the crème de la crème of the British comedy world" [ 26 ] including members of comedy troupe Monty Python , and later expanded to also include performances by leading rock musicians. The series was created and developed by Monty Python alumnus John Cleese and entertainment industry executive Martin Lewis working closely with Amnesty staff members Peter Luff (assistant director of Amnesty 1974–1978) and subsequently with Peter Walker (Amnesty Fund-Raising Officer 1978–1982). Cleese, Lewis and Luff worked together on the first two shows (1976 and 1977). Cleese, Lewis and Walker worked together on the 1979 and 1981 shows, the first to carry what The Daily Telegraph described as the "rather brilliantly re-christened" Secret Policeman's Ball title.

[ 26 ] The organization was awarded the 1977 Nobel Peace Prize for its "defence of human dignity against torture " [ 27 ] and the United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights in 1978.

[ 28 ] During the mid-to-late-1980s, Amnesty organized two major musical events took place to increase awareness of Amnesty and of human rights. The 1986 Conspiracy of Hope tour, which played five concerts in the US, and culminated in a daylong show, featuring some thirty-odd acts at Giants Stadium, and the 1988 Human Rights Now!

world tour. Human Rights Now!, which was timed to coincide with the 40th anniversary of the United Nations' Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), played a series of concerts on five continents over six weeks. Both tours featured some of the most famous musicians and bands of the day.

[ citation needed ] 1990s Throughout the 1990s, Amnesty continued to grow, to a membership of over seven million in over 150 countries and territories, [ 3 ] led by Senegalese Secretary General Pierre Sané . At the intergovernmental level, Amnesty International argued in favour of creating a United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (established 1993) and an International Criminal Court (established 2002).

[ citation needed ] Amnesty continued to work on a wide range of issues and world events. For example, South African groups joined in 1992 and hosted a visit by Pierre Sané to meet with the apartheid government to press for an investigation into allegations of police abuse, an end to arms sales to the African Great Lakes region and the abolition of the death penalty. In particular, Amnesty International brought attention to violations committed on specific groups, including refugees , racial/ethnic/religious minorities, women and those executed or on Death Row .

[ 29 ] In 1995, when AI wanted to promote how Shell Oil Company was involved with the execution of an environmental and human-rights activist Ken Saro-Wiwa in Nigeria, it was stopped. Newspapers and advertising companies refused to run AI's ads because Shell Oil was a customer of theirs as well. Shell's main argument was that it was drilling oil in a country that already violated human rights and had no way to enforce human-rights policies. To combat the buzz that AI was trying to create, it immediately publicized how Shell was helping to improve overall life in Nigeria.

Salil Shetty , the director of Amnesty, said, "Social media re-energises the idea of the global citizen".

[ 16 ] James M. Russell notes how the drive for profit from private media sources conflicts with the stories that AI wants to be heard.

[ 30 ] Amnesty International became involved in the legal battle over Augusto Pinochet , former Chilean dictator, who sought to avoid extradition to Spain to face charges after his arrest in London in 1998 by the Metropolitan Police .

Lord Hoffman had an indirect connection with Amnesty International, and this led to an important test for the appearance of bias in legal proceedings in UK law. There was a suit [ 31 ] against the decision to release Senator Pinochet, taken by the then British Home Secretary Jack Straw, before that decision had actually been taken, in an attempt to prevent the release of Senator Pinochet. The English High Court refused [ 32 ] the application, and Senator Pinochet was released and returned to Chile.

2000s After 2000, Amnesty International's primary focus turned to the challenges arising from globalization and the reaction to the 11 September 2001 attacks in the United States. The issue of globalization provoked a major shift in Amnesty International policy, as the scope of its work was widened to include economic, social and cultural rights, an area that it had declined to work on in the past. Amnesty International felt this shift was important, not just to give credence to its principle of the indivisibility of rights, but because of what it saw as the growing power of companies and the undermining of many nation-states as a result of globalization.

[ 33 ] In the aftermath of 11 September attacks, the new Amnesty International Secretary General, Irene Khan , reported that a senior government official had said to Amnesty International delegates: "Your role collapsed with the collapse of the Twin Towers in New York." [ 34 ] In the years following the attacks, some [ who?

] believe that the gains made by human rights organizations over previous decades had possibly been eroded.

[ 35 ] Amnesty International argued that human rights were the basis for the security of all, not a barrier to it. Criticism came directly from the Bush administration and The Washington Post , when Khan, in 2005, likened the US government's detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba , to a Soviet Gulag .

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] During the first half of the new decade, Amnesty International turned its attention to violence against women , controls on the world arms trade , concerns surrounding the effectiveness of the UN, and ending torture.

[ 38 ] With its membership close to two million by 2005, [ 39 ] Amnesty continued to work for prisoners of conscience.

In 2007, AI's executive committee decided to support access to abortion "within reasonable gestational limits...for women in cases of rape, incest or violence, or where the pregnancy jeopardizes a mother's life or health".

[ 40 ] Amnesty International reported, concerning the Iraq War , on 17 March 2008, that despite claims the security situation in Iraq has improved in recent months, the human rights situation is disastrous, after the start of the war five years earlier in 2003.

[ 41 ] In 2009, Amnesty International accused Israel and the Palestinian Hamas movement of committing war crimes during Israel's January offensive in Gaza, called Operation Cast Lead , that resulted in the deaths of more than 1,400 Palestinians and 13 Israelis.

[ 42 ] The 117-page Amnesty report charged Israeli forces with killing hundreds of civilians and wanton destruction of thousands of homes. Amnesty found evidence of Israeli soldiers using Palestinian civilians as human shields. A subsequent United Nations Fact Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict was carried out; Amnesty stated that its findings were consistent with those of Amnesty's own field investigation, and called on the UN to act promptly to implement the mission's recommendations.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] 2010s Amnesty International, 19 March 2011 Japanese branch of Amnesty International, 23 May 2014 Early 2010s In February 2010, Amnesty suspended Gita Sahgal , its gender unit head, after she criticized Amnesty for its links with Moazzam Begg , director of Cageprisoners . She said it was "a gross error of judgment" to work with "Britain's most famous supporter of the Taliban".

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Amnesty responded that Sahgal was not suspended "for raising these issues internally... [Begg] speaks about his own views ..., not Amnesty International's".

[ 47 ] Among those who spoke up for Sahgal were Salman Rushdie , [ 48 ] Member of Parliament Denis MacShane , Joan Smith , Christopher Hitchens , Martin Bright , Melanie Phillips , and Nick Cohen .

[ 46 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] In July 2011, Amnesty International celebrated its 50 years with an animated short film directed by Carlos Lascano , produced by Eallin Motion Art and Dreamlife Studio, with music by Academy Award-winner Hans Zimmer and nominee Lorne Balfe.

[ 55 ] In August 2012, Amnesty International's chief executive in India sought an impartial investigation, led by the United Nations, to render justice to those affected by war crimes in Sri Lanka.

[ 56 ] Mid-2010s Supporters of Amnesty International at Cologne Pride Parade 2014 On 18 August 2014, in the wake of demonstrations sparked by people protesting the fatal police shooting of Michael Brown , Amnesty International sent a 13-person contingent of human rights activists to seek meetings with officials as well as to train local activists in non-violent protest methods.

[ 57 ] This was the first time that the organization has deployed such a team to the United States.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] In the 2015 annual Amnesty International UK conference, delegates narrowly voted (468 votes to 461) against a motion proposing a campaign against antisemitism in the UK. The debate on the motion formed a consensus that Amnesty should fight "discrimination against all ethnic and religious groups", but the division among delegates was over the issue of whether it would be appropriate for an anti-racism campaign with a "single focus".

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] The Jewish Chronicle noted that Amnesty International had previously published a report on discrimination against Muslims in Europe.

[ 63 ] In August 2015, The Times reported that Yasmin Hussein, then Amnesty's director of faith and human rights and previously its head of international advocacy and a prominent representative at the United Nations , had "undeclared private links to men alleged to be key players in a secretive network of global Islamists ", including the Muslim Brotherhood and Hamas .

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] The Times also detailed instances where Hussein was alleged to have had inappropriately close relationships with the al-Qazzaz family, members of which were high-ranking government ministers in the administration of Mohammed Morsi and Muslim Brotherhood leaders at the time.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Ms Hussein denied supporting the Muslim Brotherhood and told Amnesty that "any connections are purely circumstantial".

[ 64 ] In June 2016, Amnesty International called on the United Nations General Assembly to "immediately suspend" Saudi Arabia from the UN Human Rights Council .

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Richard Bennett, head of Amnesty's UN Office, said: "The credibility of the U.N. Human Rights Council is at stake. Since joining the council, Saudi Arabia's dire human rights record at home has continued to deteriorate and the coalition it leads has unlawfully killed and injured thousands of civilians in the conflict in Yemen ." [ 68 ] In December 2016, Amnesty International revealed that Voiceless Victims , a fake non-profit organization which claims to raise awareness for migrant workers who are victims of human rights abuses in Qatar , had been trying to spy on their staff.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] Late 2010s Amnesty International sign at the WorldPride Madrid in July 2017 In October 2018, an Amnesty International researcher was abducted and beaten while observing demonstrations in Magas, the capital of Ingushetia, Russia.

[ 71 ] On 25 October, federal officers raided the Bengaluru office for 10 hours on a suspicion that the organization had violated foreign direct investment guidelines on the orders of the Enforcement Directorate . Employees and supporters of Amnesty International say this is an act to intimidate organizations and people who question the authority and capabilities of government leaders. Aakar Patel, the executive director of the Indian branch claimed, "The Enforcement Directorate's raid on our office today shows how the authorities are now treating human rights organizations like criminal enterprises, using heavy-handed methods. On Sep 29, the Ministry of Home Affairs said Amnesty International using "glossy statements" about humanitarian work etc. as a "ploy to divert attention" from their activities which were in clear contravention of laid down Indian laws. Amnesty International received permission only once in Dec 2000, since then it had been denied Foreign Contribution permission under the Foreign Contribution Act by successive Governments. However, in order to circumvent the FCRA regulations, Amnesty UK remitted large amounts of money to four entities registered in India by classifying it as Foreign Direct Investment (FDI).

[ 72 ] The current Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi , has been criticized by foreign medias for harming civil society in India, specifically by targeting advocacy groups.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] India has cancelled the registration of about 15,000 nongovernmental organizations under the Foreign Contribution Regulation Act (FCRA); the U.N. has issued statements against the policies that allow these cancellations to occur.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] Though nothing was found to confirm these accusations, the government plans on continuing the investigation and has frozen the bank accounts of all the offices in India . A spokesperson for the Enforcement Directorate has said the investigation could take three months to complete.

[ 76 ] On 30 October 2018, Amnesty called for the arrest and prosecution of Nigerian security forces claiming that they used excessive force against Shi'a protesters during a peaceful religious procession around Abuja, Nigeria. At least 45 were killed and 122 were injured during the event.

[ 78 ] In November 2018, Amnesty reported the arrest of 19 or more rights activists and lawyers in Egypt . The arrests were made by the Egyptian authorities as part of the regime's ongoing crackdown on dissent. One of the arrested was Hoda Abdel-Monaim, a 60-year-old human rights lawyer and former member of the National Council for Human Rights. Amnesty reported that following the arrests Egyptian Coordination for Rights and Freedoms (ECRF) decided to suspend its activities due to the hostile environment towards civil society in the country.

[ 79 ] On 5 December 2018, Amnesty International strongly condemned the execution of the leaders of the " black realtors " gang Ihar Hershankou and Siamion Berazhnoy in Belarus .

[ 80 ] They were shot despite UN Human Rights Committee request for a delay.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] Amnesty International sign in Rouen , 4 May 2019 In February 2019, Amnesty International's management team offered to resign after an independent report found what it called a "toxic culture" of workplace bullying , and found evidence of bullying , harassment , sexism and racism , after being asked to investigate the suicides of 30-year Amnesty veteran Gaetan Mootoo in Paris in May 2018 (who left a note citing work pressures), and 28-year-old intern Rosalind McGregor in Geneva in July 2018.

[ 83 ] In April 2019, Amnesty International's deputy director for research in Europe, Massimo Moratti, warned that if extradited to the United States, WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange would face the "risk of serious human rights violations, namely detention conditions, which could violate the prohibition of torture".

[ 84 ] On 14 May 2019, Amnesty International filed a petition with the District Court of Tel Aviv, Israel, seeking a revocation of the export licence of surveillance technology firm NSO Group .

[ 85 ] The filing states that "staff of Amnesty International have an ongoing and well-founded fear they may continue to be targeted and ultimately surveilled" [ 86 ] by NSO technology. Other lawsuits have also been filed against NSO in Israeli courts over alleged human-rights abuses, including a December 2018 filing by Saudi dissident Omar Abdulaziz, who claimed NSO's software targeted his phone during a period in which he was in regular contact with murdered journalist Jamal Kashoggi .

[ 87 ] In September 2019, European Commission President-elect Ursula von der Leyen created the new position of "Vice President for Protecting our European Way of Life ", who will be responsible for upholding the rule-of-law, internal security and migration.

[ 88 ] Amnesty International accused the European Union of "using the framing of the far right" by linking migration with security.

[ 89 ] On 24 November 2019, Anil Raj , a former Amnesty International board member, was killed by a car bomb while working with the United Nations Development Project. U.S. Secretary of State, Mike Pompeo announced Raj's death at a briefing 26 Nov, during which he discussed other acts of terrorism.

[ 90 ] 2020s In August 2020, Amnesty International expressed concerns about what it called the "widespread torture of peaceful protesters" and treatment of detainees in Belarus.

[ 91 ] The organization also said that more than 1,100 people were killed by bandits in rural communities in northern Nigeria during the first six months of 2020.

[ 92 ] Amnesty International investigated what it called "excessive" and "unlawful" killings of teenagers by Angolan police who were enforcing restrictions during the coronavirus pandemic.

[ 93 ] In May 2020, the organization raised concerns about security flaws in a COVID-19 contact tracing app mandated in Qatar .

[ 94 ] In September 2020, Amnesty shut down its India operations after the government froze its bank accounts due to alleged financial irregularities.

[ 95 ] On 2 November 2020, Amnesty International reported that 54 people – mostly Amhara women and children and elderly people – were killed by the OLF in the village of Gawa Qanqa, Ethiopia.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] In April 2021, Amnesty International distanced itself from a tweet by Agnès Callamard , its newly appointed Secretary General, asserting that Israel had killed Yasser Arafat ; Callamard herself has not deleted the tweet.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] In February 2022, Amnesty accused Israel of committing the crime of apartheid against the Palestinians , joining other human rights organizations that had previously accused Israel of the crime against humanity . In 2021, Human Rights Watch and B'tselem both accused Israel of apartheid for its treatment of the Palestinians in the occupied territories.

[ 101 ] An Amnesty report stated that Israel maintains "an institutionalized regime of oppression and domination of the Palestinian population for the benefit of Jewish Israelis".

[ 102 ] The Israeli Foreign Ministry stated that Amnesty was peddling "lies, inconsistencies, and unfounded assertions that originate from well-known anti-Israeli hate organisations". The Palestinian Foreign Ministry called the report a "detailed affirmation of the cruel reality of entrenched racism, exclusion, oppression, colonialism, apartheid, and attempted erasure that the Palestinian people have endured".

[ 102 ] In March 2022, Paul O'Brien, the Amnesty International USA Director, speaking to a Women's National Democratic Club audience in the US, stated: "We are opposed to the idea—and this, I think, is an existential part of the debate—that Israel should be preserved as a state for the Jewish people", while adding "Amnesty takes no political views on any question, including the right of the State of Israel to survive." [ 103 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] [ 106 ] [ undue weight?

– discuss ] On 7 April 2022, six weeks after the beginning of the Russian invasion of Ukraine , the Russian Ministry of Justice announced that the offices of Amnesty International and 14 other well-known international organizations had been closed for "violations of Russian law".

[ 107 ] In December 2024, Amnesty concluded that Israel was committing genocide in Gaza in its war against Palestinian militants in the territory.

[ 108 ] In January 2025, Amnesty International suspended Amnesty Israel for "evidence of endemic anti-Palestinian racism within AI Israel" within the local branch and its failure to accept the conclusions of Amnesty's reports on Israeli apartheid and the allegations of genocide against Palestinians in Gaza. The suspension is set to last for two years while a review panel decides on whether to reinstate the Israel branch or permanently ban it.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] In 2025, Amnesty was designated as an undesirable organization in Russia.

[ 111 ] Structure Amnesty International Sections, 2012 The Amnesty Canadian headquarters in Ottawa Amnesty International is largely made up of voluntary members but retains a small number of paid professionals. In countries in which Amnesty International has a strong presence, members are organized as "sections". In 2019 there were 63 sections worldwide.

[ 112 ] Amnesty International is structured around three main components: the Global Assembly, the International Board, and the International Secretariat. The Global Assembly is the movement’s highest decision-making body, bringing together representatives from national sections each year to vote on key strategic issues. One of its main roles is to elect the International Board, a group of eight members responsible for overseeing the organisation between Global Assembly meetings. The International Secretariat, led by a Secretary General appointed by the International Board, manages the daily operations of the global movement. It provides most of Amnesty’s research, coordinates international campaign strategies, and issues urgent actions, which are then adapted by national sections.

[ 113 ] Amnesty International Sections, 2005 Algeria; Argentina; Australia ; Austria; Belgium (Dutch-speaking); Belgium (French-speaking); Benin; Bermuda; Canada (English-speaking); Canada (French-speaking); Chile; Côte d'Ivoire; Denmark; Faroe Islands; Finland; France; Germany; Greece; Guyana; Hong Kong; Iceland; Ireland ; Israel; Italy; Japan; Korea (Republic of); Luxembourg; Mauritius; Mexico; Morocco; Nepal; Netherlands; New Zealand ; Norway; Peru; Philippines ; Poland; Portugal; Puerto Rico; Senegal; Sierra Leone; Slovenia; Spain; Sweden; Switzerland; Taiwan; Togo; Tunisia; United Kingdom; United States of America ; Uruguay; Venezuela Amnesty International Structures, 2005 Belarus; Bolivia; Burkina Faso; Croatia; Curaçao; Czech Republic; Gambia; Hungary; Malaysia; Mali; Moldova; Mongolia; Pakistan; Paraguay; Slovakia; South Africa ; Thailand; Turkey; Ukraine; Zambia; Zimbabwe International Board (formerly known as "IEC") Chairpersons Seán MacBride , 1965–74; Dirk Börner, 1974–17; Thomas Hammarberg , 1977–79; José Zalaquett , 1979–82; Suriya Wickremasinghe, 1982–85; Wolfgang Heinz, 1985–96; Franca Sciuto, 1986–89; Peter Duffy , 1989–91; Anette Fischer , 1991–92; Ross Daniels, 1993–19; Susan Waltz , 1996–98; Mahmoud Ben Romdhane, 1999–2000; Colm O Cuanachain, 2001–02; Paul Hoffman, 2003–04; Jaap Jacobson, 2005; Hanna Roberts, 2005–06; Lilian Gonçalves-Ho Kang You , 2006–07; Peter Pack, 2007–11; Pietro Antonioli, 2011–13; and Nicole Bieske, 2013–2018, Sarah Beamish (2019 to current).

Secretaries General Amnesty International Secretaries General Secretary General Office Origin Peter Benenson Peter Benenson 1961–1966 Britain Eric Baker Eric Baker 1966–1968 Britain Martin Ennals Martin Ennals 1968–1980 Britain Thomas Hammarberg Thomas Hammarberg 1980–1986 Sweden Avery Brundage Ian Martin 1986–1992 Britain Pierre Sané Pierre Sané 1992–2001 Senegal Irene Zubaida Khan Irene Khan 2001–2010 Bangladesh Salil Shetty Salil Shetty 2010–2018 India Kumi Naidoo Kumi Naidoo 2018–2020 [ 114 ] South Africa Julie Verhaar Julie Verhaar 2020–2021 ( Acting ) Agnès Callamard Agnès Callamard 2021– present [ 2 ] France Notable national sections Amnesty International Ghana Amnesty International Australia Amnesty International India Amnesty International Ireland Amnesty International New Zealand Amnesty International Philippines Amnesty International South Africa Amnesty International Thailand Amnesty International USA Charitable status In the UK Amnesty International has two components which are registered charities under English law: Amnesty International Charity [ 115 ] and Amnesty International UK Section Charitable Trust.

[ 116 ] Principles The core principle of Amnesty International is a focus on prisoners of conscience , those persons imprisoned or prevented from expressing an opinion by means of violence. Along with this commitment to opposing repression of freedom of expression, Amnesty International's founding principles included non-intervention on political questions, a robust commitment to gathering facts about the various cases and promoting human rights.

[ 117 ] One key issue in the principles is in regards to those individuals who may advocate or tacitly support resorting to violence in struggles against repression. AI does not judge whether recourse to violence is justified or not. However, AI does not oppose the political use of violence in itself since The Universal Declaration of Human Rights , in its preamble, foresees situations in which people could "be compelled to have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against tyranny and oppression". If a prisoner is serving a sentence imposed, after a fair trial, for activities involving violence, AI will not ask the government to release the prisoner.

AI neither supports nor condemns the resort to violence by political opposition groups in itself, just as AI neither supports nor condemns a government policy of using military force in fighting against armed opposition movements. However, AI supports minimum humane standards that should be respected by governments and armed opposition groups alike. When an opposition group tortures or kills its captives, takes hostages, or commits deliberate and arbitrary killings, AI condemns these abuses.

[ 118 ] [ dubious – discuss ] Amnesty International considers capital punishment to be the ultimate, irreversible denial of human rights and opposes capital punishment in all cases, regardless of the crime committed, the circumstances surrounding the individual or the method of execution.

[ 119 ] Objectives Amnesty International's vision is of a world in which every person enjoys all of the human rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international human rights standards.

In pursuit of this vision, Amnesty International's mission is to undertake research and action focused on preventing and ending grave abuses of the rights to physical and mental integrity, freedom of conscience and expression, and freedom from discrimination, within the context of its work to promote all human rights.

-Statute of Amnesty International, 27th International Council meeting, 2005 Amnesty International primarily targets governments, but also reports on non-governmental bodies and private individuals (" non-state actors ").

There are six key areas which Amnesty deals with: [ 120 ] Women's , children's , minorities' and indigenous rights Ending torture Abolition of the death penalty Rights of refugees Rights of prisoners of conscience Protection of human dignity .

Some specific aims are to: abolish the death penalty , [ 119 ] end extra judicial executions and " disappearances ", ensure prison conditions meet international human rights standards, ensure prompt and fair trial for all political prisoners , ensure free education to all children worldwide, decriminalize abortion, [ 121 ] fight impunity from systems of justice, end the recruitment and use of child soldiers , free all prisoners of conscience , promote economic, social and cultural rights [ 122 ] for marginalized communities, protect human rights defenders , promote religious tolerance , protect LGBT rights , [ 123 ] stop torture and ill-treatment, [ 124 ] stop unlawful killings in armed conflict, [ 125 ] uphold the rights of refugees, [ 126 ] migrants , and asylum seekers , and protect human dignity. They also support worldwide decriminalisation of prostitution .

[ 127 ] Amnesty International at the 2009 Marcha Gay in Mexico City , 20 June 2009 Amnesty International launched a free human rights learning mobile application called Amnesty Academy in October 2020. It offered learners across the globe access to courses both, online and offline. All courses are downloadable within the application, which is available for both iOS and Android devices.

[ 128 ] Country focus Protesting about Israel 's policy against African refugees , Tel Aviv, 9 December 2011 Amnesty reports disproportionately on relatively more democratic and open countries, [ 129 ] arguing that its intention is not to produce a range of reports which statistically represents the world's human rights abuses, but rather to apply the pressure of public opinion to encourage improvements.

The demonstration effect of the behaviour of both key Western governments and major non-Western states is an important factor; as one former Amnesty Secretary-General pointed out, "for many countries and a large number of people, the United States is a model", and according to one Amnesty manager, "large countries influence small countries." [ 130 ] In addition, with the end of the Cold War , Amnesty felt that a greater emphasis on human rights in the North was needed to improve its credibility with its Southern critics by demonstrating its willingness to report on human rights issues in a truly global manner.

[ 130 ] According to one academic study, as a result of these considerations, the frequency of Amnesty's reports is influenced by a number of factors, besides the frequency and severity of human rights abuses. For example, Amnesty reports significantly more (than predicted by human rights abuses) on more economically powerful states; and on countries that receive US military aid, on the basis that this Western complicity in abuses increases the likelihood of public pressure being able to make a difference.

[ 130 ] In addition, around 1993–94, Amnesty consciously developed its media relations, producing fewer background reports and more press releases, to increase the impact of its reports. Press releases are partly driven by news coverage, to use existing news coverage as leverage to discuss Amnesty's human rights concerns. This increases Amnesty's focus on the countries the media is more interested in.

[ 130 ] In 2012, Kristyan Benedict , Amnesty UK's campaign manager whose main focus is Syria, listed several countries as "regimes who abuse peoples' basic universal rights": Burma , Iran , Israel , North Korea and Sudan . Benedict was criticized for including Israel in this short list on the basis that his opinion was garnered solely from "his own visits", with no other objective sources.

[ 131 ] [ 132 ] Amnesty's country focus is similar to that of some other comparable NGOs, notably Human Rights Watch : between 1991 and 2000, Amnesty and HRW shared eight of ten countries in their "top ten" (by Amnesty press releases; 7 for Amnesty reports).

[ 130 ] In addition, six of the 10 countries most reported on by Human Rights Watch in the 1990s also made The Economist 's and Newsweek 's "most covered" lists during that time.

[ 130 ] Funding Amnesty International is financed largely by fees and donations from its worldwide membership. It says that it does not accept donations from governments or governmental organizations.

[ 133 ] However, Amnesty International has received grants over the past ten years from the UK Department for International Development , [ 134 ] the European Commission , [ 135 ] the United States State Department [ 136 ] [ 137 ] and other governments.

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] Amnesty International USA has received funding from the Rockefeller Foundation , [ 140 ] but these funds are only used "in support of its human rights education work." [ 134 ] It has also received many grants from the Ford Foundation over the years.

[ 141 ] Criticism and controversies Main article: Criticism of Amnesty International Criticism of Amnesty International includes claims about publishing incorrect reports, associating with organizations with a dubious record on human rights protection, selection bias , ideological and foreign policy bias, and the issue of institutional discrimination within the organization.

[ 142 ] Following the suicide of two staff members in 2019, Amnesty launched a review of the workplace culture at the organization. The report found an internal toxic work environment, including cases of bullying and discrimination.

[ 143 ] Since the report multiple staff members around the world spoke about systemic abuse at Amnesty.

[ 144 ] Numerous governments and their supporters have criticized Amnesty's criticism of their policies, including those of Australia ; [ 145 ] Czech Republic ; [ 146 ] China ; [ 147 ] the Democratic Republic of the Congo ; [ 148 ] Egypt ; [ 149 ] India ; Iran ; Israel ; [ 132 ] Morocco ; [ 150 ] Qatar ; [ 151 ] Saudi Arabia ; [ 152 ] Vietnam ; [ 153 ] Russia ; [ 154 ] Nigeria ; [ 155 ] and the United States , [ 156 ] for what they assert is one-sided reporting or a failure to treat threats to security as a mitigating factor. The actions of these governments, and of other governments critical of Amnesty International, have been the subject of human rights concerns voiced by Amnesty.

Internal controversies 2019 report on workplace bullying Main article: Criticism of Amnesty International § 2019 Bullying Report In February 2019, Amnesty International's management team offered to resign after an independent report found what it called a "toxic culture" of workplace bullying . Evidence of bullying , harassment , sexism and racism was uncovered after two 2018 suicides were investigated: that of 30-year Amnesty veteran Gaëtan Mootoo in Paris in May 2018; and that of 28-year-old intern Rosalind McGregor in Geneva in July 2018.

[ 83 ] A 2019 externally commissioned report stated that bullying, public humiliation and other abuses of power are commonplace and routine practice by the management. It also claimed the us versus them culture among employees and the severe lack of trust in the senior management at Amnesty.

[ 157 ] [ 158 ] By October 2019 five of the seven members of the senior leadership team at Amnesty's international secretariat left the organization with "generous" redundancy packages.

[ 159 ] [ 160 ] After none of the managers responsible of bullying at Amnesty were held accountable, a group of workers petitioned for Amnesty's chief Kumi Naidoo to resign. On 5 December 2019 Naidoo resigned from his post of Amnesty's Secretary General citing ill health.

[ 161 ] 2019 budgetary crisis In May 2019, Amnesty International's Secretary General Kumi Naidoo admitted to a hole in the organization's budget of up to £17m in donor money to the end of 2020. In order to deal with the budgetary crisis, Naidoo announced to staff that the organization's headquarters would have cut almost 100 jobs as a part of urgent restructuring.

Unite the Union , the UK's biggest trade union, said the redundancies were a direct result of "overspending by the organization's senior leadership team" and have occurred "despite an increase in income".

[ 162 ] Unite, which represents Amnesty's staff, feared that cuts would fall heaviest on lower-income staff. It said that in the previous year the top 23 highest earners at Amnesty International were paid a total of £2.6m– an average of £113,000 per year. Unite demanded a review of whether it is necessary to have so many managers in the organization.

[ 163 ] Amnesty's budgetary crisis became public after the two staff suicides in 2019. A subsequent independent review of workplace culture found a "state of emergency" at the organization after a restructuring process. Following several reports that labelled Amnesty a toxic workplace, in October 2019 five of the seven high-paid senior directors at Amnesty's international secretariat in London left the organization with "generous" redundancy packages.

[ 164 ] This included Anna Neistat, who was a senior manager directly implicated in the independent report on the suicide of Amnesty's West Africa researcher Gaëtan Mootoo in the organization's Paris office. The size of exit packages granted to former senior management caused anger among other staff and an outcry among Amnesty's members, [ 165 ] and led to the resignation of Naidoo in December 2019.

[ 166 ] 2020 secret payout In September 2020, The Times reported that Amnesty International paid £800,000 in compensation over the workplace suicide of Gaëtan Mootoo and demanded his family keep the deal secret.

[ 167 ] The pre-trial agreement between London-based Amnesty's International Secretariat and Motoo's wife was reached on the condition that she keeps the deal secret by signing NDA. This was done particularly to prevent discussing the settlement with the press or on social media. The arrangement led to criticism on social media, with people asking why an organization such as Amnesty would condone the use of non-disclosure agreements. Shaista Aziz, a co-founder of the feminist advocacy group NGO Safe Space, questioned on Twitter why the "world's leading human rights organisation" was employing such contracts.

[ 168 ] The source of the money was unknown. Amnesty stated that the payout to Motoo's family "will not be made from donations or membership fees".

2021 accusation of systemic bias In April 2021, The Guardian reported that the workers of Amnesty International alleged systemic bias and use of racist language by senior staff.

[ 169 ] The internal review at Amnesty's international secretariat, the report of which was published in October 2020 but not released to the press, recorded multiple examples of alleged racism reported by workers—racial slurs, systemic bias, problematic comments towards religious practices, being some of the examples.

[ 169 ] [ 170 ] The staff at the Amnesty International UK based in London also made claims of racial discrimination.

[ 169 ] The report also documented use of the ethnic slur " nigger " with any objection from employees about its use being downplayed.

Vanessa Tsehaye , the Horn of Africa Campaigner based in the UK, has refused to comment as of April 2021.

2022 report on systemic racism In June 2022, a 106-page independent investigation by the management consultancy firm Global HPO Ltd (GHPO) concluded that Amnesty International UK (AIUK) exhibits institutional and systemic racism. This report was fully accepted by Amnesty International and Amnesty International UK published the findings of the inquiry in April 2022.

[ 171 ] GHPO's independent investigation found that UKAIUK "has failed to embed principles of anti-racism into its own DNA and faces bullying issues within the organisation." [ 172 ] GHPO's report includes recommendations for improvement actions to be taken by the organization. The alghemeiner reports that AIUK stated it "accepted all the recommendations," and that the "press' insistence on describing Amnesty as a 'leading human rights group' is furthermore problematic given the anti-Jewish racism that the NGO has displayed for years." [ 173 ] Nayirah testimony Main article: Nayirah testimony In 1990, when the United States government was deciding whether or not to invade Iraq , a Kuwaiti woman, only identified to Congress by the first name Nayirah , testified to congress that when Iraq invaded Kuwait , she stayed behind after some of her family left the country. She said she was volunteering in a local hospital when Iraqi soldiers stole the incubators with children in them and left them to freeze to death. Amnesty International, which had human rights investigators in Kuwait, confirmed the story and helped spread it among the Western public. The organization also inflated the number of children who were killed by the robbery to over 300, more than the number of incubators available in the city hospitals of the country. Her testimony aired on ABC 's Nightline and NBC Nightly News reaching an estimated audience between 35 and 53 million Americans.

[ 174 ] [ 175 ] Seven senators cited Nayirah's testimony in their speeches backing the use of force.

[ 178 ] President George Bush repeated the story at least ten times in the following weeks.

[ 179 ] Her account of the atrocities helped to stir American opinion in favour of participation in the Gulf War .

[ 180 ] It was often cited by people, including the members of Congress who voted to approve the Gulf War , as one of the reasons to fight. After the war, it was found that the testimony was entirely fabricated and that "Nayirah" was in fact the daughter of a Kuwaiti delegate to America with a leading role in the pro-war think tank responsible for organizing the hearing.

[ 181 ] Israel In 2010 Frank Johansson, the chairman of Amnesty International- Finland , called Israel a nilkkimaa , a derogatory term variously translated as "scum state", "creep state" or "punk state".

[ 182 ] [ 183 ] Johansson stood by his statement, saying that it was based on Israel's "repeated flouting of international law", and his own personal experiences with Israelis. When asked by a journalist if any other country on earth that could be described in these terms, he said that he could not think of any, although some individual "Russian officials" could be so described.

[ 183 ] In April 2021, Amnesty International distanced itself from a tweet written in 2013 by its new Secretary General, Agnès Callamard , which read: ""NYT Interview of Shimon Perres [sic] where he admits that Yasser Arafat was murdered"; Amnesty responded by saying: "The tweet was written in haste and is incorrect. It does not reflect the position of Amnesty International or Agnès Callamard." [ 184 ] [ 185 ] [ 186 ] Callamard herself has not deleted the tweet.

[ 184 ] On 11 March 2022, Paul O'Brien, the Amnesty International USA Director, stated at a private event: "We are opposed to the idea — and this, I think, is an existential part of the debate — that Israel should be preserved as a state for the Jewish people", while adding "Amnesty takes no political views on any question, including the right of the State of Israel to survive." [ 187 ] [ 188 ] [ 189 ] [ 190 ] He also rejected a poll that found 8 in 10 American Jews were pro-Israel, saying: "I believe my gut tells me that what Jewish people in this country want is to know that there's a sanctuary that is a safe and sustainable place that the Jews, the Jewish people can call home." [ 187 ] [ 188 ] [ 189 ] On 14 March 2022, all 25 Jewish Democrats in the House of Representatives issued a rare joint statement rebuking O'Brien, saying that he "has added his name to the list of those who, across centuries, have tried to deny and usurp the Jewish people's independent agency" and "condemning this and any antisemitic attempt to deny the Jewish people control of their own destiny." [ 191 ] [ 192 ] [ 193 ] On 25 March 2022, O'Brien wrote to the Jewish congressmen: "I regret representing the views of the Jewish people." [ 192 ] Russia Main article: Criticism of Amnesty International § Alexei Navalny Amnesty International designated Alexei Navalny a prisoner of conscience in 2012.

[ 194 ] However, in February 2021, it stripped Navalny of the status, due to lobbying about videos and pro-nationalist statements he made in 2007–2008 that allegedly constituted hate speech.

[ 195 ] [ 196 ] [ 197 ] [ 198 ] Amnesty's decision was described by western media as "a huge victory for Russian state propaganda" which undermined Amnesty's support of Navalny's release.

[ 199 ] [ 200 ] The designation of Navalny as a prisoner of conscience was reinstated in May 2021. Amnesty apologized for making the decision and stated that "by confirming Navalny's status as prisoner of conscience, we are not endorsing his political programme, but are highlighting the urgent need for his rights, including access to independent medical care, to be recognized and acted upon by the Russian authorities".

[ 201 ] [ 202 ] United Kingdom and the Commonwealth During the early history of Amnesty International, as it is now proven by various documents, it was secretly supported by the Foreign Office . In 1963, the FO instructed its operatives abroad to provide "discreet support" for Amnesty's campaigns. In the same year, Benenson wrote to Minister of State for the Colonies Lord Lansdowne a proposal to prop up a "refugee counsellor" on the border between the Bechuanaland Protectorate and apartheid South Africa . Amnesty intended to assist people fleeing across the border from neighbouring South Africa, but not those who were actively engaged in the struggle against apartheid. Benenson wrote: I would like to reiterate our view that these [British] territories should not be used for offensive political action by the opponents of the South African Government (...) Communist influence should not be allowed to spread in this part of Africa, and in the present delicate situation, Amnesty International would wish to support Her Majesty's Government in any such policy.

[ 18 ] The year after, the AI dropped Nelson Mandela as a "prisoner of conscience", because he was convicted of violence by the South African Government. Mandela had also been a member of the South African Communist Party .

[ 203 ] In a trip to Haiti, the British FO had also assisted Benenson in his mission to Haiti, where he was disguised because of fear of the Haitians finding out that the British government sponsored his visit. When his disguise was revealed, Benenson was severely criticized by the media.

[ 18 ] In the British colony of Aden , Hans Goran Franck, the chairman of Amnesty's Swedish section, wrote a report on allegations of torture at an interrogation centre run by the colonial government. Amnesty refused to publish the report; according to Benenson, Amnesty general-secretary Robert Swann had suppressed it in deference to the Foreign Office. According to co-founder Eric Baker , both Benenson and Swann had met Foreign Secretary George Brown in September and told him that they were willing to hold up publication if the Foreign Office promised no more allegations of torture would surface again. A memo by Lord Chancellor Gerald Gardiner , a Labour Party politician, states that: Amnesty held the Swedish complaint as long as they could simply because Peter Benenson did not want to do anything to hurt a Labour government.

[ 18 ] Benenson then travelled to Aden and reported that he had never seen an "uglier situation" in his life. He then said that British government agents had infiltrated Amnesty and suppress the report's publication. Later, documents surfaced implicating Benenson had connections to the British government, which started the Harry letters affair .

[ 20 ] [ 18 ] He then resigned, claiming that British and American intelligence agents had infiltrated Amnesty and subverted its values.

[ 20 ] After this set of events, which were dubbed by some the "Amnesty Crisis of 1966–67", [ 204 ] the relationship between Amnesty and the British Government was suspended. AI vowed that in future, it "must not only be independent and impartial but must not be put into a position where anything else could even be alleged" and the Foreign Office cautioned that "for the time being our attitude to Amnesty International must be one of reserve".

[ 18 ] 2010 CAGE controversy Amnesty International suspended Gita Sahgal , its gender unit head, after she criticized Amnesty in February 2010 for its high-profile associations with Moazzam Begg , the director of Cageprisoners , representing men in extrajudicial detention.

[ 205 ] [ 206 ] "To be appearing on platforms with Britain's most famous supporter of the Taliban , Begg, whom we treat as a human rights defender, is a gross error of judgment," she said.

[ 205 ] [ 207 ] Sahgal argued that by associating with Begg and Cageprisoners, Amnesty was risking its reputation on human rights.

[ 205 ] [ 208 ] [ 209 ] "As a former Guantanamo detainee, it was legitimate to hear his experiences, but as a supporter of the Taliban it was absolutely wrong to legitimize him as a partner," Sahgal said.

[ 205 ] She said she repeatedly brought the matter up with Amnesty for two years, to no avail.

[ 210 ] A few hours after the article was published, Sahgal was suspended from her position.

[ 211 ] Amnesty's Senior Director of Law and Policy, Widney Brown, later said Sahgal raised concerns about Begg and Cageprisoners to her personally for the first time a few days before sharing them with the Sunday Times .

[ 210 ] Sahgal issued a statement saying she felt that Amnesty was risking its reputation by associating with and thereby politically legitimizing Begg, because Cageprisoners "actively promotes Islamic Right ideas and individuals".

[ 211 ] She said the issue was not about Begg's "freedom of opinion, nor about his right to propound his views: he already exercises these rights fully as he should. The issue is ... the importance of the human rights movement maintaining an objective distance from groups and ideas that are committed to systematic discrimination and fundamentally undermine the universality of human rights." [ 211 ] The controversy prompted responses by politicians, the writer Salman Rushdie , and journalist Christopher Hitchens , among others who criticized Amnesty's association with Begg.

After her suspension and the controversy, Sahgal was interviewed by numerous media and attracted international supporters. She was interviewed on the US National Public Radio (NPR) on 27 February 2010, where she discussed the activities of Cageprisoners and why she deemed it inappropriate for Amnesty to associate with Begg.

[ 212 ] She said that Cageprisoners' Asim Qureshi spoke supporting global jihad at a Hizb ut-Tahrir rally.

[ 212 ] She stated that a best-seller at Begg's bookshop was a book by Abdullah Azzam , a mentor of Osama bin Laden and a founder of the terrorist organization Lashkar-e-Taiba .

[ 210 ] [ 212 ] In a separate interview for the Indian Daily News & Analysis , Sahgal said that, as Quereshi affirmed Begg's support for global jihad on a BBC World Service programme, "these things could have been stated in his [Begg's] introduction" with Amnesty.

[ 213 ] She said that Begg's bookshop had published The Army of Madinah , which she characterized as a jihad manual by Dhiren Barot .

[ 214 ] 2011 Irene Khan payout In February 2011, newspaper stories in the UK revealed that Irene Khan had received a payment of £533,103 from Amnesty International following her resignation from the organization on 31 December 2009, [ 215 ] a fact pointed to from Amnesty's records for the 2009–2010 financial year. The sum paid to her was more than four times her annual salary (£132,490).

[ 215 ] The deputy secretary general, Kate Gilmore , who also resigned in December 2009, received an ex-gratia payment of £320,000.

[ 215 ] According to the Daily Express , Peter Pack, the chairman of Amnesty's International Executive Committee (IEC), initially stated on 19 February 2011: "The payments to outgoing secretary general Irene Khan shown in the accounts of AI (Amnesty International) Ltd for the year ending 31 March 2010 include payments made as part of a confidential agreement between AI Ltd and Irene Khan" [ 216 ] [ unreliable source?

] and that "It is a term of this agreement that no further comment on it will be made by either party." [ 215 ] The payment and AI's initial response to its leakage to the press led to a considerable outcry.

Philip Davies , the Conservative MP for Shipley , criticized the payments, telling the Daily Express : "I am sure people making donations to Amnesty, in the belief they are alleviating poverty, never dreamed they were subsidising a fat cat payout. This will disillusion many benefactors." [ 216 ] [ unreliable source?

] On 21 February 2011, Peter Pack issued a further statement, in which he said that the payment was a "unique situation" that was "in the best interest of Amnesty's work" and that there would be no repetition of it.

[ 215 ] He stated that "the new secretary general, with the full support of the IEC, has initiated a process to review our employment policies and procedures to ensure that such a situation does not happen again." [ 215 ] Pack also stated that Amnesty was "fully committed to applying all the resources that we receive from our millions of supporters to the fight for human rights".

[ 215 ] On 25 February 2011, Pack sent a letter to Amnesty members and staff. In 2008, it stated, the IEC decided not to prolong Khan's contract for a third term. In the following months, IEC discovered that due to British employment law, it had to choose between three options: offering Khan a third term; discontinuing her post and, in their judgement, risking legal consequences; or signing a confidential agreement and issuing a pay compensation.

[ 217 ] 2019 Kurdish hunger strike In April 2019, 30 Kurdish activists, some of whom are on an indefinite hunger strike , occupied Amnesty International's building in London in a peaceful protest, in order to speak out against Amnesty's silence on the isolation of Abdullah Öcalan in a Turkish prison.

[ 218 ] The hunger strikers have also spoken out about "delaying tactics" by Amnesty, and being denied access to toilets during the occupation, despite this being a human right.

[ 219 ] [ 220 ] Two of the hunger strikers, Nahide Zengin and Mehmet Sait Zengin, received paramedic treatment and were taken to hospital during the occupation. Late in the evening of 26 April 2019, the London Met police arrested 21 remaining occupiers.

[ 221 ] Ukraine On 4 August 2022, during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine , Amnesty International published a report accusing the Armed Forces of Ukraine of endangering civilians through their combat tactics, particularly stating that Ukraine had set up military bases in residential areas (including schools and hospitals) and launched attacks from populated civilian areas.

[ 222 ] Oksana Pokalchuk , leader of Amnesty Ukraine, said that the report "was compiled by foreign observers, without any assistance from local staff".

[ 223 ] She resigned from her post and left the organization following the publication of the report.

[ 224 ] Human rights lawyers Wayne Jordash and Anna Mykytenko argued that the 4 August report contained "little to none of the military or humanitarian context essential to any reasoned view of what was (or was not) necessary in the prevailing military context" and that the report was "short on facts and analysis and long on intemperate accusation".

[ 225 ] RUSI researcher Jack Watling stated that "you need to balance military necessity with proportionality, so you need to take reasonable measures to protect civilians but that must be balanced with your orders to defend an area", thus the report's suggestions that Ukrainian forces should relocate to a nearby field or forest "demonstrated a lack of understanding of military operations and damages the credibility of the research".

[ 226 ] RUSI researcher Natia Seskuria called the report "out of touch with current reality" and stated that the Ukrainian army can legitimately house in the towns they defend, even if they have civilians nearby, because the Ukrainian authorities constantly call for evacuations from frontline towns, and forced relocations of civilian population would violate international humanitarian law.

[ 227 ] Marc Garlasco , a United Nations war crimes investigator specializing in civilian harm mitigation, said that "Ukraine can place forces in areas they are defending" and "there is no requirement to stand shoulder to shoulder in a field –  this isn't the 19th century", and expressed concern that the report could endanger Ukrainian civilians by giving Russian forces an excuse to "expand their targeting of civilian areas".

[ 228 ] Journalist Tom Mutch stated that he had participated in and reported on an evacuation of civilians in one of Amnesty's cases, which he contrasted with Amnesty's statement that it was "not aware that the Ukrainian military who located themselves in civilian structures in residential areas asked or assisted civilians to evacuate nearby buildings".

[ 226 ] The Kyiv Independent editorial team strongly criticized the report, pointing out flaws in reasoning and stating that the "Amnesty [International] could not properly articulate who the main perpetrator of violence in Ukraine was".

[ 229 ] The report sparked outrage in Ukraine and the West. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy accused Amnesty of trying to "amnesty the terrorist state and shift the responsibility from the aggressor to the victim", while Ukraine's Minister of Foreign Affairs , Dmytro Kuleba , stated that the report creates "a false balance between the oppressor and the victim".

[ 228 ] [ 230 ] [ 231 ] The report was praised by several Russian and pro-Russian figures, including the Russian embassy in London , causing further criticism against the organization.

[ 232 ] On 12 August, Amnesty International reported that "the conclusions were not conveyed with the delicacy and accuracy that should be expected from Amnesty" and said that "this also applies to the subsequent communication and reaction of the International Secretariat to public criticism". The organization condemned "the instrumentalization of the press release by the Russian authorities" and promised that the report will be verified by independent experts.

[ 233 ] [ 234 ] The criticism resulted in AI calling an internal review committee composed of independent international humanitarian law (IHL) experts to review the report, whose conclusions were not published by AI but nonetheless obtained by New York Times. The review concluded that while AI was right to include Ukraine in its analysis in general, as IHL applies to all sides of a conflict, its conclusions in respect to Ukraine were biased and not sufficiently substantiated by available evidence, and the vague language of the report could leave an impression, even if this was not intended and not supported by evidence, that "Ukrainian forces were primarily or equally to blame for the death of civilians resulting from attacks by Russia". To the contrary, the review concluded that on the basis of the evidence that AI had collected it was "simply impossible to assert that generally civilians died" as result of negligence of Ukrainian army, while "imprudent language" of the report suggested this.

[ 235 ] Awards and honours In 1977, Amnesty International was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for "having contributed to securing the ground for freedom, for justice, and thereby also for peace in the world".

[ 236 ] In 1984, Amnesty International received the Four Freedoms Award in the category of Freedom of Speech.

[ 237 ] Cultural impact Human rights concerts Main article: Human rights concerts Opening stages of the 19 September 1988 show at Philadelphia 's John F. Kennedy Stadium A Conspiracy of Hope was a short tour of six benefit concerts on behalf of Amnesty International that took place in the United States during June 1986. The purpose of the tour was not to raise funds but rather to increase awareness of human rights and of Amnesty's work on its 25th anniversary. The shows were headlined by U2 , Sting and Bryan Adams and also featured Peter Gabriel , Lou Reed , Joan Baez , and The Neville Brothers . The last three shows featured a reunion of The Police . At a press conference in each city, at related media events, and through their music at the concerts themselves, the artists engaged with the public on themes of human rights and human dignity. The six concerts were the first of what subsequently became known collectively as the Human Rights Concerts – a series of music events and tours staged by Amnesty International USA between 1986 and 1998.

Human Rights Now!

was a worldwide tour of twenty benefit concerts on behalf of Amnesty International that took place over six weeks in 1988. Held not to raise funds but to increase awareness of both the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on its 40th anniversary and the work of Amnesty International, the shows featured Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band , Sting , Peter Gabriel , Tracy Chapman , and Youssou N'Dour , plus guest artists from each of the countries where concerts were held.

The Amnesty Candle Amnesty candle The organization's logo combines two recognizable images inspired by the proverb, " Better to light a candle than curse the darkness ." [ 238 ] The candle represents the organization's efforts to bring light to the fact that political prisoners are held all over the world and its commitment to bring the prisoners hope for fair treatment and release. The barbed wire represents the hopelessness of people unjustly put in jail.

[ 239 ] The logo was designed by Diana Redhouse in 1963 as Amnesty's first Christmas card.

[ 240 ] See also Ambassador of Conscience Award Amnesty International UK Media Awards List of Amnesty International UK Media Awards winners List of peace activists Scholars at Risk World Coalition Against the Death Penalty References Notes ^ a b The anthropologist Linda Rabben refers to the origin of Amnesty as a "creation myth" with a "kernel of truth": "The immediate impetus to form Amnesty did come from Peter Benenson's righteous indignation while reading a newspaper in the London tube on 19 November 1960." [ 241 ] The historian Tom Buchanan traced the origins story to a radio broadcast by Peter Benenson in 1962. The 4 March 1962 BBC news story did not refer to a "toast to liberty", but Benenson said his tube ride was on 19 December 1960. Buchanan was unable to find the newspaper article about the Portuguese students in The Daily Telegraph for either month. Buchanan found many news stories reporting on the repressive Portuguese political arrests in The Times for November 1960.

[ 87 ] Citations ^ International Employee Directory .

^ a b "Dr Agnès Callamard appointed as Secretary General of Amnesty International" .

amnesty.org . 29 March 2021 . Retrieved 4 April 2021 .

^ a b c "Who we are" . Amnesty International . Retrieved 16 March 2015 .

^ "Amnesty International's Statute" .

Amnesty International . Archived from the original on 27 September 2023.

^ Wong, Wendy (2012).

Internal Affairs: How the Structure of NGOs Transforms Human Rights .

Cornell University Press . p. 84.

doi : 10.7591/j.cttq43kj (inactive 12 August 2025).

ISBN 978-0-8014-5079-2 .

JSTOR 10.7591/j.cttq43kj.8 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of August 2025 ( link ) ^ Srivastava, Swati (2022), "Shadowing for Human Rights through Amnesty International" , Hybrid Sovereignty in World Politics , Cambridge University Press , pp.

185– 228, doi : 10.1017/9781009204453.007 , ISBN 978-1-009-20445-3 .

^ a b c Benenson, Peter (28 May 1961).

"The Forgotten Prisoners" .

The Observer . Retrieved 28 May 2011 .

^ "About Amnesty International" . Amnesty International . Retrieved 20 July 2008 .

^ Childs, Peter; Storry, Mike, eds. (2002). "Amnesty International".

Encyclopedia of Contemporary British Culture . London: Routledge. pp.

22– 23.

^ "AGNI Online: Amnesty International: Myth and Reality by Linda Rabben" .

agnionline.bu.edu . 15 October 2001 . Retrieved 10 June 2021 .

^ McKinney, Seamus (29 September 2018).

"Sir Louis Blom-Cooper: Campaigning lawyer had strong links with Northern Ireland" .

The Irish News . Archived from the original on 11 May 2021 . Retrieved 10 June 2021 .

^ Keane, Elizabeth (2006).

An Irish Statesman and Revolutionary: The Nationalist and Internationalist Politics of Sean MacBride . I.B. Tauris.

ISBN 978-1-84511-125-0 .

^ Wheeler, Douglas L; Opello, Walter C (2010), Historical Dictionary of Portugal , Scarecrow Press, p. xxvi .

^ Benenson, P. (1983). Memoir ^ a b Buchanan, T. (2002). "The Truth Will Set You Free: The Making of Amnesty International".

Journal of Contemporary History .

37 (4): 575– 97.

doi : 10.1177/00220094020370040501 .

ISSN 0022-0094 .

JSTOR 3180761 .

S2CID 154183908 .

^ a b McVeigh, Tracy (29 May 2011).

"Amnesty International marks 50 years of fighting for free speech" .

The Observer . London.

^ Report 1962 . Amnesty International. 1963.

^ a b c d e f g Sellars, Kirsten (January 2009).

"Peter Benenson in David P. Forsythe (ed.), (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009), pp. 162–165" .

The Encyclopaedia of Human Rights .

^ Larsen, Egon (1979).

A flame in barbed wire : the story of Amnesty International (1st American ed.). New York: Norton.

ISBN 978-0393012132 .

OCLC 4832507 .

^ a b c d "Peter Benenson" .

The Independent . 28 February 2005.

Archived from the original on 25 May 2017 . Retrieved 23 October 2020 .

^ a b Power, Jonathan (1981).

Amnesty International, the Human Rights Story . McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 978-0-07-050597-1 .

^ Amnesty International Report 1968-69 . Amnesty International. 1969.

^ Amnesty International Report 1979 . Amnesty International. 1980.

^ "THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL TIMELINE" (PDF) .

Amnesty International . Retrieved 19 July 2024 .

^ Cheng, Wendy (2023).

Island X: Taiwanese Student Migrants, Campus Spies, and Cold War Activism . Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press .

ISBN 9780295752051 .

^ a b Monahan, Mark (4 October 2008).

"Hot ticket: The Secret Policeman's Ball at the Royal Albert Hall, London" .

The Daily Telegraph . UK.

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022.

^ "The Nobel Peace Prize 1977 – Presentation Speech" . Nobel Prize.

^ "United Nations Prize in the field of Human Rights" (PDF) .

^ When the State Kills: The Death Penalty Vs. Human Rights , Amnesty International, 1989 ( ISBN 978-0862101640 ).

^ Russell, James M. (2002). "The Ambivalence about the Globalization of Telecommunications: The Story of Amnesty International, Shell Oil Company and Nigeria".

Journal of Human Rights .

1 (3): 405– 416.

doi : 10.1080/14754830210156625 .

S2CID 144174755 .

Retrieved 3 March 2013.

^ "Legal lessons of Pinochet case" .

BBC News . 2 March 2000 . Retrieved 23 April 2010 .

^ uncredited (31 January 2000).

"Pinochet appeal fails" .

BBC News . Retrieved 9 February 2009 .

^ Amnesty International News Service "Amnesty International 26th International Council Meeting Media briefing" , 15 August 2003. Retrieved 9 January 2011.

^ Amnesty International Report 2002 . Amnesty International. 2003.

^ Saunders, Joe (19 November 2001).

"Revisiting Humanitarian Intervention: Post-September 11" . Carnegie Council for Ethics in international Affairs . Retrieved 24 April 2016 .

^ "American Gulag" .

The Washington Post . 26 May 2005 . Retrieved 2 October 2006 .

^ "Bush says Amnesty report 'absurd' " .

BBC News . 31 May 2005 . Retrieved 2 October 2006 .

^ "endtorture.org International Campaign against Torture" (PDF) .

^ Amnesty International Report 2005: the state of the world's human rights . Amnesty International. 2004.

ISBN 978-1-887204-42-2 .

^ "Women's Rights" (PDF) . Amnesty International USA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 June 2009 . Retrieved 5 November 2009 .

^ "Reports: 'Disastrous' Iraqi humanitarian crisis" . CNN. 17 March 2008.

Archived from the original on 21 March 2008 . Retrieved 17 March 2008 .

^ Koutsoukis, Jason (3 July 2009).

"Israel used human shields: Amnesty" . Melbourne: Fairfax Digital . Retrieved 3 July 2009 .

^ "UN must ensure Goldstone inquiry recommendations are implemented" . Amnesty International. 15 September 2009.

^ "Turkmenistan" .

Amnesty International .

^ Bright, Martin (7 February 2010).

"Gita Sahgal: A Statement" .

The Spectator . Retrieved 18 March 2010 .

^ a b Smith, Joan, "Joan Smith: Amnesty shouldn't support men like Moazzam Begg; A prisoner of conscience can turn into an apologist for extremism" , The Independent , 11 February 2010. Retrieved 17 February 2010.

^ "Amnesty International on its work with Moazzam Begg and Cageprisoners" . Amnesty International. 11 February 2010 . Retrieved 18 March 2010 .

^ "Salman Rushdie's statement on Amnesty International" , The Sunday Times , 21 February 2010.

^ MacShane, Denis (10 February 2010).

"Letter To Amnesty International from Denis MacShane, Member of British Parliament" . Archived from the original on 16 February 2010 . Retrieved 17 February 2010 .

^ Phillips, Melanie (14 February 2010).

"The human wrongs industry spits out one of its own" .

The Spectator . UK . Retrieved 23 February 2010 .

^ Plait, Phil (15 February 2010).

"Amnesty International loses sight of its original purpose" .

Slate .

^ Bright, Martin, "Amnesty International, Moazzam Begg and the Bravery of Gita Sahgal" Archived 11 February 2010 at the Wayback Machine , The Spectator , 7 February 2010.

^ "Misalliance; Amnesty has lent spurious legitimacy to extremists who spurn its values" , The Times , 12 February 2010. Retrieved 17 February 2010.

^ Cohen, Nick, "We abhor torture – but that requires paying a price; Spineless judges, third-rate politicians and Amnesty prefer an easy life to fighting for liberty" , The Observer , 14 February 2010. Retrieved 17 February 2010.

^ "Amnesty International – 50 years on Vimeo" . Vimeo. 23 May 2011.

^ Kumar, S. Vijay (11 August 2012).

"Amnesty wants U.N. probe into Sri Lanka war crimes" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India.

^ Wulfhorst, Ellen (18 August 2014).

"National Guard called to Missouri town roiled by police shooting of teen" .

Reuters . Retrieved 18 August 2014 .

^ Geidner, Chris (14 August 2014).

"Amnesty International Takes "Unprecedented" U.S. Action In Ferguson" . Buzzfeed . Retrieved 18 August 2014 .

^ Pearce, Matt; Molly Hennessy-Fiske; Tina Susman (16 August 2014).

"Some warn that Gov. Jay Nixon's curfew for Ferguson, Mo., may backfire" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 18 August 2014 .

^ Reilly, Mollie (17 August 2014).

"Amnesty International Calls For Investigation Of Ferguson Police Tactics" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved 18 August 2014 .

^ "Amnesty Votes Down Proposal for U.K. Campaign Against anti-Semitism" .

Haaretz . Retrieved 2 February 2022 .

^ Winer, Stuart (22 April 2015).

"Amnesty International rejects call to fight anti-Semitism" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 2 February 2022 .

^ "Amnesty rejects call to campaign against antisemitism" .

www.thejc.com . 21 April 2015 . Retrieved 26 October 2023 .

^ a b c Norfolk, Andrew.

"Amnesty director's links to global network of Islamists" .

The Times .

ISSN 0140-0460 . Retrieved 23 February 2022 .

^ a b Norfolk, Andrew.

"A shadowy web traced back to Bradford" .

The Times .

ISSN 0140-0460 . Retrieved 23 February 2022 .

^ "Suspend Saudi Arabia from UN Human Rights Council" . Amnesty International. 29 June 2016.

^ "UN: Shameful pandering to Saudi Arabia over children killed in Yemen conflict" . Amnesty International. 7 June 2016.

^ "Rights groups: Suspend Saudi Arabia from U.N. Human Rights Council over war crimes" . Salon. 29 June 2016.

^ Untersinger, Martin (22 December 2016).

"Comment une ONG fantôme a tenté d'espionner Amnesty International" .

Le Monde . Retrieved 27 December 2016 .

^ Fox-Brewster, Thomas (21 December 2016).

"This Fake Nonprofit Has Been Accused Of Spying On Real Human Rights Activists" .

Forbes . Retrieved 27 December 2016 .

^ Luhn, Alec (15 October 2018).

"Amnesty International activist abducted, beaten and faced mock-execution in Russia" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022.

^ "Amnesty International's statement far from truth, attempt to influence probe into its illegalities: MHA" .

The Economic Times . Retrieved 5 February 2021 .

^ Mohan, Rohini (9 January 2017).

"Opinion | Narendra Modi's Crackdown on Civil Society in India" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 29 October 2018 .

^ Bhalla, Nita (9 November 2016).

"India uses foreign funding law to harass charities: rights groups" .

U.S . Retrieved 29 October 2018 .

^ Kazmin, Amy (30 July 2018).

"Indians sound alarm over 'Orwellian' data collection system" .

Financial Times . Retrieved 29 October 2018 .

^ a b Das, Krishna N. (26 October 2018).

"Amnesty India says raid and frozen accounts aimed at silencing government critics" .

The Japan Times Online .

ISSN 0447-5763 . Retrieved 29 October 2018 .

^ "The UN wants India to stop trying to starve charities that are critical of the government" .

Business Insider . Reuters. 16 June 2016 . Retrieved 29 October 2018 .

^ Abiodun, Eromosele (November 2018).

"Amnesty International Wants Nigerian Security Forces Held Accountable for Killing Shiites" .

^ "Egypt arrests 19 rights activists, lawyers: Amnesty" .

Deutsche Welle . 1 November 2018 . Retrieved 23 December 2018 .

^ "BELARUS: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL CONDEMNS EXECUTION OF TWO MORE PRISONERS" .

Amnesty International . 5 December 2018 . Retrieved 7 December 2018 .

^ "Black realtors case: One more executed in Belarus" .

BelSat . 28 November 2018 . Retrieved 7 December 2018 .

^ "Belarus: Amnesty International condemns execution of two more prisoners" .

Viasna-96 . 5 December 2018 . Retrieved 7 December 2018 .

^ a b "Amnesty management team offers to resign over 'toxic culture' of bullying" .

RTÉ News . 23 February 2019 . Retrieved 24 February 2019 .

^ "UK's Labour Party calls for PM to prevent Assange's extradition" .

Al-Jazeera . 12 April 2019.

^ "Israel: Amnesty International engages in legal action to stop NSO Group's web of surveillance" .

Amnesty International . 13 May 2019 . Retrieved 6 June 2019 .

^ Sabbagh, Dan (18 May 2019).

"Israeli firm linked to WhatsApp spyware attack faces lawsuit" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 6 June 2019 .

^ a b Buchanan, Tom (October 2002). " 'The Truth Will Set You Free': The Making of Amnesty International".

Journal of Contemporary History .

37 (4): 575– 597.

doi : 10.1177/00220094020370040501 .

JSTOR 3180761 .

S2CID 154183908 .

Retrieved 25 September 2008 ^ "New EU post to protect European Way of Life slammed as 'grotesque' " .

Reuters . 10 September 2019. Archived from the original on 11 September 2019.

^ "EU chief under fire over 'protecting way of life' portfolio" .

BBC News . 11 September 2019.

^ [1] Archived 6 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine India West News ^ Homan, Timothy R. (15 August 2020).

"Pressure builds on US to respond to brutal crackdown in Belarus" .

The Hill . Retrieved 19 August 2020 .

^ "More than 1,100 villagers killed in Nigeria this year: Amnesty" .

Al Jazeera . 24 August 2020 . Retrieved 25 August 2020 .

^ "Teens killed by Angolan police enforcing virus curbs: Amnesty" .

Aljazeera . 25 August 2020 . Retrieved 25 August 2020 .

^ Anwar, Nessa (17 August 2020).

"Governments have collected large amounts of data to fight the coronavirus. That's raising privacy concerns" .

CNBC . Retrieved 19 August 2020 .

^ "Amnesty International to halt India operations" .

BBC News . 29 September 2020 . Retrieved 29 September 2020 .

^ "At least 54 killed in Ethiopia massacre, says Amnesty" .

The Guardian . 2 November 2020 . Retrieved 3 November 2020 .

^ "Ethiopia: over 50 killed in 'horrendous' attack on village by armed group" .

Amnesty International . 2 November 2020 . Retrieved 3 November 2020 .

^ Keyser, Zachary (16 April 2021).

"Amnesty denounces S-G's tweet that alluded Israel assassinated Arafat" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 2 February 2022 .

^ Pfeffer, Anshel (1 February 2022).

"Israel leaks Amnesty report on 'apartheid' against Palestinians" .

The Times .

ISSN 0140-0460 . Retrieved 2 February 2022 .

^ Daventry, Michael (15 April 2021).

"Amnesty International chief retracts 'Israel murdered Arafat' claim" .

www.jewishnews.co.uk . Retrieved 2 February 2022 .

^ Berger, Miriam (1 February 2022).

"Amnesty International, joining other human rights groups, says Israel is 'committing the crime of apartheid' " .

Washington Post . Retrieved 2 February 2022 .

^ a b "Israeli policies against Palestinians amount to apartheid – Amnesty" .

BBC News . 1 February 2022 . Retrieved 2 February 2022 .

^ Deutch, Gabby (11 March 2022).

"Israel 'shouldn't exist as a Jewish state,' Amnesty USA director tells Democratic group" .

Jewish Insider . Retrieved 12 March 2022 .

^ "Amnesty USA Head Criticized for Saying Israel "Shouldn't Exist As a Jewish State" " .

Jewish Journal . 11 March 2022 . Retrieved 12 March 2022 .

^ "Amnesty International official is 'opposed' to Israel as a Jewish state" .

Jewish Telegraphic Agency . 11 March 2022 . Retrieved 12 March 2022 .

^ Edit, 23 (11 March 2022).

"Amnesty's US director: Israel shouldn't be Jewish state, rather 'safe Jewish space' — report" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 12 March 2022 .

{{ cite web }} : |first1= has numeric name ( help ) ^ AFP : Russland schließt parteinahe deutsche Stiftungen ^ "Amnesty International investigation concludes Israel is committing genocide against Palestinians in Gaza" . Amnesty International. 5 December 2024.

^ "Amnesty International suspends defiant Israel branch for 'undermining' its mission" .

The Times of Israel . 8 January 2025.

^ Starr, Michael (7 January 2025).

"Amnesty International suspends Israel branch for rejecting NGO's reports" .

The Jerusalem Post .

^ Starcevic, Seb (19 May 2025).

"Russia bans 'undesirable' Amnesty International" .

Politico Europe . Archived from the original on 21 May 2025 . Retrieved 21 May 2025 .

^ "Statute of Amnesty International" . Amnesty International.

^ "How we are governed" .

Amnesty International NZ . Retrieved 22 July 2025 .

^ "New Secretary General Kumi Naidoo pledges support for African human rights defenders to hold the powerful to account" . Amnesty International. 17 August 2018 . Retrieved 26 September 2018 .

^ " AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL CHARITY, registered charity no. 294230 " .

Charity Commission for England and Wales .

^ " AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL UK SECTION CHARITABLE TRUST, registered charity no. 1051681 " .

Charity Commission for England and Wales .

^ Clarke, Anne Marie (2001).

Diplomacy of Conscience: Amnesty International and Changing Human Rights Norms . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-05743-9 .

^ "AI's Focus" . Amnesty-volunteer.org.

^ a b "Death Penalty" .

Amnesty International .

Archived from the original on 17 February 2024.

^ Nagengast, Carole (1997). "Women, Minorities, and Indigenous Peoples: Universalism and Cultural Relativity".

Southwestern Journal of Anthropology .

53 (3): 349– 369.

JSTOR 3630958 .

^ Amnesty International.

"KEY FACTS ON ABORTION" . Retrieved 24 February 2024 .

^ Amnesty International.

"Economic, social and cultural rights" . Retrieved 24 February 2024 .

^ "LGBTI rights" .

Amnesty International . Archived from the original on 19 June 2018 . Retrieved 30 May 2018 .

^ Amnesty International.

"TORTURE" . Retrieved 24 February 2024 .

^ Amnesty International.

"ARMED CONFLICT" . Retrieved 24 February 2024 .

^ Amnesty International.

"REFUGEES, ASYLUM SEEKERS AND MIGRANTS" . Retrieved 24 February 2024 .

^ Bolton, Doug (11 August 2015).

"Amnesty International backs worldwide decriminalisation of prostitution" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 13 August 2015 . Retrieved 24 November 2019 .

^ "Amnesty launches human rights learning app to equip next generation of activists" .

Amnesty International . 29 October 2020 . Retrieved 29 October 2020 .

^ "Colombia: Amnesty International response to Andrés Ballesteros et al." Archived 6 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine , AMR 23/006/2007 , 21 February 2007. Retrieved on 20 January 2012.

^ a b c d e f Ronand, James; Ramos, Howard; Rodgers, Kathleen (2005).

"Transnational Information Politics: NGO Human Rights Reporting, 1986–2000" (PDF) .

International Studies Quarterly . pp.

557– 587. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 March 2009.

^ Dysch, Marcus (19 July 2012).

"Amnesty International defends official accused of anti-Israel bias" . Amnesty International . Retrieved 27 February 2013 .

^ a b Peretz, Martin (26 August 2010).

"Amnesty International Official Calls Israel A 'Scum State' " .

The New Republic . Retrieved 5 July 2016 .

^ "Who finances Amnesty International's work?" . Amnesty International. 28 May 1961. Archived from the original on 10 February 2015 . Retrieved 4 December 2016 .

^ a b Amnesty International Charity Limited Report and financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2011 , p. 8, Paragraph 10.

^ "Amnesty International Limited and Amnesty International Charity Limited Report and financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2007" (PDF) . p. 45, Note 17.

^ "Report of Government Foreign Funding, in Hebrew, 2009" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 June 2012.

^ "Report of Government Foreign Funding, in Hebrew, 2008" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 June 2012.

^ "Amnesty International 2010 Report, Page 10, Indicator 8" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 June 2012.

^ "Amnesty International – INGO Accountability Charter Global Compliance Report 2009, Page 3" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 June 2012.

^ "ORDERS OF MAGNITUDE" . 4 March 2016.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2021 .

^ "Grants All" .

Ford Foundation . Retrieved 27 October 2020 .

^ Bernstein, Dennis (2002).

"Interview: Amnesty on Jenin – Dennis Bernstein and Dr. Francis Boyle Discuss the Politics of Human Rights" .

Covert Action Quarterly .

Archived from the original on 16 April 2008 . Retrieved 5 August 2009 .

^ McVeigh, Karen (6 February 2019).

"Amnesty International has toxic working culture, report finds" .

The Guardian .

^ "Amnesty International accused of gender discrimination by former staff" .

openDemocracy . Retrieved 30 January 2023 .

^ "Australia rejects Amnesty's bribery allegations as 'slur' on border police" , Deutsche Welle . 29 October 2015.

^ "The Amnesty International 2015 Report alleging discrimination in primary schools is unfounded but not criminal says the Czech prosecutor" Archived 12 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine , New Europe . 11 March 2016.

^ The U.S. and China This Week , U.S.-China Policy Foundation, 16 February 2001. Retrieved 15 May 2006.

^ "DR Congo blasts Amnesty International report on repression" , The Namibian , 14 January 2000. Retrieved 15 May 2006.

^ "Egypt says Amnesty International's accusations are 'biased and politicized' " .

Ahram Online . 28 September 2019 . Retrieved 10 September 2021 .

^ "In Absence of Evidence, Morocco Questions Context of Latest Amnesty International Report, FM" .

www.mapnews.ma . 2 July 2020 . Retrieved 2 July 2020 .

^ "Qatar rejects rights group report on 'rampant' labour abuse" . Reuters. 2 December 2015.

^ "Saudi Arabia outraged by Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch's criticism" .

Ya Libnan . 1 July 2016.

^ "The Cream of The Diplomatic Crop from Ha Noi" , Thiên Lý Bửu Tòa. Retrieved 15 May 2006.

^ "Russian official blasts Amnesty International over Chechnya refugees" , Human Rights Violations in Chechnya, 22 August 2003. Retrieved 15 May 2006.

^ Adebayo, Bukola.

"Amnesty accuses Nigerian troops of raping women rescued from Boko Haram" .

CNN . Retrieved 15 July 2018 .

^ Press Briefing By Scott McClellan , The White House, 25 May 2005. Retrieved 30 May 2006.

^ McVeigh, Karen (6 February 2019).

"Amnesty International has toxic working culture, report finds" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 20 September 2019 .

^ "Document" .

Amnesty International . Retrieved 20 September 2019 .

^ O'Neill, Sean (28 May 2019).

"Anger over big payoffs for bosses at toxic Amnesty" .

The Times . Retrieved 18 October 2019 .

^ Can Amnesty recover from this tragic death?

, RFI , 26 May 2019 ^ "Amnesty International's Secretary General steps down" .

Amnesty International . 5 December 2019 . Retrieved 5 December 2019 .

^ Amnesty International to make almost 100 staff redundant , The Guardian , 9 June 2019 ^ Amnesty International staff braced for redundancies , The Guardian , 27 April 2019 ^ O'Neill, Sean (28 May 2019).

"Anger over big payoffs for bosses at toxic Amnesty" .

The Times . Retrieved 30 January 2020 .

^ Reporter, Sean O’Neill, Chief (20 July 2024).

"Anger over big payoffs for bosses at 'toxic' Amnesty" .

www.thetimes.com . Retrieved 20 July 2024 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Secretary General and Coalition Leadership Team , Amnesty International , 31 January 2020 ^ "Amnesty's secret £800,000 payout after suicide of Gaetan Mootoo" .

The Times . Retrieved 11 October 2020 .

^ "Amnesty International criticised for using non-disclosure agreement in relation to alleged £800k payment" .

www.thirdsector.co.uk/ . Retrieved 11 October 2020 .

^ a b c "Amnesty International has culture of white privilege, report finds" .

The Guardian . 20 April 2021 . Retrieved 20 April 2021 .

^ "Document" .

Amnesty International . Retrieved 20 April 2021 .

^ "Statement: Racism inquiry" .

^ Bozinovska, Elizabeta (18 June 2022).

"Global HPO: Amnesty International UK is 'Institutionally Racist' " .

Focus Washington – Navigating the Swamp . Retrieved 20 July 2022 .

^ Algemeiner, The (22 June 2022).

"Where Was the Media When an Independent Investigation Found Amnesty Int'l to Be 'Institutionally Racist'?" .

Algemeiner.com . Retrieved 20 July 2022 .

^ Sriramesh, p. 864 ^ Rowse, "How to build support for war" ^ Walton, p. 772 ^ Eemeren, p. 70 ^ This was viewed as important since the 10 January 1991 authorization to use force passed by only 5 senate votes.

[ 176 ] [ 177 ] ^ Walton, p.771 ^ Krauss, Clifford (12 January 1992).

"CONGRESSMAN SAYS GIRL WAS CREDIBLE" .

The New York Times .

^ How False Testimony and a Massive U.S. Propaganda Machine Bolstered George H.W. Bush's War on Iraq , 5 December 2018, archived from the original on 21 December 2021 , retrieved 11 December 2018 ^ "Finland's Amnesty head calls Israel 'punk state' " . Jewish Telegraphic Agency. 24 August 2010. Archived from the original on 27 August 2010.

^ a b "Amnesty Int'l Finland: Israel scum state" , Benjamin Weinthal, 14 August 2010, The Jerusalem Post .

^ a b Daventry, Michael (15 April 2021).

"Amnesty International chief retracts 'Israel murdered Arafat' claim" .

www.jewishnews.co.uk . Retrieved 16 April 2022 .

^ "Amnesty denounces S-G's tweet that alluded Israel assassinated Arafat" .

The Jerusalem Post | JPost.com . 16 April 2021 . Retrieved 16 April 2022 .

^ Jerusalem, Anshel Pfeffer.

"Israel leaks Amnesty report on 'apartheid' against Palestinians" .

The Times .

ISSN 0140-0460 . Retrieved 16 April 2022 .

^ a b Deutch, Gabby (11 March 2022).

"Israel 'shouldn't exist as a Jewish state,' Amnesty USA director tells Democratic group" .

Jewish Insider . Retrieved 16 April 2022 .

^ a b "Amnesty USA Head Criticized for Saying Israel "Shouldn't Exist As a Jewish State" " .

Jewish Journal . 11 March 2022 . Retrieved 16 April 2022 .

^ a b "Amnesty International official is 'opposed' to Israel as a Jewish state" .

Jewish Telegraphic Agency . 11 March 2022 . Retrieved 16 April 2022 .

^ Edit, 23 (11 March 2022).

"Amnesty's US director: Israel shouldn't be Jewish state, rather 'safe Jewish space' — report" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 16 April 2022 .

{{ cite web }} : |first1= has numeric name ( help ) ^ Samuels, Ben (14 March 2022).

"All Jewish House Democrats Slam Amnesty Chief's 'Offensive' Remarks on U.S. Jews and Israel" .

Haaretz . Retrieved 16 April 2022 .

^ a b Rod, Marc (31 March 2022).

"Amnesty's O'Brien responds to Jewish Dems: 'I regret representing the views of the Jewish people' " .

Jewish Insider . Retrieved 16 April 2022 .

^ "In rare show of unity, all 25 Jewish House Dems blast Amnesty director's comments on Israel" .

The Times of Israel . Jewish Telegraphic Agency. 14 March 2022 . Retrieved 16 April 2022 .

^ "Amnesty Calls Navalny, Udaltsov 'Prisoners of Conscience' " . RFE/RL. 18 May 2012.

Archived from the original on 13 January 2013 . Retrieved 18 May 2012 .

^ Gessen, Masha (24 February 2021).

"Why Won't Amnesty International Call Alexey Navalny a Prisoner of Conscience?" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on 8 May 2021 . Retrieved 3 May 2021 .

^ Carroll, Oliver (24 February 2021).

"Anger after Amnesty strips Navalny of 'prisoner of conscience' status" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2021 . Retrieved 27 May 2021 .

In recent months, as Mr Navalny has gained prominence internationally... Russian state media has stepped up messages emphasising his nationalistic past. Those arguments have been amplified in a broad network of Kremlin-sympathising media at home and abroad. These outlets include Grayzone , an opaquely funded leftist publication based in the United States, which appears to have been privy to lobbying around the Amnesty decision.

^ Malinboym, Veronika (25 February 2021).

"Amnesty's removal of Navalny's 'prisoner of conscience' status sparks Twitter storm" .

English Jamnews .

Archived from the original on 18 May 2021 . Retrieved 18 May 2021 .

^ "Amnesty International rescinds Alexey Navalny's 'prisoner of conscience' status because of past 'hate speech', following rumored 'campaign' by individuals tied to Russia Today" .

Meduza . 24 February 2021.

Archived from the original on 18 May 2021 . Retrieved 18 May 2021 .

^ "Amnesty strips Alexei Navalny of "prisoner of conscience" status" . BBC News. 24 February 2021 . Retrieved 28 February 2021 .

^ Brown, David.

"Supporters quit Amnesty International over "betrayal" of Alexei Navalny" .

The Times . Retrieved 28 February 2021 .

^ "Amnesty apologises to Alexei Navalny over 'prisoner of conscience' status" . BBC News. 7 May 2021.

Archived from the original on 20 May 2021 . Retrieved 27 May 2021 .

[In February, AI] said the decision [to remove the status] had been made internally and was not influenced by the Russian state. But in a new statement on Friday the organisation apologised and said their decision had been used to "further violate Navalny's rights" in Russia.

^ "Statement on Alexei Navalny's status as Prisoner of Conscience" .

Amnesty International . 7 May 2021 . Retrieved 22 February 2024 .

^ "Mandela and the South African Communist Party" .

www.sahistory.org.za . Retrieved 27 October 2020 .

^ Buchanan, Tom.

Amnesty International in Crisis, 1966–7 . Oxford Academic.

^ a b c d Kerbaj, Richard (7 February 2010).

"Amnesty International is 'damaged' by Taliban link; An official at the human rights charity deplores its work with a 'jihadist' " .

The Sunday Times . London. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011 . Retrieved 2 March 2010 .

^ Gupta, Rahila (9 February 2010).

"Double standards on human rights; Where does Amnesty International stand on women's rights after suspending Gita Sahgal for criticising links with Moazzam Begg?" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 11 February 2010 .

^ Aaronovitch, David (9 February 2010).

"How Amnesty chose the wrong poster-boy; Collaboration with Moazzam Begg, an extremist who has supported jihadi movements, looks like a serious mistake" .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011 . Retrieved 2 March 2010 .

^ Bright, Martin (7 February 2010).

"Gita Sahgal: A Statement" .

The Spectator . Archived from the original on 16 March 2010 . Retrieved 18 March 2010 .

^ "Joan Smith: Amnesty shouldn't support men like Moazzam Begg; A prisoner of conscience can turn into an apologist for extremism," The Independent , 11 February 2010. Retrieved 11 February 2010 ^ a b c Guttenplan, D. D.; Margaronis, Maria.

"Who Speaks for Human Rights?" .

The Nation . Retrieved 12 March 2016 .

^ a b c Sahgal, Gita (13 May 2010).

"Gita Sahgal: A Statement" .

The New York Review of Books . Retrieved 30 September 2015 .

^ a b c "Is Amnesty International Supporting a Jihadist?" .

All Things Considered . NPR. 27 February 2010 . Retrieved 28 February 2010 .

^ Chakraberty, Sumit (21 February 2010).

"Gita Sahgal talks about human wrongs" .

Daily News & Analysis . Retrieved 28 February 2010 .

^ "Dangerous liaisons" .

Daily News and Analysis . 18 April 2010 . Retrieved 27 April 2010 .

^ a b c d e f g Mason, Tania, "Charity Commission has 'no jurisdiction' over board member's payment from Amnesty" , civilsociety.co.uk, 21 February 2011. Retrieved 21 February 2011.

^ a b Chapman, John, "Amnesty boss gets secret £500,000 payout" , Daily Express , 19 February 2011. Retrieved 21 February 2011.

^ Pack, Peter.

"A letter to all AI members and staff from the International Executive Committee" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 25 January 2012 .

^ "Protest at Amnesty International office" .

Amnesty International . 25 April 2019 . Retrieved 17 June 2019 .

^ "Kurdish Hunger Strikers Occupy Amnesty International HQ" .

Byline Times . 26 April 2019 . Retrieved 17 June 2019 .

^ Sabin, Lamiat (26 April 2019).

"Hunger-strikers accuse Amnesty International of hypocrisy" .

Morning Star . Retrieved 17 June 2019 .

^ Glynn, Sarah (26 April 2019).

"Solidarity with the activists occupying the offices of Amnesty International in London" .

Scottish Solidarity with Kurdistan . Retrieved 17 June 2019 .

^ "Ukraine: Ukrainian fighting tactics endanger civilians" .

Amnesty International . 4 August 2022.

Archived from the original on 8 August 2022 . Retrieved 9 August 2022 .

^ Hayda, Julian (5 August 2022).

"Amnesty International's report criticizing Ukraine is dividing the rights group" .

NPR . Retrieved 6 August 2022 .

^ Pietsch, Bryan (8 August 2022).

"Amnesty International's Ukraine chief resigns after report criticizes Kyiv" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

^ Jordash, Wayne; Mykytenko, Anna (5 August 2022).

"What is wrong with Amnesty International's Conclusions that "Ukrainian fighting tactics endanger civilians" " .

Ukrainska Pravda .

Archived from the original on 7 August 2022 . Retrieved 7 August 2022 .

^ a b Mutch, Tom (8 August 2022).

"Why did Amnesty International Ignore My Warnings about their Ukraine Investigation?" .

Byline Times .

Archived from the original on 8 August 2022 . Retrieved 9 August 2022 .

^ "Скандал вокруг обвинений Amnesty против Украины: могут ли ВСУ использовать школы и больницы" .

BBC News Russian (in Russian).

^ a b Hopkins, Valerie; Gibbons-Neff, Thomas (7 August 2022).

"Amnesty International Assessment That Ukraine 'Put Civilians in Harm's Way' Stirs Outrage" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 12 August 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 .

^ "Editorial: It is Amnesty International's report that endangers Ukrainian civilians" .

The Kyiv Independent . 8 August 2022 . Retrieved 10 August 2022 .

^ Askew, Joshua (5 August 2022).

"Outrage in Kyiv after Amnesty accuses it of endangering civilian life" .

Euronews .

^ Grynszpan, Emmanuel (6 August 2022).

"Amnesty International in turmoil after publication of its report on the war in Ukraine" .

Le Monde .

^ "Pro-Moscow Figures Hail Controversial Amnesty Report on Kyiv War Tactics" .

The Moscow Times . 5 August 2022.

^ "Доклад Amnesty International о ВС Украины проверят независимые эксперты" .

Deutsche Welle (in Russian). 13 August 2022.

^ Shandra, Alya (13 August 2022).

"Amnesty to review controversial statement on Ukrainian Army" .

Euromaidan Press .

^ Savage, Charlie (27 April 2023).

"Unreleased Report Finds Faults in Amnesty International's Criticism of Ukraine" .

The New York Times .

^ "The Nobel Peace Prize 1977" . Nobel Foundation . Retrieved 29 March 2018 .

^ "Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms Awards – Roosevelt Institute" . Roosevelt Institute. 29 September 2015.

^ Airey, David (15 June 2008).

"Amnesty International" .

Logo Design Love . Retrieved 1 March 2023 .

^ "History – The Meaning of the Amnesty Candle" . Amnesty International. Archived from the original on 18 June 2008 . Retrieved 4 June 2008 .

^ Yvonne and Denis Baron (7 December 2007).

"Diana Redhouse" .

Obituary . The Guardian.

^ Rabben, Linda (2001).

"Amnesty International: Myth and Reality" .

AGNI (54). Archived from the original on 12 October 2008 . Retrieved 25 September 2008 .

Further reading Buchanan, Tom. (2002) " 'The truth will set you free': The making of Amnesty International." Journal of Contemporary History 37.4 (2002): 575–597.

online Buchanan, Tom. "Amnesty International in crisis, 1966–7." Twentieth Century British History 15.3 (2004): 267–289.

online Clark, Anne Marie (2001).

Diplomacy of Conscience: Amnesty International and Changing Human Rights Norms . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-05743-9 .

Ganzfried, Miriam (2021).

Amnesty International and Women's Rights Feminist Strategies, Leadership Commitment and Internal Resistances.

( transcript Verlag). ISBN 978-3-8376-6008-1.

Girot, Marc (2011).

Amnesty International, Enquête sur une organisation génétiquement modifiée . Editions du Cygne.

ISBN 9782849242469 .

.

Habibe, K. A. R. A. "Human Rights in China In The Xi Jinping Era: From The Perspective of Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International." Doğu Asya Araştırmaları Dergisi 2.1: 66–96.

online Hopgood, Stephen (2006).

Keepers of the Flame: Understanding Amnesty International . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8014-4402-9 .

online Meirelles, Renata.

State Violence, Torture, and Political Prisoners: On the Role Played by Amnesty International in Brazil During the Dictatorship (1964–1985) (Routledge, 2019) online .

Neier, Aryeh. "Amnesty International." in The International Human Rights Movement (Princeton UP, 2020) pp. 186–203.

Power, Jonathan (1981).

Amnesty International: The Human Rights Story . McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 978-0-08-028902-1 .

online Sellars, Kirsten (April 2002).

The Rise and Rise of Human Rights . Sutton Publishing Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-7509-2755-0 .

Savelsberg, Joachim J. "Global Human Rights Organizations and National Patterns: Amnesty International's Responses to Darfur." Societies Without Borders 12.2 (2021): 13+.

online Srivastava, Swati (9 February 2022).

"Navigating NGO–Government Relations in Human Rights: New Archival Evidence from Amnesty International, 1961–1986" .

International Studies Quarterly .

66 (1) sqab009.

doi : 10.1093/isq/sqab009 .

ISSN 0020-8833 .

Thakur, Ramesh. (1994) "Human rights: Amnesty international and the United Nations." Journal of Peace Research 31.2 (1994): 143–160.

online Vestergaard, Anne. "Humanitarian branding and the media: The case of Amnesty International." Journal of language and politics 7.3 (2008): 471–493.

online Vik, Hanne Hagtvedt, and Skage Alexander Østberg. "Sweden, Amnesty International and legal entrepreneurs in global anti-torture politics, 1967–1977." International History Review 44.3 (2022): 633–652.

online External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Amnesty International .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Amnesty International .

Amnesty International official website Is Amnesty International Biased?

, 2002 discussion by Dennis Bernstein and Dr.

Francis Boyle Catalogue of the Amnesty International archives , held at the Modern Records Centre, University of Warwick Amnesty International Head Irene Khan on The Unheard Truth: Poverty and Human Rights – video by Democracy Now!

Amnesty International Promotion to Eliminate the Death Penalty – video by TBWA /Paris and Pleix for Amnesty International France Amnesty International Poster Collection at the International Institute of Social History Amnesty International on Nobelprize.org v t e International human rights organisations and institutions Types Human rights group Human rights commission Human rights institutions Truth and reconciliation commission International institutions Committee on the Rights of the Child Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities International Criminal Court Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights UN Human Rights Committee UN Human Rights Council UN Security Council Regional bodies African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights African Court of Justice European Court of Human Rights European Committee for the Prevention of Torture Inter-American Commission on Human Rights Inter-American Court of Human Rights Multi-lateral bodies European Union Council of Europe Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) Organization of American States (OAS) UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA) International Labour Organization (ILO) World Health Organization (WHO) UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Joint UN Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA) Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) UN Population Fund (UNFPA) UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) UN Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) UN Development Programme (UNDP) Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO) UN Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT) Major NGOs Amnesty International FIDH Human Rights Watch Emergency NGO Human Rights First ICRC – organization with special status based on Geneva Conventions International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) v t e Laureates of the Nobel Peace Prize 1901–1925 1901 : Henry Dunant / Frédéric Passy 1902: Élie Ducommun / Charles Gobat 1903: Randal Cremer 1904: Institut de Droit International 1905: Bertha von Suttner 1906: Theodore Roosevelt 1907: Ernesto Moneta / Louis Renault 1908: Klas Arnoldson / Fredrik Bajer 1909: A. M. F. Beernaert / Paul Estournelles de Constant 1910: International Peace Bureau 1911: Tobias Asser / Alfred Fried 1912: Elihu Root 1913: Henri La Fontaine 1914 1915 1916 1917: International Committee of the Red Cross 1918 1919: Woodrow Wilson 1920: Léon Bourgeois 1921: Hjalmar Branting / Christian Lange 1922: Fridtjof Nansen 1923 1924 1925: Austen Chamberlain / Charles Dawes 1926–1950 1926: Aristide Briand / Gustav Stresemann 1927: Ferdinand Buisson / Ludwig Quidde 1928 1929: Frank B. Kellogg 1930: Nathan Söderblom 1931: Jane Addams / Nicholas Butler 1932 1933: Norman Angell 1934: Arthur Henderson 1935: Carl von Ossietzky 1936: Carlos Saavedra Lamas 1937: Robert Cecil 1938: Nansen International Office for Refugees 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944: International Committee of the Red Cross 1945: Cordell Hull 1946: Emily Balch / John Mott 1947: Friends Service Council / American Friends Service Committee 1948 1949: John Boyd Orr 1950: Ralph Bunche 1951–1975 1951: Léon Jouhaux 1952: Albert Schweitzer 1953: George C. Marshall 1954: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 1955 1956 1957: Lester B. Pearson 1958: Georges Pire 1959: Philip Noel-Baker 1960: Albert Luthuli 1961: Dag Hammarskjöld 1962: Linus Pauling 1963: International Committee of the Red Cross / League of Red Cross Societies 1964 : Martin Luther King Jr.

1965 : UNICEF 1966 1967 1968 : René Cassin 1969 : International Labour Organization 1970 : Norman Borlaug 1971 : Willy Brandt 1972 1973 : Lê Đức Thọ (declined award) / Henry Kissinger 1974: Seán MacBride / Eisaku Satō 1975: Andrei Sakharov 1976–2000 1976: Betty Williams / Mairead Corrigan 1977: Amnesty International 1978: Anwar Sadat / Menachem Begin 1979: Mother Teresa 1980: Adolfo Pérez Esquivel 1981: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 1982: Alva Myrdal / Alfonso García Robles 1983: Lech Wałęsa 1984: Desmond Tutu 1985: International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War 1986: Elie Wiesel 1987: Óscar Arias 1988: UN Peacekeeping Forces 1989: Tenzin Gyatso (14th Dalai Lama) 1990: Mikhail Gorbachev 1991: Aung San Suu Kyi 1992: Rigoberta Menchú 1993: Nelson Mandela / F. W. de Klerk 1994: Shimon Peres / Yitzhak Rabin / Yasser Arafat 1995: Pugwash Conferences / Joseph Rotblat 1996: Carlos Belo / José Ramos-Horta 1997: International Campaign to Ban Landmines / Jody Williams 1998: John Hume / David Trimble 1999: Médecins Sans Frontières 2000: Kim Dae-jung 2001–present 2001 : United Nations / Kofi Annan 2002 : Jimmy Carter 2003 : Shirin Ebadi 2004 : Wangari Maathai 2005 : International Atomic Energy Agency / Mohamed ElBaradei 2006 : Grameen Bank / Muhammad Yunus 2007 : Al Gore / Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 2008 : Martti Ahtisaari 2009 : Barack Obama 2010 : Liu Xiaobo 2011 : Ellen Johnson Sirleaf / Leymah Gbowee / Tawakkol Karman 2012 : European Union 2013 : Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 2014 : Kailash Satyarthi / Malala Yousafzai 2015 : Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet 2016 : Juan Manuel Santos 2017 : International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons 2018 : Denis Mukwege / Nadia Murad 2019 : Abiy Ahmed 2020 : World Food Programme 2021 : Maria Ressa / Dmitry Muratov 2022 : Ales Bialiatski / Memorial / Center for Civil Liberties 2023 : Narges Mohammadi 2024 : Nihon Hidankyo v t e 1977 Nobel Prize laureates Chemistry Ilya Prigogine (Belgium) Literature ( 1977 ) Vicente Aleixandre (Spain) Peace Amnesty International Physics Philip Warren Anderson (United States) Nevill Francis Mott (United Kingdom) John Hasbrouck Van Vleck (United States) Physiology or Medicine Roger Guillemin (United States) Andrew Schally (United States) Rosalyn Sussman Yalow (United States) Economic Sciences Bertil Ohlin (Sweden) James Meade (United Kingdom) Nobel Prize recipients 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 v t e Olof Palme Prize laureates Cyril Ramaphosa (1987) UN Peace Keeping Operation (1988) Václav Havel (1989) Harlem Désir , SOS Racisme (1990) Amnesty International (1991) Arzu Abdullayeva , Anahit Bayandour (1992) Students for Sarajevo (1993) Wei Jingsheng (1994) Fatah Youth , Israeli Labor Young Leadership , Peace Now (1995) Casa Alianza , Bruce C. Harris (1996) Salima Ghezali (1997) Veran Matić , Senad Pećanin , Viktor Ivančić (1998) Kurdo Baksi , Björn Fries , Klippan Parent Group (1999) Bryan Stevenson (2000) Fazle Hasan Abed (2001) Hanan Ashrawi (2002) Hans Blix (2003) Lyudmila Alexeyeva , Sergei Kovalev , Anna Politkovskaya (2004) Aung San Suu Kyi (2005) Kofi Annan , Mossaad Mohamed Ali (2006) Parvin Ardalan (2007) Denis Mukwege (2008) Carsten Jensen (2009) Eyad al-Sarraj (2010) Lydia Cacho , Roberto Saviano (2011) Radhia Nasraoui , Waleed Sami Abulkhair (2012) Rosa Taikon (2013) Xu Youyu (2014) Gideon Levy , Mitri Raheb (2015) Spyridon Galinos , Giusi Nicolini (2016) Hédi Fried , Emerich Roth (2017) Daniel Ellsberg (2018) John le Carré (2019) Black Lives Matter Global Network Foundation (2020) Patricia Gualinga (2022) Marta Chumalo , Eren Keskin , Narges Mohammadi (2023) Bellingcat (2024) Utøya (2025) v t e Abortion in the United Kingdom Legislation Malicious Shooting or Stabbing Act 1803 Offences Against the Person Act 1828 Offences Against the Person Act 1837 Offences Against the Person Act 1861 Infant Life (Preservation) Act 1929 Criminal Justice Act (Northern Ireland) 1945 Abortion Act 1967 Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990 Northern Ireland (Executive Formation etc) Act 2019 Advocacy Groups Abortion Law Reform Association (ALRA) British Pregnancy Advisory Service Marie Stopes International National Council for Civil Liberties Amnesty International Family Planning Association Humanists UK Sister Supporter Back Off Scotland Abortion Support Network People Janet Chance Stella Browne Dora Russell Alice Jenkins Joan Malleson Frida Laski Ian MacGillivray Dugald Baird Douglas Vernon Hubble Martin Cole Vera Houghton Douglas Houghton Diane Munday Madeleine Simms François Lafitte David Paintin Walter L. Neustatter Eliot Slater Lewis Silkin John Silkin Samuel Silkin Malcolm Potts Caroline Deys Glanville Williams Peter Diggory David Steel Michael Winstanley John Dunwoody Gwyneth Dunwoody Peter Jackson Renée Short George Sinclair David Owen Roy Jenkins Kenneth Robinson Richard Crossman Ian Mikardo John Marks Jo Richardson Ann Furedi Barbara Hewson Anna Lo Opposition Groups Society for the Protection of Unborn Children (SPUC) Christian Action, Research and Education Both Lives Matter Catholic Church in England and Wales Catholic Church in Scotland ProLife Alliance (defunct) Right to Life UK People Aleck Bourne Phyllis Bowman Bernard Braine James Dunn Jill Knight Simon Mahon Norman St John-Stevas James Dempsey James White Ian Campbell John Corrie Bill Benyon Michael Ancram David Alton Victoria Gillick Jack Scarisbrick Nuala Scarisbrick Joe Benton Jim Dobbin Nadine Dorries Rob Flello Jacob Rees-Mogg Thérèse Coffey Joanna Jepson Heidi Crowter Related Malthusian League British Society for the Study of Sex Psychology World League for Sexual Reform International Planned Parenthood Federation UN Population Fund Marie Stopes Margaret Sanger Abortion in the Republic of Ireland Abortion in Canada Abortion in Australia Abortion in the United States Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Argentina Korea Poland Israel Finland Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐x8dhc
Cached time: 20250817215815
Cache expiry: 1216921
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.346 seconds
Real time usage: 2.684 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 15401/1000000
Revision size: 155555/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 519267/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14163/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 29/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 825576/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.432/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12067578/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2272.391      1 -total
 58.79% 1335.870      2 Template:Reflist
 29.18%  663.129    115 Template:Cite_web
 15.22%  345.837     62 Template:Cite_news
  7.93%  180.276      1 Template:Infobox_organization
  7.64%  173.525      1 Template:Infobox
  4.98%  113.202     17 Template:Cite_book
  4.29%   97.533      1 Template:Short_description
  3.88%   88.257      5 Template:Navbox
  3.46%   78.552      1 Template:Official_url Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18947898:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817215815 and revision id 1306461946. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Amnesty_International&oldid=1306461946 " Categories : Amnesty International Abortion-rights organisations in the United Kingdom 1961 establishments in England Imprisonment and detention Olof Palme Prize laureates Anti–death penalty organizations Organizations awarded Nobel Peace Prizes Organisations based in the London Borough of Islington Organizations established in 1961 Non-profit organisations based in London Organizations listed in Russia as undesirable Government oversight and watchdog organizations Hidden categories: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of August 2025 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: numeric name CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Use Oxford spelling from July 2022 Use dmy dates from February 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2010 Articles with minor POV problems from May 2022 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from July 2011 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from April 2023 Commons category link from Wikidata Nobelprize template using Wikidata property P8024 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 21:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Amnesty International 94 languages Add topic

