Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Content 2 Inclusion 3 Texts and translations 4 Notes Toggle the table of contents Halcyon (dialogue) 10 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Íslenska Italiano Македонски 日本語 Português Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Platonism Life Theory of forms Intelligible form Hyperuranion Theory of soul Nous Thumos Phren Epistemology Anamnesis Peritrope Dianoia Cardinal virtues Moral rationalism Political philosophy Mimesis Orthotes onomaton Euthyphro dilemma The Republic Allegory of the cave Analogy of the Sun Analogy of the divided line Form of the Good Noble lie Philosopher king Plato's number Ship of State Ring of Gyges Myth of Er Timaeus Atlantis Demiurge World soul Organicism Classical element Platonic solid Tertium quid Khôra Related articles Commentaries The Academy in Athens Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Pseudo-Platonica Related categories Plato Philosophy portal v t e Halcyon ( Ancient Greek : Ἀλκυών ) is a short dialogue attributed in the manuscripts to both Plato and Lucian , but the work is not by either writer.

[ 1 ] Favorinus , writing in the early second century, attributes it to a certain Leon, [ 2 ] as did Nicias of Nicaea .

[ 3 ] Content [ edit ] In the dialogue, Socrates relates to Chaerephon the ancient myth of Halcyon , a woman who was transformed by the gods into a bird to be able to search the seas for her husband Ceyx , who was lost at sea. Skeptical of the account, Chaerephon questions the possibility that humans can be transformed into birds. In response, Socrates cautions that there are many amazing things unknown or at least not fully understood by humans, and advocates epistemological humility for mortals in light of the gods' abilities or, more generally, in light of what humans do not know.

For comparison, Socrates refers to a bad storm that recently took place and was immediately followed by a sudden calm. Such a sudden transformation is all at once amazing, real, and beyond the power of humans to effect. He also points out the vast differences in strength and intelligence between adults and children, with the latter often being incapable of comprehending what adults can do. Both analogies, taken together, support the possibility that the gods may indeed have the ability to transform humans into birds, which process is simply not understood by humans, as opposed to being impossible. Socrates concludes by resolving to pass the myth down to his children as it was communicated to him, and especially with the hope that it will inspire his wives Xanthippe and Myrto to remain devoted to him.  As is stated at its conclusion, the conversation is conducted in the port of Phaleron , also the narrative setting of Plato's Symposium .

Inclusion [ edit ] The text was included in the first-century Platonic canon of Thrasyllus of Mendes but had been expunged prior to the Stephanus pagination and is thus rarely found in modern collections of Plato although it appears in Hackett's Complete Works .

[ 4 ] It is often still included among the spurious works of Lucian.

[ 5 ] Texts and translations [ edit ] Macleod, M. D., Lucian , Vol. VIII (Harvard University Press, 1967).

ISBN 978-0-674-99476-8 (Greek and English) Stief, Jake E., Halcyon (Stief Books, 2018).

ASIN B07DMRR5VJ (English) Notes [ edit ] ^ A. E. Taylor, (2001), Plato: The Man and His Work , page 552. Courier Dover Publications ^ Diogenes Laërtius , iii. 62 ^ Athenaeus xi. 506 c ^ Plato (1997). "Halcyon". In Cooper, John M.; Hutchinson, D. S. (eds.).

Complete Works . Translated by Indwood, Brad. Indianapolis/Cambridge: Hackett Publishing Co. pp.

1714– 1717.

ISBN 9780872203495 .

^ John Madison Cooper , D. S. Hutchinson, eds., Plato, Complete works , Indianapolis, Indiana, Hackett Publishing, 1997, ISBN 978-0-87220-349-5 , p. 1714 v t e Socrates Bibliography Cultural depictions Life Trial of Socrates Socratic problem Concepts Social gadfly Socratic dialogue Socratic intellectualism Socratic method Socratic paradox Socratic questioning Phrases " I know that I know nothing " " The unexamined life is not worth living " Family Sophroniscus (father) Phaenarete (mother) Xanthippe (wife) Lamprocles (son) Menexenus (son) Myrto (wife) Works that include Socrates Art Double Herm of Socrates and Seneca (3rd-century sculpture) The Death of Socrates (1787 painting) Socrates (1950 sculpture) Stage The Clouds (423 BC play) Der geduldige Socrates (1721 opera) Socrates (1759 play) Socrate (1919 oratorio) Socrates on Trial (2007 play) Literature De genio Socratis (1st-century essay) On the Concept of Irony with Continual Reference to Socrates (1841 thesis) The Plot to Save Socrates (2006 novel) Other Serenade after Plato's "Symposium" (1954 serenade) Barefoot in Athens (1966 film) Socrates (1970 film) Dialogues Plato Apology Axiochus Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Demodocus Epinomis Eryxias Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hipparchus Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Lysis Menexenus Meno Minos On Justice On Virtue Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Theages Timaeus Xenophon Apology Memorabilia Oeconomicus Symposium Other Halcyon Socratic Letters Related Euthyphro dilemma Form of the Good Peritrope Religious skepticism Category v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato v t e Works by Lucian Works by Lucian Amores On the Syrian Goddess Dialogues of the Gods How to Write History Heracles The Lover of Lies The Passing of Peregrinus Toxaris A True Story Pseudo-Lucianic writings Halcyon Philopatris Timarion Judgment of the Vowels Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Halcyon_(dialogue)&oldid=1260062608 " Categories : Dialogues of Plato Works by Lucian Ancient Greek pseudepigrapha Hidden category: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 28 November 2024, at 16:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Halcyon (dialogue) 10 languages Add topic

