Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Organization Toggle Organization subsection 2.1 Institutes 2.2 Centers 2.3 Programs 3 Projects Toggle Projects subsection 3.1 The National Science, Technology and Innovation Plan 3.2 King Abdullah's Initiative for Arabic Content 4 Nuclear technology 5 Scientific achievements 6 Information Technology Unit (ITU) 7 Internet proxy for Saudi Arabia 8 Board Membership 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology 3 languages العربية עברית Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Organisation in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( August 2012 ) King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology مدينة الملك عبدالعزيز للعلوم والتقنية Logo of King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology Established 1977 President Munir M. Eldesouki Location Al Raed, Riyadh 24°43′03″N 46°38′35″E ﻿ / ﻿ 24.71741°N 46.64302°E ﻿ / 24.71741; 46.64302 Website [2] King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology ( KACST ; Arabic : مدينة الملك عبدالعزيز للعلوم والتقنية , romanized : Madīnat al-Malik ʻAbd-al-ʻAzīz lil-ʻUlūm wa-al-Tiqnīyah ) in Riyadh , Saudi Arabia is a governmental organization established in 1977 as the Saudi Arabian National Center for Science & Technology ( SANCST ; المركز الوطني العربي السعودي للعلوم والتقنية , al-Markaz al-Waṭanī al-ʻArabī al-Saʻūdī lil-ʻUlūm wa-al-Tiqnīyah ); in 1985, it was renamed King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology.

History [ edit ] In 1977, the Saudi Arabian National Center for Science and Technology (SANCST) was established, with Prof.

Rida M.S. Obaid being the president. This center was created as an independent scientific organization that is responsible for the promotion of science and technology in Saudi Arabia. However, the name was later changed to King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST). In 1987, KACST has joined the International Council for Science (ICSU) as a National Member.

[ 1 ] In 1984, Abdul Rahman Al-Athel was named as the President of the city. In 2007, Mohammed Ibrahim Al-Suwaiyel , who used to be the KACST vice president for research, became the president. HH Dr. Turki Al Saud is the KACST vice president.

[ citation needed ] Organization [ edit ] Institutes [ edit ] The research complex is divided into the following research institutes: [ citation needed ] Atomic Energy Research Institute Computer and Electronics Research Institute Petroleum and Petrochemical Institute Energy Research Institute Resource and Development Institute Astronomy and Geophysics Institute Space Research Institute Centers [ edit ] KACST has many different research centers, including: [ 2 ] [ 3 ] GIS Innovation Center [ 4 ] National Center for Nano Technology Research The National Robotics and Intelligent Systems Center The National Center for Water Research The National Center of Mathematics & Physics Technology Development Center The National Center for Astronomy The National Center for Biotechnology The National Center for Agricultural Technologies The National Centre Environmental Technology The National Center for Radiation Protection The National Center for Radioactive Waste Management Center of Excellence for Wireless Applications - CEWA (Working with Intel ) Center of Excellence for Software Development (Working with IBM ) Saudi Lunar and Near-Earth Object Science Center (Working with NASA ) [ 5 ] Center of Excellence for Space and Aeronautics (Working with Stanford University ) Center of Excellence for Wildlife Research (Working with the Saudi Wildlife Authority ) Center of Excellence for Nanotechnology (Working with IBM) Center of Excellence for Nanotechnology Manufacturing (Working with Intel) Center of Excellence for Green Nanotechnology (Working with UCLA ) Center of Excellence for Bionanotechnology (Working with Northwestern University ) Center of Excellence for Nanomedicines (Working with UCSD ) Center for Excellence in Biomedicine (Working with Brigham and Women's Hospital ) Media Center Middle East Center for Energy Efficiency (Working with Intel) Joint Center for Genomics (Working with Chinese Academy of Sciences ) Advanced Sensors & Electronics Defense (ASED) Center Center for Complex Engineering System - CCES (Working with MIT ) Programs [ edit ] KACST is now working in the following programs: [ 6 ] National Satellite Technology Program National ECP Program National Program for Advanced Materials and Building Systems National Program for Automobile Technology Aviation Technology National Program Projects [ edit ] The National Science, Technology and Innovation Plan [ edit ] The National Science, Technology and Innovation Plan (NSTIP) is a collaboration between the King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology and the Ministry of Economy and Planning . This program was approved by the Council of Ministers in 2002. This program has fifteen strategic technologies that will help the future development of Saudi Arabia.

[ 7 ] These plans are: [ 8 ] Water , Oil and Gas , Petrochemicals Technology , Nanotechnologies , Biotechnology , Information Technology , ECP ( Electronics , Communications , Photonics ), Space and Aeronautics Technology , Energy , Advanced Materials , Environment , Mathematics and Physics , Medical and Health , Agricultural Technology , Building and Construction King Abdullah's Initiative for Arabic Content [ edit ] King Abdullah's Initiative for Arabic Content [ ar ] is a project that aims to provide high-quality Arabic contents in all disciplines. To achieve this goal, KACST started to work with the local and international organizations. For example: Nature Arabic Edition : KACST has collaborated with the Macmillan Publishers to translate Nature journal into Arabic. The print issues are freely available to qualified subscribers.

[ 9 ] Also, the contents of this journal will be available online for free.

[ 10 ] Wiki Arabi ( Arabic : ويكي عربي ): This is another project initiated by King Abdullah's Initiative for Arabic Content. This project aims to improve the content of the Arabic Wikipedia by translating the high-quality articles from other languages of Wikipedia such as English , French and Hebrew Wikipedia . The first Wiki Arabi event was in 2010, where over 2000 articles were translated into Arabic.

[ 11 ] The second Wiki Arabi was in 2012.

[ 12 ] Nuclear technology [ edit ] See also: Nuclear program of Saudi Arabia In 1988, KACST starts planning to develop nuclear technology in Saudi Arabia. Therefore, KACST decided to open the Atomic Energy Research Institute (AERI). This Institute will help Saudi Arabia to develop the nuclear power along with King Abdullah City for Atomic and Renewable Energy .

[ 13 ] The AERI has four different departments: Radiation Protection Department, Industrial Applications, Nuclear Reactors and Safety, and a Materials Department [ 14 ] Scientific achievements [ edit ] KACST's Space Research Institute has designed some satellites that are used in scientific purposes. Such as: SaudiSat 5A,5B , SaudiComSat-1 , SaudiGeo-1 and the Geostationary Satellite SGS-1 ( 1/Hellas Sat 4 ) and Arabsat-6A which was recently launched on 4 February 2019.

In 2006, KACST signed a collaboration agreement with CERN to participate in the construction of LINAC4 project. KACST engineers constructed a warm prototype of it. This prototype was then qualified at CERN. And now, KACST is working build up a high-energy physics community to participate in future CERN programs.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] On September 30, 2008, KACST funded the science team of Gravity Probe B , helping them to complete the project.

In 2012, KACST announced the first electrostatic accelerator in Saudi Arabia. This accelerator has been designed by the National Center of Mathematics and Physics .

[ 17 ] In April 2013, KACST announced the creation of WaferCatalyst , which is a Multi-project Wafer (MPW) consolidation initiative, which aims to promote Integrated circuit design and related technologies in Saudi Arabia and surrounding regions.

Information Technology Unit (ITU) [ edit ] Information Technology requirements for research center and city staff is fulfilled by the ITU section situated in building No. 1.

[ citation needed ] Internet proxy for Saudi Arabia [ edit ] The King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology operates the Internet backbone in Saudi Arabia as well as the local registry address space. According to RIPE , "all Saudi Arabia web traffic will come from [the] IP block" registered to KACST.

[ 18 ] Board Membership [ edit ] Ahmed Alsuwaiyan (March 2017 – December 2019).

See also [ edit ] Communication in Saudi Arabia Censorship in Saudi Arabia List of things named after Saudi kings References [ edit ] ^ "Detailed information — ICSU" . Icsu.org. Archived from the original on 2015-06-02 . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

^ "الرئيسية" . Kacst.edu.sa. Archived from the original on 2013-08-21 . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

^ [1] Archived May 30, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ "KACST GIS Innovation Center (GISTIC)| GIS projects | GIS Center | R&D Center in Saudi Arabia" . GISTIC . Retrieved 2015-02-24 .

^ "NASA Partners with Saudi Arabia on Moon and Asteroid Research" . Nasa.gov . Retrieved 8 October 2014 .

^ "الرئيسية" . Kacst.edu.sa. Archived from the original on 2013-08-26 . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

^ "حددت السياسة الوطنية للعلوم والتقنية، التي أقرها مجلس الوزراء في المملكة العربية السعودية لعام 1423ه (2002 م)، 15 تقنية إستراتيجية تعتبر جوهرية وأساسية" . Nstip.kacst.edu.sa. Archived from the original on 24 February 2015 . Retrieved 24 February 2015 .

^ "حددت السياسة الوطنية للعلوم والتقنية، التي أقرها مجلس الوزراء في المملكة العربية السعودية لعام 1423ه (2002 م)، 15" . Nstip.kacst.edu.sa. Archived from the original on 24 February 2015 . Retrieved 24 February 2015 .

^ "Nature Arabic Edition Inaugural Issue Published - DUBAI, UAE, October 17, 2012/PRNewswire/" . M.prnewswire.com. 2012-10-17. Archived from the original on January 11, 2013 . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

^ "Press release archive: About NPG" . Nature.com. 2011-10-03 . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

^ "ويكي عربي |" . Wikiarabi.org. Archived from the original on 2013-08-31 . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

^ "ويكي عربي 2: مشروع إثراء موسوعة ويكيبيديا | ويكي عربي" . Wikiarabi2.org. Archived from the original on 2013-08-01 . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

^ "Atomic Energy Research Institute" . Kacst.edu.sa. Archived from the original on 2013-05-28 . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

^ Sokolski, Henry D. (2005).

Getting Ready for Nuclear-Ready Iran - ßĘČ Google . DIANE.

ISBN 9781428916340 . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

^ Co-operation Agreement between the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) and King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST) on behalf of the Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arab. Proposition d'accord de coopération entre le CERN et La King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST) au nom du Gouvernement du Royaume d'Arabie Saoudite concernant la poursuite du développement de la coopération scientifique et technique en physique des hautes énergies. 135th Session of Council , 2005 , retrieved 2024-02-26 ^ "Saudi Arabia" . International-relations.web.cern.ch. 2013-01-30 . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

^ "D. Mohammed Al Suwaiyel Inaugurates the First Phase of Operating the Electrostatic Accelerator" . Kacst.edu.sa. 2012-05-16. Archived from the original on 2013-08-05 . Retrieved 2013-08-18 .

^ "Internet Filtering in Saudi Arabia in 2004" . Retrieved 8 October 2014 .

External links [ edit ] Official website (in English and Arabic) The National Science, Technology and Innovation Plan website (in English) King Abdullah's Initiative for Arabic Content (in Arabic) KACST high resolution logo (text in black) KACST high resolution logo (text in white) GIS Innovation Center (in English) v t e International Science Council (ISC) National members Albania Angola Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Benin Bolivia Bosnia & Herzegovina Republika Srpska Botswana Brazil ANPOCS Bulgaria Burkina Faso Cameroon Canada SSHRC Chile China CASS Colombia Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Cuba Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Egypt El Salvador Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Finland France Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Guatemala Honduras Hungary India ICSSR Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya North Korea South Korea KSSRC KAST Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Mauritius Mexico COMECSO Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nigeria North Macedonia Norway UB Oman Pakistan PAS PCSIR Panama Peru Philippines PSSC Poland Portugal Romania Russia Rwanda Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Singapore Slovak Republic Slovenia South Africa HSRC Spain Sri Lanka Sudan SNAS Sweden Switzerland Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Togo Tunisia Turkey Science Academy TÜBİTAK Uganda Ukraine United Kingdom British Academy ESRC United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Zambia Zimbabwe RCZ Transnational members ACSS AASSREC CASS CLACSO CODESRIA FLACSO UAI OSSREA USP Unions and associations 4S IALS IASSA IAU ICA IEA IFSM IGU IMU INQUA IPRA IPSA ISA ISEE ISPRS IUBMB IUBS IUCr IUFoST IUFRO IUGG IUGS IUHPST IUIS IUMRS IUMS IUNS IUPAB IUPAC IUPAP IUPESM IUPHAR IUPS IUPsyS IUSS IUSSP IUTAM IUTOX URSI WAPOR WAU Affiliated members AAS AASSA ACSS ASTC CIE EADI ECPR FIG GYA IAAP IAHR IASC ICA ICIAM ICLAS ICO ICSTI IFDO IFIP IFLA IFS IIASA ISA ISDE IUVSTA IWA PSA SSRC TNI TWAS UIS Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=King_Abdulaziz_City_for_Science_and_Technology&oldid=1305311060 " Categories : 1977 establishments in Saudi Arabia Government agencies established in 1977 Science and technology in Saudi Arabia Scientific organisations based in Saudi Arabia Government agencies of Saudi Arabia Organisations based in Riyadh Members of the International Council for Science Members of the International Science Council Censorship in Saudi Arabia Institutes associated with CERN Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2012 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using infobox university with the image name parameter Pages using infobox university with conflicting parameters Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles with Arabic-language sources (ar) Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 09:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology 3 languages Add topic

