Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Composition 2 Geology 3 Etymology 4 Banatite 5 Occurrence Toggle Occurrence subsection 5.1 United States 5.2 Egypt 5.3 Ireland 6 Uses 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Granodiorite 43 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Corsu Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Hornjoserbsce Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of coarse grained intrusive igneous rock This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Granodiorite" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A sample of granodiorite from Massif Central, France QAPF diagram for classification of plutonic rocks Mineral assemblage of igneous rocks Photomicrograph of thin section of granodiorite from Slovakia (in crossed polarised light ) Granodiorite ( / ˌ ɡ r æ n oʊ ˈ d aɪ .

ə r aɪ t , ˌ ɡ r æ n ə ˈ -/ GRAN -oh- DY -ə-ryte, GRAN -ə- ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] is a coarse-grained ( phaneritic ) intrusive igneous rock similar to granite , but containing more plagioclase feldspar than orthoclase feldspar .

The term banatite is sometimes used informally for various rocks ranging from granite to diorite , including granodiorite. The term granodiorite was first used by G. F. Becker (1893) to describe granitic rocks in the Sierra Nevada , United States.

[ 3 ] Composition [ edit ] According to the QAPF diagram , granodiorite has a greater than 20% quartz by volume, and between 65% and 90% of the feldspar is plagioclase. A greater amount of plagioclase would designate the rock as tonalite .

Granodiorite is felsic to intermediate in composition. It is the intrusive igneous equivalent of the extrusive igneous dacite . It contains a large amount of sodium (Na) and calcium (Ca) rich plagioclase, potassium feldspar , quartz , and minor amounts of muscovite mica as the lighter colored mineral components.

Biotite and amphiboles often in the form of hornblende are more abundant in granodiorite than in granite, giving it a more distinct two-toned or overall darker appearance. Mica may be present in well-formed hexagonal crystals, and hornblende may appear as needle-like crystals. Minor amounts of oxide minerals such as magnetite , ilmenite , and ulvöspinel , as well as some sulfide minerals may also be present.

Geology [ edit ] Granodiorite near the Roses Lighthouse, Catalonia, Spain.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] On average, the upper continental crust has the same composition as granodiorite.

Granodiorite is a plutonic igneous rock, formed by intrusion of silica-rich magma , which cools in batholiths or stocks below the Earth's surface. It is usually only exposed at the surface after uplift and erosion have occurred.

Etymology [ edit ] The name comes from two related rocks to which granodiorite is an intermediate: granite and diorite . The gran- root comes from the Latin grānum for " grain ", an English language derivative. Diorite is named after the contrasting colors of the rock.

Banatite [ edit ] Banatite is a term used informally for various rocks ranging from granite to diorite , but often granodiorite, that were intruded in the Late Cretaceous in the Banat and nearby regions of present-day Hungary and Serbia .

[ 6 ] The term is also used in Australia in connection with Gulaga / Mount Dromedary in New South Wales , where it is described as "a rock of intermediate composition between quartz diorite and quartz monzonite ".

[ 7 ] Occurrence [ edit ] United States [ edit ] Plymouth Rock is a glacial erratic boulder of granodiorite. The Sierra Nevada mountains contain large sections of granodiorite.

Egypt [ edit ] Granodiorite was quarried at Mons Claudianus in the Red Sea Governorate in eastern Egypt from the 1st century AD to the mid-3rd century AD.  Much of the quarried stone was transported to Rome for use in major projects such as the Pantheon and Hadrian's Villa . Additionally, granodiorite was used for the Rosetta Stone .

The extent of Egyptian granodiorite masonry is unclear. Egypt's 6000-year history makes determining the period of usage difficult as well. Perhaps like porphyry , it was ignored by the successive dynasties of Egypt and only heavily mined during Ptolemaic or Roman times. This is evidenced by the fact that most examples of granodiorite sculpture seem to have come from later dates. However, its presence in the Rosetta Stone implies that they had considerable experience with it and the fact that only newer artifacts are found may simply be because earlier pieces were lost.

Ireland [ edit ] Granodiorite is quarried in the Newry area of County Armagh with the common name of 'Newry granite'.

[ 8 ] Uses [ edit ] Granodiorite is most often used as crushed stone for road building. It is also used as construction material, building facade, and paving, and as an ornamental stone.

[ 9 ] The Rosetta Stone is a stele made from granodiorite.

[ 10 ] The portico columns of the Pantheon in Rome are formed from single shafts of granodiorite, each 12 metres tall by 1.5 metres in diameter.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] List of rock types References [ edit ] This article incorporates public domain material from Granodiorite definition .

United States Geological Survey .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] .

^ "granodiorite" .

Lexico UK English Dictionary .

Oxford University Press . Archived from the original on 2020-03-22.

^ "granodiorite" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 2016-01-21 .

^ Tomkeieff, S.I., Walton, E. K., Randall, B. A. O., Battey M. H. (eds.), 1983: Dictionary of Petrology. Wiley–Blackwell, Chichester, p. 233 ^ These rocks crystallized in depth from magma 300 million years ago. The original magma became deformed during cooling. Once the magma solidified, cracks opened in the rocks and were filled with residual magma, forming light-coloured dykes. Finally, as the magma cooled further, some of the dykes were themselves fractured in shear zones. See: Site of Geological Interest Roses Lighthouse (in Catalan, with a summary in English).

^ Elena Druguet and Jordi Carreras, Folds and Shear Zones at Cap de Creus , 2019, Field Trip Guide, Itinerary 2, at semanticscholar.org.

^ "Banatite" .

Mindat.org . 12 August 2021 . Retrieved 26 December 2021 .

^ "Gulaga / Mt Dromedary Mining Heritage and Geology" .

Geological Sites of New South Wales . Retrieved 26 December 2021 .

^ "Newry By-pass" .

www.habitas.org.uk . Retrieved 7 August 2022 .

^ Molecular Expressions Microscopy Primer: Specialized Microscopy Techniques – Polarized Light Microscopy Gallery – Granodiorite . Micro.magnet.fsu.edu. Retrieved on 2015-11-19.

^ Image gallery: The Rosetta Stone . British Museum (2015-03-20). Retrieved on 2015-11-19.

^ "Granodiorite" .

Lexico UK English Dictionary .

Oxford University Press . Archived from the original on 2020-03-22.

^ "Granodiorite" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 2016-01-21 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Granodiorite at Wikimedia Commons v t e Common igneous rocks classified by silicon dioxide content Type Ultramafic <45% SiO 2 Mafic 45–52% SiO 2 Intermediate 52–63% SiO 2 Intermediate – felsic 63–69% SiO 2 Felsic >69% SiO 2 Volcanic rocks : Subvolcanic rocks : Plutonic rocks : Picrite basalt Peridotite Basalt Diabase (Dolerite) Gabbro Andesite Microdiorite Diorite Dacite Microgranodiorite Granodiorite Rhyolite Microgranite Granite v t e Types of rocks Igneous rock Adakite Alkali feldspar granite Andesite Anorthosite Aplite Basalt Alkali basalt Picrite basalt Basaltic trachyandesite Mugearite Shoshonite Basanite Blairmorite Boninite Carbonatite Charnockite Enderbite Dacite Diabase Diorite Napoleonite Dunite Essexite Foidolite Gabbro Granite Granodiorite Granophyre Harzburgite Hornblendite Hyaloclastite Icelandite Ignimbrite Ijolite Kimberlite Komatiite Lamproite Lamprophyre Latite Lherzolite Monzogranite Monzonite Nepheline syenite Nephelinite Norite Obsidian Pegmatite Peridotite Phonolite Phonotephrite Porphyry Pumice Pyroxenite Quartz diorite Quartz monzonite Quartzolite Rhyodacite Rhyolite Comendite Pantellerite Scoria Shonkinite Sovite Syenite Tachylyte Tephriphonolite Tephrite Tonalite Trachyandesite Benmoreite Trachybasalt Hawaiite Trachyte Troctolite Trondhjemite Tuff Websterite Wehrlite Sedimentary rock Argillite Arkose Banded iron formation Breccia Calcarenite Chalk Chert Claystone Coal Conglomerate Coquina Diamictite Diatomite Dolomite Evaporite Flint Geyserite Greywacke Gritstone Itacolumite Jaspillite Laterite Lignite Limestone Lumachelle Marl Mudstone Oil shale Oolite Phosphorite Sandstone Shale Siltstone Sylvinite Tillite Travertine Tufa Turbidite Varve Wackestone Metamorphic rock Anthracite Amphibolite Blueschist Cataclasite Eclogite Gneiss Granulite Greenschist Hornfels Calcflinta Itabirite Litchfieldite Marble Migmatite Mylonite Metapelite Metapsammite Phyllite Pseudotachylite Quartzite Schist Serpentinite Skarn Slate Suevite Talc carbonate Soapstone Tectonite Whiteschist Specific varieties Adamellite Appinite Aphanite Borolanite Blue Granite Epidosite Felsite Flint Ganister Gossan Hyaloclastite Ijolite Jadeitite Jasperoid Kenyte Lapis lazuli Larvikite Litchfieldite Llanite Luxullianite Mangerite Novaculite Pietersite Pyrolite Rapakivi granite Rhomb porphyry Rodingite Shonkinite Taconite Tachylite Teschenite Theralite Unakite Variolite Wad Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Granodiorite&oldid=1294435248 " Categories : Felsic rocks Granitic rocks Intermediate rocks Plutonic rocks Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2020 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the United States Geological Survey Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 18:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Granodiorite 43 languages Add topic

