Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Modern theories 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Moderate realism 6 languages Español Français Italiano Polski Русский Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in philosophy Aristotle, by Francesco Hayez Moderate realism (also called immanent realism ) is a position in the debate on the metaphysics of universals which holds that there is no realm in which universals exist (in opposition to Platonic realism , which asserts the existence of abstract objects ), nor do they really exist within particulars as universals , but rather universals really exist within particulars as particularised , and multiplied.

Overview [ edit ] Moderate realism is opposed to both the theory of Platonic forms and nominalism . Nominalists deny the existence of universals altogether, even as particularised and multiplied within particulars. Moderate realism, however, is considered a midpoint between Platonic realism and nominalism as it holds that the universals are located in space and time although they do not have separate realms.

[ 1 ] Aristotle espoused a form of moderate realism as did Thomas Aquinas , Bonaventure , and Duns Scotus (cf.

Scotist realism ).

[ 2 ] Moderate realism is anti-realist about abstract objects , just like conceptualism is (their difference being that conceptualism denies the mind-independence of universals, while moderate realism does not).

[ 3 ] Aristotle's position, as expounded by Aquinas, denies the existence of the realm of Forms and that the world around constitutes the only world where nothing is existing precisely according to our universal concepts.

[ 4 ] Modern theories [ edit ] A more recent and influential version of immanent realism has been advanced by Willard Van Orman Quine , in works such as "Posits and Reality" (1955), [ 5 ] and D. M. Armstrong , in works such as his Universals: An Opinionated Introduction (1989, p. 8). For Quine, any object proposed by theory is considered real, stressing that "everything to which we concede existence is a posit from the standpoint of a description of the theory-building process", considering the idea that the theory withstood rigorous testing.

[ 6 ] According to Armstrong, universals are independent of the mind, and this is critical in accounting for causation and nomic connection.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Abstract object Conceptualist realism Hylomorphism In re structuralism Instantiation principle Medieval realism Model-dependent realism Nominalism Object (philosophy) Platonic form Strong realism Universal (metaphysics) References [ edit ] ^ Kumar, Navin (2020).

Media Psychology: Exploration and Application . New York: Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-367-54233-7 .

^ Nominalism, Realism, Conceptualism – Catholic Encyclopedia (1913) ^ Neil A. Manson, Robert W. Barnard (eds.), The Bloomsbury Companion to Metaphysics , Bloomsbury, 2014, p. 95.

^ Jensen, Steven J. (2018).

The Human Person . Washington, D.C.: CUA Press. p. 139.

ISBN 978-0-8132-3152-5 .

^ "Scientific Realism and Antirealism | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

^ McHenry, Leemon B. (2015).

Event Universe: The Revisionary Metaphysics of Alfred North Whitehead . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. p. 23.

ISBN 978-1-4744-0034-3 .

^ Decock, Lieven; Horsten, Leon (2000).

Quine: Naturalized Epistemology, Perceptual Knowledge and Ontology . Amsterdam: Rodopi. p. 209.

ISBN 90-420-1241-2 .

v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Moderate_realism&oldid=1294468611 " Categories : Aristotelianism Metaphysical realism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 22:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Moderate realism 6 languages Add topic

