Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Early Greek immigration 1.2 20th-century Greek immigration 1.3 21st-century Greek immigration 2 Demographics 3 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 3.1 Religion 3.2 Greek language 3.3 Media 4 Notable individuals Toggle Notable individuals subsection 4.1 Academic 4.2 Art and design 4.3 Business 4.4 Fashion 4.5 Film, theatre, and television 4.6 Journalism 4.7 Justice 4.8 Music 4.9 Politics and government 4.9.1 Federal 4.9.2 State and territory 4.10 Religion 4.11 Science and technology 4.12 Sport 4.12.1 Australian rules football 4.12.2 Boxing and kickboxing 4.12.3 Cricket 4.12.4 Soccer 4.12.5 Mixed martial arts 4.12.6 Rugby league 4.12.7 Sailing 4.12.8 Shooting 4.12.9 Skateboarding 4.12.10 Skiing 4.12.11 Tennis 4.12.12 Weightlifting 4.12.13 Wrestling 5 See also 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Greek Australians 8 languages Ελληνικά Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Română Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Australians born in Greece or with Greek ancestry Not to be confused with Australians in Greece .

Ethnic group Greek Australians Ελληνοαυστραλοί Greek Australian christening party, at Bondi Beach 1946.

Total population 424,750 (by ancestry, 2021 ) [ 1 ] ( 1.7% of the Australian population ) 92,314 (by birth, 2021 ) Regions with significant populations Melbourne , Sydney , Adelaide , Brisbane , Perth Languages Australian English · Greek ( Greco-Australian ) Religion Christianity ( Greek Orthodoxy ) Related ethnic groups Cypriot Australians · Greek New Zealanders · Greek diaspora Part of a series on Greeks Etymology Greek names By country Native communities Greece Cyprus Albania Italy Russia and Ukraine Turkey Greek diaspora Australia Melbourne Canada Toronto Germany United Kingdom United States Groups by region Modern Greece : Macedonians Sarakatsani Maniots Tsakonians Constantinople and Asia Minor : Cappadocians Constantinopolitan Greeks Phanariots Karamanlides Pontic Caucasus Crimea Africa : Egyptiots Ethiopian Greeks Sudanese Greeks Other regions : Cypriots Griko Urums Other groups : Aromanians Arvanites Megleno-Romanians Slavophones Souliotes Greek culture Art Cinema Cuisine Dance Dress Education Flag Language Literature Music Politics Religion Sport Television Theatre Religion Greek Orthodox Church Greek Roman Catholicism Greek Byzantine Catholicism Greek Evangelicalism Judaism Islam Hellenism Languages and dialects Greek : Australian Calabrian Cappadocian Constantinopolitan Cretan Cypriot Griko Hellenoromani Himariote Maniot Mariupol Pontic Tsakonian Yevanic Greeklish Other languages Aromanian Arvanitika Greek Sign Language Karamanli Turkish Megleno-Romanian Slavic Urum History of Greece ( Ancient · Byzantine · Ottoman ) v t e Greek Australians ( Greek : Ελληνοαυστραλοί , romanized : Ellinoafstralí ) are Australians of Greek ancestry. Greek Australians are one of the largest groups within the global Greek diaspora . As per the 2021 Australian census , 424,750 people stated that they had Greek ancestry (whether alone or in combination with another ancestry), comprising 1.7% of the Australian population.

[ 2 ] At the 2021 census, 92,314 Australian residents were born in Greece .

[ 2 ] Greek immigration to Australia has been one of the largest migratory flows in the history of Australia , especially after World War II and the Greek Civil War . The flow of migrants from Greece increased slightly in 2015 due to the economic crisis in Greece, [ 3 ] with Australia as one of the main destinations for departing Greeks, mainly to Melbourne , where the Greek Australian community is most deeply established.

[ 4 ] 88% of Greek Australians speak Greek [citation needed] and 91% are Christians and members of the Greek Orthodox Church .

[citation needed] Australia and Greece have a close bilateral relationship based on historical ties and the rich contribution of Greek Australians to Australian society. In 2019, the export of Australian services to Greece was valued at $92 million, while services imports from Greece totalled $750 million. Australia's stock of investment in Greece in 2019 totalled $481 million, while investment in Australia from Greece was $192 million.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] Early Greek immigration [ edit ] Greek immigration to Australia began in the early colonial period in the 19th century. The first known Greeks arrived in 1829.

[ 6 ] These Greeks were seven sailors, convicted of piracy by a British naval court, and were sentenced to transportation to New South Wales . Though they were eventually pardoned, two of those seven Greeks stayed and settled in the country. One settled on the Monaro Plains in Southern New South Wales and one at Picton near Sydney. Their names were Ghikas Bulgaris known as Jigger Bulgari, and Andonis Manolis. Jigger Bulgari married an Irish woman, and they had many children. Jigger was buried at Nimmitabel Pioneer Cemetery. The Hellenic Club of Canberra laid a commemorative marble plaque over his resting place around 2000. Andonis Manolis' grave is in the old cemetery at Mittagong. The first known free Greek migrant to Australia was Katerina Georgia Plessos (1809–1907), [ 7 ] who arrived in Sydney with her husband Major James Crummer in 1835. They married in 1827 on the island of Kalamos where Crummer, the island's commandant, met the young refugee from the Greek independence wars. In her youth, she must have been one of the last living people to speak to Lord Byron. They lived in Sydney, Newcastle and Port Macquarie. They had 11 children.

[ 8 ] The first wave of free Hellenic migrants commenced in the 1850s, and continued through the end of the 19th century, prompted in part by the recent discovery of gold in the country.

[ 9 ] 20th-century Greek immigration [ edit ] Orpheus Arfaras, Greek ceramicist, Sydney, 1952 From the last decade of the 19th century until World War I , the number of Greeks immigrating to Australia increased steadily and Hellenic communities were reasonably well established in Melbourne and Sydney at this time. The Greek language press began in Australia and in 1913, Australia had the first Greek weekly newspaper called Afstralia that was published in Melbourne.

[ 10 ] Anna Perivolaris was a leading organiser of Greek culture in Sydney in the 1920s until she was head hunted to organise a Greek after school club in Perth.

[ 11 ] There was a significant population of Greeks in Australia during World War I , especially from the Greek islands , which led to the community being heavily monitored and counted in a 'secret census' in 1916, due to questions of Greek loyalty as Greece was initially neutral during the war.

[ 12 ] Later the Greeks were raising money for the Greek Government in exile.

[ 11 ] After the changes in Greece from the mid 1970s, including the fall of the Papadopoulos regime in 1974 and the formal inclusion of Greece into the European Union , Greek immigration to Australia has slowed since the 1971 peak of 160,200 arrivals. Within Australia, the Greek immigrants have been "extremely well organised socially and politically", with approximately 600 Greek organisations in the country by 1973, and immigrants have strived to maintain their faith and cultural identity.

[ 13 ] By comparison, the Greek Cypriot community in Australia doubled following the Invasion of Cyprus by Turkey following a campaign of ethnic cleansing in 1974.

[ 14 ] 21st-century Greek immigration [ edit ] Greek Australians during a parade for Australia Day in Melbourne (2014) As the economic crisis in Greece grew, the opportunities for temporary resident Greek Australians abroad were limited.

In the early 2010s, there was an increase of Greek immigration flows to Australia due to unemployment, among other issues, because of the economic crisis in Greece . This has led to the return of many Greek Australians which had gone to Greece before the crisis and also the arrival of newcomers from Greece, who have been received by the large Greek Australian community, mainly in Melbourne .

[ 15 ] Demographics [ edit ] See also: Greek community of Melbourne At the 2021 Australian census , 424,750 people stated that they had Greek ancestry (whether alone or in combination with another ancestry), comprising 1.7% of the Australian population.

[ 2 ] At the 2021 census, 92,314 Australian residents were born in Greece .

[ 2 ] The largest concentration of Greek Australians is in the state of Victoria , which is often regarded as the heartland of the Greek Australian community. Victoria's capital Melbourne has the largest Greek Australian community in Australia.

The 2021 census showed that the following states had the largest numbers of people nominating Greek ancestry: Victoria (181,184), New South Wales (141,627), South Australia (40,704), Queensland (32,702), Western Australia (16,117).

[ 16 ] One study investigating the 54 most common ethnic groups in Australia found that Greek Australians had the lowest rate of intermarriage (marrying outside their ethnicity) than every other ethnicity in the first, second and third generations.

[ 17 ] Culture [ edit ] Religion [ edit ] According to the 2016 Australian census , 91.4% of Australians with Greek ancestry are Christian, mainly Eastern Orthodox; however, minorities who belong to different Christian denominations like Catholics, Jehovah's Witnesses and Pentecostals also exist. Together, these other denominations make up 0.4% of the Greek Australian population. 5.6% identified as spiritual, secular or irreligious, and 2.6% did not answer the census question on religion.

[ 18 ] Greek Australians are predominantly Greek Orthodox .

[ 18 ] The largest religious body of Greek Orthodox Australians is the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia , with its headquarters at the Cathedral of The Annunciation of Our Lady in the inner Sydney suburb of Redfern .

Greek language [ edit ] See also: Greco-Australian dialect In 2016, the Greek language was spoken at home by 237,588 Australian residents, a 5.8% decrease from the 2011 census data. Greek is the seventh most commonly spoken language in Australia after English, Mandarin, Arabic, Cantonese, Vietnamese and Italian.

[ 19 ] The remainder of the ethnic Greek population in Australia mainly use English as their first language. Most Greek Australians speak the Greco-Australian dialect. Greco-Australian is an Australian-based dialect of Greek that is spoken by the local disapora, including by both Greek immigrants and Australians of Greek descent.

[ 20 ] Media [ edit ] The Greek language press began in Australia in 1913 when the first Greek weekly newspaper was published in Melbourne. In South Australia, the local Greek community published a short-lived newspaper called Okeanis (Oceania), around 1914 before it moved to Sydney.

[ 21 ] On 16 November 1926, George Marsellos and John Stilson published a broadsheet under the name Panellenios Keryx (Panhellenic Herald or The Greek Herald ), becoming the second national Greek newspaper in Australia.

[ 22 ] In 1935 and 1936 a third newspaper, Pharos (Lighthouse), was published, and a number of short-lived titles were issued in the late 1960s, with the longest of these being Tachydromos (Mailman), founded in September 1968.

[ 21 ] In 1957, Hellenic/Greek language newspaper Neos Kosmos was founded by Dimitri Gogos, Bill Stefanou and Alekos Doukas, the latter also being an exceptionally well known author. Since 1994, a publication called Paroikiako Vema (Steps in the adopted Country) and printed in Renmark , has served the Greek community in rural South Australia.

[ 23 ] Multicultural broadcaster SBS ( Special Broadcasting Service ) airs a Greek-language radio program every afternoon from 4 PM to 6 PM. The program features news, current affairs, music, interviews, and a talkback segment, where listeners can dial into the program from 5:30 PM onwards and express their opinion on a topic being focused on. Additionally, SBS also airs Greek public broadcaster ERT's Eidiseis news program every morning as part of their WorldWatch programming block.

Notable individuals [ edit ] Academic [ edit ] Nikos Athanasou – Professor of Musculoskeletal Pathology at Oxford University and a novelist.

[ 24 ] Nick (Νικήτας) Birbilis – Professor of Engineering / Executive Dean, Faculty of Science, Engineering and Built Environment Deakin University Adrian David Cheok – Professor of Pervasive Computing at City University London & Director of the Mixed Reality Lab Nicholas Doumanis – Assoc. Professor of History, at the University of New South Wales Nikolas Kompridis – Professorial Fellow at the University of Western Sydney in the School of Humanities & Communication Arts Michael Kyrios - Emeritus Professor at Flinders University;  previous Vice President and Executive Dean, College of Education, Psychology and Social Work Christos Pantelis – Professor of Psychiatry, University of Melbourne Maria Skyllas-Kazacos – Emeritus Professor at the University of New South Wales, chemical engineer best known for her pioneering work of the vanadium redox battery John Tasioulas – Director of Institute for Ethics in AI and Professor of Ethics and Legal Philosophy at University of Oxford and first Greek-Australian Rhodes Scholar Art and design [ edit ] Con Chrisoulis – comic book creator Nonda Katsalidis – architect Marc Newson – industrial designer Polixeni Papapetrou – artist Paul Pholeros – architect Tony Rafty – caricaturist Stelarc (Stelios Arkadiou) – artist Christos Tsiolkas – writer Michael Zavros – artist/painter Andrew Demetriou , former chief executive of the Australian Football League (AFL) Andrew N. Liveris , CEO of Dow Chemical Company Business [ edit ] Mark Bouris – managing director of Wizard George Calombaris – chef, former judge MasterChef Australia Con Constantine – former chairman, Newcastle United Jets Andrew Demetriou – chief executive, Australian Football League Harry Katsiabanis – founder of TaxiLink and StorageX Antony J. J. Lucas – businessman noted for his philanthropic activities Marinos Lucas – businessman, theatre company operator Andrew N. Liveris – CEO of Dow Chemical Company Kostas Makris – the richest Greek in Australia (in the top 30 of the richest residents in Australia) Nick Pappas – chairman, South Sydney Rabbitohs Nicholas Paspaley Senior and Paspaley family (Paspalis) – Paspaley dominate the pearling industry Geoff Polites – chief executive officer of Australian Jaguar Land Rover FPV President / Tickford managing director Nick Politis – car retailer and chairman of the Sydney Roosters rugby league club James Samios – Hon. MBE Museum of Contemporary Art , Circular Quay , Sydney Peter V'landys – chairman of the Australian Rugby League Commission Fashion [ edit ] Christopher Chronis – fashion designer Napoleon Perdis – make-up artist Alex Perry – fashion designer Diana Glenn , actress Ada Nicodemou , actress Film, theatre, and television [ edit ] Peter Andrikidis – director and producer, Underbelly , G.P.

Alex Andreas – actor, Fat Tony & Co.

Alex Blias – actor, Home and Away Elena Carapetis – actress, Heartbreak High Gia Carides – actress, Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery , Brilliant Lies , My Big Fat Greek Wedding , Strictly Ballroom Zoe Carides – actress, Death in Brunswick , G.P.

Wayne Coles-Janess – director and producer Chantal Contouri – actress, Number 96 Mary Coustas – comedian and actress Alex Dimitriades – actor, The Heartbreak Kid , Heartbreak High , Head On , The Slap Rebekah Elmaloglou – actress, Home and Away and Neighbours Sebastian Elmaloglou – actor, Home and Away , brother of Rebekah Damien Fotiou – actor, Kangaroo Jack , Head On Nick Giannopoulos – actor, The Wog Boy , Acropolis Now and director Diana Glenn – actress George Houvardas – actor, Packed to the Rafters Hugh Jackman – actor, Paperback Hero , Australia , Logan , The Greatest Showman [ 25 ] George Kapiniaris – actor, Acropolis Now and comedian Peter Kelamis – comedian Costas Kilias – actor Ana Kokkinos – director, The Secret Life of Us , Head On Katerina Kotsonis - actress, Neighbours Nico Lathouris – actor Costas Mandylor – actor, Saw , Picket Fences Louis Mandylor – actor, My Big Fat Greek Wedding Lex Marinos – actor, Kingswood Country , director, writer and broadcaster Harry Michaels – actor, Number 96 , producer, Aerobics Oz Style , and director, Sports TV Bill Miller – director and producer George Miller – Academy Award -winning director and producer, Babe , Happy Feet , Mad Max: Fury Road George Miller , director of Babe (1995), Happy Feet (2006), and Mad Max: Fury Road (2015) Ada Nicodemou – actress, Home and Away , Heartbreak High , Police Rescue Tony Nikolakopoulos – actor and director Socratis Otto – actor, known for television series Young Lions , and Wentworth Alex Papps – actor, Home and Away , The Henderson Kids and presenter, Play School Thaao Penghlis – actor, Days of Our Lives , General Hospital , Santa Barbara (TV series) Alex Proyas – director, I, Robot , Dark City , The Crow , Knowing Alex Proyas , director of The Crow (1994) and I, Robot (2004) Jordan Raskopoulos – comedian and singer Steen Raskopoulos – actor and comedian Gina Riley – actress, Kath & Kim , comedian, entertainer and singer [ citation needed ] Nathan Saidden – comedian George Spartels – actor Nadia Tass – director, Malcolm , The Big Steal John Tatoulis – director and producer Maria Theodorakis – actress Alkinos Tsilimidos – director Olympia Valance – actress, Neighbours , Playing for Keeps and model Zoe Ventoura – actress, Packed to the Rafters Helen Zerefos – actress and cabaret singer Journalism [ edit ] Nick Adams - also known as Nick Adamopoulos, US-based political commentator Dimitri Gogos – late editor, Neos Kosmos George Donikian – news presenter, Ten Network Peter Frilingos – sports journalist with the Daily Telegraph in Sydney, and broadcaster and commentator with the Continuous Call Team Helen Kapalos – journalist, reporter Sunday Night , Seven Network Patricia Karvelas – journalist, ABC Mary Kostakidis – journalist, SBS John Mangos – news presenter and journalist, Sky News Australia George Megalogenis – author and former The Australian newspaper journalist Harry Nicolaides – novelist Peter Peters – sports broadcaster and commentator Justice [ edit ] Chris Kourakis – Chief Justice of South Australia Emilios Kyrou – Justice of the Supreme Court of Victoria John Morris – Chief Justice of Tasmania (surname originally Moros ) Music [ edit ] Peter Andre – singer, entertainer Alex Carapetis – drummer Kaz James – singer and DJ James Kannis – singer ( Australian Idol ) Chris Karan – jazz drummer ( Dudley Moore Trio ) and studio percussionist ( Bob Marley & the Wailers ) [ 26 ] Vasilliki Karagiorgos (Vassy) – singer and songwriter John Lemmone – flute player and composer Orianthi Panagaris – guitarist/musician Sally Polihronas – singer ( Bardot ) Nick Skitz – deejay-producer Costas Tsicaderis – singer-songwriter Politics and government [ edit ] Federal [ edit ] Federal government ministers: Nick Bolkus – Labor senator Michael McCormack – Nationals MP Peter Morris – Labor MP (brother of Allan Morris) Arthur Sinodinos – Liberal senator Other members of parliament: Nick Dondas – Liberal MP Steve Georganas – Labor MP George Georges – Labor senator Petro Georgiou – Liberal MP Fiona Martin – Liberal MP Allan Morris – Labor MP (brother of Peter Morris) Andrew Theophanous – Labor MP Maria Vamvakinou – Labor MP Nick Xenophon – independent senator State and territory [ edit ] Michael Costa – former Finance Minister, New South Wales Sophie Cotsis – politician, New South Wales Steve Dimopoulos – politician, Victoria Jim Fouras – politician, Queensland John Hatzistergos – Attorney General , New South Wales Steve Kamper – politician, New South Wales Peter Katsambanis – former politician, Victoria Steve Kons – Deputy Premier, Tasmania Nicholas Kotsiras – Minister, Victoria Tom Koutsantonis – Minister for Trade, South Australia Ken Michael – governor of Western Australia Jenny Mikakos – former Health Minister, Victoria John Pandazopoulos – politician, Victoria Drew Pavlou – student activist at the University of Queensland Eleni Petinos – politician, New South Wales Olivia Savvas – politician, South Australia Nick Staikos – politician, Victoria Theo Theophanous – politician, Victoria (born Cyprus ) Kat Theophanous – politician, Victoria Kon Vatskalis – politician, Northern Territory Religion [ edit ] Archbishop Stylianos Harkianakis – former Primate of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia Archbishop Makarios Griniezakis – current Primate of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia Science and technology [ edit ] Manuel Aroney – organic chemist Gerasimos Danilatos – physicist, inventor of environmental scanning electron microscope Michael Kyrios – clinical psychologist George North (Tramountanas) – pastoralist, sheep farmer and first Greek to settle in South Australia in 1842 [ 27 ] Christos Pantelis – psychiatrist George Paxinos – Professor of Psychology at the University of New South Wales Maria Skyllas-Kazacos - Emeritus professor of chemical engineering at the University of New South Wales Sport [ edit ] Australian rules football [ edit ] See also: Greek Team of the Century Luke Beveridge – Melbourne, Footscray & St Kilda player Ang Christou – Carlton player Andrew Demetriou – North Melbourne & Hawthorn player (later League CEO) Josh Francou – Port Adelaide player Gary Frangalas – Sydney & Richmond player John Georgiades – Footscray player John Georgiou – St.Kilda player Con Gorozidis – St.Kilda & Footscray player Athas Hrysoulakis – Collingwood player Peter Kanis – Hawthorn player Arthur Karanicolas – North Melbourne player Patrick Karnezis – Brisbane & Collingwood player Paul Koulouriotis – Port Adelaide & Geelong player Spiro Kourkoumelis – Carlton & St Kilda player Anthony Koutoufides – Carlton player Angelo Lekkas – Hawthorn player Spiro Malakellis – Geelong player Tony Malakellis – Geelong & Sydney player Steve Malaxos – Hawthorn & West Coast player Daniel Metropolis – West Coast & Fremantle player Russell Morris – Hawthorn & St Kilda player Chris Pavlou – Carlton player Phillip Poursanidis – Carlton player Lou Richards – Collingwood player Ron Richards – Collingwood player John Rombotis – Fitzroy, Port Adelaide & Richmond player Tony Spassopoulos – Fitzroy player Jimmy Toumpas – Melbourne & Port Adelaide player Jason Traianidis – St Kilda player Zeno Tzatzaris – Footscray player David Zaharakis – Essendon player Boxing and kickboxing [ edit ] Evangelos Goussis – Kickboxer and Boxer, convicted murderer George Kambosos Jr.

– Professional boxer Michael Katsidis – Professional Boxer, former WBA and WBO lightweight champion Stan Longinidis – Kickboxer, former World Kickboxing Champion Tosca Petridis – Kickboxer, former World Kickboxing Champion Cricket [ edit ] Jason Gillespie – cricket coach and retired Australia international cricketer Peter Hatzoglou – Melbourne Renegades cricketer Sam Konstas – Australia international cricketer Blake Nikitaras - Sydney thunder cricketer Steve Nikitaras - Former WA cricketer Marcus Stoinis – Australia international cricketer Ange Postecoglou , soccer manager and former player Soccer [ edit ] John Anastasiadis – former player of Heidelberg United , PAOK , South Melbourne and Yarraville Glory. Represented the Socceroos at U21 level. Coached Yarraville Glory, South Melbourne, Oakleigh Cannons and is current coach of Bentleigh Greens .

Panos Armenakas – player, Udinese Calcio Con Blatsis – former player of South Melbourne , Derby County , Sheffield Wednesday (on loan), Colchester United , Kocaelispor and St Patrick's Athletic . Represented the Socceroos at U20, U23 and senior level.

Con Boutsianis – former player of South Melbourne , Heidelberg United , Collingwood Warriors , Bentleigh Greens , Perth Glory , Bolton Wanderers , Bulleen Zebras , Oakleigh Cannons , Essendon United and Malvern City. He represented the Socceroos at senior level.

Dean Bouzanis – player Reading , Melbourne City and former Liverpool FC Jason Davidson – player Eupen , Melbourne Victory and former Socceroos Chris Kalantzis – player Evan Kostopoulos – player, Adelaide United Stan Lazaridis – player, Perth Glory and Socceroos Apostolos Stamatelopoulos – player, Adelaide United and Western United Michalis 'Mike' Mandalis - player, one of Australia's all-time greats South Melbourne and Melbourne Hakoah Lucas Pantelis – former player Jim Patikas – former player, first Australian participant in UEFA Champions League , former Socceroos Ange Postecoglou – coach Socceroos , Celtic and Spurs , former player Peter Raskopoulos - player, Sydney Olympic FC Nick Theodorakopoulos – coach Michael Theoklitos – former player of Brisbane Roar , Melbourne Victory , South Melbourne Michael Valkanis – coach, Melbourne City and Greece national football team assistant Helen Caceres – player Andy Vlahos – player Charlie Yankos – former Socceroos captain Terry Antonis – player, Western Sydney Wanderers Apostolos Giannou – player, Kerala Blasters Avraam Papadopoulos – player, Australian born Greece national football team member Jesse Makarounas – player, Melbourne Victory Dimitri Petratos – player, Mohun Bagan Super Giant Kosta Petratos – player, St George City Maki Petratos – player, St George City Chris Ikonomidis – player, Melbourne Victory Anthony Lesiotis – player, Melbourne City Mixed martial arts [ edit ] George Sotiropoulos – former UFC mixed martial artist Alexander Volkanovski – UFC mixed martial artist Rugby league [ edit ] Braith Anasta – player, Canterbury-Bankstown Bulldogs , Sydney Roosters Jason Demetriou - player/coach George Gatis – player, New Zealand Warriors Steve Georgallis – player, Western Suburbs Magpies , coach Michael Korkidas – player, Salford City Reds Nick Kouparitsas – player, Canterbury Bulldogs Glenn Lazarus – player Canberra Raiders , Brisbane Broncos and Melbourne Storm Billy Magoulias — player, Cronulla Sharks George Peponis – player, Canterbury-Bankstown Bulldogs , former Australian captain Peter Peters - player, Manly-Warringah Willie Peters – player, South Sydney Rabbitohs Jim Serdaris – player, South Sydney, Canterbury-Bankstown Bulldogs John Skandalis – player, Western Suburbs Magpies , Wests Tigers , Huddersfield Giants Jason Stevens – player, St-George Illawarra Dragons, Cronulla-Sutherland Sharks Justin Tsoulos – player, Parramatta Eels Arthur Kitinas – player/coach, South Sydney Sydney Roosters Sailing [ edit ] Edward Psaltis – sailor Shooting [ edit ] Michael Diamond – shooter – Olympic gold medallist, Sydney 2000 Skateboarding [ edit ] Tas Pappas – former World No.1 Ben Pappas Skiing [ edit ] Lydia Lassila – skier Tennis [ edit ] Mark Philippoussis – player Nick Kyrgios – player Thanasi Kokkinakis – player Weightlifting [ edit ] Robert Kabbas - athlete Bill Stellios - athlete Wrestling [ edit ] Tony Kontellis – professional wrestler Spiros Manousakis (Spiros Arion) – wrestler See also [ edit ] Australia portal Greece portal Australia–Greece relations Australians in Greece Cypriot Australians European Australians Europeans in Oceania Greek Cypriots Greek New Zealanders Greek Orthodox churches in New South Wales Greeks Immigration to Australia Neos Kosmos References [ edit ] ^ "2021 Australia, Census All persons QuickStats" .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . Retrieved 27 July 2022 .

^ a b c d "2021 Census of Population and Housing - General Community Profile" .

Australian Bureau of Statistics .

Archived from the original on 28 June 2022 . Retrieved 20 December 2023 .

^ Greek (24 June 2015).

"Greeks fleeing to Melbourne due to crisis" .

Greekreporter.com .

Archived from the original on 28 June 2015 . Retrieved 29 June 2015 .

^ ABC News (23 June 2015).

"Greek nationals move to Melbourne to escape growing economic, social crisis" .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation .

Archived from the original on 28 August 2015 . Retrieved 6 September 2015 .

^ "Greece country brief" .

Australian Government - Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2023 . Retrieved 20 December 2023 .

^ "Department of Immigration & Citizenship: Media – Publications: Statistics – Community Information Summaries" .

Archived from the original on 29 October 2013 . Retrieved 17 September 2013 .

^ "First Hellenes in Australia" . The Athenian Association of Sydney and NSW. Archived from the original on 16 December 2013 . Retrieved 16 December 2013 .

^ Australian Dictionary of Biography Online ^ Appleyard, Reginald; Yiannakis, John N. (2002).

Greek Pioneers in Western Australia . UWA Publishing. p. 27.

^ School of Historical Studies, Department of History.

"Greeks - Entry - eMelbourne - The Encyclopedia of Melbourne Online" .

www.emelbourne.net.au .

Archived from the original on 18 November 2022 . Retrieved 18 November 2022 .

^ a b Yiannakis, John N., "Anna Perivolaris (1888–1963)" , Australian Dictionary of Biography , Canberra: National Centre of Biography, Australian National University, archived from the original on 17 February 2024 , retrieved 17 February 2024 ^ Yianni Cartledge & Andrekos Varnava (2024) 'Making and Monitoring a ‘Suspect Community’: Australian Attacks on Greeks and the ‘Secret Census’ in 1916', Australian Historical Studies , DOI: 10.1080/1031461X.2023.2293837 - see: https://doi.org/10.1080/1031461X.2023.2293837 ^ Keays, Sue (2004). " Yassou, Souvlakia and Paniyiri: Adapting Greek Culture for Australians Archived 19 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine ".

Social Change in the 21st Century Conference . Retrieved 20 December 2013.

^ "Origins: History of immigration from Cyprus - Immigration Museum, Melbourne Australia" .

museumsvictoria.com.au .

Archived from the original on 23 August 2018 . Retrieved 23 August 2018 .

^ ABC News (11 October 2013).

"Greek-Australian citizens look to Australia to escape economic crisis" .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation .

Archived from the original on 9 July 2015 . Retrieved 30 June 2015 .

^ "Census of Population and Housing: Cultural diversity data summary, 2021" .

Australian Bureau of Statistics .

Archived from the original on 28 June 2022 . Retrieved 20 December 2023 .

^ Siew-Ean Khoo; Bob Birrell; Genevieve Heard (2009).

"Intermarriage by Birthplace and Ancestry in Australia" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 March 2022 . Retrieved 20 December 2023 .

^ a b "Australian Bureau of Statistic" .

Archived from the original on 11 April 2020 . Retrieved 6 January 2018 .

^ Statistics, c=AU; o=Commonwealth of Australia; ou=Australian Bureau of.

"Redirect to Census data page" . Retrieved 6 January 2018 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) [ permanent dead link ] ^ Kalimniou, Dean (29 June 2020).

"Tongues of Greek Australia: An Anglicised Hellenic language" .

Neos Kosmos .

Archived from the original on 27 October 2023 . Retrieved 22 October 2023 .

^ a b "SA Memory - SA Newspapers : Non-English language newspapers" .

www.samemory.sa.gov.au . 23 February 2007.

Archived from the original on 22 August 2018 . Retrieved 22 August 2018 .

^ Gilchrist, Hugh (1992).

Australians and Greeks: The middle years . Australia: Australia: Halstead Press. pp.

346– 349.

ISBN 1875684026 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Laube, Anthony.

"LibGuides: SA Newspapers: Non-English" .

guides.slsa.sa.gov.au .

Archived from the original on 22 August 2018 . Retrieved 22 August 2018 .

^ Professor Nicholas Athanasou, Professor of Musculoskeletal Pathology and Emeritus Fellow Archived 24 December 2021 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Hugh Jackman declares "I'm Greek" - Neos Kosmos" .

neoskosmos.com . 10 August 2015.

Archived from the original on 11 August 2017 . Retrieved 6 January 2018 .

^ "Chris Karan - Credits - AllMusic" .

AllMusic .

Archived from the original on 23 August 2018 . Retrieved 23 August 2018 .

^ "The Australian People" an encyclopedia of the nation, its people and their origins, by James Jupp – published 1988 Bibliography [ edit ] Tamis, Anastasios (2005).

The Greeks in Australia . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-54743-1 Gilchrist, Hugh (1992), Australians and Greeks Volume I: The Early Years , Brown, Prior, Anderson Pty. Ltd., ISBN 978-1-875684-01-4 Alexakis, Effy and Janiszewski, Leonard (1998).

In Their Own Image: Greek-Australians . Hale & Iremonger Pty Limited.

ISBN 0-86806-655-9 Alexakis, Effy and Janiszewski, Leonard (1995).

Images of Home: Mavri Xenitia . Hale & Iremonger Pty Limited.

ISBN 0-86806-560-9 Alexakis, Effy and Janiszewski, Leonard (2013).

Selling an American Dream: Australia's Greek Cafe . Macquarie University.

ISBN 9781741383959 Alexakis, Effy and Janiszewski, Leonard (2016).

Greek Cafes & Milk Bars of Australia . Halstead Press.

ISBN 9781925043181 External links [ edit ] Diamadis, Panayiotis – University of Technology, Sydney (2011).

"Greeks" .

Dictionary of Sydney . Retrieved 4 October 2015 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) (Greeks in Sydney) [ CC-By-SA ] A video of Peter Yiannoudes, who established Greek Cinema in Victoria in the 1950s on Culture Victoria Meet me at the Paragon digital stories , State Library of Queensland . Digital stories relating to Greek Australian owned café and milk bars in Queensland v t e Greek diaspora (Omogenia) Old Greek Diaspora Asia Minor Greeks genocide population exchange pogrom expulsion massacre burning Egyptian Greeks expulsion Ukrainian Greeks evacuation Soviet Greeks deportation prison shootings New Greek Diaspora Greek Americans Boston Chicago New York City Greek Australians Melbourne Sydney Greek Canadians Toronto Traditional areas of Greek settlement Albania Bulgaria Caucasus Cyprus France Italy Malta North Macedonia Russia Turkey Ukraine Europe Austria Belgium Czechia Denmark France Germany Hungary Moldova Netherlands Poland Romania Serbia Sweden United Kingdom Caucasus Armenia Azerbaijan Georgia Central Asia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Uzbekistan Middle East Israel Lebanon Syria United Arab Emirates Africa D.R. Congo Ethiopia South Africa Sudan South Sudan Zimbabwe Latin America Argentina Bahamas Brazil Chile Mexico Uruguay Venezuela Asia-Pacific New Zealand Philippines Hellenization Greek colonization Hellenistic world v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 Portals : Greece Australia NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐dqstt
Cached time: 20250817044855
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.824 seconds
Real time usage: 1.019 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4949/1000000
Revision size: 44142/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 144795/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9174/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 131434/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.478/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21875559/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  784.051      1 -total
 30.46%  238.833      1 Template:Reflist
 20.82%  163.267     19 Template:Cite_web
 13.08%  102.519      1 Template:Greeks
 12.76%  100.014      1 Template:Ethnic_group_sidebar
 12.74%   99.902      1 Template:Langx
 12.25%   96.058      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.95%   77.975      2 Template:Short_description
  6.14%   48.164      1 Template:Infobox_ethnic_group
  5.59%   43.797      4 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1957829:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044855 and revision id 1306193291. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Greek_Australians&oldid=1306193291 " Categories : Australian people of Greek descent Greek diaspora in Australia Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Australian English from January 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from April 2024 "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Articles containing Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2009 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 12:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Greek Australians 8 languages Add topic

