Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 In different fields Toggle In different fields subsection 2.1 Literature 2.2 Film 2.3 Video games 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Diegesis 21 languages Català الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Frysk 贛語 한국어 Italiano Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Style of fiction storytelling involving narration This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Diegesis" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Diegesis ( / ˌ d aɪ ə ˈ dʒ iː s ɪ s / ; from Ancient Greek διήγησις ( diḗgēsis ) ' narration, narrative ' , from διηγεῖσθαι ( diēgeîsthai ) ' to narrate ' ) is a style of fiction storytelling in which a participating narrator offers an on-site, often interior, view of the scene to the reader, viewer, or listener by subjectively describing the actions and, in some cases, thoughts, of one or more characters .

Diegetic events are those experienced by both the characters within a piece and the audience, while non-diegetic elements of a story make up the " fourth wall " separating the characters from the audience.

Diegesis in music describes a character's ability to hear the music presented for the audience, in the context of musical theatre or film scoring .

Origin [ edit ] Diegesis (Greek διήγησις "narration") and mimesis (Greek μίμησις "imitation") have been contrasted since Aristotle . For Aristotle, mimesis shows rather than tells , by means of action that is enacted.

Diegesis is the telling of a story by a narrator. The narrator may speak as a particular character, or may be the invisible narrator , or even the all-knowing narrator who speaks from "outside" in the form of commenting on the action or the characters.

In different fields [ edit ] Literature [ edit ] For narratologists all parts of narratives—characters, narrators, existents, actors—are characterized in terms of diegesis.

[ 1 ] In literature, discussions of diegesis tend to concern discourse/sjužet (in Russian Formalism ) (vs. story/ fabula ). In diegesis, the narrator tells the story.

Details about the world itself and the experiences of its characters are revealed explicitly through narrative.

The story is told or recounted, as opposed to shown or enacted.

[ 2 ] There is a presumed detachment from the story of both the speaker and the audience.

Diegesis is multi-levelled in narrative fiction.

Gérard Genette distinguishes between three "diegetic levels": The extradiegetic level (the level of the narrative's telling) is, according to Prince, "external to (not part of) any diegesis".

[ 3 ] One might think of this as what we commonly understand to be the narrator's level, the level at which exists a narrator who is not part of the story being told. (Contrast heterodiegetic narration.

[ 4 ] ) The diegetic level or intradiegetic level is understood as the level of the characters, their thoughts and actions. John Watson of the Sherlock Holmes stories is a diegetic narrator because he is narrating from within the story. (Compare homodiagetic narration.

[ 5 ] ) The metadiegetic level or hypodiegetic level is that part of a diegesis that is embedded in another one and is often understood as a story within a story , as when diegetic narrators themselves tell a story.

In dramatic texts, the poet never speaks directly; in narrative texts, poets speak as themselves.

[ 6 ] Film [ edit ] In filmmaking the term is used to refer to the story as it is directly depicted onscreen, as opposed to the (typically much longer) real time events which said story purports to tell. (It is the difference between seeing an intertitle reading "a week later," and simply waiting a week.) Diegesis may concern elements, such as characters, events, and things within the main or primary narrative. However, the author may include elements that are not intended for the primary narrative, such as stories within stories. Characters and events may be referred to elsewhere or in historical contexts and are therefore outside the main story; thus, they are presented in an extradiegetic situation.

[ citation needed ] [ dubious – discuss ] The classical distinction between the diegetic mode and the mimetic mode relates [ clarification needed ] to the difference between the epos (or epic poetry ) and drama .

[ 7 ] The "epos" relates stories by telling them through narration, while drama enacts stories through direct embodiment ( showing ). In terms of classical poetics , the cinema is an epic form [ citation needed ] that utilizes dramatic elements; this is determined by the technologies of the camera and editing . Even in a spatially and temporally continuous scene (mimicking the theatrical situation, as it were), the camera chooses for us where to look - and where not to look. In a similar way, editing causes us to jump from one place (and/or time) to another, whether it be elsewhere in the room, or across town. This jump is a form of narration; it is as if a narrator whispers to us: "meanwhile, on the other side of the forest". It is for this reason [ dubious – discuss ] that the "story-world" in cinema is referred to as "diegetic"; elements that belong to the film's narrative world are diegetic elements. This is why, in the cinema, we may refer to the film's diegetic world .

[ citation needed ] "Diegetic", in the cinema, typically refers to the internal world created by the story that the characters themselves experience and encounter: the narrative "space" that includes all the parts of the story, both those that are and those that are not actually shown on the screen, such as events that have led up to the present action; people who are being talked about; or events that are presumed to have happened elsewhere or at a different time; such as the intro to "Star Wars", with its now classic "A long time ago, in a galaxy far, far away..." Thus, elements of a film can be "diegetic" or "non diegetic". These terms are most commonly used in reference to sound in a film. Most soundtrack music in films is non diegetic; heard by the audience, but not by the characters. Some films reverse this convention; for example, Baby Driver employs diegetic music, played by the characters on music devices, to which many of the film's action scenes are set.

[ 8 ] These terms can also apply to other elements. For example, an insert shot that depicts something that is neither taking place in the world of the film, nor is seen, imagined, or thought by a character, is a non-diegetic insert . Titles, subtitles, and voice-over narration (with some exceptions) are also non-diegetic.

[ citation needed ] Video games [ edit ] In the game Dead Space , the colored spine of the player's spacesuit is used to indicate the health points of their character. This is rendered within the environment of the game, as part of the player's character. Ammo, mission updates, and several key menus are also rendered in the game world, which are viewed by the player's character.

In video games "diegesis" comprises the narrative game world, its characters, objects and actions which can be classified as "intra-diegetic", by both being part of the narration and not breaking the fourth wall .

[ 9 ] Status icons, menu bars and other UI which are not part of the game world itself can be considered as "extra-diegetic"; a game character does not know about them even though for the player they may present crucial information. A noted example of a diegetic interface in video games is that of the Dead Space series, in which the player-character is equipped with an advanced survival suit that projects holographic images to the character within the game's rendering engine that also serve as the game's user-interface to the player to show weapon selection, inventory management, and special actions that can be taken.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Diegetic music Mimesis Paratext Dramatic irony Hypodiegetic narrative References [ edit ] ^ For definitions of diegesis, Gerard Genette 's Narrative Discourse: An Essay in Method (Cornell University Press, 1980); or (for a readable introduction) H. Porter Abbott's The Cambridge Introduction to Narrative (Cambridge University Press 2002).

^ Gerald Prince, A Dictionary of Narratology, 2003, University of Nebraska Press, ISBN 0-8032-8776-3 ^ Prince, Gerald (1 January 2003) [1987].

A Dictionary of Narratology (revised ed.). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. p. 1927.

ISBN 9780803287761 . Retrieved 12 July 2025 .

extradiagetic. External to (not part of) any diagesis [...]. [...] An extradiegetic narrator is not equivalent to a heterodiegetic one.

^ Prince, Gerald (1 January 2003) [1987].

A Dictionary of Narratology (revised ed.). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. p. 1938.

ISBN 9780803287761 . Retrieved 12 July 2025 .

heterodiegetic narrative. A narrative the narrator of which is not a character in the situations and events recounted [...].

^ Prince, Gerald (1 January 2003) [1938].

A Dictionary of Narratology (revised ed.). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. p. 1927.

ISBN 9780803287761 . Retrieved 12 July 2025 .

homodiegetic narrative. A narrative the narrator of which is a character in the situations and events recounted [...].

^ See also Pfister (1977, 2–3) and Elam: "classical narrative is always oriented towards an explicit there and then , towards an imaginary "elsewhere" set in the past and which has to be evoked for the reader through predication and description. Dramatic worlds, on the other hand, are presented to the spectator as "hypothetically actual" constructs, since they are "seen" in progress "here and now" without narratorial mediation. [...] This is not merely a technical distinction but constitutes, rather, one of the cardinal principles of a poetics of the drama as opposed to one of narrative fiction. The distinction is, indeed, implicit in Aristotle 's differentiation of representational modes, namely diegesis (narrative description) versus mimesis (direct imitation)" (1980, 110–111).

^ Elam (1980, 110–111).

^ Trenholm, Richard (2 March 2018).

"Inside the Oscar-nominated sound that steers 'Baby Driver' " .

CNET . Retrieved 22 July 2021 .

^ Russell, Dave (2 February 2011).

"Video game user interface design: Diegesis theory" .

Dev.Mag . Retrieved 4 May 2017 .

^ Tach, Dave (13 March 2013).

"Deliberately diegetic: Dead Space's lead interface designer chronicles the UI's evolution at GDC" .

Polygon . Retrieved 15 April 2015 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Aristotle. 1974. "Poetics". Trans. S.H. Butcher. In Dramatic Theory and Criticism: Greeks to Grotowski . Ed. Bernard F. Dukore. Florence, KY: Heinle & Heinle.

ISBN 0-03-091152-4 . p. 31–55.

Bunia, Remigius. 2010. "Diegesis and Representation: Beyond the Fictional World, on the Margins of Story and Narrative," Poetics Today 31.4, 679–720.

doi : 10.1215/03335372-2010-010 .

Coyle, R. (2004). Pop goes the music track. Metro Magazine, 140, 94–95.

Elam, Keir. 1980.

The Semiotics of Theatre and Drama . New Accents Ser. London and New York: Methuen.

ISBN 0-416-72060-9 .

Pfister, Manfred. 1977.

The Theory and Analysis of Drama . Trans. John Halliday. European Studies in English Literature Ser. Cambridige: Cambridge University Press, 1988.

ISBN 0-521-42383-X .

Plato . c. 373 BC.

Republic . Retrieved from Project Gutenberg on 2 September 2007.

Michael Ryan, Melissa Lenos, An Introduction to Film Analysis: Technique and Meaning in Narrative Film , The Continuum International Publishing Group, 2012.

ISBN 9780826430021 .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of diegesis at Wiktionary v t e Narrative Character Antagonist Archenemy Character arc Character flaw Characterization Confidant Deuteragonist False protagonist Focal character Foil Gothic double Hamartia Hero Anti Byronic Tragic Narrator Protagonist Stock character Straight man Supporting character Title character Tritagonist Villain Plot Ab ovo Action Backstory Origin story Chekhov's gun Cliché Cliffhanger Conflict Deus ex machina Dialogue Dramatic structure Eucatastrophe Foreshadowing Flashback Flashforward Frame story In medias res Kishōtenketsu MacGuffin Pace Plot device Plot twist Poetic justice Red herring Reveal Self-insertion Shaggy dog story Stereotype Story arc Story within a story Subplot Suspense Trope Setting Alternate history Backstory Crossover Dreamworld Dystopia Fictional location city country universe parallel Utopia Worldbuilding Theme Irony Leitmotif Metaphor Moral Moral development Motif Deal with the Devil Conflict between good and evil Self-fulfilling prophecy Time travel Style Allegory Bathos Comic relief Diction Figure of speech Imagery Mode Mood Narration Narrative techniques Hook Show, don't tell Stylistic device Suspension of disbelief Symbolism Tone Structure Act Act structure Three-act structure Freytag's Pyramid Exposition / Protasis Rising action/Epitasis Climax / Peripeteia Falling action/Catastasis Denouement/Catastrophe Linear narrative Nonlinear narrative films television series Premise Types of fiction with multiple endings Form Drama Fabliau Flash fiction Folklore Fable Fairy tale Legend Myth Tall tale Gamebook Narrative art Narrative poetry Epic poetry Novel Novella Parable Short story Vignette Genre ( List ) Fiction Action fiction Adventure Comic Crime Docu Epistolary Ergodic Erotic Historical Western Mystery Nautical Paranoid Philosophical Picaresque Political Pop culture Psychological Religious Rogue Romance Chivalric Prose Saga Satire Speculative fiction Fantasy Gothic Southern Horror Magic realism Science Hard Utopian and dystopian Underwater Superhero Theological Thriller Urban Nonfiction Autobiography Biography Novel Creative Narration Diegesis First-person Second-person Third-person Third-person omniscient narrative Subjectivity Unreliable narrator Multiple narrators Stream of consciousness Stream of unconsciousness Tense Past Present Future Related Dominant narrative Fiction writing Continuity Canon Reboot Retcon Parallel novel Prequel / Sequel Genre List Literary science Literary theory Narrative identity Narrative paradigm Narrative therapy Narratology Metafiction Political narrative Rhetoric Glossary Screenwriting Series of works Storytelling Tellability Verisimilitude v t e Literary composition General topics Characterization Description Exposition Fiction writing Literature Writer Writer's block Techniques / devices Linguistic contrast Literary contrast Cliché Idiom Trope Methods Writing process Prewriting Assemblage Cut-up technique Diegesis Mimesis Pastiche Plagiarism Features Writing style Writer's voice Grammatical mood Register Rhetorical modes Stylistics Tone Forms Creative nonfiction Essay Joke Novel Poetry Screenplay Short story Beyond the arts Articulation (sociological) Composition studies Technical writing Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Diegesis&oldid=1304835256 " Categories : The arts Concepts in aesthetics Film theory Narratology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2022 Articles needing additional references from September 2009 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from July 2022 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2019 This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 12:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Diegesis 21 languages Add topic

