Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Traditions 3 Membership 4 Notable members 5 References 6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Cambridge Apostles 11 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Latina Nederlands 日本語 Português Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Secret society at the University of Cambridge, UK Cambridge Apostles Founded 1 April 1820 ; 205 years ago ( 1820-04-01 ) University of Cambridge Type Secret society Affiliation Independent Status Unknown Emphasis Debate Scope Local Chapters 1 Former name Conversazione Society Headquarters Cambridge, England United Kingdom The Cambridge Apostles (also known as the Conversazione Society) is an intellectual society at the University of Cambridge founded in 1820 by George Tomlinson , a Cambridge student who became the first Bishop of Gibraltar .

History [ edit ] Student George Tomlinson founded what he called the " Conversazione Society" at the University of Cambridge on 1 April 1820.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] This intellectual society soon was called the Cambridge Apostles because of its twelve original members.

[ 4 ] These founding members were it seems Tory , evangelical Anglican students from St John's College, Cambridge .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] New members were invited and elected to membership by the extant membership. Membership and activities of the society are secret, but the society has met regularly for at least 150 years.

The Apostles was essentially formed as a discussion group to explore and debate, in a small group, questions of philosophy, politics, ethics, governance, and religion, inter alia.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Meetings were held once per week, traditionally on Saturday evenings, during which one member would give a prepared talk on a topic (or a question for debate) that was then thrown open for discussion. Members also shared poetry and dance lessons.

[ 3 ] In the early 20th century, the Cambridge Apostles were considered by some "as a haven for overt, full-blooded—almost aggressive— homosexuality ." [ 3 ] After reading her son's letters, one Apostle's mother called the group "a hotbed of vice".

[ 3 ] The Apostles first admitted women in the 1970s.

[ 3 ] [ 5 ] As of 2023, the society's annual dinner has become "a somewhat erratic occurrence".

[ 3 ] Its last known members graduated from Cambridge in the 1970s, leading one writer to question whether or not the Apostles are still active.

[ 3 ] The Apostles' papers, through 1930, are housed at King's College, Cambridge , archives.

[ 4 ] Traditions [ edit ] The members would meet weekly to eat "whales" (anchovies or sardines on toast) and discuss an essay written by a member.

[ 3 ] [ 6 ] The debate at each meeting was called the discussion on the Hearth Rug because the speaker stands with the moderator on a hearth rug when speaking if one were present.

The Apostles retained minutes of meetings and a leather diary of their membership, the Photo Book, stretching back to its founding.  These include handwritten notes about the topics on which each member had spoken.

[ 4 ] It was included in the so-called Ark, a cedar chest containing a collection of papers about the topics discussed and the results of votes on the propositions nominated for debate.

[ 4 ] It was a point of honour that the question voted upon should bear only a tangential relationship to the matter debated.

[ 4 ] Active members were referred to as Apostles; they called each other Brethren.

[ 4 ] After retirement from the society, Apostles were said to "take wings" and become Angels.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Undergraduates applied to become Angels after graduating or being awarded a fellowship. Every few years, amid great secrecy, all the Angels were invited to an Apostles' dinner at a Cambridge college. There used to be an annual dinner, usually held in London.

[ 7 ] Membership [ edit ] There are only twelve members at any given time, and membership is secret.

[ 3 ] Membership consisted largely of undergraduates, but there have been graduate students and members who already have held university and college posts. The society traditionally drew most of its members from Christ's , St John's , Jesus , Trinity and King's Colleges, although, in the 20th century, the majority of its members came from King's and Trinity.

[ 4 ] Women first were elected into the society in the 1970s, [ 3 ] though the question "Should we like to elect women" was put (and the division upon it apparently won) at a much earlier meeting.

[ 4 ] Undergraduates being considered for membership were called embryos and were invited to embryo parties, where members judged whether the student should be invited to join.

[ 3 ] The embryos attended these parties without knowing they were being considered for membership. Becoming an Apostle involved taking an oath of secrecy and listening to the reading of a curse, originally written by Apostle Fenton John Anthony Hort , the theologian, on the occasion of the resignation of Henry John Roby from the Apostles after his joining in 1855.

[ 8 ] Notable members [ edit ] Main article: List of Cambridge Apostles members Alfred Tennyson joined the Apostles in 1829, probably through the invitation of his friend Arthur Hallam .

Bertrand Russell and G. E. Moore joined as students, as did John Maynard Keynes , who invited Ludwig Wittgenstein to join. Russell had been worried that Wittgenstein would not appreciate the group's unseriousness and style of humour. Wittgenstein was admitted in 1912 but resigned almost immediately because he could not tolerate the level of the discussion on the Hearth Rug. He also had trouble tolerating the discussions in the Moral Sciences Club . He rejoined in the 1920s when he returned to Cambridge.

Soviet spies Anthony Blunt , Guy Burgess and John Cairncross , three of the Cambridge Five , and Michael Straight were all members of the Apostles in the early 1930s.

References [ edit ] ^ Endres, Nikolai (2014).

"Cambridge Apostles" (PDF) .

glbtq Archive . Retrieved 19 September 2021 .

^ W. C. Lubenow, The Cambridge Apostles 1820-1914 , Cambridge University Press, 1999.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Datta, Taneesha (31 March 2023).

" 'A hotbed of vice': the Cambridge Apostles" .

Varsity Online . Retrieved 30 June 2024 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l "The Apostles, up to 1930" .

King's College, Cambridge . Archived from the original on 26 April 2025.

^ "A Cambridge Secret Revealed: The Apostles" .

King's College, Cambridge . January 2011. Archived from the original on 28 March 2025.

^ Brookfield, Frances Mary.

The Cambridge "Apostles" , C. Scribner's Sons, 1907 ^ "A Cambridge secret revealed: The Apostles" . King's College, Cambridge. January 2011 . Retrieved 19 May 2023 .

^ Lubenow, William C. (1998).

The Cambridge Apostles, 1820-1914: Liberalism, Imagination, and Friendship in British Intellectual and Professional Life . Cambridge University Press. pp.

46– 47.

ISBN 978-0521037280 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Allen, Peter (1978).

The Cambridge Apostles: The Early Years .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-21803-0 .

Deacon, Richard (1986).

The Cambridge Apostles: A History of Cambridge University's Elite Intellectual Secret Society . Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

ISBN 978-0-374-11820-4 .

Levy, Paul (1980).

Moore: G. E. Moore and the Cambridge Apostles . Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

ISBN 978-0-03-053616-8 .

v t e Bloomsbury Group Core members Clive Bell Vanessa Bell E. M. Forster Roger Fry Duncan Grant John Maynard Keynes Desmond MacCarthy Lytton Strachey Leonard Woolf Virginia Woolf Old Bloomsbury Cambridge Apostles and G. E. Moore Adrian Stephen Karin Stephen Saxon Sydney-Turner Mary MacCarthy Associated others Quentin Bell Dora Carrington Angelica Garnett David Garnett Lady Ottoline Morrell Frances Partridge Ralph Partridge Vita Sackville-West Thoby Stephen Projects Dreadnought hoax Hogarth Press Omega Workshops Notable addresses 33 Fitzroy Square 46 Gordon Square Charleston Farmhouse Monk's House Topics List of Bloomsbury Group people Bloomsbury Group in LGBT history v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cambridge_Apostles&oldid=1306374353 " Categories : 1820 establishments in England Clubs and societies of the University of Cambridge Collegiate secret societies Student organizations established in 1820 Bloomsbury Group Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 Pages using infobox fraternity with missing member badge Pages using infobox fraternity with missing members Pages using infobox fraternity with missing colors Pages using infobox fraternity with missing website This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 11:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cambridge Apostles 11 languages Add topic

