Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Literary references 3 Selected works 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Carle Vernet 22 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French painter (1758–1836) This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Carle Vernet" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2012 ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Carle Vernet Portrait of Carle Vernet by Robert Lefèvre , 1804 Born Antoine Charles Horace Vernet ( 1758-08-14 ) 14 August 1758 Bordeaux , Kingdom of France Died 27 November 1836 (1836-11-27) (aged 78) Paris , France Nationality French Occupation Painting Children Horace Vernet Parent Claude Joseph Vernet Antoine Charles Horace Vernet , better known as Carle Vernet ( French pronunciation: [kaʁl vɛʁnɛ] ; 14 August 1758 – 27 November 1836), was a French painter, the youngest child of Claude-Joseph Vernet and the father of Horace Vernet .

Biography [ edit ] The Battle of Wagram ; colored litho by Carle Vernet and Jacques Swebach Vernet was born in Bordeaux . At the age of five, he showed an extraordinary passion for drawing horses, but went through the regular academic course as a pupil of his father and of Nicolas-Bernard Lépicié . Strangely, after winning the Prix de Rome (1782), he seemed to lose interest in the occupation, and his father had to recall him from Rome to prevent his entering a monastery .

[ 1 ] In his "Triumph of Aemilius Paulus", Vernet broke with tradition and drew the horse with the forms he had learnt from nature in stables and riding schools.

[ 1 ] His hunting pieces, races, landscapes, and work as a lithographer were also very popular.

Carle's sister was executed by the guillotine during the Revolution . After this, he gave up art.

The Plaster Kiln at Montmartre When he again began to produce under the French Directory (1795–1799), his style had changed radically. He started drawing in minute detail battles and campaigns to glorify Napoleon.

[ citation needed ] His drawings of Napoleon 's  Italian campaign won acclaim as did the Battle of Marengo ,  and for his Morning of Austerlitz Napoleon awarded him the Legion of Honour , [ 1 ] and Louis XVIII of France awarded him the Order of Saint Michael . Afterwards he excelled in hunting scenes and depictions of horses.

He produced a painting Capture of Pamplona celebrating the 1823 Siege of Pamplona which he exhibited at the Paris Salon of 1824 .

In addition to being a painter and lithographer, Carle Vernet was an avid horseman. Just days before his death at the age of seventy-eight, he was seen racing as if he were a sprightly young man.

He died in Paris .

[ 1 ] Literary references [ edit ] In Maria Wirtemberska 's novel Malvina, or the Heart's Intuition (1816; English translation 2001, by Ursula Phillips), it is said that a view that is being described merits the talent of Vernet, who as the writer explains in her own footnote was a sea painter.

Selected works [ edit ] Arrival of Emigres on the French Coast with the Duchess of Berry A Mameluke Leading His Horse Napoleon at the Battle of Borodino Un Incroyable , two French dandies, one bearing what may be the first recorded top hat Capture of Pamplona , 1824 See also [ edit ] Les Neuf Sœurs Felice Cerruti Bauduc References [ edit ] ^ a b c d One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Vernet s.v. Antoine Charles Horace Vernet ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 27 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 1030.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Carle Vernet .

‹ The template below ( Authority control (arts) ) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Artists ULAN RKD Artists KulturNav 2 Victoria Scientific illustrators Städel National Gallery of Canada People Deutsche Biographie Other SNAC Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Carle_Vernet&oldid=1291580249 " Categories : 1758 births 1835 deaths Painters from Bordeaux 18th-century French painters French male painters 19th-century French painters Prix de Rome for painting Recipients of the Legion of Honour Members of the Académie des beaux-arts 19th-century French male artists 18th-century French male artists Equine artists French sports painters Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2012 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 May 2025, at 03:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Carle Vernet 22 languages Add topic

