Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 From Union of Reformist Forces in Macedonia to Liberal Party of Macedonia 1.2 From Democratic Party of Macedonia to Liberal Democratic Party 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in North Macedonia Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Liberalism in North Macedonia" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e This article gives an overview of liberalism in North Macedonia . North Macedonia was not an independent country before 1991, so the parties from Serbia and Yugoslavia were active before that year. It is limited to liberal parties with substantial support, mainly proved by having had a representation in parliament. The sign ⇒ denotes another party in that scheme. For inclusion in this scheme it is not necessary for parties to label themselves as a liberal party.

History [ edit ] In the years immediately following independence, liberalism became a major force but, since 2000, the major political grouping has split into the liberal democrats and mainline factions. Nowadays, the liberals are divided into the Liberal Democratic Party ( Liberalna Demokraticka Partija , member LI ), part of the left of center government coalition, and the Liberal Party of Macedonia ( Liberalna Partija na Makedonija , member ELDR ), part of the right of center opposition coalition.

[ 1 ] From Union of Reformist Forces in Macedonia to Liberal Party of Macedonia [ edit ] 1990: The Macedonian followers of Ante Marković established the Union of Reformist Forces in Macedonia ( Sojuz na Reformiskite Sili na Makedonija ), led by Stojan Andov .

1991: The party was renamed Reformist Forces of Macedonia-Liberal Party ( Sojuz na Reformiskite Sili na Makedonija-Liberalna Partija ) after the Young Democratic-Progressive Party joined the party.

1994: The party was renamed Liberal Party of Macedonia ( Liberalna Partija na Makedonija ).

1997: The party merged with the Democratic Party into the Liberal Democratic Party ( Liberalno-Demokratska Partija ).

2000: The LDP split and the Liberal Party of Macedonia ( Liberalna Partija na Makedonija ) was reconstituted with Andov as leader.

From Democratic Party of Macedonia to Liberal Democratic Party [ edit ] 1993: Petar Gošev left the SDSM and founded the centrist Democratic Party ( Demokratska Partija ) 1997: The party merged with the Liberal Party of Macedonia into the Liberal Democratic Party ( Liberalno-Demokratska Partija ) 2000: The LDP split and the Liberal Party of Macedonia was reconstituted. Most of the party continued as the Liberal Democratic Party, with Risto Penov as leader See also [ edit ] History of North Macedonia Politics of North Macedonia List of political parties in North Macedonia References [ edit ] ^ Irwin, Zachary T. (2019). "Macedonia/North Macedonia since 1989". In Ramet, Sabrina P.; Hassenstab, Christine M. (eds.).

Central and Southeast European Politics since 1989 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

362– 398.

v t e Liberalism in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard This liberalism -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalism_in_North_Macedonia&oldid=1261570557 " Categories : Liberalism in North Macedonia Liberalism by country Politics of North Macedonia Liberalism stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles needing additional references from December 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with excerpts All stub articles This page was last edited on 6 December 2024, at 20:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in North Macedonia Add languages Add topic

