Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Some current members Toggle Some current members subsection 1.1 DPMMS 1.1.1 Statistical Laboratory 1.2 DAMTP 2 Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics Toggle Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics subsection 2.1 Heads of department 2.2 Statistical Laboratory 2.2.1 Directors of the Statistical Laboratory 3 Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics Toggle Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics subsection 3.1 Heads of department 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Faculty of Mathematics, University of Cambridge Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mathematics research and teaching centre in Cambridge, England Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Cambridge The Faculty of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge comprises the Department of Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics ( DPMMS ) and the Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics ( DAMTP ). It is housed in the Centre for Mathematical Sciences site in West Cambridge , alongside the Isaac Newton Institute . Many distinguished mathematicians have been members of the faculty.

Some current members [ edit ] DPMMS [ edit ] Béla Bollobás John Coates Thomas Forster Timothy Gowers Peter Johnstone Imre Leader Gabriel Paternain Statistical Laboratory [ edit ] John Aston Geoffrey Grimmett Frank Kelly Ioannis Kontoyiannis Richard Nickl James Norris Richard Samworth David Spiegelhalter Richard Weber DAMTP [ edit ] Gary Gibbons Julia Gog , professor of mathematical biology Raymond E. Goldstein Rich Kerswell Paul Linden Michael Green Peter Haynes , fluid dynamicist John Hinch , fluid dynamicist, retired 2014 Richard Jozsa Hugh Osborn John Papaloizou Malcolm Perry David Tong , theoretical physicist Paul Townsend Grae Worster , editor for the Journal of Fluid Mechanics Mihaela van der Schaar Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics [ edit ] The Department of Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics (DPMMS) was created in 1964 under the headship of Sir William Hodge .

[ 1 ] It was housed in a converted warehouse at 16 Mill Lane, adjacent to its sister department DAMTP, until its move around 2000 to the present Centre for Mathematical Sciences where it occupies Pavilions C, D, and E.

Heads of department [ edit ] 1964–1969 W. V. D. Hodge 1969–1984 J. W. S. Cassels 1984–1991 D. J. H. Garling 1991–1997 John H. Coates 1997–2002 W. B. R. Lickorish 2002–2007 Geoffrey Grimmett 2007–2014 Martin Hyland 2014–2018 Gabriel Paternain 2018–2023 James Norris since 2023 Ivan Smith Statistical Laboratory [ edit ] The Statistical Laboratory is a Sub-Department of DPMMS.

[ 2 ] It was created in 1947 with accommodation in a "temporary hut", and was established on 21 March 1953 within the Faculty of Mathematics.

[ 1 ] It moved in 1958 to the basement of the new Chemistry Department in Lensfield Road, and then formed part of the new Department (DPMMS) in Mill Lane on its creation in 1964. It occupies Pavilion D of the Centre for Mathematical Sciences .

Directors of the Statistical Laboratory [ edit ] 1953–1956 John Wishart 1956–1957 Henry Daniels , Acting Director 1957–1960 Dennis Lindley 1960–1962 Morris Walker , Acting Director 1962–1973 David Kendall 1973–1987 Peter Whittle 1987–1991 David Williams 1991–1993 Frank Kelly 1994–2000 Geoffrey Grimmett 2000–2009 Richard Weber 2009–2017 James Norris 2017– Richard Samworth Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics [ edit ] Department of Applied Mathematics & Theoretical Physics is based at Centre for Mathematical Sciences .

The Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics (DAMTP) was founded by George Batchelor in 1959, and for many years was situated on Silver Street, in the former office buildings of Cambridge University Press .

[ 3 ] However since the opening of the Isaac Newton Institute in 1991, the Department has been located at the Centre for Mathematical Sciences (Cambridge) . Theoretical Physics (including cosmology , relativity , and high energy physics ) occupies most of Pavilion B, while Applied Mathematics (including fluid dynamics and solid mechanics ) occupies most of Pavilions F, G, and H.

Heads of department [ edit ] 1959–1983 George Batchelor 1983–1991 Keith Moffatt 1991–2000 David Crighton 2000–2005 Timothy J. Pedley 2005–2015 Peter Haynes 2015–2020 Nigel Peake 2020– Colm-Cille Patrick Caulfield See also [ edit ] Mathematical Tripos Wrangler (University of Cambridge) List of Cambridge mathematicians Chairs associated with the Faculty: Lucasian Professor of Mathematics Lowndean Professor of Astronomy and Geometry Rouse Ball Professor of Mathematics Sadleirian Professor of Pure Mathematics Herchel Smith Professorship of Pure Mathematics Professorship of Mathematical Statistics Churchill Professorship of Mathematics of Information Professorship of Statistical Science Winton Professorship of the Public Understanding of Risk References [ edit ] ^ a b Whittle, P.

, The Cambridge Statistical Laboratory up to 1993 (revised 2002) , archived from the original on 19 December 2013 , retrieved 30 April 2009 ^ Statutes and Ordinances of the University of Cambridge , archived from the original on 28 April 2009 ^ "History of DAMTP" . DAMTP.

External links [ edit ] Official website On Google maps Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics website Statistical Laboratory website Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics website Cambridge Centre for Analysis website v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Authority control databases ISNI Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Faculty_of_Mathematics,_University_of_Cambridge&oldid=1297694653 " Categories : Faculty of Mathematics, University of Cambridge Faculties in the School of the Physical Sciences, University of Cambridge Mathematics departments in the United Kingdom Theoretical physics institutes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 This page was last edited on 27 June 2025, at 22:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Faculty of Mathematics, University of Cambridge Add languages Add topic

