Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and overview 2 Title and logo 3 Contributors 4 Ideology and reception 5 Catalyst 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Jacobin (magazine) 19 languages Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kapampangan Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American socialist magazine "Catalyst (journal)" redirects here. For the Australian publication, see Catalyst (magazine) .

For other uses, see Jacobin (disambiguation) .

Jacobin Issue 11/12 (fall 2013) Publisher Remeike Forbes Categories Politics , culture Frequency Quarterly Paid circulation 75,000 [ 1 ] Unpaid circulation >3 million (online monthly) [ 1 ] Founder Bhaskar Sunkara First issue 2010 Country United States Based in New York Language English Website jacobin .com ISSN 2158-2602 OCLC 677928766 This article is part of a series on Socialism in the United States History Utopian socialism Bishop Hill Commune Brook Farm Icarians Jonestown Looking Backward New Harmony Oneida Community Progressive Era 1877 St. Louis general strike Christian socialism in Utah 1912 Lawrence textile strike Catholic Worker Movement Green Corn Rebellion Labor unionization Haymarket affair May Day Women's suffrage Red Scare American Defense Society American Protective League Communist Party USA and African Americans Communist Party USA in the labor movement 1919–1937 1937–1957 Espionage Act of 1917 First Red Scare John Birch Society McCarthyism Seattle General Strike Smith Act Smith Act trials Anti-war and civil rights movements Black power movement COINTELPRO " I Have a Dream " March on Washington New Left Poor People's Campaign Contemporary 1999 Seattle WTO protests 2008 financial crisis Occupy movement Activists Alston Balagoon Berkman Day Dixon Du Bois Ehrenreich Ervin Flynn Goldman Grace Guthrie Hampton Hay Haywood (Bill) Haywood (Harry) Hill Hoffman Jones Keller King Labadie Lovestone Marcy Mitchell Morello Newton Ochs Parsons (Albert) Parsons (Lucy) Reed (John) Robbins Rocha Rustin Sacco and Vanzetti Seale Seeger Shakur Tankian Zinn Commentators Brooks Bruenig (Elizabeth) Bruenig (Matt) Cockburn Hedges Harrington Jameson Kochinski Magdoff Moore Parenti Piker Robinson (Nathan) Roediger Sinclair Sunkara Sweezy West Intellectuals Albert Andrews Avrich Bellamy (Edward) Bellamy (Francis) Bookchin Brisbane Butler Cabet Cannon Cantor Carmichael Chomsky Clark Cleaver Davis (Angela) Davis (Mike) Dean Dennis Dreiser Einstein Fearing Feinberg Flemm Foster Gilmore Graeber Greene Hahnel Hammett Heywood (Angela) Heywood (Ezra) Hillquit Kelley London Lum Most Noyes Piven Reed (Adolph) Ripley Robinson (Cedric) Rocker Sandburg Shachtman Smith Stone Wolff Wood Wright Zerzan Politicians Abern Berger Bowman Bush Casar Debs De Leon De la Cruz Dellums Ford Foster Gitlow Hall Hawkins Hillquit Hoan La Guardia London Mamdani Marcantonio McReynolds Mitchell Ocasio-Cortez Panken Randolph Ruthenberg Sanders Sawant Seidel Thomas Tlaib Turner Zeidler Organizations Active American Communist Party Antifa Black Riders Liberation Party Black Socialists in America Communist Party USA Democratic Socialists of America Freedom Party of New York Freedom Road Socialist Organization Freedom Socialist Party Green Mountain Peace and Justice Party Green Party of the United States Industrial Workers of the World Legal Marijuana Now Party New Afrikan Black Panther Party Party for Socialism and Liberation Peace and Freedom Party Progressive Dane Progressive Labor Party Revolutionary Communist Party, USA Socialist Action Socialist Alternative South Carolina Workers Party Social Democrats, USA Socialist Equality Party Socialist Party USA Socialist Rifle Association Socialist Workers Party Solidarity Spark Spartacist League Working Families Party Workers World Party Working Class Party World Socialist Party of the United States Defunct American Indian Movement American Labor Party American Union of Associationists American Workers Party Black Panther Party Citizens Party Communist League of America Communist League of Struggle Communist Workers' Party Democratic Socialist Federation Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee Farmer–Labor Party Human Rights Party Independent Socialist League International Socialists International Socialist Organization International Workingmen's Association Justice Party Labor Party of the United States Labor Party Maoist Internationalist Movement Red Guards Red Guard Party New American Movement New Party Nonpartisan League Patriot Party People's Party Proletarian Party of America Raza Unida Party Redneck Revolt Revolutionary Socialist League Revolutionary Youth Movement Social Democracy of America Social Democratic Federation Social Democratic Party of America Socialist Labor Party of America Socialist Party of America SDS Weather Underground White Panther Party Workers Party of the United States Young Lords Young Patriots Organization Literature Appeal to Reason Current Affairs Daily Worker Dissent International Socialist Review Jacobin The Jungle Looking Backward Monopoly Capital Monthly Review The Other America A People's History of the United States Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat Voluntary Socialism Why Socialism?

ZNetwork Related topics American Left Anarchism in the United States individualist Labor history Labor laws Labor unions Minimum wage Progressivism in the United States Socialism portal United States portal v t e Jacobin is an American socialist magazine based in New York .

Bhaskar Sunkara was its founding editor. As of 2023, [update] the magazine reported a paid print circulation of 75,000 and more than 3 million monthly online visitors.

[ 1 ] Established in 2010, Jacobin's circulation grew in 2016 with the increasing attention on leftist ideas stimulated by Bernie Sanders ' presidential campaign . The magazine's name is inspired by C. L. R. James 's 1938 book The Black Jacobins , about the Haitian Revolution . Ideologically, the magazine is associated with democratic socialism and the Democratic Socialists of America .

History and overview [ edit ] The publication began as an online magazine released in September 2010, [ 2 ] expanding into a print journal later that year.

[ 3 ] Jacobin founder Bhaskar Sunkara said that he intended for Jacobin to perform a similar role on the contemporary left to that undertaken by National Review on the post-war right, i.e. "to cohere people around a set of ideas, and to interact with the mainstream of liberalism with that set of ideas".

[ 4 ] In 2016, the Columbia Journalism Review called it "most successful American ideological magazine to launch in the past decade".

[ 5 ] Jacobin ' s popularity grew with the increasing attention on leftist ideas stimulated by Bernie Sanders ' 2016 presidential campaign , with subscriptions tripling from 10,000 in the summer of 2015 to 32,000 as of the first issue of 2017, with 16,000 new subscribers being added in the two months after Donald Trump 's election.

[ 4 ] In spring 2017, Jacobin launched a peer-reviewed journal, Catalyst: A Journal of Theory and Strategy , which is today edited by New York University professor Vivek Chibber and a small editorial board. As of 2022, Catalyst claims a subscriber base of 7,500.

[ 6 ] In November 2018, the magazine's first foreign-language edition, Jacobin Italia , was launched. Sunkara described it as "a classic franchise model", with the parent publication providing publishing and editorial advice and taking a small slice of revenue, but otherwise granting the Italian magazine autonomy.

[ 4 ] Today, other editions are published out of Argentina, Brazil, Germany, Greece, and the Netherlands.

[ 7 ] Title and logo [ edit ] The name of the magazine derives from the 1938 book The Black Jacobins: Toussaint L'Ouverture and the San Domingo Revolution by C. L. R. James in which James ascribes the Haitian revolutionists a greater purity in regards to their attachment to the ideals of the French Revolution than the French Jacobins .

[ 8 ] According to creative director Remeike Forbes, the magazine's frequently used "Black Jacobin" logo was inspired by a scene in the movie Burn!

referring to Nicaraguan national hero José Dolores Estrada .

[ 9 ] Contributors [ edit ] Sunkara has said he feels that "all of our writers fit within a broad socialist tradition", noting that the magazine does sometimes publish articles by liberals and social democrats , but that such pieces are written from a perspective that is consistent with the magazine's editorial vision.

[ 10 ] Notable Jacobin contributors have included: Kristen Ghodsee Slavoj Žižek Yanis Varoufakis Hilary Wainwright Kareem Abdul-Jabbar Jeremy Corbyn Pablo Iglesias Turrión Jon Trickett Zohran Mamdani Ideology and reception [ edit ] Jacobin has been variously described as democratic socialist , socialist and Marxist .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Writing for the New Statesman in November 2013, Max Strasser suggested that Jacobin claims to "take the mantle of Marxist thought of Ralph Miliband and a similar vein of democratic socialism".

[ 13 ] According to an article published in September 2014 by the Nieman Journalism Lab , Jacobin is a journal of "democratic socialist thought".

[ 14 ] Jacobin ' s own "Essential Guide to Jacobin ", published in 2023, states that "[o]ne of Jacobin's primary goals from the beginning has been to popularize the idea of democratic socialism." [ 15 ] In January 2013, The New York Times ran a profile of Bhaskar Sunkara, commenting on the publication's unexpected success and engagement with mainstream liberalism .

[ 16 ] In an October 2013 article for Tablet , Michelle Goldberg discussed Jacobin as part of a revival of interest in Marxism among young intellectuals.

[ 17 ] In February 2016, Jake Blumgart, who contributed to the magazine in its early years, stated that it "found an audience by mixing data-driven analysis and Marxist commentary with an irreverent and accessible style".

[ 11 ] In a 2014 interview published in New Left Review , Sunkara named a number of ideological influences on the magazine, including Michael Harrington , whom he described as "very underrated as a popularizer of Marxist thought"; Ralph Miliband and others such as Leo Panitch who were influenced by Trotskyism without fully embracing it; theorists working in the Eurocommunist tradition; and " Second International radicals" including Vladimir Lenin and Karl Kautsky .

[ 10 ] In April 2016, Noam Chomsky called the magazine "a bright light in dark times".

[ 18 ] In a March 2018 article published in the Weekly Worker , Jim Creegan highlighted the association of a number of the magazine's editors and writers with the Democratic Socialists of America (DSA), describing Jacobin as "the closest thing to a flagship publication of the DSA left" while also stressing the political diversity of contributors, incorporating "everyone from social democratic liberals to avowed revolutionaries".

[ 19 ] Catalyst [ edit ] Associated with Jacobin, Catalyst: A Journal of Theory and Strategy is a quarterly interdisciplinary academic journal covering left-wing politics , capitalism , and Marxist theory.

[ 20 ] Established in the spring of 2017 as a collaboration between editors Vivek Chibber , Robert Brenner , and Jacobin , Catalyst attempts to "promote wide-ranging discussion and to organized debate on the urgent questions facing the working class, the emergent mass movements, and radical and socialist political organizations." [ 21 ] Sunkara has described Catalyst as "a more theoretical journal, a more academic journal" compared to Jacobin .

[ 22 ] In 2015, Chibber and Brenner approached Bhaskar Sunkara about the possibility of publishing a theoretical journal of socialist politics where Chibber and Brenner would assume editorial control, while Jacobin would design, produce, and circulate the journal. The intention of Catalyst was to address and compensate for a perceived generational gap in left-wing politics after the New Left , taking up political questions commonly explored in the past by the American left and readdressing them to the millennial audience that makes up the Jacobin readership.

[ 23 ] The first issue of Catalyst was officially released in May of 2017 at a celebration at the In These Times offices in Chicago .

[ 24 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c "About Us" .

Jacobin .

Archived from the original on June 27, 2021 . Retrieved April 10, 2023 .

The print magazine is released quarterly and reaches 75,000 subscribers, in addition to a web audience of over three million per a month.

^ "This is what you need to know" .

Bookforum . September 28, 2010.

Archived from the original on March 20, 2012 . Retrieved April 2, 2011 .

^ Blumgart, Jake (December 18, 2012).

"The Next Left: An Interview with Bhaskar Sunkara" .

Boston Review . Archived from the original on March 3, 2016 . Retrieved October 28, 2013 .

^ a b c Baird, Robert P. (January 2, 2019).

"The ABCs of Jacobin" .

Columbia Journalism Review .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2019 . Retrieved March 4, 2019 .

^ "The ABCs of Jacobin" .

Columbia Journalism Review . Retrieved May 28, 2023 .

^ "About Page" .

Catalyst: A Journal of Theory and Strategy .

Archived from the original on June 19, 2020 . Retrieved June 25, 2020 .

^ Página12 (February 15, 2021).

"El alcance regional de la revista Jacobin | Una publicación con debates, reflexiones y análisis de coyuntura" .

PAGINA12 . Retrieved February 6, 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Budgen, Sebastian; et al. (October 19, 2015).

"Jacobin Magazine: entretien avec Bhaskar Sunkara" .

Revueperiode (in French).

Archived from the original on February 24, 2016 . Retrieved February 24, 2016 .

^ Forbes, Remeike (Spring 2012).

"The Black Jacobin. Our visual identity" .

Jacobin .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2017 . Retrieved December 29, 2017 .

^ a b Sunkara, Bhaskar (2014).

"Interview: Project Jacobin" .

New Left Review (in French).

90 : 28– 43.

Archived from the original on April 19, 2018 . Retrieved March 26, 2018 .

There are of course Socialist Worker and International Socialist Review which are associated with the International Socialist Organization (ISO), an American Trotskyist group with about 1,000 members.

Note: International Socialist Review commenced 1956; from the 1990s, continued as a publication of Center for Economic Research and Social Change ; last issue produced in 2019.

^ a b Blumgart, Jake (February 6, 2016).

"Jawnts: Giving socialism a good name" .

Philly.com .

Philadelphia Media Network . Archived from the original on August 17, 2016 . Retrieved July 10, 2020 .

^ Matthews, Dylan (March 21, 2016).

"Inside Jacobin: how a socialist magazine is winning the left's war of ideas" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on May 23, 2020 . Retrieved June 13, 2017 .

^ Strasser, Max (November 9, 2013).

"Who are the new socialist wunderkinds of America?" .

New Statesman .

Archived from the original on August 7, 2016 . Retrieved July 18, 2016 .

^ O'Donovan, Caroline (September 16, 2014).

"Jacobin: A Marxist rag run on a lot of petty-bourgeois hustle" .

Nieman Journalism Lab .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2016 . Retrieved July 18, 2016 .

^ "The Essential Guide to Jacobin " .

jacobin.com .

^ Schuessler, Jennifer (January 1, 2013).

"A Young Publisher Takes Marx Into the Mainstream" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 11, 2020 . Retrieved February 27, 2017 .

^ Goldberg, Michelle (October 14, 2013).

"A Generation of Intellectuals Shaped by 2008 Crash Rescues Marx From History's Dustbin" .

Tablet .

Archived from the original on July 13, 2020 . Retrieved July 10, 2020 .

^ Srinivasan, Meera (April 5, 2016).

"The voice of the American Left" .

The Hindu .

Archived from the original on August 9, 2020 . Retrieved June 27, 2020 .

^ Creegan, Jim (March 22, 2018).

"Walking the Tightrope" .

Weekly Worker .

Archived from the original on April 25, 2020 . Retrieved March 26, 2018 .

^ "Announcing Catalyst" .

Jacobin Magazine . May 4, 2017 . Retrieved June 10, 2017 .

^ Brenner, Robert (2017).

"Introducing Catalyst" .

Catalyst: A Journal of Theory and Strategy .

1 (1): 5.

^ " 'We were not trying to hide Marxism': Interview with Bhaskar Sunkara, editor of Jacobin Magazine" .

LeftEast . Interviewed by Alona Liasheva. July 31, 2025 . Retrieved June 13, 2017 .

^ Vivek Chibber and René Rojas (June 9, 2017).

Launching Catalyst (Facebook Video).

Verso Books : Jacobin Magazine .  Event occurs at 1:05:00 . Retrieved June 9, 2017 .

^ "Chicago Release Party for Catalyst Issue 1/Jacobin Issue 25" .

Jacobin Magazine Official Facebook . Facebook. May 20, 2017 . Retrieved June 10, 2017 .

Further reading [ edit ] Arrieta-Kenna, Ruairí (December 8, 2019).

"How the Cool Kids of the Left Turned on Elizabeth Warren" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on December 10, 2019 . Retrieved December 10, 2019 .

v t e Socialism in the United States History Utopian socialism Bishop Hill Commune Brook Farm Icarians Looking Backward New Harmony Oneida Community Progressive Era 1877 St. Louis general strike 1912 Lawrence textile strike Catholic Worker Movement Green Corn Rebellion Labor unionization Haymarket affair May Day Women's suffrage Repression and persecution American Defense Society American Protective League Communist Party USA and African Americans Communists in the labor movement 1919–1937 1937–1957 Espionage Act of 1917 First Red Scare John Birch Society McCarthyism Seattle General Strike Smith Act Smith Act trials Anti-war and civil rights movements Black power movement COINTELPRO " I Have a Dream " March on Washington New Left Poor People's Campaign Contemporary 1999 Seattle WTO protests 2008 financial crisis Occupy Wall Street 2011 Wisconsin protests 2018–2019 education workers' strikes in the United States Parties and organizations Active Black Riders Liberation Party Colorado Springs Socialists Committees of Correspondence for Democracy and Socialism Communist Party USA Democratic Socialists of America Freedom Road Socialist Organization Freedom Socialist Party Industrial Workers of the World Legal Marijuana Now Party New Afrikan Black Panther Party New Students for a Democratic Society Party for Socialism and Liberation Peace and Freedom Party Progressive Labor Party Redneck Revolt Revolutionary Communist Party, USA Social Democrats, USA Socialist Action Socialist Alternative Socialist Equality Party Socialist Party USA Socialist Rifle Association Socialist Workers Party Spartacist League/U.S.

Workers World Party World Socialist Party of the United States Former American Labor Party American Workers Party Black Panther Party Communist League of America Communist Workers' Party Democratic Socialist Federation Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee Farmer–Labor Party International Socialist Organization Maoist Internationalist Movement New American Movement Proletarian Party of America Puerto Rican Socialist Party Social Democracy of America Social Democratic Federation Social Democratic Party of America Socialist Labor Party of America Socialist Party of America Students for a Democratic Society Weather Underground White Panther Party Workers Party of the United States Youth International Party People Martin Abern Stephen Pearl Andrews Paul Avrich Kuwasi Balagoon Jack Barnes Edward Bellamy Victor L. Berger Alexander Berkman Murray Bookchin Earl Browder Étienne Cabet James P. Cannon Stokely Carmichael Noam Chomsky Voltairine de Cleyre Angela Davis Dorothy Day Eugene V. Debs Daniel De Leon Clarissa Dixon Farrell Dobbs W. E. B. Du Bois Albert Einstein James W. Ford William Z. Foster Luigi Galleani Benjamin Gitlow Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Gus Hall Michael Harrington Harry Hay Bill Haywood Harry Haywood Chris Hedges Angela Heywood Ezra Heywood Joe Hill Morris Hillquit Daniel Hoan Abbie Hoffman Martin Luther King Jr.

Jo Labadie Jay Lovestone Dyer Lum David McReynolds Charlene Mitchell Johann Most Huey P. Newton Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Phil Ochs Robert Owen Albert Parsons Lucy Parsons A. Philip Randolph George Ripley John Reed Rudolf Rocker Bayard Rustin C. E. Ruthenberg Nicola Sacco Bernie Sanders Kshama Sawant Bobby Seale Emil Seidel Max Shachtman Upton Sinclair Lysander Spooner Paul Sweezy Norman Thomas Benjamin Tucker Bartolomeo Vanzetti Josiah Warren Hasan Piker Cornel West Malcolm X Frank Zeidler John Zerzan Literature Appeal to Reason Daily Worker International Socialist Review Jacobin The Jungle Looking Backward Monopoly Capital Monthly Review The Other America Voluntary Socialism Why Socialism?

Related topics American Left Anarchism Anarchism in the United States Anarchist communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-syndicalism Democratic socialism Green anarchism Individualist anarchism Individualist anarchism in the United States Labor history Labor laws Labor unions Libertarian socialism Marxism Marxism–Leninism Minimum wage Mutualism Post-left anarchy Scientific socialism Social democracy Socialism Utopian socialism Politics portal Socialism portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jacobin_(magazine)&oldid=1303509588 " Categories : 2010 establishments in New York City Magazines established in 2010 Magazines published in New York City Marxist magazines Political magazines published in the United States Quarterly magazines published in the United States Socialism in the United States Socialist magazines Socialist publications Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 French-language sources (fr) Use American English from September 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from January 2021 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2023 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 11:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jacobin (magazine) 19 languages Add topic

