Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Publications 3 Awards 4 Personal life 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Anthony Hallam 3 languages Deutsch Français مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British geologist, palaeontologist and writer (1933–2017) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Anthony Hallam" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Anthony Hallam Born ( 1933-12-23 ) 23 December 1933 Leicester , UK Died 23 October 2017 (2017-10-23) (aged 83) Birmingham , England Alma mater University of Cambridge Known for Geology of the Jurassic Awards 1990 Lyell Medal of the Geological Society of London ; Lapworth Medal of the Palaeontological Association ; Leopold-von-Buch-Plakette , German Geological Society Scientific career Fields Palaeontology and stratigraphy Institutions University of Birmingham Doctoral advisor William Joscelyn Arkell Anthony Hallam , aka Tony Hallam , (23 December 1933 – 23 October 2017) was a British geologist , palaeontologist and writer . His research interests concentrated on the Jurassic Period , with particular reference to stratigraphy , sea level changes and palaeontology . He was also interested in mass extinctions , especially the end Triassic event.

Biography [ edit ] Born in Leicester and having attended local schools, Hallam won an exhibition to St John's College, Cambridge , graduating with a double first class degree in geology in 1955. He remained at Cambridge University as researcher under the supervision of the late William Joscelyn Arkell , widely regarded as the expert on the Jurassic Period at that time. His thesis involved the study of the alternating limestone – shale rhythms of the Lower Jurassic of Southern England . He also published work on the evolution of Gryphaea , an extinct species of oyster . He was awarded a PhD in 1959 for a thesis entitled " Stratigraphical studies in some Liassic rocks ".

Following a period as lecturer at the University of Edinburgh (1958–67), Hallam moved to the University of Oxford as lecturer in geology . He was also a Fellow of New College, Oxford . It was during this time that he continued his research into the controversial evolution of Gryphaea , publishing several papers with the late Stephen Jay Gould .

Hallam was appointed Lapworth Professor of geology at the University of Birmingham in 1977. This prestigious chair was named in honour of Charles Lapworth , the first Professor of geology at that university. Following retirement in 1999, Hallam remained at Birmingham University as professor emeritus .

He directly supervised over 35 graduate research students, including Bruce Sellwood (1967–70) and Geoff Townson (1968–71).

Publications [ edit ] He has written over 200 research papers and is the author or editor of more than twelve books, including Jurassic Environments , Great Geological Controversies and Catastrophes and Lesser Calamities: The Causes of Mass Extinctions .

Phanerozoic sea-level changes , ( Columbia University Press 1992) ISBN 978-0-231-07424-7 Awards [ edit ] He was awarded the Lyell Medal by the Geological Society of London in 1990.

[ 1 ] In 2007, he was awarded the Lapworth Medal , by the Palaeontological Association , that Society's highest award.

[ 2 ] Personal life [ edit ] Hallam was a very active researcher, undertaking field trips and attending conferences well into retirement.  In his spare time he enjoyed watching football, the arts, cinema and travel.

References [ edit ] ^ Geological Society of London.

Lyell Medal Award Winners Archived 21 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine Verified 2011-01-28.

^ Palaeontological Association.

Lapworth Medal Recipients Verified 2011-01-28.

External links [ edit ] Anthony Hallam's website at University of Birmingham Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Latvia Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anthony_Hallam&oldid=1283432622 " Categories : 1933 births 2017 deaths Scientists from Leicester Lyell Medal winners Alumni of St John's College, Cambridge Fellows of New College, Oxford Academics of the University of Edinburgh Academics of the University of Birmingham 20th-century British geologists British palaeontologists Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2020 Use British English from April 2013 Articles needing additional references from May 2009 All articles needing additional references Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 1 April 2025, at 13:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anthony Hallam 3 languages Add topic

