Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and terminology 2 Pan-African belts 3 References 4 Sources Toggle the table of contents Pan-African orogeny 14 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands Русский Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Series of major mountain-forming events in the Neoproterozoic The Pan-African orogeny was a series of major Neoproterozoic orogenic events which related to the formation of the supercontinents Gondwana and Pannotia about 600 million years ago.

[ 1 ] This orogeny is also known as the Pan-Gondwanan or Saldanian Orogeny .

[ 2 ] The Pan-African orogeny and the Grenville orogeny are the largest known systems of orogenies on Earth.

[ 3 ] The sum of the continental crust formed in the Pan-African orogeny and the Grenville orogeny makes the Neoproterozoic the period of Earth's history that has produced most continental crust.

[ 3 ] History and terminology [ edit ] The term Pan-African was coined by Kennedy 1964 for a tectono-thermal event at about 500 Ma when a series of mobile belts in Africa formed between much older African cratons .  At the time, other terms were used for similar orogenic events on other continents, i.e.

Brasiliano in South America; Adelaidean in Australia; and Beardmore in Antarctica.

Later, when plate tectonics became generally accepted, the term Pan-African was extended to all of the supercontinent Gondwana.  Because the formation of Gondwana encompassed several continents and extended from the Neoproterozoic to the early Palaeozoic, Pan-African could no longer be considered a single orogeny, [ 4 ] but rather an orogenic cycle that included the opening and closing of several large oceans and the collisions of several continental blocks.  Furthermore, the Pan-African events are contemporaneous with the Cadomian orogeny in Europe and the Baikalian orogeny in Asia, and crust from these areas were probably part of Pannotia (i.e. Gondwana when it first formed) during the Precambrian.

[ 5 ] Attempts to correlate the African Pan-African belts with the South American Brasiliano belts on the other side of the Atlantic has in many cases been problematic.

[ 6 ] Pan-African belts [ edit ] West Gondwana with major cratons in brown and Pan-African orogens in grey Orogenic belts of the Pan-African system include: The Arabian-Nubian Shield , extending from Ethiopia to the southern Levant, it is associated with the opening of the Red Sea .

[ 7 ] The Mozambique Belt , extending from east Antarctica through East Africa up to the Arabian-Nubian Shield , formed as a suture between plates during the Pan-African orogeny.

[ 8 ] The Mozambique ocean began closing between Madagascar-India and the Congo – Tanzania craton between 700 and 580 million years ago, with closure between 600 and 500 million years ago.

[ 9 ] The Zambezi Belt branches off the Mozambique Belt in northern Zimbabwe and extends into Zambia.

[ 10 ] The Damara Belt is exposed in Namibia between the Congo and Kalahari cratons and continues southwards into the coastal Gariep and Saldania Belts and northwards into the Kaoko Belt.  It is the result of closure of the Adamastor and Damara oceans and includes two horizons associated with a severe equator-ward glaciation explained by the Snowball Earth hypothesis.

[ 11 ] The Lufilian Arc is most likely a continuation of the Damara Belt in Namibia to which it connects in northern Botswana. It is a broad arc reaching as far north as the southern DRC and Zambia.

[ 10 ] The Gariep and Saldania belts run along the western and southern edge of the Kalahari Craton. Also the result of the closure of the Adamastor Ocean, the marine deposits, seamounts, and, ophiolites they contain were accreted onto the Kalahari margin around 540 Ma.  They include the granite at Sea Point, Cape Town visited by Charles Darwin in 1836.

[ 12 ] The Kaoko Belt branches north-west from the Damara Belt into Angola.  Also produced by the closure of the Adamastor Ocean, this belt includes a shear zone known as the 733–550 Ma-old Puros lineament in southern Angola.  It contains 2030–1450 Ma-old, strongly deformed basement rocks, probably derived from the Congo Craton, mixed with Late Archaean granitoid gneisses of unknown origin.  No island arcs or ophiolote are known from the Kaoko Belt.

[ 13 ] The West Congo Belt is the product of 999–912 Ma-old rifting along the western margin of the Congo Craton followed by the formation of a foreland basin onto which the belt was deposited 900–570 Ma.  In the western belt allochthonous Palaeo- and Mesoproterozoic basement rocks override the foreland sequence.  It includes glacial deposits similar to those in the Lufilian Arc and is conjugate to the Araçuaí Belt in Brazil.

[ 13 ] The 3000 km-long Trans–Saharan Belt runs north and east of the more than 2000 Ma-old West African Craton bordering the Tuareg and Nigerian shields.  It consists of a strongly deformed pre-Neoproterozoic basement and Neoproterozoic oceanic rocks containing ophiolite, accretionary prisms , arc-related and high-pressure metamorphic rocks dated to 900–520 Ma.

[ 14 ] The Central African belts between the Congo and Nigerian shields consists of Neoproterozoic rocks and deformed granitoids interlayered with wedges of Palaeoproterozoic basement.  The southern part is the product of a continental collision during which it was thrusted onto the Congo Craton.  The central and northern parts are thrust-and-shear zones correlated with similar structures in Brazil.  The belts in Central Africa continue east as the Oubanguide Belt with which they form the Central African Shear Zone .

[ 15 ] The Saharan Metacraton between the Hoggar Mountains and the Nile river consists of an Archaean-Palaeoproterozoic basement overprinted by Pan-African granitoids.

[ 14 ] The Rokelide Belt passes along the western margin of the Archaean Man Shield in the southern West African Craton.  It was intensely deformed during the Pan-African orogeny with a peak reached around 560 Ma and can be an accretionary belt.

[ 16 ] References [ edit ] ^ Glossary .

^ van Hinsbergen 2011 , p. 148 ^ a b Rino, S.; Kon, Y.; Sato, W.; Maruyama, S.; Santosh, M.; Zhao, D. (2008). "The Grenvillian and Pan-African orogens: World's largest orogenies through geologic time, and their implications on the origin of superplume".

Gondwana Research .

14 ( 1– 2): 51– 72.

doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2008.01.001 .

^ Meert 2003 ^ Kröner & Stern 2004 , Introduction, p. 1 ^ Frimmel, Hartwig E. (2010). "Configuration of Pan-African Orogenic Belts in Southwestern Africa". In Gaucher, Claudio; Sial, Alcides; Haverson, Galen (eds.).

Neoproterozoic-cambrian tectonics, global change and evolution: a focus on south western Gondwana . Elsevier. pp.

145 –151.

^ Kröner & Stern 2004 , pp. 2–4 ^ Cutten 2002 .

^ Grantham, Maboko & Eglington 2003 , p. 417–418.

^ a b Kröner & Stern 2004 , p. 7 ^ Kröner & Stern 2004 , pp. 7–8 ^ Kröner & Stern 2004 , pp. 8–9 ^ a b Kröner & Stern 2004 , p. 9 ^ a b Kröner & Stern 2004 , pp. 9–10 ^ Kröner & Stern 2004 , p. 10 ^ Kröner & Stern 2004 , pp. 10–11 Sources [ edit ] Cutten, Huntly N.C. (October 29, 2002).

"The Mozambique Belt, Eastern Africa – Tectonic Evolution of the Mozambique Ocean and Gondwana Amalgamation" . The Geological Society of America. Archived from the original on 2016-06-04 . Retrieved 2011-12-28 .

"Glossary of Plate Tectonic and Paleogeographic Terms" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-06-18 . Retrieved 2006-04-09 .

(not available without registration (free)) Grantham, G.H.; Maboko, M.; Eglington, B.M. (2003).

"A review of the evolution of the Mozambique Belt and implications for the amalgamation and dispersal of Rodinia and Gondwana" .

Proterozoic East Gondwana: supercontinent assembly and breakup . Geological Society.

ISBN 1-86239-125-4 .

van Hinsbergen, D. J. J. (2011).

The Formation and Evolution of Africa: A Synopsis of 3.8 Ga of Earth History . Geological Society of London.

ISBN 9781862393356 . Retrieved 6 July 2015 .

Kennedy, W. Q. (1964).

The structural differentiation of Africa in the Pan-African (±500 my) tectonic episode . Annual Reports of the Institute of African Geology. Vol. 8. Leeds University. pp.

48– 49.

Kröner, A.; Stern, R. J. (2004).

"Pan-African Orogeny" . In Selley, R. C.; Cocks, R.; Plimer, I. (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Geology . Vol. 1. Amsterdam: Elsevier. pp.

1– 12.

ISBN 9780126363807 . Retrieved 31 December 2015 .

Meert, J.G. (2003). "A synopsis of events related to the assembly of eastern Gondwana".

Tectonophysics .

362 ( 1– 4): 1– 40.

doi : 10.1016/S0040-1951(02)00629-7 .

v t e Major African geological formations Plates Major plates: African plate Minor plates: Somali plate Microplates: Lwandle plate Madagascar plate Rovuma plate Seychelles plate Victoria Microplate Cratons and shields Arabian-Nubian Shield Congo Craton Kaapvaal Craton Kalahari Craton Saharan Metacraton Tanzania Craton Tuareg Shield West African Craton Zimbabwe Craton Shear zones Aswa Dislocation Broodkop Shear Zone Central African Shear Zone Chuan Shear Zones Foumban Shear Zone Kandi Fault Zone Mwembeshi Shear Zone Todi Shear Zone Western Meseta Shear Zone Orogens Alpine Orogen Cape Fold Belt Damara Orogen East African Orogen Eburnean Orogen Gondwanide Orogen Kibaran Orogen Kuunga Orogen Mauritanide Belt Pan-African orogens Terra Australis Orogen Rifts Afar Triangle Anza trough Bahr el Arab rift Benue Trough Blue Nile rift East African Rift Gulf of Suez Rift Lamu Embayment Melut Basin Muglad Basin Red Sea Rift Sangha Aulacogen Atbara rift Urema Valley West and Central African Rift System White Nile rift Sedimentary basins Angola Basin Aoukar Blue Nile Basin Chad Basin Congo Basin Douala Basin El Djouf Karoo Basin Gabon Basin Iullemmeden Basin Kufra Basin Murzuq Basin Niger Delta Basin Ogaden Basin Orange River Basin Ouled Abdoun Basin Owambo Basin Reggane Basin Rio del Rey Basin Sirte Basin Somali Coastal Basin Taoudeni Basin Tanzania Coastal Basin Tindouf Basin Turkana Basin Mountain ranges Aïr Mountains Atlas Mountains Aurès Mountains Bambouk Mountains Blue Mountains Cameroon line Central Pangean Mountains Chaillu Mountains Drakensberg Eastern Arc Mountains Eastern Rift mountains Ethiopian Highlands Great Escarpment Great Karas Mountains Guinea Highlands Hoggar Mountains Imatong Mountains Jebel Uweinat Loma Mountains Mandara Mountains Marrah Mountains Mitumba Mountains Nuba Mountains Rif Mountains Rwenzori Mountains Sankwala Mountains Serra da Leba Serra da Chela Teffedest Mountains Tibesti Mountains Inselbergs (aka koppie) Anti-Atlas Mount Gorongosa Jugurtha Tableland Mount Mabu Mulanje Massif Mont Niénokoué Wase Rock Zuma Rock List of inselbergs Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pan-African_orogeny&oldid=1303099031 " Categories : Orogenies of Africa Orogenies of South America Neoproterozoic Africa Neoproterozoic South America Neoproterozoic orogenies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 03:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pan-African orogeny 14 languages Add topic

