Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Western familism Toggle Western familism subsection 1.1 Historical and philosophical background of Western familism 1.1.1 Ancient political familialism 1.1.2 Modern political familialism 1.2 Criticism of Western familism 1.2.1 Criticism in practice 1.2.2 Criticism from the LGBT community 1.2.3 Criticism in psychology 1.2.4 Criticism in psychoanalysis 1.2.5 Criticism in Marxism 2 In politics Toggle In politics subsection 2.1 Australia 2.2 United Kingdom 2.3 New Zealand 2.4 Russia 2.5 Singapore 2.6 United States 2.6.1 Republican Party 2.6.2 Democratic Party 2.6.3 Demographics 2.6.4 Christian right 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Familialism 7 languages Deutsch Français 한국어 हिन्दी עברית Português Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophy that prioritizes the family "Familist" redirects here. For members of the sixteenth century religious sect, see Familia Caritatis .

The examples and perspective in this deal primarily with Western culture and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new, as appropriate.

( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Conservatism Variants Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Libertarian Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Balance of power Class collaboration Collective identity Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family as a state model Family values Fundamentalism Gender roles Complementarianism Essentialism Historism Honour Imperialism Law and order Loyalty Maternalism Monarchism Royalism Moral absolutism Natalism Nationalism Nativism Natural law Norms Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organised religion State Orthodoxy Patriarchy Patriarchalism Patriotism Peace through strength Property rights Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Sovereignty Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Johnson Hume Burke More Maistre Bonald Chateaubriand Czartoryski Coleridge Karamzin Savigny Carlyle Ranke Newman Tocqueville Dostoevsky Taine Le Bon Nordau Belloc Iorga Chesterton Spengler Jabotinsky Ilyin Savarkar Schmitt Eliot Mannheim Jünger Evola Strauss Röpke Gadamer Freyre Voegelin Oakeshott Burnham Lefebvre Qutb Kuehnelt-Leddihn Gómez Dávila Kirk Solzhenitsyn Koselleck Mishima Buckley Sowell Mansfield Scruton Hoppe Dugin Peterson Politicians Adams Pitt Canning Metternich Disraeli Bismarck Salisbury Dmowski Mannerheim Baldwin Maurras Horthy Metaxas Churchill Adenauer De Gasperi Chiang Salazar De Gaulle Dollfuss Franco Khomeini Reagan Powell Pinochet Marcos Park Smith Reza Shah Suharto Lee Zia Vajpayee Thatcher Kohl Fujimori Trump Bush Kaczyński Netanyahu Modi Putin Erdoğan Abe Sarkozy Bolsonaro Yoon Orbán Milei Meloni Bukele Religion Christian democracy Christian right Confucianism Clericalism Hindutva Islamism Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Theravada Buddhism Traditionalist Catholicism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Personal variants Berlusconism Bukelism Cameronism Chiangism Erdoğanism Francoism Fujimorism Gaullism Janismo Kaczyzm Maurrassisme Mellismo Metaxism Powellism Pinochetism Putinism Qutbism Khomeinism Reaganism Sarkozysm Thatcherism Trumpism Ziaism National variants Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Belize Brazil Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Cuba Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Guatemala Hungary Iceland India Iran Israel Italy Japan Luxembourg Malaysia Mexico Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Panama Peru Poland Russia Serbia Singapore Sweden Switzerland South Korea Taiwan Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Toryism United States Related ideologies Agrarianism Black conservatism In US Conservative feminism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Conservative socialism Corporatism Hispanic conservatism In US LGBTQ conservatism Ordoliberalism Para-fascism Related topics Anti-communism White Terror Anti-gender movement Anti-immigration Catholic social teaching Conservative wave NatCon Radical right Europe US Right realism Right-wing politics Alt Authoritarianism Centre Dictatorship Far New Small-c conservative Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Familialism or familism is a philosophy that puts priority to family .

[ 1 ] The term familialism has been specifically used for advocating a welfare system wherein it is presumed that families will take responsibility for the care of their members rather than leaving that responsibility to the government .

[ 1 ] The term familism relates more to family values .

[ 1 ] This can manifest as prioritizing the needs of the family higher than that of individuals.

[ 1 ] Yet, the two terms are often used interchangeably.

[ 2 ] In the Western world , familialism views the nuclear family of one father , one mother , and their child or children as the central and primary social unit of human ordering and the principal unit of a functioning society and civilization .

[ 1 ] In Asia, aged parents living with the family is often viewed as traditional.

[ 1 ] It is suggested that Asian familialism became more fixed after encounters with Europeans following the Age of Discovery . In Japan, drafts based on French laws were rejected after criticism from people like Hozumi Yatsuka ( 穂積 八束 ) by the reason that "civil law will destroy filial piety ".

[ 1 ] Regarding familism as a fertility factor , there is limited support among Hispanics of an increased number of children with increased familism in the sense of prioritizing the needs of the family higher than that of individuals.

[ 3 ] On the other hand, the fertility impact is unknown in regard to systems where the majority of the economic and caring responsibilities rest on the family (such as in Southern Europe), as opposed to defamilialized systems where welfare and caring responsibilities are largely supported by the state (such as Nordic countries).

[ 4 ] Western familism [ edit ] Part of a series on Integralism Principles Anti-communism Anti-liberalism Anti-Masonry Anti-Zionism Catholic social teaching Common good Confessionalism Consistent life ethic Corporatism Counter-revolution Decentralization ( Fueros ) Medievalism ( Medieval Church-State Estamentalism Manorialism Feudal duties Medieval Communalism ) Organicism Doctrine of the two swords Distributism ( Cooperativism Guildism ) By the Grace of God ( Deposing power ) Ecclesiastical court " Error has no rights " Familialism Gelasian Diarchy Integral Education Integral nationalism Integral state Monarchism ( Accidentalism ) Natural law Panhispanism Patriotism Political traditionalism Res publica Christiana Sun and Moon allegory Social Kingship Solidarity Traditionalist Catholicism Ultramontanism Variants Brazilian Neo- Catholic French Lusitano Spanish Thinkers Ambrose Aquinas Augustine Balmes Barbey d'Aurevilly Billot Blanc de Bonald Chesterton Castellani de Chateaubriand Corrêa de Oliveira Cuesta Delassus Donoso Cortés Eyzaguirre Ezcurra Feser Fita Fontcuberta Gago Gaume Gelasius I Genta Gómez Gómez Davila González Groulx Hahn Koneczny Madiran Maeztu Maurras Meinvielle Menéndez y Pelayo Ousset Pemán Pie Pius IX Pius X le Play Raposo Reale Salgado Salvany dos Santos Sardinha Solana Taparelli Urquiza Valdivieso Vázquez de Mella Vermeule Veuillot Politicians Abascal Ahimeir Barroso Charlemagne Clavarana Constantine I Estévanez Fernández García Gomar Gómez Lamamié (José) Lamamié (Juan) Larraín Louis IX Maurras Moreno Nocedal Olazábal du Pin Pujo Quiroga Rocamora Sánchez Santamaria dos Santos Senante Theodosius I de Villèle Works Catholic Bible The City of God De regno, ad regem Cypri Treatise on Law El liberalismo es pecado Papal documents ( Famuli vestrae pietatis Mirari Vos Quanta Cura Immortale Dei Rerum novarum Pascendi Dominici Gregis ) El Siglo Futuro Mes idées politiques O que é o Integralismo Organizations Action Française Acción Española Brazilian Patrianovist Imperial Action Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Integralist Front Catalan Patriotic Movement Catholic and Royal Army Cristeros Integrist Party Milícia Catalana Palmarian Catholic Church Los TECOS El Yunque Popular Representation Party Sanfedisti Spanish Catholic Movement Viva Maria Related Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Traditionalism Legitimism Federales Carlism Christ the King Deus vult Miguelism Neocatólicos Sodalitium Pianum Clerico-nationalism Clerical fascism ( Estado Novo Falangism Francoism Tacuara ) Nacionalismo Person Dignity Theory Orthodox Peronism Third Position Common good constitutionalism Gremialismo High Tory Politics portal v t e In the Western world , familialism views the nuclear family of one father , one mother , and their child or children as the central and primary social unit of human ordering and the principal unit of a functioning society and civilization . Accordingly, this unit is also the basis of a multi-generational extended family , which is embedded in socially as well as genetically inter-related communities, nations, etc., and ultimately in the whole human family past, present and future. As such, Western familialism usually opposes other social forms and models that are chosen as alternatives (i.e.

single-parent , LGBT parenting , etc.).

[ 1 ] Historical and philosophical background of Western familism [ edit ] Ancient political familialism [ edit ] " Family as a model for the state " as an idea in political philosophy originated in the Socratic - Platonic principle of macrocosm/microcosm , which identifies recurrent patterns at larger and smaller scales of the cosmos, including the social world. In particular, monarchists have argued that the state mirrors the patriarchal family, with the subjects obeying the king as children obey their father, which in turn helps to justify monarchical or aristocratic rule.

Plutarch (46–120 CE) records a laconic saying of the Dorians attributed to Lycurgus (8th century BCE). Asked why he did not establish a democracy in Lacedaemon ( Sparta ), Lycurgus responded, "Begin, friend, and set it up in your family". Plutarch claims that Spartan government resembled the family in its form.

[2] Aristotle (384–322 BCE) argued that the schema of authority and subordination exists in the whole of nature. He gave examples such as man and animal (domestic), man and wife , slaves and children. Further, he claimed that it is found in any animal, as the relationship he believed to exist between soul and body, of "which the former is by nature the ruling and the later subject factor".

[3] Aristotle further asserted that "the government of a household is a monarchy since every house is governed by a single ruler".

[4] Later, he said that husbands exercise a republican government over their wives and monarchical government over their children, and that they exhibit political office over slaves and royal office over the family in general.

[5] Arius Didymus (1st century CE ), cited centuries later by Stobaeus , wrote that "A primary kind of association ( politeia ) is the legal union of a man and woman for begetting children and for sharing life". From the collection of households a village is formed and from villages a city, "So just as the household yields for the city the seeds of its formation, thus it yields the constitution ( politeia )". Further, Didymus claims that "Connected with the house is a pattern of monarchy, of aristocracy and of democracy. The relationship of parents to children is monarchic, of husbands to wives aristocratic, of children to one another democratic".

[6] Modern political familialism [ edit ] The family is in the center of the social philosophy of the early Chicago School of Economics . It is a recurring point of reference in the economic and social theories of its founder Frank Knight .

[7] Knight positions his notion of the family in contrast to the dominant notion of individualism: "Our 'individualism' is really 'familism'. ... The family is still the unit in production and consumption." [8] Some modern thinkers, such as Louis de Bonald , have written as if the family were a miniature state. In his analysis of the family relationships of father, mother and child, Bonald related these to the functions of a state: the father is the power, the mother is the minister and the child as subject. As the father is "active and strong" and the child is "passive or weak", the mother is the "median term between the two extremes of this continuous proportion". Like many apologists for political familialism, De Bonald justified his analysis on biblical authority: "(It) calls man the reason , the head , the power of woman: Vir caput est mulieris (the man is head of the woman) says St. Paul. It calls woman the helper or minister of man: "Let us make man," says Genesis, "a helper similar to him." It calls the child a subject , since it tells it, in a thousand places, to obey its parents".

[9] Bonald also sees divorce as the first stage of disorder in the state, insisting that the deconstitution of the family brings about the deconstitution of state, with The Kyklos not far behind.

[10] Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn also connects family and monarchy: "Due to its inherent patriarchalism, monarchy fits organically into the ecclesiastic and familistic pattern of a Christian society. (Compare the teaching of Pope Leo XIII : 'Likewise the powers of fathers of families preserves expressly a certain image and form of the authority which is in God, from which all paternity in heaven and earth receives its name —Eph 3.15') The relationship between the King as 'father of the fatherland ' and the people is one of mutual love".

[11] George Lakoff has more recently claimed that the left-right distinction in politics reflects a different ideals of the family; for the right-wing , the ideal is a patriarchal family based upon absolutist morality; for the left-wing , the ideal is an unconditionally loving family. As a result, Lakoff argues, both sides find each other's views not only immoral, but incomprehensible, since they appear to violate each side's deeply held beliefs about personal morality in the sphere of the family.

[12] Criticism of Western familism [ edit ] Criticism in practice [ edit ] Familialism has been challenged as historically and sociologically inadequate to describe the complexity of actual family relations.

[ 5 ] In modern American society in which the male head of the household can no longer be guaranteed a wage suitable to support a family, 1950s-style familialism has been criticized as counterproductive to family formation and fertility.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Imposition of Western-style familialism on other cultures has been disruptive to traditional non-nuclear family forms such as matrilineality .

[ 8 ] The rhetoric of "family values" has been used to demonize single mothers and LGBT couples, who allegedly lack them. This has a disproportionate impact on the African-American community, as African-American women are more likely to be single mothers.

[ 9 ] Criticism from the LGBT community [ edit ] LGBT communities tend to accept and support the diversity of intimate human associations, partially as a result of their historically ostracized status from nuclear family structures. From its inception in the late 1960s, the gay rights movement has asserted every individual's right to create and define their own relationships and family in the way most conducive to the safety, happiness, and self-actualization of each individual.

For example, the glossary of LGBT terms of Family Pride Canada, a Canadian organization advocating for family equality for LGBT parents, defines familialism as: a rigidly conservative ideology promoted by the defenders of "Family Values," who insist, despite all the sociological evidence to the contrary, that the only real family is a traditional 1950s-style white, middle-class household with a faithfully married dad and a mom whose sex life is strictly yet blissfully procreative, and whose high moral standards are passed on like old china to their perfectly heterosexual children.

[ 10 ] Criticism in psychology [ edit ] Normalization of the nuclear family as the only healthy environment for children has been criticized by psychologists.
In a peer-reviewed study from 2007, adoptees have been shown to display self-esteem comparable with non-adoptees.

[ 11 ] In a meta-study from 2012, "quality of parenting and parent–child relationships" is described as the most important factor to children development. Also "Dimensions of family structure including such factors as divorce, single parenthood, and the parents' sexual orientation and biological relatedness between parents and children are of little or no predictive importance" [ 12 ] Criticism in psychoanalysis [ edit ] Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari , in their now-classic 1972 book Anti-Oedipus , argued that psychiatry and psychoanalysis , since their inception, have been affected by an incurable familialism, which is their ordinary bed and board.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Psychoanalysis has never escaped from this, having remained captive to an unrepentant familialism.

[ 16 ] Michel Foucault wrote that through familialism psychoanalysis completed and perfected what the psychiatry of 19th century insane asylums had set out to do and that it enforced the power structures of bourgeois society and its values: Family-Children (paternal authority), Fault-Punishment (immediate justice), Madness-Disorder (social and moral order).

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Deleuze and Guattari added that "the familialism inherent in psychoanalysis doesn't so much destroy classical psychiatry as shine forth as the latter's crowning achievement", and that since the 19th century, the study of mental illnesses and madness has remained the prisoner of the familial postulate and its correlates.

[ 19 ] Through familialism, and the psychoanalysis based on it, guilt is inscribed upon the family's smallest member, the child, and parental authority is absolved.

[ 20 ] According to Deleuze and Guattari, among the psychiatrists only Karl Jaspers and Ronald Laing , have escaped familialism.

[ 21 ] This was not the case of the culturalist psychoanalysts , which, despite their conflict with orthodox psychoanalysts , had a "stubborn maintenance of a familialist perspective", still speaking "the same language of a familialized social realm".

[ 22 ] Criticism in Marxism [ edit ] In The Communist Manifesto of 1848, Karl Marx describes how the bourgeois or monogamous two-parent family has as its foundation capital and private gain.

[ 23 ] Marx also pointed out that this family existed only in its full form among the bourgeoisie or upper classes, and was nearly absent among the exploited proletariat or working class.

[ 23 ] He felt that the vanishment of capital would also result in the vanishment of the monogamous marriage , and the exploitation of the working class.

[ 23 ] He explains how family ties among the proletarians are divided by the capitalist system, and their children are used simply as instruments of labour.

[ 23 ] This is partly due to child labour laws being less strict at the time in Western society .

[ 23 ] In Marx's view, the bourgeois husband sees his wife as an instrument of labour, and therefore to be exploited, as instruments of production (or labour) exist under capitalism for this purpose.

[ 24 ] In The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State , published in 1884, Frederick Engels was also extremely critical of the monogamous two parent family and viewed it as one of many institutions for the division of labour in capitalist society. In his chapter "The Monogamous Family", Engels traces monogamous marriage back to the Greeks, who viewed the practice's sole aim as making "the man supreme in the family, and to propagate, as the future heirs to his wealth, children indisputably his own".

[ 25 ] He felt that the monogamous marriage made explicit the subjugation of one sex by the other throughout history, and that the first division of labour "is that between man and woman for the propagation of children".

[ 25 ] Engels views the monogamous two-parent family as a microcosm of society, stating "It is the cellular form of civilized society, in which the nature of the oppositions and contradictions fully active in that society can be already studied".

[ 25 ] Engels pointed out disparities between the legal recognition of a marriage, and the reality of it. A legal marriage is entered into freely by both partners, and the law states both partners must have common ground in rights and duties.

[ 25 ] There are other factors that the bureaucratic legal system cannot take into account however, since it is "not the law's business".

[ 25 ] These may include differences in the class position of both parties and pressure on them from outside to bear children.

[ 25 ] For Engels, the obligation of the husband in the traditional two-parent familial structure is to earn a living and support his family.

[ 25 ] This gives him a position of supremacy.

[ 25 ] This role is given without a particular need for special legal titles or privileges.

[ 25 ] Within the family, he represents the bourgeois, and the wife represents the proletariat.

[ 25 ] Engels, on the other hand, equates the position of the wife in marriage with one of exploitation and prostitution, as she sells her body "once and for all into slavery".

[ 25 ] More recent criticism from a Marxist perspective comes from Lisa Healy in her 2009 essay "Capitalism and the Transforming Family Unit: A Marxist Analysis".

[ 26 ] Her essay examines the single-parent family, defining it as one parent, often a woman, living with one or more usually unmarried children.

[ 27 ] The stigmatization of lone parents is tied to their low rate of participation in the workforce, and a pattern of dependency on welfare.

[ 28 ] This results in less significant contributions to the capitalist system on their part.

[ 28 ] This stigmatization is reinforced by the state, such as through insufficient welfare payments.

[ 28 ] This exposes capitalist interests that are inherent to their society and which favour two-parent families.

[ 28 ] In politics [ edit ] This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( June 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( June 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Australia [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Australia Ideologies Agrarianism Australian nationalism Christian right Liberal conservatism Right-wing populism Hansonism Principles Familialism Federalism Free market Free trade (factions) Limited government Loyalism Monarchism Property rights Protectionism (factions) Rule of law Intellectuals Blainey Coleman Donnelly Finnis Flint Harries Henderson Melluish Minogue Oldmeadow Santamaria Stove Windschuttle Jurists Allan Barton Callinan Craven Dawson Gleeson Gibbs Hayne Heydon Myers Steward Commentators Akerman Albrechtsen Bolt Credlin Dean Devine (Frank) Devine (Miranda) Hadley Jones Kenny Kerr Lehmann McGuinness Mundine Murray van Onselen Panahi de Percy Price Shelton Politicians Abbott Anderson Anning Barton [ citation needed ] Bernardi Bonner [ citation needed ] Canavan Christensen Petersen Dutton Hanson Howard Joyce Katter Kelly Lyons [ citation needed ] Menzies McMahon Morrison Mundine Newman Nile Palmer Price Reid Vanstone [ citation needed ] Parties Active Australian Christians Democratic Labour Party Family First (2021) Katter's Australian Liberal–National Coalition Liberal LNP National Country Liberal Party Libertarian Party Pauline Hanson's One Nation Shooters, Fishers and Farmers Trumpet of Patriots United Australia Party Defunct Christian Democratic Party Commonwealth Liberal Party Conservatives Conservative Party Conservative National Party Family First (2002) Liberal (Queensland) National (Queensland) National Defence League Nationalist Party United Australia Party Organisations Active Advance Australia Australians for Constitutional Monarchy Australian Christian Lobby Australian Jewish Association Coalition for Marriage CPAC Australia Cormack Foundation National Civic Council Ramsay Centre for Western Civilisation Defunct Australian Academy of Art Australian National Flag Association King and Empire Alliance Old Guard Think tanks Centre for Independent Studies Institute of Public Affairs Menzies Research Centre Page Research Centre Samuel Griffith Society H. R. Nicholls Society Media ADH TV The Australian Counterpoint The Daily Telegraph Herald Sun News Weekly Quadrant Quillette Sky News Australia The Argus (Defunct) Related topics Conservatism in New Zealand The Fabrication of Aboriginal History (2002) Far-right politics in Australia (factions) Liberal Party factions Moderates Centre Right National Right One Australia Politics of Australia Liberalism Conservatism portal Australia portal v t e See also: Australian Family Movement and Family First Party (2021) The Family First Party originally contested the 2002 South Australian state election , where former Assemblies of God pastor Andrew Evans won one of the eleven seats in the 22-seat South Australian Legislative Council on 4 percent of the statewide vote. The party made their federal debut at the 2004 general election , electing Steve Fielding on 2 percent of the Victorian vote in the Australian Senate , out of six Victorian senate seats up for election. Both MPs were able to be elected with Australia's Single Transferable Vote and Group voting ticket system in the upper house. The party opposes abortion , euthanasia , harm reduction , gay adoptions , in-vitro fertilisation (IVF) for gay couples and gay civil unions . It supports drug prevention, zero tolerance for law breaking, rehabilitation, and avoidance of all sexual behaviors it considers deviant.

In the 2007 Australian election, Family First came under fire for giving preferences in some areas to the Liberty and Democracy Party , a libertarian party that supports legalization of incest , gay marriage, and drug use.

[ 29 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United Kingdom Ideologies Burkean Cameronism Muscular liberalism Civic Compassionate Euroscepticism Green Liberal Classical Thatcherism Neo One-nation Powellism Progressive Toryism High Red Social Ultra Principles Anglo-Saxonism British unionism Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Familialism Imperialism Loyalism Moral absolutism Victorian Nationalism British English Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Ordered liberty Protectionism Royalism Social hierarchy Social market economy Sovereignty State church Tradition History Cavalier Stuart Restoration Tories Jacobitism 1794 Treason Trials Old Whigs Corn Laws Oxford Movement Young England Neo-Jacobite Revival New Right Wets and dries Brexit Intellectuals Bagehot Belloc Biggar Blond Burke Butterfield Carlyle Chesterton Clark Coleridge Conquest Dalrymple Dawson Eliot Elton Ferguson Filmer Galton Gibbon Gray Haldane Hayek Hulme Hume Johnson (Paul) Johnson (Samuel) Kipling Kedourie Laslett Lawrence Ludovici More Newman Oakeshott (Michael) Parvini Ruskin Scott Scruton Southey Stephen Trueman Unwin Waugh Williamson Wordsworth Politicians Anderson Badenoch Baldwin Balfour Braverman Burke Butler Cameron Canning Cazalet Chamberlain Churchill Clarke Disraeli Goldsmith Gove Hannan Hayes Hogg Howard Jenrick Johnson (Boris) Joseph Leigh Liverpool Lowe Macmillan Major May Peel Pitt Powell Rees-Mogg Salisbury Thatcher Whittle Willetts Commentators Amis Benjamin Bowden Burton Clarkson Cohen Forsyth (Frederick) Goodwin Hanbury-Tracy Hitchens Johnson (Paul) Kisin Liddle Lunn Moore Morgan Murray Nelson Oakeshott (Isabel) O'Sullivan Pearce Perry Roberts Smith Starkey Sullivan Turner Watson Welch West Worsthorne Young Literature Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) " Tamworth Manifesto " (1834) On Heroes (1841) Coningsby (1844) Sybil (1845) Latter-Day Pamphlets (1850) Culture and Anarchy (1867–68) Orthodoxy (1908) The Servile State (1912) " Tradition and the Individual Talent " (1919) The Whig Interpretation of History (1931) The Abolition of Man (1943) The Left Was Never Right (1945) " Rivers of Blood " (1968) The Abolition of Britain (1999) Our Culture, What's Left of It (2005) The Rage Against God (2010) The Great Degeneration (2013) How to Be a Conservative (2014) Conservatism (2017) The Strange Death of Europe (2017) Parties Active Alliance EPP: European People's Party UK Christian Party Christian Peoples Alliance Conservative and Unionist Party Common Sense Group Conservative Future (Defunct) Young Conservatives Democratic Unionist Party Heritage Party Reform UK Social Democratic Party (UK, 1990–present) Traditional Unionist Voice UK Independence Party Ulster Unionist Party Workers Party of Britain Defunct For Britain Movement Tories Veterans and People's Party Activists Booth-Smith Bowden Forsyth (James) Goldsmith Hitchens Keen-Minshull Littlewood Marshall Montgomerie Murray Payne Shawcross Stroud Sullivan Worsthorne Organisations 55 Tufton Street Centre for Policy Studies IEA LGB Alliance Migration Watch UK Policy Exchange Bright Blue Blue Collar Conservativism Conservative Democratic Alliance (Defunct) Conservative Philosophy Group Cornerstone Group CSC European Research Group The Freedom Association Henry Jackson Society London Swinton Circle Monday Club (Defunct) NATCON One Nation Conservatives Orange Order Oxford University Conservative Association Right Book Club (Defunct) Revolutionary Conservative Caucus (Defunct) Social Affairs Unit (Defunct) Tory Reform Group Traditional Britain Group Turning Point UK Western Goals Institute (Defunct) Media Anti-Jacobin Review (Defunct) Catholic Herald ConservativeHome The Critic Daily Express Sunday Express Daily Mail The Daily Sceptic The Daily Telegraph Evening Standard GB News Guido Fawkes The Mail on Sunday The Salisbury Review The Spectator The Sun The Sun on Sunday The Sunday Telegraph The Sunday Times Talk The Times UnHerd Related Anglo-Catholicism Antidisestablishmentarianism Blue Labour Cambridge Analytica " Constructive conservatism " List of British conservatives Merry England O'Sullivan's first law Philosophy of Thomas Carlyle Politics of the United Kingdom Liberalism Libertarianism Socialism Public schools in the UK Remigration Conservatism portal United Kingdom portal v t e Family values was a recurrent theme in the Conservative government of John Major . His Back to Basics initiative became the subject of ridicule after the party was affected by a series of sleaze scandals. John Major himself, the architect of the policy, was subsequently found to have had an affair with Edwina Currie . Family values were revived under David Cameron , being a recurring theme in his speeches on social responsibility and related policies, demonstrated by his Marriage Tax allowance policy which would provide tax breaks for married couples.

New Zealand [ edit ] See also: The Family Party This article is part of a series on Conservatism in New Zealand Principles Agrarianism Economic liberalism Familialism Law and order Limited government Loyalism Monarchism Property rights Protectionism Rule of law Tradition History Continuous Ministry Historic conservatism in New Zealand (pre–1930s) Politicians Whitaker Atkinson Russell Massey Bell Coates Forbes Hamilton Holland Holyoake Marshall Muldoon Bolger Richardson Shipley Birch Copeland English Brash Key Bridges Muller Collins Luxon Activists Ormond Farrar McCoskrie Slater Williams Parties Active ACT New Zealand National Party New Zealand First New Conservatives Party Defunct Reform Party United Party Democrat Party New Zealand Party Christian Heritage Party Conservative Party Christian Democrats Progressive Greens Destiny New Zealand The Kiwi Party Focus NZ The Family Party Organisations and media Auckland Future Citizens' Association Communities and Residents Coalition of Concerned Citizens Family First New Zealand Investigate Monarchy New Zealand National Front New Zealand Legion Taxpayers' Union Young Nationals Related Christian politics in New Zealand Conservatism in Australia Liberalism in New Zealand Listener letter on science (2021) Politics of New Zealand Conservatism portal New Zealand portal v t e Family values politics reached their apex under the social conservative administration of the Third National Government (1975–84), widely criticised for its populist and social conservative views about abortion and homosexuality. Under the Fourth Labour Government (1984–90), homosexuality was decriminalised and abortion access became easier to obtain.

In the early 1990s, New Zealand reformed its electoral system , replacing the first-past-the-post electoral system with the Mixed Member Proportional system. This provided a particular impetus to the formation of separatist conservative Christian political parties, disgruntled at the Fourth National Government (1990–99), which seemed to embrace bipartisan social liberalism to offset Labour's earlier appeal to social liberal voters. Such parties tried to recruit conservative Christian voters to blunt social liberal legislative reforms, but had meagre success in doing so. During the tenure of Fifth Labour Government (1999–2008), prostitution law reform (2003), same-sex civil unions (2005) and the repeal of laws that permitted parental corporal punishment of children (2007) became law.

At present, Family First New Zealand , a 'non-partisan' social conservative lobby group, operates to try to forestall further legislative reforms such as same-sex marriage and same-sex adoption . In 2005, conservative Christians tried to pre-emptively ban same-sex marriage in New Zealand through alterations to the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 , but the bill failed 47 votes to 73 at its first reading. At most, the only durable success such organisations can claim in New Zealand is the continuing criminality of cannabis possession and use under New Zealand's Misuse of Drugs Act 1975 .

Russia [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Russia Ideologies Eurasianism Duginism Monarchism Tsarism Populism Putinism Russian nationalism All-Russian Christian Ultra Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Traditionalist conservatism Principles Authority Autocracy Bureaucracy Byzantinism Duty Economic interventionism Familialism Imperialism Irredentism Law and order Orthodox values Nuclear Orthodoxy Moscow, third Rome Patriotism Reactionism Russian culture Russification Sobornost Social hierarchy Social order Sovereign democracy Statism History Black Hundreds Great Russia Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality Russian Empire White movement White Army White émigré Zemstvo Intellectuals Aksakov Boot Chudinova Danilevsky Dostoevsky Dugin Frank Ilyin Karamzin Katkov Khomyakov Leontiev von Lilienfeld Obolensky Pobedonostsev Prokhanov Rozanov Semyonov Shafarevich Shcherbatov Solovyov Solzhenitsyn Sorokin Strakhov Surkov Tarkovsky Tikhomirov Tikhon Trubetskoy Uvarov Vikulov von Wrangel Yuryev Zhukovsky Literature St Petersburg Dialogues (1821) The Organic Theory of Societies (1873) Sociology of Revolution (1925) The Gulag Archipelago (1973) Foundations of Geopolitics (1997) The Notre Dame de Paris Mosque (2005) The Fourth Political Theory (2009) Politicians Alexander I Alexander III Butina Dubrovin Durnovo Gryzlov Kolchak Kornilov von Lilienfeld Luzhkov Malyshkin Mizulina Nicholas I Nicholas II Pikhno Pobedonostsev Putin Rodzianko Rogozin Rostopchin Sadovnichiy Shulgin Slutsky Surkov Tolstoy von Ungern Uvarov Vladimir Volodin Yuryev Zhirinovsky Parties Active Eurasia Party Great Russia Liberal Democratic Party of Russia Monarchist Party of Russia Rodina Russian All-People's Union Union of Right Forces United Russia Defunct For Truth Liberal Democratic Party of the Soviet Union People's Union Pamyat Society Union of the Russian People Organisations All-Russia People's Front Izborsky Club Krepostniki National Alliance of Russian Solidarists Union of the Russian People Media Elementy (Defunct) Kievlyanin Kozma Minin Nash Sovremennik Russkoye Znamya Zavtra Znamya Related topics Anti-communism Anti-socialism Anti-Islamism Anti-national sentiments American Chechen Jew Polish Romanian Tatar Turkish Ukrainian Opposition to LGBTQ rights Politics of Russia Liberalism Russia for Russians Russia under Vladimir Putin Serfdom in Russia Silovik Conservatism portal Russia portal v t e Federal law of Russian Federation no. 436-FZ of 2010-12-23  " On Protecting Children from Information Harmful to Their Health and Development " lists information "negating family values and forming disrespect to parents and/or other family members" as information not suitable for children ("18+" rating).

[ 30 ] It does not contain any separate definition of family values.

Singapore [ edit ] Singapore 's main political party, the People's Action Party , promotes family values intensively. Former Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong said that "The family is the basic building block of our society. [...] And by "family" in Singapore, we mean one man, one woman, marrying, having children and bringing up children within that framework of a stable family unit." [ 31 ] One MP has described the nature of family values in the city-state as "almost Victorian in nature". The government is opposed to same-sex adoption . The Singaporean justice system uses corporal punishment .

[ 32 ] United States [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The use of family values as a political term dates back to 1976, when it appeared in the Republican Party platform .

[ 33 ] The phrase became more widespread after Vice President Dan Quayle used it in a speech at the 1992 Republican National Convention .  Quayle had also launched a national controversy when he criticized the television program Murphy Brown for a story line that depicted the title character becoming a single mother by choice, citing it as an example of how popular culture contributes to a "poverty of values", and saying: "[i]t doesn't help matters when primetime TV has Murphy Brown—a character who supposedly epitomizes today's intelligent, highly paid, professional woman—mocking the importance of fathers, by bearing a child alone, and calling it just another 'lifestyle choice'".  Quayle's remarks initiated widespread controversy, and have had a continuing effect on U.S. politics.

[ citation needed ] Stephanie Coontz , a professor of family history and the author of several books and essays about the history of marriage , says that this brief remark by Quayle about Murphy Brown "kicked off more than a decade of outcries against the 'collapse of the family'".

[ 34 ] In 1998, a Harris survey found that: 52% of women and 42% of men thought family values means "loving, taking care of, and supporting each other" 38% of women and 35% of men thought family values means "knowing right from wrong and having good values" 2% of women and 1% men thought of family values in terms of the "traditional family" The survey noted that 93% of all women thought that society should value all types of families (Harris did not publish the responses for men).

[ 35 ] Republican Party [ edit ] Since 1980, the Republican Party has used the issue of family values to attract socially conservative voters.

[ 36 ] While "family values" remains an amorphous concept, social conservatives usually understand the term to include some combination of the following principles [ citation needed ] (also referenced in the 2004 Republican Party platform): [ 37 ] opposition to sex outside of marriage support for a traditional role for women in "the family" opposition to same-sex marriage , homosexuality and gender transition support for complementarianism [ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] opposition to legalized induced abortion support for abstinence-only sex education support for policies said to protect children from obscenity and exploitation Social and religious conservatives often use the term "family values" to promote conservative ideology that supports traditional morality or Christian values .

[ citation needed ] Social conservatism in the United States is centered on the preservation of what adherents often call 'traditional' or ' family values '. Some American conservative Christians see their religion as the source of morality and consider the nuclear family an essential element in society. For example, "The American Family Association exists to motivate and equip citizens to change the culture to reflect Biblical truth and traditional family values." [ 41 ] Such groups [ which?

] variously oppose abortion , pornography , masturbation , pre-marital sex , polygamy , homosexuality , certain aspects of feminism , cohabitation , separation of church and state , legalization of recreational drugs , and depictions of sexuality in the media.

[ 42 ] Democratic Party [ edit ] Although the term "family values" remains a core issue for the Republican Party, the Democratic Party has also used the term, though differing in its definition. In his acceptance speech at the 2004 Democratic National Convention , John Kerry said "it is time for those who talk about family values to start valuing families".

[ 43 ] Other liberals have used the phrase to support such values as family planning , affordable child-care , and maternity leave .

[ 44 ] For example, groups such as People For the American Way , Planned Parenthood , and Parents and Friends of Lesbians and Gays have attempted to define the concept in a way that promotes the acceptance of single-parent families, same-sex monogamous relationships and marriage. This understanding of family values does not promote conservative morality, instead focusing on encouraging and supporting alternative family structures, access to contraception and abortion , increasing the minimum wage , sex education , childcare, and parent-friendly employment laws, which provide for maternity leave and leave for medical emergencies involving children.

[ 45 ] While conservative sexual ethics focus on preventing premarital or non-procreative sex, liberal sexual ethics are typically [ quantify ] directed rather towards consent , regardless of whether or not the partners are married.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] A woman at the Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear holding a sign that declares her ideas of family values Demographics [ edit ] Population studies have found that in 2004 and 2008, liberal-voting ("blue") states have lower rates of divorce and teenage pregnancy than conservative-voting ("red") states.  June Carbone, author of Red Families vs. Blue Families , opines that the driving factor is that people in liberal states tend to wait longer before getting married.

[ 49 ] A 2002 government survey found that 95% of adult Americans had premarital sex.  This number had risen slightly from the 1950s, when it was nearly 90%.  The median age of first premarital sex has dropped in that time from 20.4 to 17.6.

[ 50 ] Christian right [ edit ] The Christian right often promotes the term family values to refer to their version of familialism.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] Focus on the Family is an American Christian conservative organization whose family values include adoption by married, opposite-sex parents; [ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] and traditional gender roles . It opposes abortion, divorce, LGBT rights , particularly LGBT adoption and same-sex marriage , [ 57 ] pornography, masturbation , and pre-marital sex . The Family Research Council is an example of a right-wing organization claiming to uphold traditional family values. Due to its usage of virulent anti-gay rhetoric and opposition to civil rights for LGBT people, it was classified as a hate group .

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] Part of a series on Conservatism in Poland Schools Old Conservatives Austrian Partition: Podolacy [ pl ] , Stańczycy [ pl ] Prussian partition: Neoconservatives Russian partition: Biali , Realists, Żubry [ pl ] New Conservatives Endecja Chadecja Ideologies Christian democracy Civic nationalism Golden Liberty Monarchism National Democracy National conservatism Nationalism Christian Populism Kaczyzm Traditionalism Principles Catholic social teaching Familialism Germanophobia Nobility Szlachta Patriotism Polish culture Sovereignty History Januszajtis putsch Polish Messianism National League November Uprising Romanticism in Poland Christ of Europe Winkelriedism [ pl ] Sarmatism Targowica Confederation Intellectuals Balicki Bobrzyński Chrzanowski Czartoryski Dmowski Doboszyński Giertych Głąbiński Gumplowicz Jeske-Choińskis Koneczny Konopczyński Krasiński Krasnodębski Legutko Cat-Mackiewicz Nawrocki Ossendowski Piasecki Sienkiewicz Szujski Tarnowski Tyrmand Rydzyk Wielomski Politicians Bobrzyński Bałażak Braun Czartoryski Dmowski Duda Głąbiński Grabski Hall Kaczyński (Lech) Kaczyński (Jarosław) Kucharzewski Jaworski Morawiecki (Kornel) Morawiecki (Mateusz) Nawrocki Popławski Rybarski Szujski Szydło Wielopolski Zamoyski Ziobro Literature The Trilogy (1884–1888) Quo Vadis (1895–1896) The Knights of the Cross (1900) The Demon in Democracy (2016) Parties Active Agreement Centre for Poland Law and Justice‎ League of Polish Families Renewal of the Republic of Poland Repair Poland Movement Right Wing of the Republic Defunct Centre Agreement Christian National Union Movement for the Reconstruction of Poland Movement for the Republic National Party Poland Comes First Poland Together Solidarity Electoral Action Sovereign Poland‎ The Republicans‎ There is One Poland Historical Hetmans' Party National-Democratic Party National Party Państwowe Zjednoczenie na Kresach Polish Party Polish Electoral Society in Silesia Popular National Union Organisations Fighting Solidarity Camp of Great Poland Conservative-Monarchist Club Institute for Legacy of Polish National Thought National Union Ordo Iuris Polish Coalition Polish League Polish League Against Defamation Polish Nobility Association United Right Media Do Rzeczy Gazeta Polska Najwyższy Czas!

Nasz Dziennik Radio Maryja Sieci Uważam Rze Related topics Fourth Polish Republic Politics of Poland Liberalism March for Life and Family Mohair berets Sejm cross Conservatism portal Poland portal v t e See also [ edit ] Conservatism portal Nepotism , favoritism granted to relatives and friends without regard to merit Nuclear family , a family group consisting of a pair of adults and their children Natalism , a belief that promotes human reproduction Extended family Single parent Family Party of Germany League of Polish Families Nepal Pariwar Dal New Reform Party of Ontario , founded as Family Coalition Party of Ontario Party for Japanese Kokoro The People of the Family We Are Family (Slovakia) World Congress of Families References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h Emiko Ochiai; Leo Aoi Hosoya (2014).

Transformation of the Intimate and the Public in Asian Modernity. The Intimate and the Public in Asian and Global Perspectives . BRILL. pp.

20– 21.

ISBN 9789004264359 .

^ Campos, Belinda; Schetter, Christine Dunkel; Abdou, Cleopatra M.; Hobel, Calvin J.; Glynn, Laura M.; Sandman, Curt A. (2008).

"Familialism, social support, and stress: Positive implications for pregnant Latinas" .

Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology .

14 (2): 155– 162.

doi : 10.1037/1099-9809.14.2.155 .

ISSN 1939-0106 .

PMC 2859297 .

PMID 18426288 .

^ Hartnett, Caroline Sten; Parrado, Emilio A. (2012).

"Hispanic Familism Reconsidered" .

The Sociological Quarterly .

53 (4): 636– 653.

doi : 10.1111/j.1533-8525.2012.01252.x .

ISSN 0038-0253 .

PMC 3775387 .

PMID 24068847 .

^ Nicoletta Balbo; Francesco C. Billari; Melinda Mills (2013).

"Fertility in Advanced Societies: A Review of Research" .

European Journal of Population .

29 (1): 1– 38.

doi : 10.1007/s10680-012-9277-y .

PMC 3576563 .

PMID 23440941 .

^ DePaulo, B. and Milardo, R. (2011).

"Interview: Beyond the Nuclear Family" .

^ Elmelech, Yuval (2008).

Transmitting inequality: wealth and the American family . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 88.

ISBN 978-0-7425-4585-4 .

^ Beets, Gijs (2010).

The Future of Motherhood in Western Societies: Late Fertility and Its Consequences . Springer. p. 125.

ISBN 978-90-481-8968-7 .

^ Haney, Lynne Allison; Pollard, Lisa (2003).

Families of a new world: gender, politics, and state development in a global context . Psychology Press. p. 11.

ISBN 978-0-415-93447-3 .

^ Perry, Twila L.

"Family Values" . Markkula Center for Applied Ethics at the University of Santa Clara . Retrieved 26 October 2018 .

^ "Family Pride Canada: Glossary of LGBT Terms: Familialism" . Archived from the original on 25 July 2009 . Retrieved 15 November 2009 .

^ Juffer, F.; Van Ijzendoorn, M. H. (2007). "Adoptees Do Not Lack Self-Esteem: A Meta-Analysis of Studies on Self-Esteem of Transracial, International, and Domestic Adoptees".

Psychological Bulletin .

133 (6): 1067– 1083.

doi : 10.1037/0033-2909.133.6.1067 .

PMID 17967094 .

^ Lamb, Michael E. (2012).

"Mothers, Fathers, Families, and Circumstances: Factors Affecting Children's Adjustment" .

Applied Developmental Science .

16 (2): 98– 111.

doi : 10.1080/10888691.2012.667344 .

S2CID 145728456 .

^ Arthur Redding (1997) God the linguist teaches us to breathe: Ivan Blatný's English poems ^ Mindy Badía, Bonnie L. Gasior (2006) Crosscurrents: transatlantic perspectives on early modern Hispanic drama p. 144 ^ Emma L. Jeanes and Christian De Cock (2005) Making the Familiar Strange: A Deleuzian Perspective on Creativity , University of Exeter , Creativity and Innovation Management Community Workshop, 23–24 March 2005, Oxford ^ Deleuze and Guattari (1972) Anti-Oedipus pp. 101–2, 143, 181, 293, 304, 393 ^ Deleuze and Guattari (1972) Anti-Oedipus p. 102 ^ Michel Foucault [1961] The History of Madness , Routledge 2006, pp. 490–1, 507–8, 510–1 ^ Deleuze and Guattari (1972) Anti-Oedipus pp. 293, 393 ^ Deleuze and Guattari (1972) Anti-Oedipus p. 304 ^ Deleuze and Guattari (1972) Anti-Oedipus p. 143 ^ Deleuze and Guattari (1972) Anti-Oedipus pp. 189–1 ^ a b c d e Gaspar, Phil.

"The Communist Manifesto" , Google Books , Chicago, 2005. Retrieved on 24 October 2013. p. 65.

^ Gaspar, Phil.

"The Communist Manifesto" , Google Books , Chicago, 2005. Retrieved on 24 October 2013. p. 66.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Harris, Mark, Ed.

"Frederick Engels: The Monogamous Family" , Marxists.org , 2010. Retrieved on 24 October 2013.

^ Healy, Lisa.

"Capitalism and the Transforming Family Unit" , Socheolas , University of Limerick, November 2009. Retrieved on 24 October 2013.

^ Healy, Lisa.

"Capitalism and the Transforming Family Unit" , Socheolas , University of Limerick, November 2009. Retrieved on 24 October 2013. p. 25.

^ a b c d Healy, Lisa.

"Capitalism and the Transforming Family Unit" , Socheolas , University of Limerick, November 2009. Retrieved on 24 October 2013. p. 26.

^ Lewis, Steve (6 November 2007).

"Christian party's unholy alliance" .

Herald Sun .

^ Антон Одынец (4 January 2011).

Детей защитят от 'вредных' книг и фильмов [Protecting children against 'harmful' books and movies] (in Russian). Фонтанка.Ру. Archived from the original on 4 October 2012 . Retrieved 2 August 2012 .

^ "Global Rights/Commonwealth, Stage 1, Appendix 3" . Alex Au. 3 October 2009.

Archived from the original on 18 July 2011 . Retrieved 26 September 2010 .

^ Han, Kirsten (January 2019).

"A London DJ's punishment sheds light on Singapore's caning shame" .

The Guardian .

^ Stone, Lawrence (16–17 November 1994).

"Family Values in a Historical Perspective" (PDF) .

The Tanner Lectures on Human Values . University of Utah. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 June 2010 . Retrieved 24 July 2012 .

^ Coontz, Stephanie (1 May 2005).

"For Better, For Worse" .

Washingtonpost.com . Retrieved 3 December 2013 .

^ "Public Opinion on the Family – Family Diversity" . Libraryindex.com. Archived from the original on 25 March 2016 . Retrieved 16 January 2011 .

Questions about family values have generally included issues concerning the current diversity of family structures.

^ "T. Rexs Guide to Life — Main / Republican Family Values" . Archived from the original on 24 February 2007.

^ "2004 Republican Party Platform: A Safer World and a More Hopeful America" (PDF) . MSNBC. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 May 2012 . Retrieved 23 July 2012 .

^ Mobley, Kendal P. (2009).

Helen Barrett Montgomery: The Global Mission of Domestic Feminism .

Baylor University Press .

ISBN 9781602581876 . Retrieved 31 December 2007 .

Late Victorian culture assumed that family was the basic model for society and that the relationships and values of the family, which were based on complementarian gender assumptions, ought to be extended into social ...

^ Lichtman, Allan J. (May 2009).

White Protestant Nation: The Rise of the American Conservative Movement .

Grove Press .

ISBN 9780802144201 . Retrieved 31 December 2007 .

The new right put a positive spin on anti-pluralist morality. They weren't just against sinners and feminists; they were the "pro-family" and "pro-life" champions of wholesome "family values." Still, defense of the family meant battling the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA), abortion, pornography, gay rights, and gun control.

^ Goodwin Heltzel, Prof. Peter (14 May 2014).

Jesus and Justice: Evangelicals, Race, and American Politics .

Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0300155730 . Retrieved 31 December 2007 .

Founded at the same time that the evangelical pro-life movement was gathering stream, Focus was politicized from its inception. In the 1980s Dobson became more involved in politics, focusing on a cluster of issues related to family matters, including abortion, pornography, and the women's movement.

^ "American Family Association" . Afa.net. 6 August 2010 . Retrieved 16 January 2011 .

^ "A Rebirth of Constitutional Government" .

^ John Woolley; Gerhard Peters (29 July 2004).

"Speech to the 2004 Democratic National Convention" . Boston, Massachusetts: The American Presidency Project . Archived from the original on 1 November 2004 . Retrieved 3 December 2013 .

^ Myriam Miedzian, Family Values: American and French Style , The Huffington Post , 2008-05-21 ^ "/ News / Boston Globe / Opinion / Op-ed / Walking the walk on family values" . Boston.com. 31 October 2004. Archived from the original on 4 November 2013 . Retrieved 3 December 2013 .

^ Friedman, Jaclyn; Jessica Valenti (2008).

Yes Means Yes! Visions of Female Sexual Power and a World Without Rape . Seal Press.

ISBN 978-1-58005-257-3 .

^ Corinna, Heather .

"What Is Feminist Sex Education?" .

Scarleteen . Retrieved 3 October 2010 .

^ Corinna, Heather (11 May 2010).

"How Can Sex Ed Prevent Rape?" .

Scarleteen . Archived from the original on 28 December 2013 . Retrieved 3 October 2010 .

^ "Red Families Vs. Blue Families" .

NPR . 9 May 2010 . Retrieved 22 May 2010 .

^ Jayson, Sharon (19 December 2006).

"Most Americans have had premarital sex, study finds" .

USA Today . Retrieved 22 May 2010 .

Based on data from National Survey of Family Growth (2002).

^ Ronald Simkins; Gail S. Risch (1 March 2008).

Religion and the Family . Fordham Univ Press.

ISBN 978-1-881871-49-1 .

^ Edgell, Penny; Docka, Danielle (2007). "Beyond the Nuclear Family? Familism and Gender Ideology in Diverse Religious Communities".

Sociological Forum .

22 (1): 25– 50.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.601.6524 .

doi : 10.1111/j.1573-7861.2006.00003.x .

ISSN 0884-8971 .

^ Seth Dowland, Family Values and the Rise of the Christian Right (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2015) ^ Focus on the Family Issue Analysts.

"Our Position (Adoption)" . Focus on the Family. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 10 April 2014 .

^ Culver, Virginia (5 February 2002). "Adoption plan stirs controversy Gays applaud doctors' stance; Focus on Family denounces it".

The Denver Post .

^ Draper, Electa.

"Adoption initiative halves numbers of kids needing families" .

The Denver Post . Retrieved 10 April 2014 .

^ [1] SPLC on anti-gay groups ^ Eichler, Alex.

"13 New Organizations Added to Anti-Gay 'Hate Groups' List" .

The Wire via The Atlantic . Retrieved 13 March 2017 .

^ Lin, Joy (25 March 2015).

"Family Research Council Demands Apology Over 'Hate Group' Label" .

FoxNews . Retrieved 6 March 2017 .

^ Plutarch: The Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans , trans. by John Dryden and revised by Arthur Hugh Clough, The Modern Library (div of Random House, Inc). Bio on Lycurgus; pg 65.

^ Politics , Aristotle, Loeb Classical Library, Bk I, §II 8–10; 1254a 20–35; pg 19–21 ^ Politics , Bk I, §11,21;1255b 15–20; pg 29.

^ Hellenistic Commentary to the New Testament , ed. By M. Eugene Boring, Klaus Berger, Carsten Colpe, Abingdon Press, Nashville, TN, 1995.

^ Hellenistic Commentary to the New Testament , ed. By M. Eugene Boring, Klaus Berger, Carsten Colpe, Abingdon Press, Nashville, TN, 1995.

^ On Divorce , Louis de Bonald, trans. By Nicholas Davidson, Transaction Publishers, New Brunswick, 1993. pp 44–46.

^ On Divorce , Louis de Bonald, pp 88–89; 149.

^ Liberty or Equality , Von Kuehnelt-Leddihn, pg 155.

^ George Lakoff, What Conservatives Know That Liberals Don't , ISBN 0-226-46796-1 ^ Frank H. Knight, (1923). The Ethics of Competition. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 37(4), 579–624.

https://doi.org/10.2307/1884053 , p. 590f.

^ Noppeney, C. (1998). Zwischen Chicago-Schule und Ordoliberalismus: Wirtschaftsethische Spuren in der Ökonomie Frank Knights (Bd. 21). Bern: Paul Haupt, p. 176ff, ISBN 3-258-05836-9 Further reading [ edit ] Anne Revillard (2007) Stating Family Values and Women's Rights: Familialism and Feminism Within the French Republic French Politics 5, 210–228.

doi : 10.1057/palgrave.fp.8200124 Alberto Alesina; Paola Giuliano  (2010) The Power of the Family Journal of Economic Growth , vol. 15(2), 93-125 doi : 10.3386/w13051 Frederick Engels (1884) The Monogamous Family The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State. Chapter 2, Part 4. Retrieved 24 October 2013.

Carle C. Zimmerman (1947) Family and Civilization The close and causal connections between the rise and fall of different types of families and the rise and fall of civilizations. Zimmerman traces the evolution of family structure from tribes and clans to extended and large nuclear families to the small nuclear families and broken families of today.

v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political ideologies The Establishment Anti Hardline Moderate Political spectrum Far-left Left-wing Centre-left Centrism Centre-right Right-wing Far-right Radical Reactionary Revolutionary Accelerationism Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Communalism Communism Bolshevism Marxism-Leninism National Bolshevism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Corporatism Distributism Social credit Environmentalism Familialism Fascism Nazism Third Position Feminism Fundamentalism Green Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Marxism Monarchism Royalism Nationalism Republicanism Classical Modern Social democracy Socialism Third Way Zionism See also Authoritarianism Anti Collectivism Colonialism Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Extremism Federalism Confederalism Confederatism Globalism Ideological repression Imperialism Individualism Internationalism Localism Masculism Militarism Nihilism Pacifism Pluralism Populism Progressivism Reformism Regionalism Separatism Statism Syncretism Totalitarianism NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐9x7xd
Cached time: 20250815222240
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.257 seconds
Real time usage: 1.503 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10841/1000000
Revision size: 49946/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 478449/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 24539/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 28/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 275722/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.609/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23134596/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  979.107      1 -total
 29.47%  288.534      1 Template:Reflist
 19.50%  190.896      1 Template:Conservatism_sidebar
 14.81%  144.980      6 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.78%  105.574      4 Template:Lang
 10.57%  103.494      9 Template:Cite_book
  7.03%   68.825     16 Template:Cite_web
  5.67%   55.547      1 Template:Short_description
  4.81%   47.073      9 Template:Fix
  4.63%   45.345      1 Template:Conservatism_in_Australia Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18256873:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815222240 and revision id 1304661798. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Familialism&oldid=1304661798 " Categories : Family Ideologies Social ideologies Political ideologies Conservatism Social conservatism Censorship of LGBTQ issues Social justice Hidden categories: CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2020 Use New Zealand English from July 2017 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Articles with limited geographic scope from March 2021 Western culture-centric Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles that may contain original research from June 2014 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing additional references from June 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2014 Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 11:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Familialism 7 languages Add topic

