Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Lithosphere 2 Weathering and dissolution of minerals 3 Biosphere 4 Redox conditions in wetland soils 5 Atmosphere 6 Soil in forests 7 Soil in the tropics 8 Soil in grasslands and deserts 9 References Toggle the table of contents Pedosphere 40 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Монгол 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Outermost layer of the Earth that is composed of soil and subject to soil formation processes Not to be confused with Child prostitution .

The pedosphere (from Ancient Greek πέδον ( pédon ) ' ground, earth ' and σφαῖρα ( sphaîra ) ' sphere ' ) is the outermost layer of the Earth that is composed of soil and subject to soil formation processes. It exists at the interface of the lithosphere , atmosphere , hydrosphere and biosphere .

[ 1 ] The pedosphere is the skin of the Earth and only develops when there is a dynamic interaction between the atmosphere (air in and above the soil), biosphere (living organisms), lithosphere (unconsolidated regolith and consolidated bedrock ) and the hydrosphere (water in, on and below the soil). The pedosphere is the foundation of terrestrial life on Earth.

The pedosphere acts as the mediator of chemical and biogeochemical flux into and out of these respective systems and is made up of gaseous, mineralic, fluid and biologic components. The pedosphere lies within the Critical Zone, a broader interface that includes vegetation, pedosphere, aquifer systems, regolith and finally ends at some depth in the bedrock where the biosphere and hydrosphere cease to make significant changes to the chemistry at depth. As part of the larger global system, any particular environment in which soil forms is influenced solely by its geographic position on the globe as climatic, geologic, biologic and anthropogenic changes occur with changes in longitude and latitude.

The pedosphere lies below the vegetative cover of the biosphere and above the hydrosphere and lithosphere. The soil forming process (pedogenesis) can begin without the aid of biology but is significantly quickened in the presence of biologic reactions, where it forms a soil carbon sponge .

[ 2 ] Soil formation begins with the chemical and/or physical breakdown of minerals to form the initial material that overlies the bedrock substrate. Biology quickens this by secreting acidic compounds that help break rock apart. Particular biologic pioneers are lichen , mosses and seed bearing plants, [ 3 ] but many other inorganic reactions take place that diversify the chemical makeup of the early soil layer. Once weathering and decomposition products accumulate, a coherent soil body allows the migration of fluids both vertically and laterally through the soil profile , causing ion exchange between solid, fluid and gaseous phases. As time progresses, the bulk geochemistry of the soil layer will deviate away from the initial composition of the bedrock and will evolve to a chemistry that reflects the type of reactions that take place in the soil.

[ 4 ] Lithosphere [ edit ] Main article: Lithosphere The primary conditions for soil development are controlled by the chemical composition of the rock on which the soil will be. Rock types that form the base of the soil profile are often either sedimentary (carbonate or siliceous), igneous or metaigneous ( metamorphosed igneous rocks) or volcanic and metavolcanic rocks. The rock type and the processes that lead to its exposure at the surface are controlled by the regional geologic setting of the specific area under study, which revolve around the underlying theory of plate tectonics , subsequent deformation , uplift , subsidence and deposition .

Metaigneous and metavolcanic rocks form the largest component of cratons and are high in silica . Igneous and volcanic rocks are also high in silica, but with non-metamorphosed rock, weathering becomes faster and the mobilization of ions is more widespread. Rocks high in silica produce silicic acid as a weathering product. There are few rock types that lead to localized enrichment of some of the biologically limiting elements like phosphorus (P) and nitrogen (N). Phosphatic shale (< 15% P 2 O 5 ) and phosphorite (> 15% P 2 O 5 ) form in anoxic deep water basins that preserve organic material.

[ 5 ] Greenstone (metabasalt), phyllite , and schist release up to 30–50% of the nitrogen pool.

[ 6 ] Thick successions of carbonate rocks are often deposited on craton margins during sea level rise. The widespread dissolution of carbonate and evaporites leads to elevated levels of Mg 2+ , HCO − 3 , Sr 2+ , Na + , Cl − and SO 2− 4 ions in aqueous solution.

[ 7 ] Weathering and dissolution of minerals [ edit ] The process of soil formation is dominated by chemical weathering of silicate minerals, aided by acidic products of pioneering plants and organisms as well as carbonic acid inputs from the atmosphere. Carbonic acid is produced in the atmosphere and soil layers through the carbonation reaction.

[ 4 ] H 2 O + CO 2 ⇌ H + + HCO 3 − H 2 CO 3 This is the dominant form of chemical weathering and aides in the breakdown of carbonate minerals (such as calcite and dolomite ) and silicate minerals (such as feldspar ). The breakdown of the Na-feldspar, albite , by carbonic acid to form kaolinite clay is as follows: [ 4 ] 2 NaAlSi 3 O 8 + 2 H 2 CO 3 + 9 H 2 O ⇌ 2 Na + + 2 HCO 3 − + 4 H 4 SiO 4 + Al 2 Si 2 O 5 (OH) 4 Evidence of this reaction in the field would be elevated levels of bicarbonate ( HCO − 3 ), sodium and silica ions in the water runoff.

The breakdown of carbonate minerals: [ 4 ] [ 7 ] CaCO 3 + H 2 CO 3 ⇌ Ca 2+ + 2 HCO 3 − CaCO 3 ⇌ Ca 2+ + CO 3 2− The further dissolution of carbonic acid (H 2 CO 3 ) and bicarbonate ( HCO − 3 ) produces CO 2 gas. Oxidization is also a major contributor to the breakdown of many silicate minerals and formation of secondary minerals ( diagenesis ) in the early soil profile. Oxidation of olivine (FeMgSiO 4 ) releases Fe, Mg and Si ions.

[ 8 ] The Mg is soluble in water and is carried in the runoff , but the Fe often reacts with oxygen to precipitate Fe 2 O 3 ( hematite ), the oxidized state of iron oxide.

Sulfur , a byproduct of decaying organic material, will also react with iron to form pyrite (FeS 2 ) in reducing environments. Pyrite dissolution leads to low pH levels due to elevated H + ions and further precipitation of Fe 2 O 3 [ 4 ] ultimately changing the redox conditions of the environment.

Biosphere [ edit ] Inputs from the biosphere may begin with lichen and other microorganisms that secrete oxalic acid . These microorganisms, associated with the lichen community or independently inhabiting rocks, include blue-green algae , green algae , various fungi , and numerous bacteria.

[ 9 ] Lichen has long been viewed as the pioneers of soil development as the following 1997 Isozaki statement suggests: The initial conversion of rock into soil is carried on by the pioneer lichens and their successors, the mosses, in which the hair-like rhizoids assume the role of roots in breaking down the surface into fine dust.

[ 10 ] However, lichens are not necessarily the only pioneering organisms nor the earliest form of soil formation as it has been documented that seed-bearing plants may occupy an area and colonize quicker than lichen. Also, eolian sedimentation (wind generated) can produce high rates of sediment accumulation. Nonetheless, lichen can certainly withstand harsher conditions than most vascular plants, and although they have slower colonization rates, they do form the dominant group in alpine regions .

Organic acids released from plant roots include acetic acid and citric acid . During the decay of organic matter phenolic acids are released from plant matter and humic acid and fulvic acid are released by soil microbes. These organic acids speed up chemical weathering by combining with some of the weathering products in a process known as chelation . In the soil profile, these organic acids are often concentrated at the top of the profile, while carbonic acid plays a larger role towards the bottom of the profile or below in the aquifer.

[ 4 ] As the soil column develops further into thicker accumulations, larger animals come to inhabit the soil and continue to alter the chemical evolution of their respective niche .

Earthworms aerate the soil and convert large amounts of organic matter into rich humus , improving soil fertility . Small burrowing mammals store food, grow young and may hibernate in the pedosphere altering the course of soil evolution. Large mammalian herbivores above ground transport nutrients in form of nitrogen-rich waste and phosphorus-rich antlers, while predators leave phosphorus-rich piles of bones on the soil surface, leading to localized enrichment of the soil.

Redox conditions in wetland soils [ edit ] Nutrient cycling in lakes and freshwater wetlands depends heavily on redox conditions.

[ 4 ] Under a few millimeters of water, heterotrophic bacteria metabolize and consume oxygen. They therefore deplete the soil of oxygen and create the need for anaerobic respiration . Some anaerobic microbial processes include denitrification , sulfate reduction and methanogenesis and are responsible for the release of N 2 (nitrogen), H 2 S ( hydrogen sulfide ) and CH 4 ( methane ).  Other anaerobic microbial processes are linked to changes in the oxidation state of iron and manganese.  As a result of anaerobic decomposition, the soil stores large amounts of organic carbon because the soil carbon sponge stays intact.

[ 4 ] The reduction potential describes which way chemical reactions will proceed in oxygen deficient soils and controls the nutrient cycling in flooded systems. Reduction potential is used to express the likelihood of an environment to receive electrons [ 4 ] and therefore become reduced. For example, if a system already has plenty of electrons (anoxic, organic-rich shale ) it is reduced.  In a system, it will likely donate electrons to a part that has a low concentration of electrons, or an oxidized environment, to equilibrate to the chemical gradient. An oxidized environment has high redox potential, whereas a reduced environment has a low redox potential.

The redox potential is controlled by the oxidation state of the chemical species, pH and the amount of O 2 there is in the system. The oxidizing environment accepts electrons because of the presence of O 2 , which acts as an electron acceptor: [ 4 ] O 2 + 4 e − + 4 H + ⇌ 2 H 2 O This equation will tend to move to the right in acidic conditions. Higher redox potentials are found at lower pH levels. Bacteria, heterotrophic organisms, consume oxygen while decomposing organic material.  This depletes the soils of oxygen, thus decreasing the redox potential. At high redox potential, the oxidized form of iron, ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), will be deposited commonly as hematite . In low redox conditions, decomposition rates decrease and the deposition of ferrous iron (Fe 2+ ) increase.

By using analytical geochemical tools such as X-ray fluorescence or inductively coupled mass spectrometry the two forms of Fe (Fe 2+ and Fe 3+ ) can be measured in ancient rocks therefore determining the redox potential for ancient soils. Such a study was done on Permian through Triassic rocks (300–200 million years old) in Japan and British Columbia. The geologists found hematite throughout the early and middle Permian but began to find the reduced form of iron in pyrite within the ancient soils near the end of the Permian and into the Triassic. These results suggest that conditions became less oxygen rich, even anoxic, during the late Permian, which eventually led to the greatest extinction in Earth’s history, the P-T extinction .

[ 11 ] Decomposition in anoxic or reduced soils is also carried out by sulfur-reducing bacteria which, instead of O 2 use SO 2− 4 as an electron acceptor and produce hydrogen sulfide (H 2 S) and carbon dioxide in the process: [ 4 ] 2 H + + SO 4 2− + 2 [CH 2 O] ⇄ 2 CO 2 + H 2 S + 2 H 2 O The H 2 S gas percolates upwards and reacts with Fe 2+ and precipitates pyrite, acting as a trap for the toxic H 2 S gas. However, H 2 S is still a large fraction of emissions from wetland soils.

[ 12 ] In most freshwater wetlands there is little sulfate ( SO 2− 4 ) so methanogenesis becomes the dominant form of decomposition by methanogenic bacteria only when sulfate is depleted.

Acetate , a compound that is a byproduct of fermenting cellulose is split by methanogenic bacteria to produce methane (CH 4 ) and carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), which are released to the atmosphere. Methane is also released during the reduction of CO 2 by the same bacteria.

[ 4 ] Atmosphere [ edit ] In the pedosphere it is safe to assume that gases are in equilibrium with the atmosphere.

[ 7 ] Because plant roots and soil microbes release CO 2 to the soil, the concentration of bicarbonate ( HCO − 3 ) in soil waters is much greater than that in equilibrium with the atmosphere, [ 13 ] the high concentration of CO 2 and the occurrence of metals in soil solutions results in lower pH levels in the soil. Gases that escape from the pedosphere to the atmosphere include the gaseous byproducts of carbonate dissolution, decomposition, redox reactions and microbial photosynthesis . The main inputs from the atmosphere are aeolian sedimentation, rainfall and gas diffusion. Eolian sedimentation includes anything that can be entrained by wind or that stays suspended in air and includes a wide variety of aerosol particles, biological particles like pollen, and dust particles. Nitrogen is the most abundant constituent in rain (after water), as water vapor utilizes aerosol particles to nucleate rain droplets.

[ 4 ] Soil in forests [ edit ] Soil is well developed in the forest as suggested by the thick humus layers, rich diversity of large trees and animals that live there. Forest soils can form a thick soil carbon sponge.  In forests, precipitation exceeds evapotranspiration which results in an excess of water that percolates downward through the soil layers. Slow rates of decomposition leads to large amounts of fulvic acid , greatly enhancing chemical weathering. The downward percolation , in conjunction with chemical weathering leaches Mg, Fe, and aluminium (Al) from the soil and transports them downward, a process known as podzolization . This process leads to marked contrasts in the appearance and chemistry of the soil layers.

[ 4 ] Soil in the tropics [ edit ] Tropical forests receive more insolation and rainfall over longer growing seasons than any other environment on earth. With these elevated temperatures, insolation and rainfall, biomass is extremely productive leading to the production of as much as 800 grams of carbon per square meter per year (8 tons of C/hectare/year).

[ 4 ] Higher temperatures and larger amounts of water contribute to higher rates of chemical weathering. Increased rates of decomposition cause smaller amounts of fulvic acid to percolate and leach metals from the zone of active weathering. Thus, in stark contrast to soil in temperate forests, tropical forests have little to no podzolization and therefore do not have marked visual and chemical contrasts with the soil layers. Instead, the mobile metals Mg, Fe and Al are precipitated as oxide minerals giving the soil a rusty red color.

[ 4 ] Soil in grasslands and deserts [ edit ] Precipitation in grasslands is equal to or less than evapotranspiration and causes soil development to operate in relative drought.

[ 4 ] Leaching and migration of weathering products is therefore decreased. Large amounts of evaporation cause a buildup of calcium (Ca), and other large cations flocculate clay minerals and fulvic acids in the upper soil profile. Low amounts of precipitation and high levels of evapotranspiration limit the downward percolation of water and organic acids, reducing chemical weathering and soil development. The depth to the maximum concentration of clay increases in areas of increased precipitation and leaching. When leaching is decreased, the calcium precipitates as calcite (CaCO 3 ) in the lower soil levels, a layer known as caliche .

Deserts behave similarly to grasslands but operate in constant drought as precipitation is less than evapotranspiration. Chemical weathering proceeds more slowly than in grasslands and beneath the caliche layer may be a layer of gypsum and halite .

[ 4 ] To study soils in deserts, pedologists have used the concept of chronosequences to relate the timing and development of the soil layers. It has been shown that phosphorus leaches very quickly from the system, and soil P-levels decrease with age.

[ 14 ] Furthermore, carbon buildup in the soils is decreased due to slower decomposition rates. As a result, the rates of carbon circulation in the biogeochemical cycle is decreased.

[ citation needed ] Environment portal Ecology portal Earth sciences portal References [ edit ] ^ Elissa Levine, 2001, The Pedosphere As A Hub ^ Jehne, Walter, Regenerate Earth , accessed 2022 ^ Cooper, R. (1953). "The Role of Lichens in Soil Formation and Plant Succession".

Ecology .

34 (4): 805– 807.

Bibcode : 1953Ecol...34..805C .

doi : 10.2307/1931347 .

JSTOR 1931347 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r Schlesinger, W.H.; Bernhardt, E.S. (2013).

Biogeochemistry: an analysis of global change (3rd ed.). Oxford: Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0123858740 .

^ Boggs, S., Jr., 1995, Principles of Sedimentary and Stratigraphy. Prentice Hall, NJ, USA ^ Holloway, J.; Dahlgren, R. (1999). "Geologic nitrogen in terrestrial biogeochemical cycling".

Geology .

27 (6): 567.

Bibcode : 1999Geo....27..567H .

doi : 10.1130/0091-7613(1999)027<0567:GNITBC>2.3.CO;2 .

^ a b c Faure, G., 1998, Principles and Applications of Geochemistry, 600 pp, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.

^ Grandstaff, D., 1986, The dissolution rate of forsteritic olivine from Hawaiian beach sand: Rates of chemical weathering of rocks and minerals, pp. 41–59.

^ Chen, J.; Blume, H.-P.; Beyer, L. (2000). "Weathering of rocks induced by lichen colonization — a review".

CATENA .

39 (2): 121– 146.

Bibcode : 2000Caten..39..121C .

doi : 10.1016/S0341-8162(99)00085-5 .

^ Clements, F.E., and Shelford, V.E., 1939, Bioecology. John Wiley, New York.

^ Isozaki, Y. (1997). "Permo-Triassic Boundary Superanoxia and Stratified Superocean: Records from Lost Deep Sea".

Science .

276 (5310): 235– 238.

doi : 10.1126/science.276.5310.235 .

PMID 9092467 .

^ Kelly, D.; Smith, N. (1990). "Organic Sulfur Compounds in the Environment Biogeochemistry, Microbiology, and Ecological Aspects".

Advances in Microbial Ecology . Vol. 11. pp.

345– 385.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4684-7612-5_9 .

ISBN 978-1-4684-7614-9 .

^ Piñol, J.; Alcañiz, J.M.; Rodà, F. (1995). "Carbon dioxide efflux and pCO 2 in soils of three Quercus ilex montane forests".

Biogeochemistry .

30 (3): 191– 215.

Bibcode : 1995Biogc..30..191P .

doi : 10.1007/BF02186413 .

S2CID 91670150 .

^ Lajtha, K.; Schlesinger, W.H. (1988). "The Biogeochemistry of Phosphorus Cycling and Phosphorus Availability Along a Desert Soil Chronosequence".

Ecology .

69 (1): 24– 39.

Bibcode : 1988Ecol...69...24L .

doi : 10.2307/1943157 .

JSTOR 1943157 .

v t e Soil science History Index Main fields Pedology Edaphology Soil biology Soil microbiology Soil zoology Soil ecology Soil physics Soil mechanics Soil chemistry Environmental soil science Agricultural soil science Soil topics Soil Pedosphere Soil morphology Pedodiversity Soil formation Soil erosion Soil contamination Soil retrogression and degradation Soil compaction Soil compaction (agriculture) Soil sealing Soil salinity Alkali soil Soil pH Soil acidification Soil health Soil life Soil biodiversity Soil quality Soil value Soil fertility Soil resilience Soil color Soil texture Soil structure Pore space in soil Pore water pressure Soil crust Soil horizon Soil biomantle Soil carbon Soil gas Soil respiration Soil organic matter Soil moisture Soil water (retention) Soil type v t e Soil classification World Reference Base for Soil Resources (1998–) Acrisols Alisols Andosols Anthrosols Arenosols Calcisols Cambisols Chernozem Cryosols Durisols Ferralsols Fluvisols Gleysols Gypsisols Histosol Kastanozems Leptosols Lixisols Luvisols Nitisols Phaeozems Planosols Plinthosols Podzols Regosols Retisols Solonchaks Solonetz Stagnosol Technosols Umbrisols Vertisols USDA soil taxonomy Alfisols Andisols Aridisols Entisols Gelisols Histosols Inceptisols Mollisols Oxisols Spodosols Ultisols Vertisols Other systems FAO soil classification (1974–1998) Unified Soil Classification System AASHTO Soil Classification System Référentiel pédologique (French classification system) Canadian system of soil classification Australian Soil Classification Polish Soil Classification 1938 USDA soil taxonomy List of U.S. state soils List of vineyard soil types PG-3 (Spanish classification system) Non-systematic soil types Sand Silt Clay Loam Topsoil Subsoil Soil crust Claypan Hardpan Gypcrust Caliche Parent material Pedosphere Laimosphere Rhizosphere Bulk soil Alkali soil Bay mud Blue goo Brickearth Brown earth Calcareous grassland Dark earth Dry quicksand Duplex soil Eluvium Expansive clay Fill dirt Fuller's earth Hydrophobic soil Loess Lunar soil Martian soil Mud Muskeg Paleosol Peat Prime farmland Quicksand Serpentine soil Spodic soil Stagnogley Subaqueous soil Takir Terra preta Terra rossa Tropical peat Yedoma Types of soil Applications Soil conservation Soil management Soil guideline value Soil survey Soil test Soil governance Soil value Soil salinity control Erosion control Agroecology Liming (soil) Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Geomorphology Geotechnical engineering Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Societies, Initiatives Australian Society of Soil Science Incorporated Canadian Society of Soil Science Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (India) German Soil Science Society Indian Institute of Soil Science International Union of Soil Sciences International Year of Soil National Society of Consulting Soil Scientists (US) OPAL Soil Centre (UK) Soil Science Society of Poland Soil and Water Conservation Society (US) Soil Science Society of America World Congress of Soil Science Scientific journals Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica B Journal of Soil and Water Conservation Plant and Soil Pochvovedenie Soil Research Soil Science Society of America Journal See also Land use Land conversion Land management Vegetation Infiltration (hydrology) Groundwater Crust (geology) Impervious surface / Surface runoff Petrichor Wikipedia:WikiProject Soil Category soil Category soil science List of soil scientists NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐pkbnk
Cached time: 20250814230102
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.529 seconds
Real time usage: 0.686 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3172/1000000
Revision size: 21578/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 100673/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6369/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 58848/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.329/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16749227/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  584.038      1 -total
 24.05%  140.443      1 Template:Reflist
 22.77%  132.998      2 Template:Navbox
 22.32%  130.386      1 Template:Etymology
 18.56%  108.401      6 Template:Cite_journal
 15.99%   93.406      2 Template:Wikt-lang
 14.67%   85.687      1 Template:Soil_science_topics
 13.40%   78.254      1 Template:Short_description
  8.93%   52.145      1 Template:Soil_type
  6.56%   38.324      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1203155:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814230102 and revision id 1303674313. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pedosphere&oldid=1303674313 " Categories : Pedology Geochemistry Structure of the Earth Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 11:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pedosphere 40 languages Add topic

