Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of the term Toggle History of the term subsection 1.1 Other uses 2 Works 3 Relationship with pop culture 4 Criticism 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Postfeminism 26 languages العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca বাংলা Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Монгол پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Русский Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia View of feminism as outdated Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Not to be confused with Postmodern feminism .

Postfeminism (alternatively rendered as post-feminism ) is an alleged decrease in popular support for feminism from the 1990s onwards.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] It can be considered a critical way of understanding the changed relations among feminism, femininity and popular culture. The term is sometimes confused with subsequent feminisms such as postmodern feminism , [ 4 ] xenofeminism , and the fourth wave .

Research conducted at Kent State University in the 2000s narrowed postfeminism to four main claims: support for feminism declined; women began hating feminism and feminists; society had already attained social equality, thus making feminism outdated; and the label "feminist" has a negative stigma.

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] History of the term [ edit ] One of the earliest modern uses of the term was in Susan Bolotin's 1982 article "Voices of the Post-Feminist Generation", published in New York Times Magazine . This article was based on a number of interviews with women who largely agreed with the goals of feminism, but did not identify as feminists.

[ 6 ] In the 1990s the term became popular in academia and the media and was used in both complimentary and dismissive ways.

[ 7 ] Since then there has been confusion surrounding the intended meaning of "post" in the context of "postfeminism". "Post" offers to situate feminism in history by proclaiming the end of this history. It then confirms feminist history as a thing of the past. However, some claim that it is impossible that feminism could be aligned with "post" when it is unthinkable, as it would be the same as calling the current world a post racist, post-classist, and post-sexist society.

[ 7 ] Contemporarily the term postfeminist is still used to refer to young women "who are thought to benefit from the women's movement through expanded access to employment and education and new family arrangements but at the same time do not push for further political change", Pamela Aronson, Professor of Sociology, asserts.

[ 8 ] Other uses [ edit ] Toril Moi used the term in Sexual/Textual Politics (1985) to advocate a feminism that would deconstruct the equality-versus-difference binary.

[ 7 ] In Lacan and Postfeminism (2000), author Elizabeth Wright identified a "positive reading" of postfeminism that, instead of indicating an overcoming of feminism, refers to post-structuralist critiques of second-wave feminism.

[ 9 ] From a similar perspective, Diane Davis affirmed that postfeminism is just a continuation of what first and second wave feminisms want.

[ 10 ] In Feminism: A Beginner’s Guide (2010) , Sally Scholz referred to the fourth wave as postfeminism.

[ 11 ] Works [ edit ] In her 1994 book Who Stole Feminism? How Women Have Betrayed Women , Christina Hoff Sommers considers much of modern academic feminist theory and the feminist movement to be gynocentric . She labels this " gender feminism " and proposes " equity feminism "—an ideology that aims for full civil and legal equality. She argues that while the feminists she designates as gender feminists advocate preferential treatment and portray women as victims, equity feminism provides a viable alternative form of feminism.

[ 12 ] These descriptions and her other work have caused Hoff Sommers to be described as an antifeminist by some other feminists.

[ 13 ] [ self-published source ] [ 14 ] Some contemporary feminists, such as Katha Pollitt or Nadine Strossen , consider feminism to hold simply that "women are people." Views that separate the sexes rather than unite them are considered by these writers to be sexist rather than feminist .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Relationship with pop culture [ edit ] Postfeminism has been seen in media as a form of feminism that accepts popular culture instead of rejecting it, as was typical with second wave feminists.

[ 17 ] Many popular shows from the 1990s and early 2000s are considered to be postfeminist works because they tend to focus on women who are empowered by popular cultural representations of other women. Because of this, postfeminists claimed that such media was more accessible and inclusive than past representations of women in the media; however, some feminists believe that postfeminist works focus too much on white, middle-class women.

[ 17 ] Such shows and movies include The Devil Wears Prada , Xena: Warrior Princess , The Princess Diaries , Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Sex and the City .

Many of these works also involve women monitoring their appearance as a form of self-management, be it in the form of dieting, exercise, or—most popularly—makeover scenes.

[ 18 ] Postfeminist literature—also known as chick lit —has been criticized by feminists for similar themes and notions. However, the genre is also praised for being confident, witty, and complicated, bringing in feminist themes, revolving around women, and reinventing standards of fiction.

[ 19 ] Examples can also be found in Pretty Little Liars . The novels explore the complexity of girlhood in a society that assumes gender equality, which is in line with postfeminism. The constant surveillance and self policing of the series' protagonists depicts the performance of heterosexuality, hyperfemininity, and critical gaze forced upon girls. The materialism and performance from the girls in Pretty Little Liars critiques the notion that society has full gender equality, and thus offers a critique of postfeminism.

[ 20 ] Criticism [ edit ] Susan Faludi argues in Backlash: The Undeclared War Against American Women (1991) that a backlash against second-wave feminism had successfully re-defined feminism through its terms. It was constructed by the media and, without reliable evidence, pointed women's liberation movement as the source of many of the problems alleged to be plaguing women in the late 1980s. According to her, this type of backlash is a historical trend, recurring when it appeared that women had made substantial gains in their efforts to obtain equal rights.

[ 21 ] Similarly, Amelia Jones claims that the postfeminist texts which emerged in the 1980s and 1990s portrayed second-wave feminism as a monolithic entity and were overly generalizing in their criticism.

[ 22 ] Angela McRobbie suggests that adding the prefix post- to feminism undermined the strides that feminism made in achieving equality for everyone, including women. In McRobbie's opinion, postfeminism gave the impression that equality has been achieved and feminists could now focus on something else entirely. She believed that postfeminism was most clearly seen on so-called feminist media products, such as Bridget Jones's Diary , Sex and the City , and Ally McBeal . Female characters like Bridget Jones and Carrie Bradshaw claimed to be liberated and clearly enjoy their sexuality, but what they were constantly searching for was the one man who would make everything worthwhile.

[ 23 ] In an article on print jewelry advertisements in Singapore, Michelle Lazar analyses how the construction of 'postfeminist' femininity has given rise to a neoliberal hybrid "pronounced sense of self or 'I-dentity'". She states that the increasing number of female wage earners has led to advertisers updating their image of women but that "through this hybrid postfeminist I-dentity, advertisers have found a way to reinstall a new normativity that coexists with the status quo".

[ 24 ] Postfeminist ads and fashion have been criticized for using femininity as a commodity veiled as liberation.

[ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Angela McRobbie , Professor for Communications at Goldsmiths, University of London Choice feminism Gender studies Individualist feminism Lad culture Lipstick feminism Rosalind Gill , Professor of Social and Cultural Analysis at King's College, London Third-wave feminism References [ edit ] ^ a b Hall, Elaine J.; Rodriguez, Marnie Salupo (2003). "The Myth of Postfeminism".

Gender and Society .

17 (6): 878– 902.

doi : 10.1177/0891243203257639 .

JSTOR 3594675 .

S2CID 145741088 .

^ Abbott, Pamela; Tyler, Melissa; Wallace, Claire (2005).

An Introduction to Sociology: Feminist Perspectives (3rd ed.). Routledge. p.

xi .

ISBN 978-1-134-38245-3 .

^ Mateo–Gomez, Tatiana (2009). "Feminist Criticism". In Richter, William L. (ed.).

Approaches to Political Thought . Rowman & Littlefield. p.

279 .

ISBN 978-1-4616-3656-4 .

^ Feng, Yang (2009).

Studies On Contemporary Chinese Women Development . Renmin Press Beijing, People's Publishing House, PRC.

ISBN 978-605-86254-2-6 .

^ Abbott, Pamela; Tyler, Melissa; Wallace, Claire (2006).

An Introduction to Sociology: Feminist Perspectives . Routledge. p. 52.

ISBN 9781134382453 .

^ Rosen, Ruth. The World Split Open: How the Modern Women's Movement Changed America. New York: Viking, 2000, 275, 337.

^ a b c Kavka, Misha (2002). "Feminism, Ethics, and History, or What is the "Post" in Postfeminism?".

Tulsa Studies in Women's Literature .

21 (1): 29– 44.

doi : 10.2307/4149214 .

JSTOR 4149214 .

^ Aronson, Pamela (2003). "Feminists or "Postfeminists"?: Young Women's Attitudes toward Feminism and Gender Relations".

Gender and Society .

17 (6): 903– 22.

doi : 10.1177/0891243203257145 .

S2CID 146792123 .

^ Wright, Elizabeth, Lacan and Postfeminism (Icon Books, 2000), ISBN 978-1-84046-182-4 ^ Davis, Debra Diane, Breaking Up [at] Totality: A Rhetoric of Laughter (Carbondale: Southern Ill. Univ. Press, 2000 ( ISBN 0-8093-2228-5 )), p. 141 n. 8 (brackets in title so in original) (author asst. prof. rhetoric, Univ. of Iowa).

^ Scholz, Sally J. (2010).

Feminism: a beginner's guide . Oneworld beginner's guide. Oxford: Oneworld. p. 7.

ISBN 978-1-85168-712-1 .

^ Hoff Sommers, Christina, Who Stole Feminism? How Women Have Betrayed Women (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, 1995) ^ Flood, Michael (7 July 2004). "Backlash: Angry men's movements", in Stacey Elin Rossi, ed.: The Battle and Backlash Rage On. N.p.: XLibris, 273.

ISBN 1-4134-5934-X ^ "Uncovering the Right—Female Anti-Feminism for Fame and Profit" . Archived from the original on 15 December 2007 . Retrieved 21 December 2007 .

^ Pollitt, Katha, Reasonable Creatures: Essays on Women and Feminism (Vintage, 1995) ISBN 978-0-679-76278-2 ^ Strossen, Nadine, Defending Pornography: Free Speech, Sex, and the Fight for Women's Rights (Prentice Hall & IBD, 1995), ISBN 978-0-684-19749-4 ^ a b Feasey, Rebecca (7 August 2010). "Charmed: Why Teen Television Appeals to Women".

Journal of Popular Film and Television .

34 (1): 2– 9.

doi : 10.3200/JPFT.34.1.2-9 .

S2CID 194032693 .

^ "Post feminism in popular culture: A potential for critical resistance?" .

Politics and Culture . 9 November 2009. Archived from the original on 18 May 2021 . Retrieved 17 April 2018 .

^ "What is chick-lit? | Electronic Book Review" .

www.electronicbookreview.com . Archived from the original on 15 April 2018 . Retrieved 17 April 2018 .

^ Whitney, Sarah (11 November 2017).

"Kisses, Bitches: Pretty Little Liars Frames Postfeminism's Adolescent Girl" .

Tulsa Studies in Women's Literature .

36 (2): 353– 377.

doi : 10.1353/tsw.2017.0026 .

ISSN 1936-1645 .

S2CID 148901816 .

^ Faludi, Susan, Backlash: The Undeclared War Against American Women (Three Rivers Press, 2006) ^ Jones, Amelia. "Postfeminism, Feminist Pleasures, and Embodied Theories of Art," New Feminist Criticism: Art, Identity, Action, Eds. Joana Frueh, Cassandra L. Langer and Arlene Raven. New York: HarperCollins, 1994. 16–41, 20.

^ McRobbie, Angela (2004). "Post-feminism and popular culture".

Feminist Media Studies .

4 (3): 255– 264.

doi : 10.1080/1468077042000309937 .

S2CID 56017452 .

^ Lazar, Michelle (2014). "Recuperating feminism, reclaiming femininity: Hybrid postfeminist I-dentity in consumer advertisements".

Gender and Language .

8 (2): 205– 224.

doi : 10.1558/genl.v8i2.205 .

^ "AMERICANA: "A Critique of Post-feminism" by Zsófia Kulcsár" .

americanaejournal.hu . Retrieved 17 April 2018 .

Further reading [ edit ] Gill, Rosalind (May 2007).

"Postfeminist media culture. Elements of a sensibility" .

European Journal of Cultural Studies .

10 (2): 147– 166.

doi : 10.1177/1367549407075898 .

hdl : 2262/52270 .

S2CID 145620486 .

v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Postfeminism&oldid=1306517746 " Categories : Criticism of feminism Feminism and society Politics Women in society Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Use dmy dates from August 2024 All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from December 2017 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 04:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Postfeminism 26 languages Add topic

