Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 References Toggle References subsection 1.1 Citations 1.2 Classical sources 1.3 Modern sources Toggle the table of contents Myrtoan Sea 48 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego Հայերեն Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska עברית ქართული Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски მარგალური Nederlands Polski Português Русский کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 37°N 24°E ﻿ / ﻿ 37°N 24°E ﻿ / 37; 24 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of the Mediterranean Sea between the Cyclades and the Peloponnese This article has an unclear citation style .

The references used may be made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation and footnoting .

( April 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Myrtoan Sea Location Mediterranean Sea The Myrtoan Sea (also Mirtoan Sea and Myrtoum Mare ; Greek : Μυρτώο Πέλαγος , romanized : Mirtóo Pélagos Greek pronunciation: [mirˈto.o ˈpelaɣos] ) is a subdivision of the Mediterranean Sea that lies between the Cyclades and Peloponnese .  It is described as the part of the Aegean Sea south of Euboea , Attica , and Argolis .

[ 1 ] Some of the water mass of the Black Sea reaches the Myrtoan Sea, via transport through the Aegean Sea (Saundry, Hogan & Baum 2011).

The Saronic Gulf , the gulf of Athens , lies between the Corinth Canal and the Myrtoan Sea.

It is said to have been named after the mythical hero Myrtilus , who was thrown into this sea by an enraged Pelops .  It is also said to have derived its name from a small island named Myrtus.

[ 2 ] The name has also been connected with that of the maiden Myrto.

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on March 12, 2007 . Retrieved August 31, 2006 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Harry Thurston Peck, Harpers Dictionary of Classical Antiquities (1898), M, Mylae, Myrtōum Maré" .

www.perseus.tufts.edu . Retrieved 2025-06-06 .

Classical sources [ edit ] Horace makes a reference to Mare Myrtoum in Liber I, Carmen I, line 14 ("Ad Maecenatem"). — "Carmina (Horatius)/Liber I/Carmen I - Wikisource" .

la.wikisource.org .

Pliny the Elder (iv. 11. s. 18) considers the Myrtoan a part of the Aegean.

Strabo distinguishes between the Myrtoan and Aegean; Strabo wrote that the Aegean terminated at the promontory of Sunium in Attica.

Modern sources [ edit ] Peter Saundry, C.Michael Hogan & Steve Baum. 2011.

Sea of Crete . Encyclopedia of Earth. Eds.M.Pidwirny & C.J.Cleveland. National Council for Science and Environment. Washington DC.

v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category v t e Marginal seas of the Atlantic Ocean Basins Foxe Basin Bays Baffin Bay Bay of Biscay Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Bothnian Bay Hudson Bay James Bay Pottles Bay Channels English Channel Gulfs Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Seas Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea Greenland Sea Icarian Sea Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea Kattegat Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Skagerrak Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Oceans portal Authority control databases : Geographic Pleiades 37°N 24°E ﻿ / ﻿ 37°N 24°E ﻿ / 37; 24 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Myrtoan_Sea&oldid=1294267481 " Categories : Marginal seas of the Mediterranean Aegean Sea Seas of Greece Landforms of the South Aegean Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia references cleanup from April 2016 All articles needing references cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from April 2016 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Pages using infobox body of water with duplicate parameters Articles using infobox body of water without alt Articles using infobox body of water without coordinates Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map Articles using infobox body of water without image bathymetry Articles containing Greek-language text Pages with Greek IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2016 Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 6 June 2025, at 17:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Myrtoan Sea 48 languages Add topic

