Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Directors of the Institute 2 Nobel prizes awarded to FIAN scientists 3 Facilities 4 Publications of the Institute 5 Films about the Lebedev Physical Institute 6 See also 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Lebedev Physical Institute 17 languages Български Deutsch Eesti Español Français 한국어 עברית Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 55°41′52″N 37°33′55″E ﻿ / ﻿ 55.69778°N 37.56528°E ﻿ / 55.69778; 37.56528 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Russian science institute This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines .

Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references .

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Lebedev Physical Institute" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Russian .

(April 2025) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 992 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Russian Wikipedia article at [[:ru:Физический институт имени П. Н. Лебедева РАН]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|ru|Физический институт имени П. Н. Лебедева РАН}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Lebedev Physical Institute Russian : Физи́ческий институ́т имени П. Н. Ле́бедева Российской академии наук (ФИАН) Agency overview Formed 1934 Headquarters 119991, Moscow , Leninsky Avenue , 53 Employees 1600 Agency executive Nikolai Kolachevsky , director Parent agency Russian Academy of Sciences Website lebedev .ru (in Russian) The Lebedev Physical Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences ( LPI RAS or just LPI ) (in Russian : Физи́ческий институ́т имени П. Н. Ле́бедева Российской академии наук (ФИАН) ), situated in Moscow, is a Russian research institute specializing in physics . The institute was established in its present shape in 1934 by academician Sergey Vavilov . It moved to Moscow and was named after a Russian physicist Pyotr Lebedev the same year. It is also known as P. N. Lebedev Institute of Physics or just Lebedev Institute . In Russian it is often referred to by the acronym FIAN (ФИАН) standing for "Physical Institute of the Academy of Sciences". The range of the research activities includes: laser technology, dark matter structure, nanostructures, superconductivity, cosmic rays, and gamma-astronomy. The institute developed a technique of crystallizing cubic zirconia (which was called Fianit in Russia, named after FIAN).

Directors of the Institute [ edit ] Sergey Vavilov (1934–1951) Dmitri Skobeltsyn (1951–1972) Nikolay Basov (1973–1988) Leonid Keldysh (1988–1994) Oleg Krokhin (1994–2004) Gennady Mesyats (2004–2015) Nikolai Kolachevsky [ ru ] (2015–) Nobel prizes awarded to FIAN scientists [ edit ] 1958 — Pavel Cherenkov , Igor Tamm , Ilya Frank : "for the discovery and the interpretation of the Cherenkov-Vavilov effect ".

1964 — Nikolay Basov , Alexander Prokhorov : "for fundamental work in the field of quantum electronics, which has led to the construction of oscillators and amplifiers based on the maser - laser principle".

1975 — Andrei Sakharov won a Peace Prize for his campaigning for human rights.

2003 — Vitaly Ginzburg : "for pioneering contributions to the theory of superconductors and superfluids ".

Facilities [ edit ] The institute has, among other research facilities, a particle accelerator: 1.2 GeV electron synchrotron called "Pakhra", located in Troitsk near Moscow (at the LPI's HEP department). However, the institute is not totally (or even perhaps mainly) focused on accelerator/particle physics, but the scope of the research of the institute contains most of the areas of modern physics.

Publications of the Institute [ edit ] "Краткие сообщения по физике" (in Russian) ; English version: Bulletin of the Lebedev Physics Institute "Квантовая электроника" (in Russian) ; English translation: Quantum Electronics (formerly Soviet Journal of Quantum Electronics ) Films about the Lebedev Physical Institute [ edit ] In 2021 it was released a documentary “Mishik Kazaryan: The Path of an Explorer” (2021) ( https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WWuZsXSCFxo ). The film (original title «Мишик Казарян: путь Искателя») was directed by Leonid Ioffe. It narrates about the life and work of Professor Mishik Kazaryan, an experimental physicist, laureate of the USSR State Prize, who worked in the Lebedev Physical Institute. The film also allows to immerse into the life of the Lebedev Physical Institute since middle of 1960-s.

See also [ edit ] A. M. Prokhorov General Physics Institute [ Wikidata ] Pushchino Radio Astronomy Observatory External links [ edit ] Lebedev Physics Institute official web site Archived 2015-09-19 at the Wayback Machine 55°41′52″N 37°33′55″E ﻿ / ﻿ 55.69778°N 37.56528°E ﻿ / 55.69778; 37.56528 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Norway Latvia Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lebedev_Physical_Institute&oldid=1305438199 " Categories : Physics research institutes Universities and institutes established in the Soviet Union Research institutes in the Soviet Union Institutes of the Russian Academy of Sciences Nuclear research institutes in Russia 1714 establishments in Russia Cultural heritage monuments in Moscow Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia external links cleanup from April 2025 Articles lacking sources from April 2025 All articles lacking sources Articles needing translation from Russian Wikipedia Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Russian-language text Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) Webarchive template wayback links Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 02:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lebedev Physical Institute 17 languages Add topic

