Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and education 2 Career 3 Hermetic alchemist 4 Death 5 Gallery 6 Writings 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Heinrich Khunrath 16 languages Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski مصرى Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German scientist (c.1560–1605) Heinrich Khunrath Medicinae Doctoris Born 1560 Dresden , Electorate of Saxony Died 9 September 1605 (1605-09-09) (aged 44–45) Nationality German Other names Henrico; Henrici Occupation Physician Known for Hermetic philosophy, alchemy Notable work Amphitheatrum sapientiae aeternae Heinrich Khunrath (c. 1560 – 9 September 1605), or Dr. Henricus Khunrath as he was also called, was a German physician , hermetic philosopher , and alchemist .

Frances Yates considered him to be a link between the philosophy of John Dee and Rosicrucianism . His name, in the spelling "Henricus Künraht" was used as a pseudonym for the 1670 publisher of the Tractatus Theologico-Politicus of Baruch Spinoza .

Life and education [ edit ] Khunrath was born in Dresden , Saxony , the son of the merchant Sebastian Kunrat and his wife Anna in the year 1560. He was the younger brother of the Leipzig physician Conrad Khunrath .

[ 1 ] In the winter of 1570, he may have enrolled at the University of Leipzig under the name of Henricus Conrad Lips. The uncertainties surrounding his life stem from his supposed use of multiple names. It is certain that in May 1588, he matriculated at the University of Basel , Switzerland , earning his Medicinæ Doctor degree on 3 September 1588, after a defense of twenty-eight doctoral theses.

Career [ edit ] Khunrath, a disciple of Paracelsus , practiced medicine in Dresden, Magdeburg , and Hamburg and may have held a professorial position in Leipzig. He travelled widely after 1588, including a stay at the Imperial court in Prague , home to the mystically-inclined Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor . Before reaching Prague he had met John Dee at Bremen on 27 May 1589, when Dee was on his way back to England from Bohemia.  Khunrath praised Dee in his later works.  During his court stay Khunrath met the alchemist Edward Kelley who had remained behind after he and Dee had parted company (Kelley was arrested on 30 April 1591 as an alleged imposter). In September 1591, Khunrath was appointed court physician to Count Rosemberk in Trebona . He probably met Johann Thölde while at Trebona, one of the suggested authors of the " Basilius Valentinus " treatises on alchemy.

Hermetic alchemist [ edit ] "The First Stage of the Great Work," better-known as the "Alchemist's Laboratory." The drawing of the laboratory is credited to architectural painter Hans Vredeman de Vries (1527–1604) and shows Khunrath in his laboratory.

Khunrath's brushes with John Dee and Thölde and Paracelsian beliefs led him to develop a Christianized natural magic , seeking to find the secret prima materia that would lead man into eternal wisdom. The Christianized view that Khunrath took was framed around his commitment to Lutheran theology. He also held that experience and observation were essential to practical alchemical research, as would a natural philosopher .

His most famous work on alchemy is the Amphitheatrum Sapientiae Aeternae (Amphitheater of Eternal Wisdom), a work on the mystical aspects of that art, which contains the oft-seen engraving entitled "The First Stage of the Great Work", better-known as the "Alchemist's Laboratory". The book was first published at Hamburg in 1595, with four circular elaborate, hand-colored, engraved plates heightened with gold and silver which Khunrath designed and were engraved by Paullus van der Doort . The book was then made more widely available in an expanded edition with the addition of other plates published posthumously in Hanau in 1609.

Amphitheatrum Sapientiae Aeternae is an alchemical classic, combining both Christianity and magic. In it, Khunrath showed himself to be an adept of spiritual alchemy and illustrated the many-staged and intricate path to spiritual perfection. Khunrath's work was important in Lutheran circles.

John Warwick Montgomery has pointed out that Johann Arndt (1555–1621), who was the influential writer of Lutheran books of pietiesm and devotion, composed a commentary on Amphitheatrum . Some of the ideas in his works are Kabbalistic in nature and foreshadow Rosicrucianism.

Death [ edit ] Khunrath may have encountered some opposition to his alchemical work because most of his publications on alchemy were published widely after his death. He died in either Dresden or Leipzig on 9 September 1605. The tension between spirituality and experiment in Amphitheatrum Sapientiae Aeternae brought about its condemnation by the Sorbonne in 1625.

Gallery [ edit ] The following are colored illustrations from a copy of the Amphitheatrum sapientiae aeternae at the University of Wisconsin–Madison Libraries : Writings [ edit ] De signatura rerum naturalium theses . Basel. 1588.

Amphitheatrum sapientiae aeternae . Hamburg. 1595.

Carlos Gilly; Anja Hallacker; Hanns-Peter Neumann, eds. (2013).

Amphitheatrum sapientiae aeternae – Schauplatz der ewig allein wahren Weisheit (in Latin and German) (Clavis Pansophiae 6 ed.). Stuttgart - Bad Cannstatt: frommann-holzboog. p. 500.

ISBN 978-3-7728-1628-4 . Archived from the original on 16 October 2014 . Retrieved 22 September 2014 .

- Reprint of the first (Hamburg 1595) and second (last) edition (Hanau 1609), together with a transcription of a German translation (18th century).

[ 2 ] Confessio de chao physico-chemicorum catholico : in quo catholice habitat azoth sive materia prima mundi, h.e. mercurius sapientum : ubi magnesiae (subjecti videlicet lapidis philosophorum catholici) conditiones fideliter recensentur . 1595.

Von hylealischen das ist, pri-materialischen catholischen, oder algemeinemx natürlichen … chaos der naturgemässen alchymiae und alchymisten, wiederholete, verneuerte und wolvermehrete naturgemäss-alchymisch- und recht-lehrende philosophische Confessio oder Bekandtniss … Deme beygefügt ist eine treuhertzige Wahrnungs-Vermahnung an alle wahre Alchymisten, sich vor den betrügerischen Arg-Chymisten zu hüten . Magdeburg. 1597.

Naturgemes-alchymisch symbolum, oder, gahr kurtze Bekentnus …: von allgemeinem, natürlichen, dreyeinigen, wunderbaren, und wunderthätigen, allergeheimbsten Chao der naturgemessen Alchymisten: desz philosophischen universal und grossen Steins rechten natürlichen unnd eigenen Subjecto, oder, waren und einiger Materia . Hamburg. 1598.

Magnesia catholica philosophorum, das ist, höheste Nothwendigkeit in Alchymia, auch mügliche uberkommung augenscheinliche Weisung, vnd genugsame Erweisung catholischer verborgener Magnesiae; des geheimen wunderthetigen vniversal Steins naturgemess-chymischer philosophorum Rechten vnd allein wahren pri-materialischen Svbiecti . Magdeburg. 1599.

Wahrhafter Bericht vom philosophischen Athanor und dessen Gebrauch und Nutzen … . Magdeburg. 1603.

Quaestiones tres, per-utiles …: cum curationem, tum praecautionem absolutam … Arenae, Sabuli, Calculi, Podagrae, Gonagrae, Chiragrae, aliorumque morborum tartareorum microcosmi … hominis puta, concernentes: das ist, hochnützliche … drei Fragen, die gründliche, vollkommene und warhafftige Curation oder Genesung, so wol auch Precaution, oder Verhutung Sandes, Grieses Steins, Zipperleins und anderer mehr tartarischer Kranckheiten microcosmi … oder des Menschen betreffende . Leipzig. 1607.

De igne magorum philosophorumque secreto externo & visibili; das ist, Philosophische Erklahrung, von, und uber dem … Gludt und Flammenfewer der uhralten Magorum oder Weysen … Beneben andern zweyen Tractätlein: deren das erste in … Judicium … eines erfahrnen Cabalisten und Philosophen uber die 4. Figuren desz grossen Amphitheatri . Strassburg. 1608.

Lux in tenebris; das ist … Liecht vnd Wegnuss vnd Irrthumb vmbgeben … . 1614.

Medulla Distillatoria & Medica . Hamburg. 1638.

References [ edit ] ^ Albert Ladenburg: Heinrich Khunrath. In: Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie. Band 15. Duncker & Humblot, Leipzig 1882, S. 709.

^ "Frommann-holzboog" . Archived from the original on 16 October 2014 . Retrieved 22 September 2014 .

Further reading [ edit ] This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Heinrich Khunrath" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Forshaw, Peter (2006a).

"Alchemy in the Amphitheatre': Some consideration of the alchemical content of the engravings in Heinrich Khunrath's Amphitheatre of Eternal Wisdom (1609)" . In Wamberg, Jacob (ed.).

Art and Alchemy . Museum Tusculanum Press . Retrieved 12 December 2021 – via academia.edu.

Forshaw, Peter J. (2006b).

"Curious Knowledge and Wonder-Working Wisdom in the Occult Works of Heinrich Khunrath" . In Evans, R. J. W.; Marr, Alexander (eds.).

Curiosity and Wonder from the Renaissance to the Enlightenment . Ashgate: Aldershot . Retrieved 12 December 2021 – via academia.edu.

Forshaw, Peter J. (2021).

"A Necessary Conjunction: Cabala, Magic, and Alchemy in the Theosophy of Heinrich Khunrath (1560-1605)" . In Hedesan, G. D.; Rudbøg, T. (eds.).

Innovation in Esotericism from the Renaissance to the Present . London: Palgrave Macmillan – via academia.edu.

Forshaw, Peter (2007). "Subliming Spirits: Physical-Chemistry and Theo-Alchemy in the Works of Heinrich Khunrath (1560–1605)". In Linden, Stanton J. (ed.).

"Mystical Metal of Gold": Essays on Alchemy and Renaissance Culture . AMS Press.

Forshaw, Peter J. (2024).

"An Amphitheatrical Microcosm: Heinrich Khunrath's Oratorium-Laboratorium" . In Wagner, B.; Gannon, C. (eds.).

Opus Magnum: Matthäus Maerian d. Ä und die Bebilderung der Alchemie . Heidelberg: Universität Heidelberg – via academia.edu.

Franklyn, Julian, ed. (1990).

A Survey of the Occult . Electric Book Company.

Montgomery, John Warwick (June 1963). "Lutheran Astrology and Lutheran Alchemy in the Age of the Reformation".

Ambix: The Journal of the Society for the Study of Alchemy and Early Chemistry .

11 : 65– 86.

Szulakowska, Urszula (2000).

The Alchemy of Light .

Brill Academic Publishers .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Heinrich Khunrath at Wikimedia Commons University of Wisconsin-Madison site on Khunrath's Amphitheatrum sapientiae aeternae including biography and bibliography.

The naturall Chymicall Symboll or short Confession of Doctor Kunwrath Khunrath Portrait Heinrich Khunrath at the Galileo Project A Philosophicall short songe of the incorporating of the Spirit of the Lord in Salt (archive) "An Interpretation of the Alchemy Lab Drawing" by John Read The Alchemy of the Amphitheatrum - a 2012 webinar by Peter Forshaw about Heinrich Khunrath on the website of the Ritman Library , Amsterdam.

A Not-So-Lazy Henry: Heinrich Khunrath in his Laboratory - 2022 online seminar of the Society for the History of Alchemy and Chemistry given by Peter Forshaw v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Poland Israel Belgium People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Heinrich_Khunrath&oldid=1305315207 " Categories : 1605 deaths German occult writers German astrologers 16th-century astrologers 17th-century astrologers German alchemists Christian Kabbalists 16th-century German physicians Paracelsians 1560s births 17th-century German physicians 16th-century German writers 16th-century German male writers 17th-century German male writers 16th-century alchemists 17th-century alchemists 17th-century German philosophers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2015 Articles with hCards CS1 Latin-language sources (la) CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles needing additional references from December 2021 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 09:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Heinrich Khunrath 16 languages Add topic

