Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mythology 2 Depictions 3 Honours 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Calliope 55 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kurdî Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Muse of epic poetry This article is about the muse. For the steam instrument, see Calliope (instrument) . For other uses, see Calliope (disambiguation) .

Calliope Goddess of Epic Poetry Member of the Muses Detail of painting The Muses Urania and Calliope by Simon Vouet , in which she holds a copy of the Odyssey Abode Mount Olympus Symbols Lyre Genealogy Parents Zeus and Mnemosyne Siblings Euterpe , Polyhymnia , Urania , Clio , Erato , Thalia , Terpsichore , Melpomene and several paternal half-siblings Consort Apollo , Oeagrus , Zeus Children Orpheus , Linus , the Corybantes In Greek mythology , Calliope ( / k ə ˈ l aɪ .

ə p i / kə- LY -ə-pee ; Ancient Greek : Καλλιόπη , romanized : Kalliópē , lit.

'beautiful-voiced') is the Muse who presides over eloquence and epic poetry , so called from the ecstatic harmony of her voice.

Hesiod and Ovid called her the "Chief of all Muses".

[ 1 ] Fresco of Calliope, muse of epic poetry, from the Villa Moregine, western triclinium A Mythology [ edit ] Calliope had two famous sons, Orpheus [ 2 ] and Linus , [ 3 ] by either Apollo or King Oeagrus of Thrace . She taught Orpheus verses for singing.

[ 2 ] According to Hesiod, she was also the wisest of the Muses, as well as the most assertive. Calliope married Oeagrus in Pimpleia , a town near Mount Olympus .

[ 4 ] She is said to have defeated the daughters of Pierus , king of Thessaly, in a singing match, and then, to punish their presumption, turned them into magpies .

[ 5 ] In some accounts, Calliope is the mother of the Corybantes by her father Zeus.

[ 6 ] Phrontis, thought by Daniel Albert Wyttenbach to be the mother of Lysis , is also described as Calliope's daughter according to Plutarch 's Moralia .

[ 7 ] She was sometimes believed to be Homer 's muse for the Iliad and the Odyssey .

[ 8 ] The Roman epic poet Virgil invokes her in the Aeneid ("Aid, O Calliope, the martial song!").

[ 9 ] In some cases, she is said to be the mother of Sirens by the river-god Achelous .

[ 10 ] Another account adds that Calliope bore Rhesus to the river-god Strymon .

[ 11 ] Depictions [ edit ] Calliope, muse de l'éloquence et de la poésie épique (Calliope, muse of eloquence and epic poetry) Calliope is usually shown with a writing tablet in her hand. At times, she is depicted carrying a roll of paper or a book, or wearing a gold crown. She is also depicted with her children.

The Italian poet Dante Alighieri , in his Divine Comedy , refers to Calliope: Here rise to life again, dead poetry!

Let it, O holy Muses, for I am yours, And here Calliope, strike a higher key, Accompanying my song with that sweet air which made the wretched Magpies feel a blow that turned all hope of pardon to despair — Dante, trans. Esolen, [ 12 ] "Purgatorio", Canto I, lines 7 to 12 Honours [ edit ] Calliope Beach in Antarctica is named after the muse, as is the calliope hummingbird of North and Central America, and the calliope steam organ. Calliope Saddle is part of the Thisbe Valley Track in the Catlins Forest, South Otago, NZ. The Queensland town of Calliope is another location named after the muse, and is located in central Queensland.

See also [ edit ] Muses in popular culture Notes [ edit ] ^ Hesiod , Theogony 79–80: This belief in the goddess's identity, however, really cannot be proved from the text of the Iliad , because there is no evidence as to the referent of θεά (goddess). Neither Kirk nor Leaf makes such a claim in their commentaries on the Iliad . They simply say that she is "the Muse" (Μοῦσα). Kirk does say that it was conventional for Muses to invoked at the beginning of oral poems, since the process of the oral tradition was for the Muse to "sing" through the singer. See G. S. Kirk, ed., Books 1–4 , vol. I in The Iliad: A Commentary (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985), p. 51; and Walter Leaf, ed., Books I–XII , vol. I of The Iliad . 2nd ed. (London: Macmillan, 1900), p. 3.

^ a b Hoopes And Evslin, The Greek Gods .

ISBN 0-590-44110-8 , ISBN 0-590-44110-8 , 1995, page 77. "His father was a Thracian king; his mother the muse Calliope. For a while, he lived on Parnassus with his mother and his eight beautiful aunts and there met Apollo who was courting the laughing muse Thalia. Apollo was taken with Orpheus, gave him his little golden lyre, and taught him to play. And his mother taught him to make verses for singing." ^ Pseudo-Apollodorus , Bibliotheca 2.4.9: "This Linus was a brother of Orpheus; he came to Thebes and became a Theban." ^ Apollonius of Rhodes , Argonautica 1.2.23–34: "First then let us name Orpheus whom once Calliope bare, it is said, wedded to Thracian Oeagrus, near the Pimpleian height. Men say that he by the music of his songs charmed the stubborn rocks upon the mountains and the course of rivers. And the wild oak-trees to this day, tokens of that magic strain, that grow at Zone on the Thracian shore, stand in ordered ranks close together, the same which under the charm of his lyre he led down from Pieria." ^ Ovid , Metamorphoses 5.294–340 , 662–678 ^ Strabo , Geographica 10.3.19 ^ Plutarch (1927).

"Plutarch's Moralia" .

The Internet Archive . Cambridge University Press; Harvard University Press. pp.

368– 369.

^ Nagy, Gregory (2018-08-16).

"A re-invocation of the Muse for the Homeric Iliad" .

Classical Inquiries .

Archived from the original on 2019-04-30 . Retrieved 2021-03-18 .

^ Virgil, Aeneid 9.525 ^ Servius , Commentary on Virgil's Aeneid 5.864 ^ Euripides , Rhesus 347 ; Apollodorus , 1.3.4 ^ "The Unsheathing of Dante" .

References [ edit ] Apollodorus , The Library with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921.

ISBN 0-674-99135-4 .

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.

Greek text available from the same website .

Apollonius Rhodius , Argonautica translated by Robert Cooper Seaton (1853–1915), R. C. Loeb Classical Library Volume 001. London, William Heinemann Ltd, 1912.

Online version at the Topos Text Project.

Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica . George W. Mooney. London. Longmans, Green. 1912.

Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library .

Euripides , The Rhesus of Euripides translated into English rhyming verse with explanatory notes by Gilbert Murray, LL.D., D.Litt., F.B.A., Regius Professor of Greek in the University of Oxford. Euripides. Gilbert Murray. New York. Oxford University Press. 1913.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.

Euripides , Euripidis Fabulae.

vol. 3 . Gilbert Murray. Oxford. Clarendon Press, Oxford. 1913.

Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library .

Hesiod , Theogony from The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White, Cambridge, MA.,Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.

Greek text available from the same website .

Plutarch (1927). "Plutarch's Moralia".

The Internet Archive . Cambridge University Press; Harvard University Press. pp. 368–369.

[ 1 ] Publius Ovidius Naso , Metamorphoses translated by Brookes More (1859–1942). Boston, Cornhill Publishing Co. 1922.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.

Publius Ovidius Naso, Metamorphoses.

Hugo Magnus. Gotha (Germany). Friedr. Andr. Perthes. 1892.

Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library .

Publius Vergilius Maro , Aeneid.

Theodore C. Williams. trans. Boston. Houghton Mifflin Co. 1910.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.

Publius Vergilius Maro, Bucolics, Aeneid, and Georgics . J. B. Greenough. Boston. Ginn & Co. 1900.

Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library .

Strabo , The Geography of Strabo.

Edition by H.L. Jones. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.

Strabo, Geographica edited by A. Meineke. Leipzig: Teubner. 1877.

Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Calliope at Wikimedia Commons CALLIOPE in The Theoi Project Warburg Institute Iconographic Database v t e Muses Nine Muses Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Other Muses Aoede Apollonis Arche Borysthenis Cephisso Hypate Melete Mese Mneme Nete Polymatheia Thelxinoë Related Zeus (father) Mnemosyne (mother) Mouseion Pierian Spring Muse (person) Muses in popular culture v t e Ancient Greek deities Primal elements Aether Chaos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx The Ourea Pontus Tartarus Uranus Titans Twelve Titans Coeus Crius Cronus Dione Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Descendants of the Titans Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Olympian deities Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Olympian Gods Asclepius Eileithyia Enyo Eris Iris Harmonia Hebe Heracles Paean Pan Muses Daughters of Zeus Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Daughters of Apollo Apollonis Borysthenis Cephisso Boeotian Muses Aoide Melete Mneme Muses of the Lyre Hypate Mese Nete Muses at Sicyon Polymatheia Charites (Graces) Aglaia Euphrosyne Hegemone Pasithea Thalia Horae (Hours) Dike Eirene Eunomia Children of Styx Bia Kratos Nike Zelus Water deities Sea deities Amphitrite Benthesikyme Brizo Calliste Calypso Ceto Eurybia Glaucus Leucothea Melicertes Nereus Nerites Oceanus Phorcys Pontus Poseidon Proteus Rhodos Tethys Thalassa Thaumas Thetis Triton Oceanids Acaste Admete Asia Callirhoe Ceto Clymene (consort of Helios) Clymene (wife of Iapetus) Clytie Dione Dodone Doris Electra Eurynome Idyia Melia (consort of Apollo) Melia (consort of Inachus) Metis Perse Philyra Pleione Plouto Styx Telesto Theia Zeuxo Nereids Amatheia Amphithoe Amphitrite Arethusa Cymatolege Cymo Dynamene Galatea Galene Protomedeia Psamathe Sao Spio Thalia Thetis River gods Achelous Alpheus Anapus Asopus Asterion Axius Caanthus Cebren Cephissus Enipeus Kladeos Meander Nilus Numicus Phyllis Peneus Sangarius Scamander Selemnus Simoeis Strymon Naiads Aegina Achiroe Aganippe The Anigrides Argyra Bistonis Bolbe Caliadne Cassotis Castalia Cleocharia Creusa Daphne Drosera Harpina The Ionides Ismenis Larunda Lilaea Liriope Melite Metope Minthe Moria Nana Nicaea Orseis Pallas Pirene Salmacis Stilbe The Thriae Corycia Cleodora Melaina Tiasa Personifications Children of Eris Algos Amphillogiai The Androktasiai Atë Dysnomia Horkos Hysminai Lethe Logoi Limos Machai Neikea Phonoi Ponos Pseudea Children of Nyx Apate Eris Geras Hesperides Hypnos The Keres The Moirai Atropos Clotho Lachesis Momus Moros Nemesis Oizys The Oneiroi Philotes Thanatos Others Achlys Adephagia Aergia Aidos Aion Alala Alastor Aletheia Alke Amechania Anaideia Ananke Angelia Anteros Apheleia Arete The Arae Astraea Caerus Chronos Chrysus Corus Deimos Dikaiosyne Dyssebeia Eiresione Ekecheiria Eulabeia Eupraxia Eusebeia Ersa Eros Erotes Gelos Hedone Hedylogos Heimarmene Hermaphroditus Homados Homonoia Horme Hymen Iacchus Ioke Kakia Koalemos Kydoimos The Litae Lyssa The Maniae Methe Nomos Palioxis Peitharchia Peitho Penia Penthus Pepromene Pheme Phobos Phrike Phthonus Poine Polemos Poros Praxidice Proioxis Prophasis Soter Soteria Thrasos Tyche Other deities Sky The Anemoi Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Hesperus Phosphorus Phaethon Astrape and Bronte Aura The Hesperides The Hyades Nephele The Pleiades Alcyone Sterope Celaeno Electra Maia Merope Taygete Sirius Tritopatores Agriculture Aphaia Demeter Despoina Eunostus Opora Philomelus Plutus Health Asclepius Aceso Epione Iaso Hygieia Paean Panacea Telesphorus Rustic deities Aetna Agdistis The Alseids Amphictyonis Aristaeus Attis Britomartis The Cabeiri Comus The Dryades Erato The Hamadryades Chrysopeleia The Epimelides Hecaterus Leuce The Maenades The Meliae Hyperborean maidens The Oreads Echo Priapus Rhapso Silenus Telete Others Aphroditus Arke Auxesia Enodia Circe Enyalius Hecate Orthanes Palaestra Pasiphaë Phanes Sosipolis Authority control databases International VIAF 2 WorldCat National Germany France BnF data People DDB Other IdRef ^ Cite error: The named reference :0 was invoked but never defined (see the help page ).

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Calliope&oldid=1305589804 " Categories : Ancient Greek epic poetry Daughters of Zeus Muses (mythology) Female lovers of Apollo Metamorphoses characters Divine women of Zeus Greek mythology of Thrace Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages with reference errors Pages with broken reference names This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 00:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Calliope 55 languages Add topic

