Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Controversy within the field 3 Institutions 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Area studies 30 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית Қазақша Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Türkçe Winaray 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Interdisciplinary fields of research "Regional studies" redirects here; not to be confused with Regional planning .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Area studies" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Area studies , also known as regional studies , is an interdisciplinary field of research and scholarship pertaining to particular geographical , national / federal , or cultural regions.  The term exists primarily as a general description for what are, in the practice of scholarship, many heterogeneous fields of research, encompassing both the social sciences and the humanities . Typical area study programs involve international relations , strategic studies , history , anthropology , political science , political economy , cultural studies , languages , geography , literature , and other related disciplines. In contrast to cultural studies, area studies often include diaspora and emigration from the area.

History [ edit ] While area studies had been taught at the Seminar for Oriental Languages of the Friedrich-Wilhelm University Berlin (now Humboldt-University ) since 1887, interdisciplinary area studies became increasingly common in the United States and in Western scholarship after World War II . Before that war American universities had just a few faculty who taught or conducted research on the non-Western world. Foreign-area studies were virtually nonexistent. After the war, liberals and conservatives alike were concerned about the U.S. ability to respond effectively to perceived external threats from the Soviet Union and China in the context of the emerging Cold War , as well as to the fall-out from the decolonization of Africa and Asia .

[ citation needed ] Area studies programs originated within the U.S.

Office of Strategic Services , the predecessor agency to the CIA.

[ 1 ] : 83 In this context, the Ford Foundation , the Rockefeller Foundation , and the Carnegie Corporation of New York convened a series of meetings producing a broad consensus that to address this knowledge deficit, the U.S. must invest in international studies.

[ citation needed ] Participants argued that a large brain trust of internationally oriented political scientists and economists was an urgent national priority. There was a central tension, however, between those who felt strongly that, instead of applying Western models, social scientists should develop culturally and historically contextualized knowledge of various parts of the world by working closely with humanists, and those who thought social scientists should seek to develop overarching macrohistorial theories that could draw connections between patterns of change and development across different geographies. The former became area-studies advocates, the latter proponents of modernization theory .

The Ford Foundation would eventually become the dominant player in shaping the area studies program in the U.S.

[ 4 ] In 1950, the foundation established the prestigious Foreign Area Fellowship Program (FAFP), the first large-scale national competition in support of area-studies training in the U.S. From 1953 to 1966, it contributed $270 million to 34 universities for area and language studies. Also during this period, it poured millions of dollars into the committees run jointly by the Social Science Research Council and the American Council of Learned Societies for field-development workshops, conferences, and publication programs.

[ 5 ] Eventually, the SSRC-ACLS joint committees would take over the administration of FAFP.

Other large and important programs followed Ford's. Most notably, the National Defense Education Act of 1957, renamed the Higher Education Act in 1965, allocated funding for some 125 university-based area-studies units known as National Resource Center programs at U.S. universities, as well as for Foreign Language and Area Studies scholarships for undergraduate students and fellowships for graduate students.

Meanwhile, area studies were also developed in the Soviet Union.

[ 6 ] Controversy within the field [ edit ] Since their inception, area studies have been subject to criticism—including by area specialists themselves. Many of them alleged that because area studies were connected to the Cold War agendas of the CIA , the FBI , and other intelligence and military agencies, participating in such programs was tantamount to serving as an agent of the state.

[ 7 ] Some argue that there is the notion that U.S. concerns and research priorities will define the intellectual terrain of area studies.

[ 8 ] Others insisted, however, that once they were established on university campuses, area studies began to encompass a much broader and deeper intellectual agenda than the one foreseen by government agencies, thus not American centric.

[ 9 ] Arguably, one of the greatest threats to the area studies project was the rise of rational choice theory in political science and economics.

[ 10 ] To mock one of the most outspoken rational choice theory critics, Japan scholar Chalmers Johnson asked: Why do you need to know Japanese or anything about Japan's history and culture if the methods of rational choice will explain why Japanese politicians and bureaucrats do the things they do?

[ 11 ] Following the demise of the Soviet Union , philanthropic foundations and scientific bureaucracies moved to attenuate their support for area studies, emphasizing instead interregional themes like "development and democracy". When the Social Science Research Council and the American Council of Learned Societies , which had long served as the national nexus for raising and administering funds for area studies, underwent their first major restructuring in thirty years, closing down their area committees, scholars interpreted this as a massive signal about the changing research environment.

[ 7 ] Institutions [ edit ] Some entire institutions of higher education (tertiary education) are devoted solely to area studies, such as the School of Oriental and African Studies of the University of London, the Tokyo University of Foreign Studies , or the German Institute of Global and Area Studies .

See also [ edit ] Cultural studies Ethnic studies Four traditions of geography IATIS Interdisciplinarity International studies Library of Congress Country Studies Regional geography References [ edit ] ^ Cheng, Wendy (2023).

Island X: Taiwanese Student Migrants, Campus Spies, and Cold War Activism . Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press .

ISBN 9780295752051 .

^ "Máster Universitario Internacional de Estudios Contemporáneos de América Latina" .

^ "Guia Informativo - Universidade Aberta" .

^ Ellen Condliffe Lagemann, The Politics of Knowledge: The Carnegie Corporation, Philanthropy, and Public Policy (University of Chicago Press, 1992), p. 178.

^ David L. Szanton, "The Origin, Nature and Challenges of Area Studies in the United States", in The Politics of Knowledge: Area Studies and the Disciplines , ed. David L. Szanton (University of California Press, 2004), pp. 10–11.

^ Rupprecht, Tobias (2015). "5: Desk revolutionaries: Soviet Latin Americanists and internationalism in the late Soviet Union".

Soviet Internationalism after Stalin . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 273.

ISBN 9781107102880 . Retrieved 2017-08-22 .

Academics from Moscow State University and IMEMO [founded in 1956] often turned to broader area studies at the ILA [the Institute of Latin America (founded in 1961 as part of the Soviet Academy of Sciences )] and taught at MGIMO [founded in 1944], Moscow State University or Lumumba University [established in 1960]. Others moved from area studies into international journalism. [...] All state and Party organs that dealt with cultural diplomacy drew on the staff of area studies and their network of contacts.

^ a b Cumings, Bruce (1997).

"Boundary Displacement: Area Studies and International Studies during and after the Cold War" .

Bulletin of Concerned Asian Scholars .

29 : 6– 26.

doi : 10.1080/14672715.1997.10409695 . Archived from the original on 2021-12-21 . Retrieved 2009-05-05 .

^ See Patrick O'Meara, "Changing perspectives on international education", (Indiana University Press 2010), pp. 81.

^ Moseley, W.G. 2009. "Area Studies in a Global Context." Chronicle of Higher Education. Nov 29.

http://chronicle.com/article/Area-Studies-in-a-Global-Co/49284/ ^ See "Rational Choice Theory", by John Scott, in Understanding Contemporary Society: Theories of The Present , edited by G. Browning, A. Halcli, and F. Webster (Sage Publications, 2000).

"Rational Choice Theory" . Archived from the original on 2009-02-27 . Retrieved 2008-07-30 .

. Retrieved 2009-04-23.

^ See Chalmers Johnson and E. B. Keehn, "A Disaster in the Making: Rational Choice and Asian Studies", The National Interest 36 (summer 1994), pp. 14–22.

Further reading [ edit ] Kuijper, Hans (2008). " Area Studies versus Disciplines: Towards an Interdisciplinary, Systemic Country Approach ".

The International Journal of Interdisciplinary Social Sciences , Vol. 3, Issue 7, pp. 205–216.

Miyoshi, Masao; Harootunian, Harry D. (2002).

Learning Places: The Afterlives of Area Studies . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

ISBN 0822328267 .

Schäfer, Wolf (2010). "Reconfiguring Area Studies for the Global Age." Globality Studies Journal, no. 22 . 31 December 2010.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Area studies .

The dictionary definition of area studies at Wiktionary v t e Regional cultural studies Local African Albanology American Asian American Black Latino Native American Arab Aramaic Armenian Aromanian Asian Central Asian East Asian Middle Eastern Southeast Asian Assyriology Australian Belarusian Bengal Canadian Celtic Chicano Czech Circumpolar Coptology Croatian Egyptology English Eskimology Ethiopian European Balkan Central European Scandinavian Yugoslav Filipinology German Hawaiian Hebraic Hellenic Hungarian Hispanism Indology Iranian Irish Italian Japanese Jewish Kartvelian Korean Kremlinology Latin American Macedonian Mandaean Mongolian New Zealand Oriental Pacific Polish Romance Romani Russian Scottish Semitic Serbian Sinology Slavic Somali Syriac Taiwan Turkology Ukrainian Welsh Zhuang Related Anthropology Area studies Cultural studies Culture by location Ethnic studies Ethnology Official culture Philology Political culture Super culture Vernacular culture v t e Social sciences Outline History Index Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural social physical Economics microeconomics macroeconomics econometrics mathematical Geography physical human technical integrated History cultural auxiliary sciences economic human military political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems public law private law Linguistics semiotics Political science international relations comparative philosophy public policy public administration Psychology abnormal cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Administration business public Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Criminology Critical animal studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental social science studies Food studies Gender studies Global studies Historical sociology History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Linguistics Management Media studies Philosophies science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Political sociology Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Quantum social science Social work Vegan studies List List of social science journals Other categorizations Behavioural sciences Geisteswissenschaft Human science Humanities Category Authority control databases National United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Area_studies&oldid=1303948337 " Categories : Area studies Cultural anthropology Ethnography Humanities Regional geography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2023 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 01:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Area studies 30 languages Add topic

