Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Relation to mind–body problem 2 Mental Events and Working Memory 3 Examples 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Mental event 6 languages العربية فارسی Français हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Any event that happens within the mind of a conscious individual For the use of this term in Buddhism, see Mental factors (Buddhism) .

A mental event is any event that happens within the mind of a conscious individual. Examples include thoughts , feelings, decisions, dreams , and realizations.

[ 1 ] These events often make up the conscious life that are associated with cognitive function.

[ 2 ] Some believe that mental events are not limited to human thought but can be associated with animals [ 3 ] and artificial intelligence [ 4 ] as well. Whether mental events are identical to complex physical events, or whether such an identity even makes sense, is central to the mind–body problem .

Relation to mind–body problem [ edit ] Some state that the mental and the physical are the very same property which cause any event(s). This view is known as substance monism . An opposing view is substance dualism , which claims that the mental and physical are fundamentally different and can exist independently. A third approach is Donald Davidson 's anomalous monism . The Philosophy of Action states that every action is caused by prior thoughts or feelings, and understanding those mental events would in turn explain behavior.

[ 5 ] Physicalism , a form of substance monism, states that everything that exists is either physical or depends on that which is physical.

[ 6 ] The existence of mental events has been used by philosophers as an argument against physicalism. For example, in his 1974 paper What Is it Like to Be a Bat?

, Thomas Nagel argues that physicalist theories of mind cannot explain an organism's subjective experience because they cannot account for its mental events.

Epiphenomenalism , according to Stanford, "Is the view that mental events are caused by physical events in the brain, but have no effect upon any physical events." [ 7 ] This stance then brings up the idea of introspection . According to David Lieberman, introspection is the ability for a person to observe his or her own mental state or events.

[ 8 ] Mental events can happen consciously and subconsciously at any given point. All mental events take place due to external stimuli. Which then must be processed via working memory .

Mental Events and Working Memory [ edit ] Mental events must occur in the working memory of short term-store. Both working memory and short-term memory are essential to mental events and cognition . According to Lieberman (2021), Baddeley and Hitch (1974) proposed that working memory consists of three distinct subsystems: what are called a phonological loop , a visuo-spatial sketchpad , and central executive .

[ 9 ] The phenological loop is responsible for holding speech-based sounds while the visuo-spatial sketchpad holds visual concepts in the mind. Both work independent of each other. Whereas the central executive is responsible for controlling both systems. The central executive is also responsible for aiding in tasks such as reasoning and understanding language.

[ 10 ] In order for mental events to occur, in Homo sapiens , situations and events must be processed through working memory in order to be perceived as a mental event. Without this system of memory, situations cannot be stored as mental events. All thoughts, feelings, decisions, dreams, and realizations must cycle through this process indefinitely.

Examples [ edit ] Mary is walking through a park and she sees and recognizes City Hall . This instance of seeing and recognizing City Hall is an instance of perception —something that happens in Mary's mind. That instance of perception is a mental event. It is an event because it is something that happens, and it is mental because it happens in Mary's mind.

Mary feels happy after doing well on an exam and she smiles . This thought is a mental event. The smile is a physical event.

An orca recognized a feeling of hunger. It eats a fish. The recognition of the feeling of hunger is a mental event. Eating the fish is the physical event.

Mary is listening to her friend talk while admiring a painting she is looking at. Her visuo-spatial sketchpad is allowing her to think about the painting she likes, creating a mental event. Simultaneously, her phonological loop is allowing her to understand the conversation. Both systems are being operated by the central executive .

See also [ edit ] Mental function Mental operations Mental rotation Functional neuroimaging Noumenon Psychedelic experience Synchronicity Working memory Vertiginous question References [ edit ] ^ Bunnin, Nicholas; Yu, Jiyuan (2004).

"Mental event" .

The Blackwell Dictionary of Western Philosophy . Blackwell Reference Online . Retrieved 2016-11-23 .

^ Mental Events. Oxford Reference. Retrieved 7 Mar. 2023, from https://www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/oi/authority.20110803100150420 ^ Griffin, Donald R. (2001-05-01).

Animal Minds: Beyond Cognition to Consciousness . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226308654 .

^ McCarthy, John (1995).

"Making Robots Conscious of their Mental States" (PDF) . Stanford University.

S2CID 10544902 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-12-23 . Retrieved 2016-11-23 .

^ Bunnin, Nicholas; Yu, Jiyuan, eds. (2004).

The Blackwell Dictionary of Western Philosophy (1 ed.). John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

doi : 10.1002/9780470996379 .

ISBN 9780470996379 .

^ Stoljar, Daniel (2016). Zalta, Edward (ed.).

"Physicalism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2016 Edition) . Retrieved 2016-11-23 .

^ Robinson, William, "Epiphenomenalism", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2019 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2019/entries/epiphenomenalism/ ^ Lieberman, D. A. (2021). Chapter 10 Working Memory. In Learning and Memory (2nd ed., p. 13). Cambridge University Press.

^ Lieberman, D. A. (2021). Chapter 10 Working Memory. In Learning and Memory (2nd ed., p. 284). Cambridge University Press.

^ Lieberman, D. A. (2021). Chapter 10 Working Memory. In Learning and Memory (2nd ed., pp. 286–287). Cambridge University Press.

Further reading [ edit ] The Mental Life of Plants and Worms, Among Others Oliver Sacks April 24, 2014 issue New York Review of Books v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mental_event&oldid=1272627544 " Categories : Consciousness Concepts in the philosophy of mind Mind–body problem Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 January 2025, at 16:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mental event 6 languages Add topic

