Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Waterway 2 Coast 3 Wildlife 4 Status 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Foxe Basin 36 languages العربية Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara Français 한국어 Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano Kiswahili Latviešu Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 65°55′50″N 77°55′10″W ﻿ / ﻿ 65.93056°N 77.91944°W ﻿ / 65.93056; -77.91944 ﻿ ( Foxe Basin ) [ 1 ] From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Oceanic basin north of Hudson Bay, in Nunavut, Canada This article is about the bay in Nunavut, Canada. For the community in the Falkland Islands, see Fox Bay .

Foxe Basin Map indicating Foxe Basin Location South of Baffin Island , Nunavut Coordinates 65°55′50″N 77°55′10″W ﻿ / ﻿ 65.93056°N 77.91944°W ﻿ / 65.93056; -77.91944 ﻿ ( Foxe Basin ) [ 1 ] Type Bay Location Foxe Basin is a shallow oceanic basin north of Hudson Bay , in Nunavut , Canada, located between Baffin Island and the Melville Peninsula . For most of the year, it is blocked by sea ice ( fast ice ) and drift ice made up of multiple ice floes .

[ 2 ] The nutrient-rich cold waters found in the basin are known to be especially favourable to phytoplankton and the numerous islands within it are important bird habitats , including Sabine's gulls and many types of shorebirds .

Bowhead whales migrate to the northern part of the basin each summer.

The basin takes its name from the English explorer Luke Foxe who entered the lower part in 1631.

[ 3 ] Waterway [ edit ] Bowhead whale ( Balaena mysticetus ), Foxe Basin, July 1999 Map of Foxe Basin and environs Foxe Basin is a broad, predominantly shallow depression, generally less than 100 m (330 ft) in depth, while to the south, depths of up to 400 m (1,300 ft) occur.

[ 4 ] The tidal range decreases from 5 m (16 ft) in the southeast to less than 1 m (3 ft 3 in) in the northwest. During much of the year, landfast ice dominates in the north, while pack ice prevails towards the south. Foxe Basin itself is rarely ice-free until September, open pack ice being common throughout the summer. Vigorous tidal currents and strong winds keep the ice pack in constant motion and contribute to the numerous polynyas and shore leads which are found throughout the region. This same motion, combined with the high sediment content of the water makes the sea ice of Foxe Basin dark and rough, easily distinguishable from other ice in the Canadian Arctic .

Foxe Basin is connected to the Gulf of Boothia via the narrow Fury and Hecla Strait , and to Hudson Bay and Hudson Strait via the wide Foxe Channel . It is also connected to Naujaat and Roes Welcome Sound via Frozen Strait .

Coast [ edit ] The terrain is rocky and rugged in the southern half of the region, and generally low-lying in the north. High cliffs are found across the southern portion of the region, where most of the seabirds nest. Coastal marshes and tidal flats up to 6.5 km (4.0 mi) in width are found in the vast lowland section of eastern Foxe Basin, as well as in the bays of Southampton Island .

Wildlife [ edit ] Atlantic walrus herd ( Odobenus rosmarus rosmarus ), on ice floe in Foxe Basin, July 1999 This is one of the little-known areas of the Canadian Arctic , though it is proving to be biologically rich and diverse. The numerous polynyas in northern Foxe Basin support high densities of bearded seals and the largest walrus herd in Canada (over 6,000 individuals).

Ringed seal and polar bear are common, with north Southampton Island as one of the highest-density polar bear denning areas in Canada.

[ 4 ] This area is also an important summering area for the bowhead whale , [ 5 ] beluga whale and narwhal . Both bowhead whales and belugas winter in the waters of northeastern Hudson Bay . Bowheads were the only known baleen whales to occur in the Hudson Bay, but recently some other species of whale, such as humpback and minke , are confirmed to migrate into the waters as well.

[ 6 ] The region is the main North American stronghold of the Sabine's gull , with some 10,000 pairs nesting here. Moderate numbers of black guillemots , Arctic terns and glaucous , herring and ivory gulls also breed here. The Great Plain of the Koukdjuak on Baffin Island is the world's largest goose nesting colony, with upwards of 1.5 million birds, 75 per cent of which are lesser snow geese and the remainder Canada and brant geese. Shorebirds and ducks are also abundant. Several hundred thousand thick-billed murres breed on the cliffs of Digges Sound and Coats Island to the south.

Status [ edit ] This region is not yet represented in the national marine conservation areas system. Studies to identify preliminary representative marine areas have yet to be undertaken.

References [ edit ] ^ "Foxe Basin" .

Geographical Names Data Base .

Natural Resources Canada . 29 July 2024.

^ Finlayson, Douglas; Clarke, R. Allyn (15 December 2013).

"Foxe Basin" .

The Canadian Encyclopedia .

Historica Canada .

^ Foxe, Luke National Historic Person .

Directory of Federal Heritage Designations .

Parks Canada .

^ a b Paulic, J.E.; Cleator, H.; Martin, K.A. (August 2014).

Ecologically and Biologically Significant Areas (EBSA) in Northern Foxe Basin, Nunavut: identification and delineation (PDF) (Report). Fisheries and Oceans Canada. Research Document 2014/042.

^ Hudson Bay-Foxe Basin Bowhead Whales (PDF) (Report). Fisheries and Oceans Canada. October 1999. Stock Status Report E2-52.

^ Higdon, Jeff W.; Ferguson, Steven H. (1 September 2011). "Reports of Humpback and Minke Whales in the Hudson Bay Region, Eastern Canadian Arctic".

Northeastern Naturalist .

18 (3): 370– 377.

doi : 10.1656/045.018.0309 .

S2CID 85843505 .

Further reading [ edit ] Anders, G.

Northern Foxe Basin An Area Economic Survey . Ottawa: Industrial Division, Northern Administration Branch, Dept. of Northern Affairs and National Resources, 1965.

Campbell, N. J., and A. E. Collin.

The Discolouration of Foxe Basin Ice . [S.l.]: Atlantic Oceanographic Group, 1957.

Colby WB, and JF Cleall. 1974. "Cephalometric Analysis of the Craniofacial Region of the Northern Foxe Basin Eskimo". American Journal of Physical Anthropology . 40, no. 2: 159–70.

Cosens, Susan E., and Andries Blouw.

Age Classes of Bowhead Whales Summering in Northern Foxe Basin . Ottawa: Fisheries and Oceans, 1999.

Crowe, Keith J.

A Cultural Geography of Northern Foxe Basin, N.W.T . Ottawa: Northern Science Research Group, Dept. of Indian Affairs and Northern Development, 1969.

Fisher, K I, and R E A Stewart. 1997. "Summer Foods of Atlantic Walrus, Odobenus Rosmarus Rosmarus, in Northern Foxe Basin, Northwest Territories".

Canadian Journal of Zoology . 75, no. 7: 1166.

Forgeron, F. D.

A Preliminary Study of Foxe Basin Bottom Sediments . [S.l.]: Atlantic Oceanographic Group, 1959.

Gaston, Anthony J., Stephen A. Smith, Robert Saunders, G. Ilya Storm, and Jane A. Whitney. 2007. "Birds and Marine Mammals in Southwestern Foxe Basin, Nunavut, Canada".

Polar Record . 43, no. 1: 33–47.

Geological Survey of Canada.

Northern Foxe Basin . Open file (Geological Survey of Canada), 2382. 1992.

Greisman, Paul.

Tidal Propagation Measurements in Foxe Basin . Canadian contractor report of hydrography and ocean sciences, no. 18. [Ottawa?]: Atlantic Region, Canadian Hydrographic Service, Ocean Science and Surveys, Atlantic, 1984.

Manning, T. H.

The Foxe Basin Coasts of Baffin Island . Geographical Journal, Vol.101,No.5-6. 1943.

Northwest Territories.

Foxe Basin Polar Bear Research Program ... Field Report . [Yellowknife?]: Northwest Territories Resources, Wildlife & Economic Development, 1984.

v t e Bays of Nunavut Kitikmeot Region Albert Edward Austin Bernard Harbour Brentford Campbell Chester Committee Denmark Foggy Fredrikshald Gernon Grays Hadley Homan Labyrinth Lord Mayor McLoughlin Ogden Pelly Shepherd Terror Wellington Wilmot and Crampton Wynniatt Kivalliq Region East Gods Mercy Hudson Mistake Native Nevill Pistol South Wager Wilson Qikiqtaaluk Region Allman Aston Augusta Bay Baffin Baillarge Baring Bartlett Batty Bere Bernier Birmingham Boatswain Bowman Brae Buchanan Cameron Committee Copes Cory Creswell Croker Cumberland Sound Dampier De la Beche Dobbin Dorchester Duke of York Dyke Acland Eden Eetookashoo Eldridge Elwin Eqe Evans Finnie Flagler Four Rivers Foxe Basin Frobisher Garnet Gibson Graham Moore Half Moon Hall Basin Harkin Hecla and Griper Herschel Hudson Irene James Kane Kew Lady Franklin M'Clure Macormick Maxwell May Inlet Nabukjuak Napier Norwegian Okse Ommanney Paquet Peary Piling Pioneer (Cornwallis Island) Pioneer (Devon Island) Prince Alfred Princess Marie Purcell Radstock Reid Resolute Rosse Rupert Rutherford Sabine (Baffin Island) Sabine (Melville Island) Sawyer Scoresby Shamrock Sherard Skene Stuart (Bathurst Island) Stuart (Cornwallis Island) Tasiujaq (Foxe Basin) Tasiujaq (Inugsuin Fiord) Triton Ungava Weatherall Woodward v t e Marginal seas of the Atlantic Ocean Basins Foxe Basin Bays Baffin Bay Bay of Biscay Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Bothnian Bay Hudson Bay James Bay Pottles Bay Channels English Channel Gulfs Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Seas Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea Greenland Sea Icarian Sea Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea Kattegat Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Skagerrak Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Oceans portal v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Other IdRef NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Foxe_Basin&oldid=1237400017 " Categories : Foxe Basin Landforms of Baffin Island Oceanic basins of the Arctic Ocean Landforms of Qikiqtaaluk Region Canadian Arctic Archipelago Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Canadian English from July 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in Canadian English Use dmy dates from July 2024 Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without image Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map Articles using infobox body of water without alt bathymetry Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 29 July 2024, at 16:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Foxe Basin 36 languages Add topic

