Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types and features Toggle Types and features subsection 1.1 Articulated robots 1.2 Autonomous robot 1.3 Cartesian coordinate robots 1.4 Cylindrical coordinate robots 1.5 Spherical coordinate robots 1.6 SCARA robots 1.7 Delta robots 1.8 Serial manipulators 1.9 Parallel architecture 2 Lower mobility parallel manipulators and concomitant motion 3 Autonomy 4 History 5 Technical description Toggle Technical description subsection 5.1 Defining parameters 5.2 Robot programming and interfaces 5.3 End-of-arm tooling 5.4 Controlling movement 5.5 Typical programming 5.6 Singularities 6 Market structure 7 Health and safety 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Industrial robot 42 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Italiano עברית Қазақша Kiswahili 日本語 Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from ISO 8373 ) Robot used in manufacturing This article is about manufacturing robots. For mining robots, see Automated mining .

An articulated industrial robot operating in a foundry Part of a series on Automation Automation in general Banking Building Home Highway system Laboratory Library Broadcast Mix Pool cleaner Pop music Reasoning Semi-automation Telephone Attendant Switchboard Teller machine Vehicular Vending machine Robotics and robots Domestic Vacuum cleaner Roomba Lawn mower Guided vehicle Industrial Paint ODD Impact of automation Manumation OOL Bias Self-driving cars Technological unemployment Jobless recovery Post-work society Threat Trade shows and awards ASP-DAC DAC DATE IEEE Robotics and Automation Award ICCAD v t e An industrial robot is a robot system used for manufacturing . Industrial robots are automated, programmable and capable of movement on three or more axes.

[ 1 ] Typical applications of robots include welding , painting, assembly, disassembly , [ 2 ] pick and place for printed circuit boards , packaging and labeling , palletizing , product inspection, and testing; all accomplished with high endurance, speed, and precision. They can assist in material handling .

In the year 2023, an estimated 4,281,585 industrial robots were in operation worldwide according to International Federation of Robotics (IFR) .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Types and features [ edit ] A set of six-axis robots used for welding Factory automation with industrial robots for palletizing food products like bread and toast at a bakery in Germany There are six types of industrial robots.

[ 5 ] Articulated robots [ edit ] Main article: Articulated robot Articulated robots [ 5 ] are the most common industrial robots.

[ 6 ] They look like a human arm , which is why they are also called robotic arm or manipulator arm .

[ 7 ] Their articulations with several degrees of freedom allow the articulated arms a wide range of movements.

Autonomous robot [ edit ] An autonomous robot is a robot that acts without recourse to human control. The first autonomous robots  environment were known as Elmer and Elsie , which were constructed in the late 1940s by W. Grey Walter . They were the first robots in history that were programmed to "think" the way biological brains do and meant to have free will.

[ 8 ] Elmer and Elsie were often labeled as tortoises because of how they were shaped and the manner in which they moved. They were capable of phototaxis which is the movement that occurs in response to light stimulus.

[ 9 ] Cartesian coordinate robots [ edit ] Main article: Cartesian coordinate robot Cartesian robots, [ 5 ] also called rectilinear, gantry robots, and x-y-z robots [ 6 ] have three prismatic joints for the movement of the tool and three rotary joints for its orientation in space.

To be able to move and orient the effector organ in all directions, such a robot needs 6 axes (or degrees of freedom). In a 2-dimensional environment, three axes are sufficient, two for displacement and one for orientation.

[ 10 ] Cylindrical coordinate robots [ edit ] The cylindrical coordinate robots [ 5 ] are characterized by their rotary joint at the base and at least one prismatic joint connecting its links.

[ 6 ] They can move vertically and horizontally by sliding. The compact effector design allows the robot to reach tight work-spaces without any loss of speed.

[ 6 ] Spherical coordinate robots [ edit ] Spherical coordinate robots only have rotary joints.

[ 5 ] They are one of the first robots to have been used in industrial applications.

[ 6 ] They are commonly used for machine tending in die-casting, plastic injection and extrusion, and for welding.

[ 6 ] SCARA robots [ edit ] Main article: SCARA robot SCARA [ 5 ] is an acronym for Selective Compliance Assembly Robot Arm.

[ 11 ] SCARA robots are recognized by their two parallel joints which provide movement in the X-Y plane.

[ 5 ] Rotating shafts are positioned vertically at the effector. SCARA robots are used for jobs that require precise lateral movements. They are ideal for assembly applications.

[ 6 ] Delta robots [ edit ] Main article: Delta robot Delta robots [ 5 ] are also referred to as parallel link robots.

[ 6 ] They consist of parallel links connected to a common base. Delta robots are particularly useful for direct control tasks and high maneuvering operations (such as quick pick-and-place tasks). Delta robots take advantage of four bar or parallelogram linkage systems.

Furthermore, industrial robots can have a serial or parallel architecture.

Serial manipulators [ edit ] Main article: Serial manipulator Serial architectures a.k.a. serial manipulators are very common industrial robots; they are designed as a series of links connected by motor-actuated joints that extend from a base to an end-effector. SCARA, Stanford manipulators are typical examples of this category.

Parallel architecture [ edit ] A parallel manipulator is designed so that each chain is usually short, simple and can thus be rigid against unwanted movement, compared to a serial manipulator . Errors in one chain's positioning are averaged in conjunction with the others, rather than being cumulative. Each actuator must still move within its own degree of freedom , as for a serial robot; however in the parallel robot the off-axis flexibility of a joint is also constrained by the effect of the other chains. It is this closed-loop stiffness that makes the overall parallel manipulator stiff relative to its components, unlike the serial chain that becomes progressively less rigid with more components.

Lower mobility parallel manipulators and concomitant motion [ edit ] A full parallel manipulator can move an object with up to 6 degrees of freedom (DoF), determined by 3 translation 3T and 3 rotation 3R coordinates for full 3T3R m obility. However, when a manipulation task requires less than 6 DoF, the use of lower mobility manipulators, with fewer than 6 DoF, may bring advantages in terms of simpler architecture, easier control, faster motion and lower cost.  For example, the 3 DoF Delta   robot has lower 3T mobility and has proven to be very successful for rapid pick-and-place translational positioning applications. The workspace of lower mobility manipulators may be decomposed into 'motion' and 'constraint' subspaces. For example, 3 position coordinates constitute the motion subspace of the 3 DoF Delta robot and the 3 orientation coordinates are in the constraint subspace.  The motion subspace of lower mobility manipulators may be further decomposed into independent (desired) and dependent (concomitant) subspaces: consisting of 'concomitant' or 'parasitic' motion which is undesired motion of the manipulator.

[ 12 ] The debilitating effects of concomitant motion should be mitigated or eliminated in the successful design of lower mobility manipulators.  For example, the Delta robot does not have parasitic motion since its end effector does not rotate.

Autonomy [ edit ] Robots exhibit varying degrees of autonomy . 
Some robots are programmed to faithfully carry out specific actions over and over again (repetitive actions) without variation and with a high degree of accuracy. These actions are determined by programmed routines that specify the direction, acceleration, velocity, deceleration, and distance of a series of coordinated motions Other robots are much more flexible as to the orientation of the object on which they are operating or even the task that has to be performed on the object itself, which the robot may even need to identify. For example, for more precise guidance, robots often contain machine vision sub-systems acting as their visual sensors, linked to powerful computers or controllers.

[ 13 ] Artificial intelligence is becoming an increasingly important factor in the modern industrial robot.

History [ edit ] The earliest known industrial robot, conforming to the ISO definition was completed by 
"Bill" Griffith P. Taylor in 1937 and published in Meccano Magazine , March 1938.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] The crane-like device was built almost entirely using Meccano parts, and powered by a single electric motor.  Five axes of movement were possible, including grab and grab rotation . Automation was achieved using punched paper tape to energise solenoids, which would facilitate the movement of the crane's control levers. The robot could stack wooden blocks in pre-programmed patterns. The number of motor revolutions required for each desired movement was first plotted on graph paper. This information was then transferred to the paper tape, which was also driven by the robot's single motor. Chris Shute built a complete replica of the robot in 1997.

George Devol, c.

1982 George Devol applied for the first robotics patents in 1954 (granted in 1961).  The first company to produce a robot was Unimation , founded by Devol and Joseph F. Engelberger in 1956. Unimation robots were also called programmable transfer machines since their main use at first was to transfer objects from one point to another, less than a dozen feet or so apart. They used hydraulic actuators and were programmed in joint coordinates , i.e. the angles of the various joints were stored during a teaching phase and replayed in operation.  They were accurate to within 1/10,000 of an inch [ 16 ] (note: although accuracy is not an appropriate measure for robots, usually evaluated in terms of repeatability - see later).  Unimation later licensed their technology to Kawasaki Heavy Industries and GKN , manufacturing Unimates in Japan and England respectively.  For some time, Unimation's only competitor was Cincinnati Milacron Inc. of Ohio . This changed radically in the late 1970s when several big Japanese conglomerates began producing similar industrial robots.

In 1969 Victor Scheinman at Stanford University invented the Stanford arm , an all-electric, 6-axis articulated robot designed to permit an arm solution . This allowed it accurately to follow arbitrary paths in space and widened the potential use of the robot to more sophisticated applications such as assembly and welding. Scheinman then designed a second arm for the MIT AI Lab, called the "MIT arm." Scheinman, after receiving a fellowship from Unimation to develop his designs, sold those designs to Unimation who further developed them with support from General Motors and later marketed it as the Programmable Universal Machine for Assembly (PUMA).

Industrial robotics took off quite quickly in Europe, with both ABB Robotics and KUKA Robotics bringing robots to the market in 1973. ABB Robotics (formerly ASEA) introduced IRB 6, among the world's first commercially available all electric micro-processor controlled robot. The first two IRB 6 robots were sold to Magnusson in Sweden for grinding and polishing pipe bends and were installed in production in January 1974. Also in 1973 KUKA Robotics built its first robot, known as FAMULUS , [ 17 ] [ 18 ] also one of the first articulated robots to have six electromechanically driven axes.

Interest in robotics increased in the late 1970s and many US companies entered the field, including large firms like General Electric , and General Motors (which formed joint venture FANUC Robotics with FANUC LTD of Japan). U.S.

startup companies included Automatix and Adept Technology , Inc. At the height of the robot boom in 1984, Unimation was acquired by Westinghouse Electric Corporation for 107 million U.S. dollars. Westinghouse sold Unimation to Stäubli Faverges SCA of France in 1988, which is still making articulated robots for general industrial and cleanroom applications and even bought the robotic division of Bosch in late 2004.

Only a few non-Japanese companies ultimately managed to survive in this market, the major ones being: Adept Technology , Stäubli , the Swedish - Swiss company AAsea Brown Boveri , the German company KUKA Robotics and the Italian company Comau .

Technical description [ edit ] Defining parameters [ edit ] Number of axes – two axes are required to reach any point in a plane; three axes are required to reach any point in space. To fully control the orientation of the end of the arm(i.e. the wrist ) three more axes ( yaw, pitch, and roll ) are required. Some designs (e.g. the SCARA robot) trade limitations in motion possibilities for cost, speed, and accuracy.

Degrees of freedom – this is usually the same as the number of axes.

Working envelope – the region of space a robot can reach.

Kinematics – the actual arrangement of rigid members and joints in the robot, which determines the robot's possible motions. Classes of robot kinematics include articulated, cartesian, parallel and SCARA.

Carrying capacity or payload – how much weight a robot can lift.

Speed – how fast the robot can position the end of its arm. This may be defined in terms of the angular or linear speed of each axis or as a compound speed i.e. the speed of the end of the arm when all axes are moving.

Acceleration – how quickly an axis can accelerate. Since this is a limiting factor a robot may not be able to reach its specified maximum speed for movements over a short distance or a complex path requiring frequent changes of direction.

Accuracy – how closely a robot can reach a commanded position. When the absolute position of the robot is measured and compared to the commanded position the error is a measure of accuracy. Accuracy can be improved with external sensing for example a vision system or Infra-Red. See robot calibration . Accuracy can vary with speed and position within the working envelope and with payload (see compliance).

Repeatability – how well the robot will return to a programmed position. This is not the same as accuracy. It may be that when told to go to a certain X-Y-Z position that it gets only to within 1 mm of that position. This would be its accuracy which may be improved by calibration. But if that position is taught into controller memory and each time it is sent there it returns to within 0.1mm of the taught position then the repeatability will be within 0.1mm.

Accuracy and repeatability are different measures. Repeatability is usually the most important criterion for a robot and is similar to the concept of 'precision' in measurement—see accuracy and precision . ISO 9283 [ 19 ] sets out a method whereby both accuracy and repeatability can be measured. Typically a robot is sent to a taught position a number of times and the error is measured at each return to the position after visiting 4 other positions. Repeatability is then quantified using the standard deviation of those samples in all three dimensions. A typical robot can, of course make a positional error exceeding that and that could be a problem for the process. Moreover, the repeatability is different in different parts of the working envelope and also changes with speed and payload. ISO 9283 specifies that accuracy and repeatability should be measured at maximum speed and at maximum payload. But this results in pessimistic values whereas the robot could be much more accurate and repeatable at light loads and speeds.
Repeatability in an industrial process is also subject to the accuracy of the end effector, for example a gripper, and even to the design of the 'fingers' that match the gripper to the object being grasped. For example, if a robot picks a screw by its head, the screw could be at a random angle. A subsequent attempt to insert the screw into a hole could easily fail. These and similar scenarios can be improved with 'lead-ins' e.g. by making the entrance to the hole tapered.

Motion control – for some applications, such as simple pick-and-place assembly, the robot need merely return repeatably to a limited number of pre-taught positions. For more sophisticated applications, such as welding and finishing ( spray painting ), motion must be continuously controlled to follow a path in space, with controlled orientation and velocity.

Power source – some robots use electric motors , others use hydraulic actuators. The former are faster, the latter are stronger and advantageous in applications such as spray painting, where a spark could set off an explosion ; however, low internal air-pressurisation of the arm can prevent ingress of flammable vapours as well as other contaminants. Nowadays, it is highly unlikely to see any hydraulic robots in the market. Additional sealings, brushless electric motors and spark-proof protection eased the construction of units that are able to work in the environment with an explosive atmosphere.

Drive – some robots connect electric motors to the joints via gears ; others connect the motor to the joint directly ( direct drive ). Using gears results in measurable 'backlash' which is free movement in an axis. Smaller robot arms frequently employ high speed, low torque DC motors, which generally require high gearing ratios; this has the disadvantage of backlash. In such cases the harmonic drive is often used.

Compliance - this is a measure of the amount in angle or distance that a robot axis will move when a force is applied to it. Because of compliance when a robot goes to a position carrying its maximum payload it will be at a position slightly lower than when it is carrying no payload. Compliance can also be responsible for overshoot when carrying high payloads in which case acceleration would need to be reduced.

Robot programming and interfaces [ edit ] Offline programming A typical well-used teach pendant with optional mouse The setup or programming of motions and sequences for an industrial robot is typically taught by linking the robot controller to a laptop , desktop computer or (internal or Internet) network .

A robot and a collection of machines or peripherals is referred to as a workcell , or cell. A typical cell might contain a parts feeder, a molding machine and a robot. The various machines are 'integrated' and controlled by a single computer or PLC . How the robot interacts with other machines in the cell must be programmed, both with regard to their positions in the cell and synchronizing with them.

Software: The computer is installed with corresponding interface software. The use of a computer greatly simplifies the programming process. Specialized robot software is run either in the robot controller or in the computer or both depending on the system design.

There are two basic entities that need to be taught (or programmed): positional data and procedure. For example, in a task to move a screw from a feeder to a hole the positions of the feeder and the hole must first be taught or programmed. Secondly the procedure to get the screw from the feeder to the hole must be programmed along with any I/O involved, for example a signal to indicate when the screw is in the feeder ready to be picked up. The purpose of the robot software is to facilitate both these programming tasks.

Teaching the robot positions may be achieved a number of ways: Positional commands The robot can be directed to the required position using a GUI or text based commands in which the required X-Y-Z position may be specified and edited.

Teach pendant: Robot positions can be taught via a teach pendant. This is a handheld control and programming unit. The common features of such units are the ability to manually send the robot to a desired position, or "inch" or "jog" to adjust a position. They also have a means to change the speed since a low speed is usually required for careful positioning, or while test-running through a new or modified routine. A large emergency stop button is usually included as well. Typically once the robot has been programmed there is no more use for the teach pendant. All teach pendants are equipped with a 3-position deadman switch . In the manual mode, it allows the robot to move only when it is in the middle position (partially pressed). If it is fully pressed in or completely released, the robot stops. This principle of operation allows natural reflexes to be used to increase safety.

Lead-by-the-nose: this is a technique offered by many robot manufacturers. In this method, one user holds the robot's manipulator, while another person enters a command which de-energizes the robot causing it to go into limp. The user then moves the robot by hand to the required positions and/or along a required path while the software logs these positions into memory. The program can later run the robot to these positions or along the taught path. This technique is popular for tasks such as paint spraying .

Offline programming is where the entire cell, the robot and all the machines or instruments in the workspace are mapped graphically. The robot can then be moved on screen and the process simulated. A robotics simulator is used to create embedded applications for a robot, without depending on the physical operation of the robot arm and end effector. The advantages of robotics simulation is that it saves time in the design of robotics applications. It can also increase the level of safety associated with robotic equipment since various "what if" scenarios can be tried and tested before the system is activated.[8] Robot simulation software provides a platform to teach, test, run, and debug programs that have been written in a variety of programming languages.

Robot simulation tools allow for robotics programs to be conveniently written and debugged off-line with the final version of the program tested on an actual robot. The ability to preview the behavior of a robotic system in a virtual world allows for a variety of mechanisms, devices, configurations and controllers to be tried and tested before being applied to a "real world" system. Robotics simulators have the ability to provide real-time computing of the simulated motion of an industrial robot using both geometric modeling and kinematics modeling.

Manufacturing independent robot programming tools are a relatively new but flexible way to program robot applications. Using a visual programming language , the programming is done via drag and drop of predefined template/building blocks. They often feature the execution of simulations to evaluate the feasibility and offline programming in combination. If the system is able to compile and upload native robot code to the robot controller, the user no longer has to learn each manufacturer's proprietary language . Therefore, this approach can be an important step to standardize programming methods.

Others in addition, machine operators often use user interface devices, typically touchscreen units, which serve as the operator control panel. The operator can switch from program to program, make adjustments within a program and also operate a host of peripheral devices that may be integrated within the same robotic system. These include end effectors , feeders that supply components to the robot, conveyor belts , emergency stop controls, machine vision systems, safety interlock systems, barcode printers and an almost infinite array of other industrial devices which are accessed and controlled via the operator control panel.

The teach pendant or PC is usually disconnected after programming and the robot then runs on the program that has been installed in its controller . However a computer is often used to 'supervise' the robot and any peripherals, or to provide additional storage for access to numerous complex paths and routines.

End-of-arm tooling [ edit ] The most essential robot peripheral is the end effector , or end-of-arm-tooling (EOAT). Common examples of end effectors include welding devices (such as MIG-welding guns, spot-welders, etc.), spray guns and also grinding and deburring devices (such as pneumatic disk or belt grinders, burrs, etc.), and grippers (devices that can grasp an object, usually electromechanical or pneumatic ). Other common means of picking up objects is by vacuum or magnets . End effectors are frequently highly complex, made to match the handled product and often capable of picking up an array of products at one time.  They may utilize various sensors to aid the robot system in locating, handling, and positioning products.

Controlling movement [ edit ] For a given robot the only parameters necessary to completely locate the end effector (gripper, welding torch, etc.) of the robot are the angles of each of the joints or displacements of the linear axes (or combinations of the two for robot formats such as SCARA). However, there are many different ways to define the points. The most common and most convenient way of defining a point is to specify a Cartesian coordinate for it, i.e. the position of the 'end effector' in mm in the X, Y and Z directions relative to the robot's origin. In addition, depending on the types of joints a particular robot may have, the orientation of the end effector in yaw, pitch, and roll and the location of the tool point relative to the robot's faceplate must also be specified. For a jointed arm these coordinates must be converted to joint angles by the robot controller and such conversions are known as Cartesian Transformations which may need to be performed iteratively or recursively for a multiple axis robot. The mathematics of the relationship between joint angles and actual spatial coordinates is called kinematics. See robot control Positioning by Cartesian coordinates may be done by entering the coordinates into the system or by using a teach pendant which moves the robot in X-Y-Z directions. It is much easier for a human operator to visualize motions up/down, left/right, etc. than to move each joint one at a time. When the desired position is reached it is then defined in some way particular to the robot software in use, e.g. P1 - P5 below.

Typical programming [ edit ] Most articulated robots perform by storing a series of positions in memory, and moving to them at various times in their programming sequence. For example, a robot which is moving items from one place (bin A) to another (bin B) might have a simple 'pick and place' program similar to the following: Define points P1–P5: Safely above workpiece (defined as P1) 10 cm Above bin A (defined as P2) At position to take part from bin A (defined as P3) 10 cm Above bin B (defined as P4) At position to take part from bin B. (defined as P5) Define program: Move to P1 Move to P2 Move to P3 Close gripper Move to P2 Move to P4 Move to P5 Open gripper Move to P4 Move to P1 and finish For examples of how this would look in popular robot languages see industrial robot programming .

Singularities [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The American National Standard for Industrial Robots and Robot Systems — Safety Requirements (ANSI/RIA R15.06-1999) defines a singularity as "a condition caused by the collinear alignment of two or more robot axes resulting in unpredictable robot motion and velocities." It is most common in robot arms that utilize a "triple-roll wrist". This is a wrist about which the three axes of the wrist, controlling yaw, pitch, and roll, all pass through a common point. An example of a wrist singularity is when the path through which the robot is traveling causes the first and third axes of the robot's wrist (i.e. robot's axes 4 and 6) to line up. The second wrist axis then attempts to spin 180° in zero time to maintain the orientation of the end effector. Another common term for this singularity is a "wrist flip". The result of a singularity can be quite dramatic and can have adverse effects on the robot arm, the end effector, and the process. Some industrial robot manufacturers have attempted to side-step the situation by slightly altering the robot's path to prevent this condition. Another method is to slow the robot's travel speed, thus reducing the speed required for the wrist to make the transition. The ANSI/RIA has mandated that robot manufacturers shall make the user aware of singularities if they occur while the system is being manually manipulated.

A second type of singularity in wrist-partitioned vertically articulated six-axis robots occurs when the wrist center lies on a cylinder that is centered about axis 1 and with radius equal to the distance between axes 1 and 4. This is called a shoulder singularity. Some robot manufacturers also mention alignment singularities, where axes 1 and 6 become coincident. This is simply a sub-case of shoulder singularities. When the robot passes close to a shoulder singularity, joint 1 spins very fast.

The third and last type of singularity in wrist-partitioned vertically articulated six-axis robots occurs when the wrist's center lies in the same plane as axes 2 and 3.

Singularities are closely related to the phenomena of gimbal lock , which has a similar root cause of axes becoming lined up.

Market structure [ edit ] According to the International Federation of Robotics (IFR) study World Robotics 2024 , there were about 4,281,585 operational industrial robots by the end of 2023.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] For the year 2018 the IFR estimates the worldwide sales of industrial robots with US$16.5 billion. Including the cost of software, peripherals and systems engineering, the annual turnover for robot systems is estimated to be US$48.0 billion in 2018.

[ 20 ] China is the largest industrial robot market [ 21 ] : 256 with 154,032 units sold in 2018.

[ 20 ] China had the largest operational stock of industrial robots, with 649,447 at the end of 2018.

[ 22 ] The biggest customer of industrial robots is automotive industry with 30% market share, then electrical/electronics industry with 25%, metal and machinery industry with 10%, rubber and plastics industry with 5%, food industry with 5%.

[ 20 ] In textiles, apparel and leather industry, 1,580 units are operational.

[ 23 ] Estimated worldwide annual supply of industrial robots (in units): [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 24 ] Year Supply 1998 69,000 1999 79,000 2000 99,000 2001 78,000 2002 69,000 2003 81,000 2004 97,000 2005 120,000 2006 112,000 2007 114,000 2008 113,000 2009 60,000 2010 118,000 2012 159,346 2013 178,132 2014 229,261 2015 253,748 2016 294,312 2017 381,335 2018 422,271 2019 373,240 2020 383,545 2021 517,385 2022 553,052 Health and safety [ edit ] Main article: Workplace robotics safety The International Federation of Robotics has predicted a worldwide increase in adoption of industrial robots and they estimated 1.7 million new robot installations in factories worldwide by 2020 [IFR 2017] Archived 2017-02-11 at the Wayback Machine . Rapid advances in automation technologies (e.g. fixed robots, collaborative and mobile robots, and exoskeletons) have the potential to improve work conditions but also to introduce workplace hazards in manufacturing workplaces.

[ 25 ] [3] Despite the lack of occupational surveillance data on injuries associated specifically with robots, researchers from the US National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) identified 61 robot-related deaths between 1992 and 2015 using keyword searches of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries research database (see info from Center for Occupational Robotics Research ). Using data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, NIOSH and its state partners have investigated 4 robot-related fatalities under the Fatality Assessment and Control Evaluation Program .  In addition the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has investigated dozens of robot-related deaths and injuries, which can be reviewed at OSHA Accident Search page . Injuries and fatalities could increase over time because of the increasing number of collaborative and co-existing robots, powered exoskeletons, and autonomous vehicles into the work environment.

Safety standards are being developed by the Robotic Industries Association (RIA) in conjunction with the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).

[4] On October 5, 2017, OSHA, NIOSH and RIA signed an alliance to work together to enhance technical expertise, identify and help address potential workplace hazards associated with traditional industrial robots and the emerging technology of human-robot collaboration installations and systems, and help identify needed research to reduce workplace hazards. On October 16 NIOSH launched the Center for Occupational Robotics Research to "provide scientific leadership to guide the development and use of occupational robots that enhance worker safety, health, and wellbeing."  So far, the research needs identified by NIOSH and its partners include: tracking and preventing injuries and fatalities, intervention and dissemination strategies to promote safe machine control and maintenance procedures, and on translating effective evidence-based interventions into workplace practice.

See also [ edit ] Automation Domestic robot Drum handler Intelligent industrial work assistant (iiwa) Lights out (manufacturing) Mobile industrial robots Cartesian coordinate robot Gantry robot Workplace Robotics Safety References [ edit ] ^ "ISO 8373:2021(en) Robotics — Vocabulary" .

www.iso.org .

^ Robot Assisted Disassembly for the Recycling of Electric Vehicle Batteries ^ a b c [1] ^ a b c [2] ^ a b c d e f g h "OSHA Technical Manual (OTM) | Section IV: Chapter 4 - Industrial Robots and Robot System Safety | Occupational Safety and Health Administration" .

www.osha.gov . Retrieved 2020-11-15 .

^ a b c d e f g h Guarana-DIY (2020-06-30).

"The Top Six Types of Industrial Robots in 2020" .

DIY-Robotics . Retrieved 2020-11-15 .

^ "Robots and robotic devices — Vocabulary" .

www.iso.org . 2012 . Retrieved 2020-11-15 .

^ "The very first robot "brains" were made of old alarm clocks" .

Gizmodo . 2012-03-07 . Retrieved 2024-01-11 .

^ "Grey Walter Constructs the First Electronic Autonomous Robots; the Origin of Social Robotics : History of Information" .

www.historyofinformation.com . Retrieved 2024-01-11 .

^ "La robotique industrielle : guide pratique" .

www.usinenouvelle.com (in French) . Retrieved 2020-11-15 .

^ "Comment savoir si le robot SCARA est le bon choix pour votre application" .

www.fanuc.eu (in French). Archived from the original on 2021-04-15 . Retrieved 2020-11-15 .

^ Nigatu, Hassen; Yihun, Yimesker (2020).

"Algebraic Insight on the Concomitant Motion of 3RPS and 3PRS PKMS" (PDF) . In Larochelle, Pierre; McCarthy, J. Michael (eds.).

Proceedings of the 2020 USCToMM Symposium on Mechanical Systems and Robotics . Mechanisms and Machine Science. Vol. 83. Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp.

242– 252.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-43929-3_22 .

ISBN 978-3-030-43929-3 .

S2CID 218789290 .

^ Turek, Fred D. (June 2011).

"Machine Vision Fundamentals, How to Make Robots See" .

NASA Tech Briefs .

35 (6): 60– 62. Archived from the original on 2012-01-27 . Retrieved 2011-11-29 .

^ "An Automatic Block-Setting Crane".

Meccano Magazine .

23 (3). Liverpool UK: Meccano: 172. March 1938.

^ Taylor, Griffith P. (1995). Robin Johnson (ed.).

The Robot Gargantua . Gargantua: Constructor Quarterly.

^ "International Federation of Robotics" .

IFR International Federation of Robotics . Retrieved 16 December 2018 .

^ KUKA-Roboter.de: 1973 The First KUKA Robot Archived 2009-02-20 at the Wayback Machine English, 28th of March 2010 ^ "History of Industrial Robots" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-12-24 . Retrieved 2012-10-27 .

^ "EVS-EN ISO 9283:2001" . Archived from the original on 10 March 2016 . Retrieved 17 April 2015 .

^ a b c "Executive Summary World Robotics 2019 Industrial Robots" (PDF) .

ifr.org .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 10 October 2019 .

^ Lan, Xiaohuan (2024).

How China Works: An Introduction to China's State-led Economic Development . Translated by Topp, Gary.

Palgrave MacMillan .

doi : 10.1007/978-981-97-0080-6 .

ISBN 978-981-97-0079-0 .

^ "Operational stock of industrial robots at year-end in selected countries" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-10-11 . Retrieved 2019-10-26 .

^ Simon Cox (5 October 2017).

"Worries about premature industrialisation" .

The Economist .

Archived from the original on 21 October 2017.

^ "China overtakes USA in robot density" .

^ Technology, Committee on Information; Automation; Workforce, and the U.S.; Board, Computer Science and Telecommunications; Sciences, Division on Engineering and Physical; Sciences, National Academies of; Engineering; Medicine, and (2017-03-16).

Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?

.

doi : 10.17226/24649 .

ISBN 9780309454025 .

Further reading [ edit ] Nof, Shimon Y. (editor) (1999).

Handbook of Industrial Robotics , 2nd ed. John Wiley & Sons. 1378 pp.

ISBN 0-471-17783-0 .

Lars Westerlund (author) (2000). The extended arm of man.

ISBN 91-7736-467-8 .

Michal Gurgul (author) (2018). Industrial robots and cobots: Everything you need to know about your future co-worker.

ISBN 978-83-952513-0-6 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Industrial robots .

Industrial robots and robot system safety (by OSHA , so in the public domain ).

International Federation of Robotics IFR (worldwide) Robotic Industries Association RIA (North America) BARA, British Automation and Robotics Association (UK) Center for Occupational Robotics Research by NIOSH Safety standards applied to Robotics Strategies for addressing new technologies from the INRS Archived 2018-02-21 at the Wayback Machine Machine Guarding - Why It's a Legal Requirement Archived 2021-04-15 at the Wayback Machine v t e Mobile robots and uncrewed vehicles Aerial Unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) Unmanned combat air vehicle (UCAV) Aerobot Helicam List of unmanned aerial vehicle applications Ornithopter Ground Walking Humanoid Android Hexapod list Other Unmanned ground vehicle (UGV) Automated guided vehicle (AGV) Self-driving car Automatic train operation (ATO) list Underwater Unmanned underwater vehicle (UUV) Autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) Intervention AUV (I-AUV) Remotely operated underwater vehicle (ROUV) Underwater glider Surface Unmanned surface vehicle (USV) Space Uncrewed spacecraft list of probes list by program list of orbiters Cargo spacecraft spaceflights to the ISS Space telescope list Other Domestic Military Rescue Medical Disability Agricultural BEAM robotics Microbotics Nanorobotics Robotics Robot locomotion Autonomous robot Autonomous logistics Radio-controlled model Remote control vehicle Remote control animal Categories Radio control Unmanned vehicles v t e Robotics Main articles Outline Glossary Index History Geography Hall of Fame Ethics Laws Competitions AI competitions Types Aerobot Anthropomorphic Humanoid Android Cyborg Gynoid Claytronics Companion Automaton Animatronic Audio-Animatronics Industrial Articulated arm Domestic Educational Entertainment Juggling Military Medical Service Disability Agricultural Food service Retail BEAM robotics Soft robotics Classifications Biorobotics Cloud robotics Continuum robot Unmanned vehicle aerial ground Mobile robot Microbotics Nanorobotics Necrobotics Robotic spacecraft Space probe Swarm Telerobotics Underwater remotely-operated Robotic fish Locomotion Tracks Walking Hexapod Climbing Electric unicycle Robotic fins Navigation and mapping Motion planning Simultaneous localization and mapping Visual odometry Vision-guided robot systems Research Evolutionary Kits Simulator Suite Open-source Software Adaptable Developmental Human–robot interaction Paradigms Perceptual Situated Ubiquitous Companies ABB Amazon Robotics Anybots Barrett Technology Boston Dynamics Doosan Robotics Energid Technologies FarmWise FANUC Figure AI Foster-Miller Harvest Automation HD Hyundai Robotics Honeybee Robotics Intuitive Surgical IRobot KUKA Rainbow Robotics Starship Technologies Symbotic Universal Robotics Wolf Robotics Yaskawa Related Critique of work Powered exoskeleton Workplace robotics safety Robotic tech vest Technological unemployment Terrainability Fictional robots Category Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐tr2m7
Cached time: 20250812015613
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.509 seconds
Real time usage: 0.649 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2691/1000000
Revision size: 45790/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 100659/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4140/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 128840/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.285/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7042688/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  516.450      1 -total
 35.69%  184.344      1 Template:Reflist
 23.68%  122.284     14 Template:Cite_web
 13.66%   70.535      1 Template:Automation
 13.35%   68.953      1 Template:Sidebar
 10.22%   52.775      1 Template:Short_description
  8.86%   45.762      1 Template:Commons_category
  8.64%   44.601      1 Template:Unreferenced_section
  8.57%   44.246      1 Template:Sister_project
  8.32%   42.965      1 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:147918:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015613 and revision id 1298036856. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Industrial_robot&oldid=1298036856 " Categories : Industrial robots American inventions Packaging machinery Occupational safety and health Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2021 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 03:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Industrial robot 42 languages Add topic

