Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Model and qualification 2 Applications and revisions Toggle Applications and revisions subsection 2.1 Max Weber 2.2 Antonio Gramsci 2.3 Walter Rodney 2.4 Freudo-Marxism and sex-economy 2.5 Critical theory 2.6 Gilles Deleuze 2.7 R.J. Robinson 2.8 Can the base be separated from the superstructure?

2.9 The legality question 2.10 Neoliberalism and the state 2.11 Triviality 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Base and superstructure 30 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Magyar 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Português Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Model of society in Marxist theory Diagram explaining the relationship between the base and the superstructure in Marxist theory Part of a series on Sociology History Outline Index Key themes Society Globalization Human behavior Human environmental impact Identity Industrial revolutions 3 / 4 / 5 Popularity Social complexity Social environment Social equality Social equity Social power Social stratification Social structure Social cycle theory Perspectives Conflict theory Critical theory Structural functionalism Positivism Social constructionism Social darwinism Symbolic interactionism Branches Aging Architecture Art Astrosociology Body Criminology Consciousness Culture Death Demography Deviance Disaster Economic Education Emotion ( Jealousy ) Environmental Family Feminist Fiscal Food Gender Generations Health Historical Immigration Industrial Internet Jewry Knowledge Language Law Leisure Literature Marxist Mathematic Medical Military Music Peace, war, and social conflict Philosophy Political Public Punishment Race and ethnicity Religion Rural Science ( History of science ) Social movements Social psychology Sociocybernetics Sociology Space Sport Technology Terrorism Urban Utopian Victimology Visual Methods Quantitative Qualitative Comparative Computational Ethnographic Conversation analysis Historical Interview Mathematical Network analysis Social experiment Survey Major theorists 1700s: Comte · Sieyès 1800s: Martineau · Tocqueville · Marx · Spencer · Le Bon · Ward · Pareto · Tönnies · Veblen · Simmel · Durkheim · Addams · Mead · Weber · Du Bois · Mannheim · Elias 1900s: Fromm · Adorno · Gehlen · Aron · Merton · Nisbet · Mills · Bell · Schoeck · Goffman · Bauman · Foucault · Luhmann · Habermas · Baudrillard · Bourdieu · Giddens Lists Bibliography Terminology Journals Organizations People Timeline By country Society portal v t e Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e In Marxist theory , societies consist of two parts: the base (or substructure ) and superstructure . The base refers to the mode of production which includes the forces and relations of production (e.g. employer–employee work conditions, the technical division of labour , and property relations) into which people enter to produce the necessities and amenities of life. The superstructure refers to society's other relationships and ideas not directly relating to production including its culture , institutions , roles , rituals , religion , media , and state . The relation of the two parts is not strictly unidirectional. The superstructure can affect the base. However, the influence of the base is predominant.

[ 1 ] Model and qualification [ edit ] In developing Alexis de Tocqueville 's observations, [ clarification needed ] Marx identified civil society as the economic base and political society as the political superstructure.

[ 2 ] Marx postulated the essentials of the base–superstructure concept in his preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (1859): The mode of production of material life conditions the general process of social, political, and intellectual life. It is not the consciousness of men that determines their existence, but their social existence that determines their consciousness. At a certain stage of development, the material productive forces of society come into conflict with the existing relations of production or—this merely expresses the same thing in legal terms—with the property relations within the framework of which they have operated hitherto [...] The changes in the economic foundation lead, sooner or later, to the transformation of the whole, immense, superstructure. In studying such transformations, it is always necessary to distinguish between the material transformation of the economic conditions of production, which can be determined with the precision of natural science, and the legal, political, religious, artistic, or philosophic—in short, ideological forms in which men become conscious of this conflict and fight it out. Just as one does not judge an individual by what he thinks about himself, so one cannot judge such a period of transformation by its consciousness, but, on the contrary, this consciousness must be explained from the contradictions of material life, from the conflict existing between the social forces of production and the relations of production.

[ 3 ] Marx's "base determines superstructure" axiom, however, requires qualification: the base is the whole of productive relationships, not only a given economic element, e.g. the working class historically, the superstructure varies and develops unevenly in society's different activities; for example, art, politics, economics, etc.

the base–superstructure relationship is reciprocal ; Engels explains that the base determines the superstructure only in the last instance .

[ 4 ] Applications and revisions [ edit ] Marx's theory of base and superstructure can be found in the disciplines of political science , sociology , anthropology , and psychology as utilized by Marxist scholars. Across these disciplines the base-superstructure relationship, and the contents of each, may take different forms.

Among Marxists, the very concept of 'base and superstructure' is contentious. The historian E. P. Thompson argues that: Meanwhile in serious intellectual circles the argument about basis/superstructure goes on and on and on ... A whole continent of discourse is being developed, with its metropolitan centres & its villas in the mountains, which rests, not upon the solid globe of historical evidence, but on the precarious point of a strained metaphor.

[ 5 ] Ellen Meiksins Wood says: 'The base/superstructure metaphor has always been more trouble than it is worth', [ 6 ] while Terry Eagleton describes base and superstructure as 'this now universally reviled paradigm'.

[ 7 ] However, other Marxists continue to insist on the paradigm's importance. For example, in Paul Thomas' words: "Without Marx's juxtaposition of base to superstructure we would probably not be speaking of social contradictions at all but would instead be discussing science, technology, production, labor, the economy, & the state along lines very different from those that are commonplace today".

[ 8 ] Similarly, from Chris Harman : "Far from ignoring the impact of the 'superstructure' on the 'base', as many ignorant critics have claimed for more than a century, Marx builds his whole account of human history around it".

[ 9 ] Stuart Hall argued, "of the many problems which perforce Marx left in an 'undeveloped' state, none is more crucial than that of 'base & superstructure'.

[ 10 ] Hall traces the development of the schema from The German Ideology and Preface to the Critique of Political Economy , in which - according to Hall - Marx and Engels show relations of production form "the base" from which "legal and political superstructures" arise, to its application in both Das Kapital and The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte .

[ 10 ] The latter work, Hall argues, offered a more sophisticated picture of the interaction between base and superstructure and showed Marx was concerned with the " necessary complexity of the social formations of advancing capitalism and of the relations between its different levels".

[ 10 ] Max Weber [ edit ] Early sociologist Max Weber preferred a form of structuralism over a base and superstructure model of society in which he proposes that the base and superstructure are reciprocal in causality—neither economic rationality nor normative ideas rule the domain of society. In summarizing results from his East Elbia research he notes that, contrary to the base and superstructure model "we have become used to," there exists a reciprocal relationship between the two.

[ 11 ] Antonio Gramsci [ edit ] The Italian political philosopher Antonio Gramsci divided Marx's superstructure into two elements: political society and civil society. Political society consists of the organized force of society (such as the police and military) while civil society refers to the consensus-creating elements that contribute to cultural hegemony (such as the media and education system.) Both constituents of this superstructure are still informed by the values of the base, serving to establish and enforce these values in society.

[ 12 ] Walter Rodney [ edit ] Walter Rodney , the Guyanese political activist and African historian, in the 1970s discussed the role of Marx's superstructure in the context of development cycles and colonialism. Rodney states that while most countries follow a developmental structure that evolves from feudalism to capitalism, China is an exception to this rule and skipped the capitalism step: [ 13 ] The explanation is very complex, but in general terms the main differences between feudal Europe and feudal China lay in the superstructure – i.e. in the body of beliefs, motivations and sociopolitical institutions which derived from the material base but in turn affected it. In China, religious, educational and bureaucratic qualifications were of utmost importance, and government was in the hands of state officials rather than being run by the landlords on their own feudal estates.

[ 14 ] By extension this means that the Marxist development cycle is malleable due to cultural superstructures, and is not an inevitable path. Rather the role of the superstructure allows for adaptation of the development cycle, especially in a colonial context.

[ 14 ] Rodney died in 1980, however, and did not have time to witness the effects of the Chinese economic reform of the 1980s ("socialist market economy") that arguably had made China the greatest capitalist country of the  world by 2016.

[ citation needed ] Freudo-Marxism and sex-economy [ edit ] Freudo-Marxist Wilhelm Reich's discipline of analysis known as sex economy is an attempt to understand the divergence of the perceived base and superstructure that occurred during the global economic crisis from 1929 to 1933 .

[ 15 ] To make sense of this phenomenon, Reich recategorized social ideology as an element in the base—not the superstructure. In this new categorization, social ideology and social psychology is a material process that self-perpetuates, the same way economic systems in the base perpetuate themselves. Reich focused on the role of sexual repression in the patriarchal family system as a way to understand how mass support for Fascism could arise in a society.

[ 16 ] Critical theory [ edit ] Contemporary Marxist interpretations such as those of critical theory reject this interpretation of the base–superstructure interaction and examine how each affects and conditions the other.

Raymond Williams , for example, argues against loose, "popular" usage of base and superstructure as discrete entities which, he explains, is not the intention of Marx and Engels: So, we have to say that when we talk of 'the base', we are talking of a process, and not a state .... We have to revalue 'superstructure' towards a related range of cultural practices, and away from a reflected, reproduced, or specifically-dependent content. And, crucially, we have to revalue 'the base' away from [the] notion[s] of [either] a fixed economic or [a] technological abstraction, and towards the specific activities of men in real, social and economic relationships, containing fundamental contradictions and variations, and, therefore, always in a state of dynamic process.

[ 17 ] Gilles Deleuze [ edit ] Gilles Deleuze takes a skeptical stance toward Marx's categorization of ideology as a part of the superstructure. Deleuze argues that this categorization minimizes the role that desire plays in forming such systems. He prefers to view ideology as an illusion altogether. In Deleuze's own words: One puts the infrastructure on one side – the economic, the serious – and on the other, the superstructure, of which ideology is a part, thus rejecting the phenomena of desire in ideology. It's a perfect way to ignore how desire works within the infrastructure, how it invests in it, how it takes part in it, how, in this respect, it organizes power and the repressive system. We do not say: ideology is a trompe l’oeil (or a concept that refers to certain illusions) We say: there is no ideology, it is an illusion. That's why it suits orthodox Marxism and the Communist Party so well. Marxism has put so much emphasis on the theme of ideology to better conceal what was happening in the USSR: a new organization of repressive power. There is no ideology, there are only organizations of power once it is admitted that the organization of power is the unity of desire and the economic infrastructure.

[ 18 ] R.J. Robinson [ edit ] Robinson argues that Engels' original argument that superstructures are 'relatively autonomous' of their base is correct but that the detail of the argument (which is based mainly on assertion) is unconvincing. Phrases such as 'in the last instance' or 'reflection' are equally undefined.

Developing the argument that superstructures exist to deal with contradictions in the base already put forward by Antonio Gramsci , Terry Eagleton and others, Robinson argues that it is this contradictoriness that forces superstructures to exist outside the base. However, because they exist to solve problems in the base, they are able to affect the base. But at the same time, superstructures exist to deal with contradictions in the base, so changes in the base (and therefore in these contradictions) continue to predominate over that base's superstructures. Hence the 'relative' element of 'relative autonomy'.

At the same time, the fact that superstructures must solve problems that their own base evidently cannot solve for itself means that they must produce effects and results the base cannot. For example, an industrial base requires masses of educated workers, but capitalism has never developed a way to create a mass of workers profitably. So it is necessary to create a public education system, outside the base, to do this.

In addition, if superstructures are required to do things the base cannot, there must be at least some aspects of the forces and relations of production superstructures use that are different from those used by the base. Therefore, a superstructure's 'system of production' must be in some sense different from the underlying mode of production/base. For example, legal systems are controlled by appointed authorities (judges), and not by property owners. Hence the 'autonomous' element of 'relative autonomy'.

[ 19 ] Can the base be separated from the superstructure?

[ edit ] John Plamenatz makes two counterclaims regarding the clear-cut separation of the base and superstructure. The first is that economic structure is independent from production in many cases, with relations of production or property also having a strong effect on production.

[ 20 ] The second claim is that relations of production can only be defined with normative terms—this implies that social life and humanity's morality cannot be truly separated as both are defined in a normative sense.

[ 21 ] Robinson observes that all economic activity (and perhaps all human activity) is normative - for example, 'it is unlikely that many enter employment without a sense, unspoken or otherwise, that it is a legitimate or proper thing to do'.

[ 22 ] The legality question [ edit ] A critique of the base and superstructure theory is that property relations (supposedly part of the base and the driving force of history) are more properly situated in legal relations, an element of the superstructure. This suggests that the distinction between base and superstructure is incoherent, and undermines the theory as a whole. Defenders of the theory claim that Marx believed in property relations and social relations of production as two separate entities.

[ 23 ] G.A. Cohen offers a detailed textual analysis to argue this was based on a false interpretation of Marx's position.

[ 24 ] Robinson argues that legality does not make exploitation possible, but only defines the rules through which it is managed socially when it becomes problematic. Legal definitions of wage labour were only articulated when those workers began to show their strength. Long before that, wage labour and a working class had existed without any notion of a formal contract between legal equals. Law regarding slavery likewise concerned mainly rules for relations between slave-holders (buying and selling, warranties, etc.), and have never been required for slavery to exist. Conversely, in modern societies, domestic labour is barely addressed by law; plainly this is not because it is not prevalent, but because it is not sufficiently contentious to become a matter of significant political dispute, and therefore to require a legal form.

[ 25 ] Neoliberalism and the state [ edit ] Colin Jenkins provides (2014) a critique on the role of the capitalist state in the era of neoliberalism , using base and superstructure theory as well as the work of Nicos Poulantzas . Regarding developments in the United States during this era (roughly 1980–2015), Jenkins highlights the nature in which political parties and the political system itself are inherently designed to protect the economic base of capitalism and, in doing so, have become "increasingly centralized, coordinated, and synchronized over the past half-century." This, according to Jenkins, has led to a "corporate-fascistic state of being" that is challenging the equilibrium of this fragile relationship. His analysis specifically addresses the role of both major parties, Democrats and Republicans, in the United States: It reminds us of John Dewey's claim that, 'As long as politics is the shadow cast on society by big business, the attenuation of the shadow will not change the substance.' In the US, the two-party political system has proven extremely effective in this regard. Aside from differences on social issues like abortion and gay marriage, as well as socioeconomic issues like unemployment insurance and public assistance, both parties ultimately embrace capitalist/corporatist interests in that they both serve as facilitators for the dominant classes: The Republican Party in its role as forerunner, pushing the limits of the capitalist model to the brink of fascism; and the Democratic Party in its role as governor, providing intermittent degrees of slack and pull against this inevitable move towards a 'corporate-fascistic state of being.

[ 26 ] Triviality [ edit ] Neven Sesardic agrees that the economic base of society affects its superstructure, however he questions how meaningful this actually is. While the original claim of a strong form of economic determinism was radical, Sesardic argues that it was watered down to the trivial claim that the base affects the superstructure and vice versa, something no philosopher would dispute. Thus Sesardic argues that Marx's claim ultimately amounts to nothing more than a trivial observation that does not make meaningful statements or explain anything about the real world.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] : 175–177 See also [ edit ] Althusser Classical Marxism Criticism of Marxism Critique of political economy Cultural hegemony Dialectical materialism Economic determinism False consciousness Historical materialism Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Materialism Organic crisis Reification Social change Social structure References [ edit ] ^ Engels's letter to J. Bloch ; from London to
Königsberg, written on September 21, 1890.

Historical Materialism (Marx, Engels, Lenin), p. 294 - 296. Published by Progress Publishers, 1972; first published by Der sozialistische Akademiker , Berlin, October 1, 1895. Translated from German. Online version: marxists.org 1999. Transcription/Markup: Brian Baggins. Retrieved December 16, 2017.

^ Zaleski, Pawel (2008). "Tocqueville on Civilian Society. A Romantic Vision of the Dichotomic Structure of Social Reality".

Archiv für Begriffsgeschichte .

50 . Felix Meiner Verlag.

^ Marx, Karl (1977).

A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy . Moscow: Progress Publishers.

Notes by R. Rojas ^ Dictionary of the Social Sciences , "Base and superstructure" entry.

^ Thompson, E.P. (1978).

The Poverty of Theory & Other Essays . London: Merlin. p. 330.

^ Wood, E.M. (1990: 126). 'Falling through the cracks: E.P. Thompson and the debate on base and superstructure.' In Kaye and McClelland (1990: 124-152).

^ Eagleton, Terry (2000). "Base and superstructure revisited".

New Literary History .

31 (2): 231– 40.

doi : 10.1353/nlh.2000.0018 .

^ Thomas, P. (1991). 'Critical reception: Marx then and now.' In Carver (1991: 23-54), The Cambridge Companion To Marx . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

^ Harman, C. (1998).

Marxism and History. Two Essays . London: Bookmarks.

^ a b c Hall, S. (2019: 143).

Essential Essays. Volume 1 . Morley, D. (ed.). London: Duke University Press.

^ Scaff, Lawrence A. (June 1984). "Weber before Weberian Sociology".

The British Journal of Sociology .

35 (2): 190– 215.

doi : 10.2307/590232 .

JSTOR 590232 .

^ Morera, Esteve (March 1990). "Gramsci and Democracy".

Canadian Journal of Political Science .

23 (1): 28, 29.

^ Campbell, Trevor A. (1981). "The Making of an Organic Intellectual: Walter Rodney (1942-1980)".

Latin American Perspectives .

8 (1): 49– 63.

doi : 10.1177/0094582X8100800105 .

JSTOR 2633130 .

S2CID 145790333 .

^ a b Walter, Rodney (2011).

How Europe underdeveloped Africa . Strickland, William, 1937-, Hill, Robert A., 1943-, Harding, Vincent,, Babu, Abdul Rahman Mohamed (Revised paperback ed.). Baltimore, Maryland.

ISBN 9781574780482 .

OCLC 773301411 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Reich, Wilhelm. The Mass Psychology of Fascism. New York: Albion, 1970. 22–23. Print.

^ Reich, Wilhelm (1970).

The Mass Psychology of Fascism . New York: Albion. p. 14.

^ Williams, Raymond (November–December 1973).

"Base and superstructure in Marxist cultural theory" .

New Left Review .

I (82).

^ Deleuze qtd. in Guattari, Félix.

Chaosophy: Texts and Interviews 1972-1977 , edited by Sylvère Lotringer, Semiotext(e), Los Angeles, 2009, p. 38.

^ Robinson, R.J. (2023).

Base and Superstructure. Understanding Marxism's Second Biggest Idea (2nd ed.). Alton: Putney:2. pp. Chs 3–5.

ISBN 9781838193843 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Lukes, Steven (1983). Miller, David; Siedentop, Larry (eds.).

The Nature of Political Theory . Oxford, Oxfordshire: Clarendon Press . p. 104.

^ Lukes, Steven (1983). Miller, David; Siedentop, Larry (eds.).

The Nature of Political Theory . Oxford, Oxfordshire: Clarendon Press . p. 105.

^ Robinson, R.J. (2023).

Base and Superstructure. Understanding Marxism's Second Biggest Idea (2nd ed.). Alton: Putney:2. pp. 194, n.2.

ISBN 9781838193843 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Cahan, Jean Axelrad (Winter 1994–1995).

"The Concept of Property in Marx's Theory of History: A Defense of the Autonomy of the Socioeconomic Base" .

Science & Society .

58 (4): 394– 395.

JSTOR 40403448 .

^ Cohen, G.A. (1970). "Symposium: On some criticisms of historical materialism".

Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volumes .

44 : 121– 156.

doi : 10.1093/aristoteliansupp/44.1.121 .

^ Robinson, R.J. (2023).

Base and Superstructure. Understanding Marxism's Second Biggest Idea (2nd ed.). Alton: Putney:2. pp.

190– 3.

ISBN 9781838193843 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Jenkins, Colin (2 February 2014).

"Calibrating the Capitalist State in the Neoliberal Era: Equilibrium, Superstructure, and the Pull Towards a Corporate-Fascistic Model" .

The Hampton Institute . Archived from the original on 29 August 2017 . Retrieved 25 December 2014 .

^ Sesardić, Neven (1985).

Marxian Utopia . Centre for Research into Communist Economies. pp.

14– 15.

ISBN 0948027010 .

^ Blanshard, Brand (1966). "Reflections on economic determinism".

The Journal of Philosophy .

63 (7): 169– 178.

doi : 10.2307/2023949 .

JSTOR 2023949 .

Further reading [ edit ] Althusser, Louis and Balibar, Étienne .

Reading Capital . London: Verso, 2009.

Bottomore, Tom (ed).

A Dictionary of Marxist Thought , 2nd ed. Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishing, 1991. 45–48.

Calhoun, Craig (ed), Dictionary of the Social Sciences Oxford University Press (2002) Hall, Stuart . "Rethinking the Base and Superstructure Metaphor." Papers on Class, Hegemony and Party . Bloomfield, J., ed. London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1977.

Chris Harman . " Base and Superstructure ".

International Socialism 2:32, Summer 1986, pp. 3–44.

Harvey, David .

A Companion to Marx's Capital.

London: Verso, 2010.

Larrain, Jorge.

Marxism and Ideology . Atlantic Highlands, New Jersey: Humanities Press, 1983.

Lukács, Georg .

History and Class Consciousness . Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1972.

Postone, Moishe .

Time, Labour, and Social Domination: A Reinterpretation of Marx's Critical Theory.

Cambridge [England]: Cambridge University Press, 1993.

R.J. Robinson.

Base and Superstructure. Understanding Marxism's Second Biggest Idea.

Alton: Putney2, 2023.

Williams, Raymond .

Marxism and Literature . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977.

External links [ edit ] Marxist Media Theory v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐tksrx
Cached time: 20250812020427
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.589 seconds
Real time usage: 0.701 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2778/1000000
Revision size: 27271/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 152997/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6407/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 114747/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.319/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8106190/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  508.292      1 -total
 40.16%  204.135      1 Template:Reflist
 25.22%  128.214      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 21.84%  111.018      9 Template:Cite_journal
 17.48%   88.836      1 Template:Sociology
 10.98%   55.789     10 Template:Cite_book
 10.05%   51.074      1 Template:Short_description
  8.78%   44.627      1 Template:Marxism
  7.74%   39.325      1 Template:Clarify
  7.06%   35.863      1 Template:Fix-span Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:40300485:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020427 and revision id 1301777469. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Base_and_superstructure&oldid=1301777469 " Categories : Marxist terminology Marxist theory Marxian economics Sociological terminology Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 16:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Base and superstructure 30 languages Add topic

