Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 References 3 Further reading 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Samuil Micu-Klein 11 languages Български Deutsch Français Latina Magyar مصرى Polski Português Română Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Romanian academic (1745–1806) Samuil Micu-Klein Samuil Micu Klein Born 1745 Sadu , Principality of Transylvania , Habsburg Empire Died ( 1806-05-13 ) 13 May 1806 Buda , Kingdom of Hungary , Habsburg Empire Occupations Theologian historian philologist Era Enlightenment Movement Transylvanian School Writing career Language Latin , Romanian Notable works Elementa linguae daco-romanae sive valachicae Samuil Micu-Klein (September 1745 – 13 May 1806) was a Romanian Greek-Catholic theologian, historian, philologist and philosopher, a member of the Enlightenment-era movement of Transylvanian School (Şcoala Ardeleană). He is the author of Elementa linguae daco-romanae sive valachicae , a book which is the reference point for the start of Modern Romanian language period.

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Born as Maniu Micu in the Transylvanian village of Sadu , in the Principality of Transylvania (now in Sibiu County , Romania ), he was the son of a Greek-Catholic protopope and the nephew of bishop Inocenţiu Micu-Klein .

[ 2 ] He began to study at the Seminary of Blaj and he joined the Order of Saint Basil in 1762, taking the religious name Samoil.

[ 3 ] Micu received a scholarship in 1762 and began studying at the Catholic Pázmáneum University of Vienna . There is little known about his life in Vienna, but it is known he was attracted to science, studying experimental physics, mechanics and mathematics, in addition to theology and philosophy.

[ 2 ] In 1772, returning to Blaj to teach ethics and mathematics at the Seminary, Klein met and befriended bishop Grigore Maior , whom he accompanied in visits throughout his diocese, trying to win converts to Greek-Catholicism. These trips proved to be useful in his study of the Romanian language , especially of the language spoken by the peasants, gathering materials for future grammar. Klein was also interested in Romanian folklore, his writings being one of the earliest works on it.

[ 2 ] In 1774, he finished writing a work of history named De ortu progressu conversione valachorum episcopis item archiepiscopis et metropolitis eorum , which talked about the Roman origins of the Romanians and the origins of their faith in the Roman Christian Church in ancient Dacia . Apparently, his goal was to make the bishopric become a metropolis, so it would no longer belong to the Archdiocese of Esztergom .

[ 2 ] He went to Vienna in 1779 to become a prefect of studies at the Saint Barbara College , where he published in 1780, together with Gheorghe Sincai , the first Romanian grammar: Elementa linguae daco-romanae sive valachicae .

[ 2 ] Klein returned to Blaj, and between 1782 and 1804, he was very productive both in his translations and in writing original works: [ 2 ] translation of textbooks for Blaj schools translation of over seventy-seven titles and 7,500 pages from the Church Fathers a history of Romania entitled Scurtă cunoştinţă a istoriei Românilor (1792) a translation of The Granite Matrix (1794) a translation of the bible ( Biblia de la Blaj , 1795) a four-volume Latin draft of Istoria, lucrurile şi întâmplările Românilor (1800, though only an 1805 translation to Romanian survived) and Cartea de rugăciuni (‘Book of Prayers’, printed at Vienna in 1779) in which he used for the first time the etymological alphabet.

[ 4 ] He came in conflict with Ioan Bob , voting against his appointment as bishop. The resentment between the two man materialized in Bob's censorship against Micu-Klein's writings and the refused request made by Micu-Klein to dissolve his monastic vow. Even so, he managed to print in 1800 Istoria și lucrurile și întâmplările românilor - his main history book - in which he promoted the idea of Dacian extermination and that Romanians are solely descending from Romans settled in Dacia.

[ 5 ] He participated in the regional cultural life, meeting with Johann Christian von Engel and Ioan Piariu-Molnar , among others.

[ 6 ] Klein moved to Buda in 1804 to become the editor at the University of Buda press for the Romanian-language books, hoping that this would allow him to publish his historical works, a project which did not materialise because of his death just two years later.

[ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ N. Felecan - Considerations on the First Books of Romanian Grammar ^ a b c d e f g Hitchins, Keith (December 1964).

"Samuel Clain and the Rumanian Enlightenment in Transylvania" .

Slavic Review .

23 (4): 660– 675.

doi : 10.2307/2492203 .

ISSN 0037-6779 .

^ Lungu, Ion (1995).

Şcoala ardeleană: mişcare ideologică naţională iluministă (Ed. nouă, rev ed.). Bucureşti: Viitorul românesc. p. 109.

ISBN 978-973-9172-12-7 .

^ Chivu, Gheorghe (6 August 2023).

"The Transylvanian School - A new Assessment" (PDF) .

diversite.eu . Retrieved 6 August 2023 .

^ Camelia, Oprea.

"Fişe biografice" .

academia.edu . Retrieved 23 February 2025 .

^ Lungu 1995 , p. 111-112.

Further reading [ edit ] Pompiliu Teodor, Sub semnul luminilor. Samuil Micu Editura Presa Universitară Clujeană, Cluj, 2000, 507 p.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Samuil Micu-Klein .

v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Samuil_Micu-Klein&oldid=1292738015 " Categories : 1745 births 1806 deaths 18th-century Romanian historians Romanians in Hungary Romanian folklorists 19th-century Romanian historians Romanian philologists Romanian schoolteachers Romanian theologians Romanian Greek-Catholic clergy Translators of the Bible into Romanian Romanian translators Age of Enlightenment Transylvanian School People from Sibiu County Order of Saint Basil the Great 18th-century translators 18th-century writers in Latin Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using embedded infobox templates with the title parameter Articles with hCards Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 15:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Samuil Micu-Klein 11 languages Add topic

