Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Germany - Confederation of the Rhine 2 Hungary 3 References 4 Sources Toggle the table of contents Prince-primate 7 languages Deutsch Bahasa Indonesia Magyar Nederlands Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Title held by individual (prince-)archbishops Part of a series on the Hierarchy of the Catholic Church Saint Peter Ecclesiastical titles ( order of precedence ) Pope Pope emeritus Cardinal Cardinal Vicar Crown Prince Protector Moderator of the curia Chaplain of His Holiness Papal legate Papal majordomo Apostolic nuncio Apostolic delegate Apostolic Syndic Apostolic visitor Vicar apostolic Apostolic exarch Apostolic prefect Assistant to the papal throne Eparch Metropolitan Patriarch Catholicos Bishop Archbishop Bishop emeritus Diocesan bishop Major archbishop Primate Suffragan bishop Titular bishop Coadjutor bishop Auxiliary bishop Prelate Provost Pontiff Territorial prelate Territorial abbot Liturgical titles Acolyte Consecrator Lector Subdeacon Administrative and pastoral titles Auditor Brother Chancellor Chaplain Military chaplain Military ordinary Coarb Confessor Consultor Curate Deacon Archdeacon Defender of the bond Definitor Devil's advocate Diocesan administrator Ecclesiastical judge Exorcist Laity Lay abbot Abthain Commendatory Lay cardinal Minister Major orders Minor orders Missionary Monsignor Officialis Ostiarius Pastor Assistant pastor Palatinus Personal prelate Preacher Prefect Presbyter Elder Priest Principal Protonotary apostolic Reverend Saint Servant of God Blessed Venerable Seminarian Vicar Judicial vicar Vicar general Vicar forane Sub-dean Consecrated and professed titles Abbess Abbot Consecrated virgin Corrector Custos Friar Dean Grand master Hermit Master of novices Monk Novice Nun Postulant Prior Provincial superior Rector Religious Superior general Additional titles Almoner Altar server Archimandrite Archpriest Archdeacon Canon Captain General of the Church Chorbishop Coarb Commissary Apostolic Conclavist Custos Datarius Gonfalonier of the Church Honorary prelate Minor canon Notarius Ostiarius Peritus Postulator Prebendary Precentor Prince-bishop Prince-abbot Prince-primate Prince-provost Promotor Fidei Protopriest Protodeacon Protosyncellus Regionarius Sacristan Sidewalk counselor Usher Associations and organization titles Third orders Oblates Confraternities Pious Unions Grand master Knights Hospitaller Order of the Holy Sepulchre Teutonic Knights Inquisitor Grand Inquisitor Preceptor Catholic Church portal v t e Prince-primate ( German : Fürstprimas , Hungarian : hercegprímás ) is a rare princely title held by individual (prince-) archbishops of specific sees in a presiding capacity in an august assembly of mainly secular princes, notably the following: Germany - Confederation of the Rhine [ edit ] The Rheinbund or ' Confederation of the Rhine ' was founded in 1806, when several German states seceded from the Holy Roman Empire and allied themselves with Emperor Napoleon of France, [ 1 ] who assumed the position of the Protector of the Confederation of the Rhine .

[ 2 ] Its highest office was held by Karl Theodor von Dalberg , first Archbishop of Mainz and then of Regensburg . He had been the first among the princes of the Holy Roman Empire and styled its Archchancellor , and as such was given the first rank among the princes of the new Confederation and the title of Fürstprimas , 'Prince Primate'.

[ 3 ] As such he presided over the College of Kings and the Diet of the Confederation, a senate-like assembly which never actually assembled.

During his term as prince-primate, Dalberg was Archbishop of Regensburg (in Bavaria ) and at first Fürst (ruling prince) of Aschaffenburg . From September 19, 1806, his territories included the former Reichsstadt and on February 16, 1810, Dalberg was promoted to the strictly secular rank of Grand Duke of Frankfurt , in chief of another former Reichsstadt (on the lower Main , enclaved in the Electorate of Mainz , now in Hessen ). At the same time, Napoleon appointed his stepson Eugène de Beauharnais — excluded from the French imperial succession — as heir to the Grand Duchy.

[ 4 ] On the eve of the collapse of the First French Empire , Dalberg resigned his secular positions and Beauharnais succeeded him as Grand Duke, though this had no practical effect, as the dissolution of the Confederation (carved up into a revised set of monarchies) also rendered the position moot.

Hungary [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Prince-primate" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In virtue of his dignity as primate of the Habsburg dynasty 's apostolic Kingdom of Hungary , the Archbishop of Esztergom enjoyed extraordinary privileges, resulting in his being titled prince primate .

The primate was entitled to hold national synods , was Legatus Natus of the Holy Roman Church , and therefore had the right, inside of his legation (territory where he represented the Pope ), to have the cross carried before him, dealt directly with Rome and had the right of visitation in the episcopal sees and the religious houses in Hungary, except the exempt Archabbey of Pannonhalma (S. Martinus in Monte Pannoniæ).

Since 1715, the primate had also been a Reichsfürst , a ruling prince of the Holy Roman Empire , entitled Prince Primate . He was the chief and privy chancellor of the Hungarian kingdom, and thus keeper of the great seal. Formerly he was also a member of the supreme court, and still earlier  governor, viceroy and főispán ('hereditary' lord-lieutenant) of Esztergom county . To the primate also belonged the right (delegated regalia ) to superintend the royal mint at Kremnica ( German : Kremnitz , Hungarian : Körmöcbánya ), for which he received a significant sum from its seigniorage revenues, called jus piseti ('right of'). By ancient custom, he had the right to crown the King of Hungary and anoint the queen. By a gift of archiepiscopal property he was at one time able to confer nobility ( Prädialadel ), another rarely delegated princely prerogative (usually only knighting was allowed to non-sovereign nobility). Another privilege was his right to take an oath before a court of justice through his deputy, and not personally.

The primate was also chief priest and chancellor of the Hungarian national Order of St. Stephen , established in 1764. As first banneret ( baro regni ) of Hungary, he was a Magnate , i.e. member of the Upper House .

References [ edit ] ^ Hans A. Schmitt. "Germany Without Prussia: A Closer Look at the Confederation of the Rhine".

German Studies Review 6, No. 4 (1983), pp 9–39.

^ Michael Kotulla: Deutsches Verfassungsrecht 1806–1918. Eine Dokumentensammlung nebst Einführungen . Volume 1: Gesamtdeutschland, Anhaltische Staaten und Baden , Springer, Berlin et al. 2006, p. 21.

^ This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Dalberg § 2.

Karl Theodor Anton Maria von Dalberg ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 7 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

762– 763.

^ Oman, Carola.

Napoleon's viceroy, Eugène de Beauharnais London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1966 Sources [ edit ] Westermann, Großer Atlas zur Weltgeschichte (in German) WorldStatesmen - here Frankfurt, see also other parties mentioned Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Prince-primate&oldid=1267326928 " Categories : Catholic ecclesiastical titles Catholic Church in Hungary Titles of national or ethnic leadership Prince-bishops Prince-primate of the Confederation of the Rhine Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text Articles needing additional references from August 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Hungarian-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 4 January 2025, at 16:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Prince-primate 7 languages Add topic

