Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Approach 3 See also Toggle See also subsection 3.1 Notable microhistorians 4 Citations 5 General and cited references 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Microhistory 32 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Latina Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Intensive historical investigation of a well-defined smaller unit of research An edition of the 1560 account of the trial of the French imposter Martin Guerre who would serve as the subject for Natalie Zemon Davis 's landmark The Return of Martin Guerre (1982) Microhistory is a genre of history that focuses on small units of research, such as an event, community, individual or a settlement. In its ambition, however, microhistory can be distinguished from a simple case study insofar as microhistory aspires to "[ask] large questions in small places", according to the definition given by Charles Joyner.

[ 1 ] It is closely associated with social and cultural history .

Origins [ edit ] Microhistory became popular in Italy in the 1970s.

[ 2 ] According to Giovanni Levi , one of the pioneers of the approach, it began as a reaction to a perceived crisis in existing historiographical approaches.

[ 3 ] Carlo Ginzburg , another of microhistory's founders, has written that he first heard the term used around 1977, and soon afterwards began to work with Levi and Simona Cerutti on Microstorie , a series of microhistorical works.

[ 4 ] The word "microhistory" dates back to 1959, when the American historian George R. Stewart published Pickett's Charge: A Microhistory of the Final Attack on Gettysburg, July 3, 1863 , which tells the story of the final day of the Battle of Gettysburg .

[ 5 ] Another early use was by the Annales historian Fernand Braudel , for whom the concept had negative connotations, being overly concerned with the history of events.

[ 6 ] A third early use of the term was in the title of Luis González 's 1968 work Pueblo en vilo: Microhistoria de San José de Gracia .

[ 6 ] González distinguished between microhistory, for him synonymous with local history, and " petite histoire ", which is primarily concerned with anecdotes.

[ 6 ] Approach [ edit ] The most distinctive aspect of the microhistorical approach is the small scale of investigations.

[ 2 ] Microhistorians focus on small units in society, as a reaction to the generalisations made by the social sciences which do not necessarily hold up when tested against these smaller units.

[ 7 ] For instance, Ginzburg's 1976 work The Cheese and the Worms – "probably the most popular and widely read work of microhistory" [ 2 ] – investigates the life of a single sixteenth-century Italian miller, Menocchio . The individuals microhistorical works are concerned with are frequently those whom Richard M. Tristano describes as "little people", especially those considered heretics.

[ 8 ] Carlo Ginzburg has written that a core principle of microhistory is making obstacles in sources, such as lacunae , part of the historical account.

[ 9 ] Relatedly, Levi has said that the point of view of the researcher becomes part of the account in microhistory.

[ 10 ] Other notable aspects of microhistory as a historical approach are an interest in the interaction of elite and popular culture, [ 11 ] and an interest in the interaction between micro- and macro-levels of history.

[ 12 ] Since the 2010s, historical research has expanded to include the field of “global microhistory,” [ 13 ] which seeks to combine the detailed focus of microhistorical studies with broader transregional or global perspectives.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Alltagsgeschichte English local history History from below Category:Microhistorians Macrohistory One-place study Notable microhistorians [ edit ] Wolfgang Behringer Robert Bickers Jaroslav Čechura [ cs ] Simona Cerutti Alain Corbin John J. Curry Robert Darnton Natalie Zemon Davis Arie van Deursen Clifford Geertz Carlo Ginzburg Luis González y González Maurizio Gribaudi Craig Harline Cynthia A. Kierner Mark Kurlansky Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie Giovanni Levi Sigurður Gylfi Magnússon Luis Mott Sue Peabody Leslie Peirce Detlev Peukert Osvaldo Raggio Jacques Revel Guido Ruggiero David Sabean Mimi Sheller Carolyn Steedman Jonathan D. Spence Alan Taylor Stella Tillyard E. P. Thompson Laurel Thatcher Ulrich Alfred F. Young Citations [ edit ] ^ Joyner, Charles W. (1999).

Shared Traditions: Southern History and Folk Culture . Urbana: University of Illinois . p. 1.

ISBN 9780252067723 .

^ a b c Tristano 1996 , p. 26.

^ Levi 1991 , p. 93-94.

^ Ginzburg 1993 , p. 10.

^ Ginzburg 1993 , p. 11.

^ a b c Ginzburg 1993 , p. 12.

^ Magnússon, Sigurdur Gylfi (2003). " 'The Singularization of History': Social History and Microhistory within the Postmodern State of Knowledge".

Journal of Social History .

36 (3): 709.

doi : 10.1353/jsh.2003.0054 .

S2CID 144942672 .

^ Tristano 1996 , p. 26-27.

^ Ginzburg 1993 , p. 28.

^ Levi 1991 , p. 106.

^ Tristano 1996 , p. 28.

^ Tristano 1996 , p. 27.

^ Ghobrial, John-Paul (2019).

"Global History and Microhistory" .

Past & Present (Supplement 14).

^ Bertrand, Romain; Calafat, Guillaume (2018).

"Global Microhistory: A Case to Follow" .

Annales. Histoire, Sciences Sociales - English Edition .

73 (1): 3– 17.

doi : 10.1017/ahsse.2020.9 .

General and cited references [ edit ] Ginzburg, Carlo (1993). "Microhistory: Two or Three Things That I Know about It".

Critical Inquiry .

20 (1). Translated by Tedeschi, John; Tedeschi, Anne C.

The University of Chicago Press : 10– 35.

doi : 10.1086/448699 .

JSTOR 1343946 .

S2CID 197852979 .

Künzel, Geraldien von Frijtag Drabbe; Galimi, Valeria (2019).

"Microcosms of the Holocaust: Exploring New Venues into Small-Scale Research of the Holocaust" .

Journal of Genocide Research .

21 (3): 335– 341.

doi : 10.1080/14623528.2019.1631517 .

Levi, Giovanni (1991). "On Microhistory". In Burke, Peter (ed.).

New Perspectives on Historical Writing . Cambridge: Polity Press . p. 254.

ISBN 9780271008271 – via Google Books .

Tristano, Richard M. (1996). "Microhistory and Holy Family Parish: Some Historical Considerations".

U.S. Catholic Historian .

14 (3: Parishes and Peoples: Religious and Social Meanings, Part Two).

Catholic University of America Press : 23– 30.

JSTOR 25154561 .

External links [ edit ] Microhistory —The website of the Center for Microhistorical Research at the Reykjavik Academy in Iceland "What Is Microhistory?" , Sigurður Gylfi Magnússon, chair of the Center for Microhistorical Research Microhistory Network —A group of historians interested in microhistory (2007–) v t e Theories of history Annales Conceptual Cultural Economic Environmental Gender Historicism Marxist Macrohistory Microhistory Postcolonial Politics Postmodern Psychohistory Social List of historians History Big History v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Authority control databases : National Germany France BnF data Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Microhistory&oldid=1299582900 " Category : Fields of history Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 07:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Microhistory 32 languages Add topic

