Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work 2 Painting contest 3 Death 4 Literary References 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Zeuxis (painter) 34 languages العربية বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Zeuxis and Parrhasius ) 5th-century BCE Greek painter Zeuxis Born c.

464 BCE Heraclea Lucania Died c.

4th century BCE [ 1 ] Place of death unknown Cause of death Death from laughter Occupation Painter Zeuxis ( / ˈ zj uː k s ɪ s / ; Ancient Greek : Ζεῦξις ) [ 2 ] (of Heraclea ) was a late 5th-century- early 4th-century BCE Greek artist famed for his ability to create images that appeared highly realistic.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] None of his works survive, but anecdotes about Zeuxis's art and life have been referenced often in the history and literature of art and in art theory .

[ 5 ] Much of the information about Zeuxis comes from Pliny the Elder 's Natural History , but his work is also discussed by Xenophon [ 6 ] and Aristotle .

[ 7 ] One of the most famous stories about Zeuxis centers on an artistic competition with the artist Parrhasius to prove which artist could create a greater illusion of nature.

[ 8 ] Zeuxis, Timanthes and Parrhasius were painters of the Ionian School of painting.  The Ionian School flourished during the 4th century BCE.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Life and work [ edit ] Victor Mottez , Zeuxis choosing his models (1858) Zeuxis was born in Heraclea in 464 BCE, probably Heraclea Lucania , in the present-day region of Basilicata in the southeastern "boot" of Italy.

[ 12 ] He may have studied with Demophilus of Himera (Sicily), or with Neseus of Thasos (an island in the northern Aegean Sea ), and/or with the Greek painter Appollodorus .

[ citation needed ] He was active across the ancient Greek world from Magna Graecia to Ephesus, to Macedonia, Samos and to Athens where his greatest number of works were made.

[ 13 ] The "Eros" of the temple of Aphrodite and the "Penelope" were some of his first works. Records cite his notable works as Helen , Zeus Enthroned , and The Infant Hercules Strangling the Serpents . He also painted an assembly of gods, Eros crowned with roses, Alcmene , Menelaus , an athlete, Pan , Marsyas chained, and an old woman. King Archelaus I of Macedon employed Zeuxis to decorate the palace of his new capital Pella with a picture of Pan.

[ 14 ] Most of his works went to Rome and Byzantium but disappeared during the time of Pausanias .

Zeuxis Choosing the Most Beautiful Women from Croton as His Models by François-André Vincent , 1789 Zeuxis was an innovative Greek painter. Although his paintings have not survived, historical records state they were known for their realism, small scale, novel subject matter, and independent format. His technique created volumetric illusion by manipulating light and shadow, a change from the usual method of filling in shapes with flat colors. Preferring small-scale panels to murals, Zeuxis also introduced genre subjects (such as still life) into painting. He contributed to the composite method of composition and may have originated an approach to, and thus influenced the concept of the ideal form of the nude, as described by art historian Kenneth Clark . As the story goes, according to Cicero , [ 15 ] Zeuxis could not find a woman beautiful enough to pose as Helen of Troy , the most beautiful woman in the world, so he selected the finest features of five different models of the city of Croton to create a composite image of ideal beauty.

[ 16 ] Painting contest [ edit ] According to the Naturalis Historia by Pliny the Elder , Zeuxis and his contemporary Parrhasius (of Ephesus and later Athens ) staged a contest to determine the greater artist. When Zeuxis unveiled his painting of grapes, they appeared so real that birds flew down to peck at them. But when Parrhasius, whose painting was concealed behind a curtain, asked Zeuxis to pull aside that curtain, the curtain itself turned out to be a painted illusion. Parrhasius won, and Zeuxis said, "I have deceived the birds, but Parrhasius has deceived Zeuxis."  This story was commonly referred to in 18th and 19th-century art theory to promote spatial illusion in painting. A similar anecdote says that Zeuxis once drew a boy holding grapes, and when birds, once again, tried to peck them, he was extremely displeased, stating that he must have painted the boy with less skill since the birds would have feared to approach otherwise.

Death [ edit ] Arent de Gelder , Self-Portrait as Zeuxis Portraying an Ugly Old Woman (1685) According to the Roman grammarian Festus , Zeuxis died laughing at a picture of an old woman he had just painted.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] The legend is mentioned in Karel van Mander 's Schilder-boeck (1604) [ 19 ] and is known by later artists who alluded to the story in their self-portraits, such as Rembrandt 's Self-Portrait as Zeuxis Laughing (c. 1662), Aert de Gelder 's Self-Portrait as Zeuxis (1685), [ 20 ] and possibly Jean-Étienne Liotard 's Self-Portrait Laughing (c. 1770).

[ 19 ] Literary References [ edit ] Zeuxis is briefly mentioned in the preface of Don Quixote by Cervantes : Of all this there will be nothing in my book, for I have nothing to quote in the margin or to note at the end, and still less do I know what authors I follow in it, to place them at the beginning, as all do, under the letters A, B, C, beginning with Aristotle and ending with Xenophon , or Zoilus , or Zeuxis, though one was a slanderer and the other a painter.

[ 21 ] and is mentioned by Mark Twain in The Innocents Abroad : As we turned and moved again through the temple, I wished that the illustrious men who had sat in it in the remote ages could visit it again and reveal themselves to our curious eyes—Plato, Aristotle, Demosthenes, Socrates, Phocion, Pythagoras, Euclid, Pindar, Xenophon, Herodotus, Praxiteles and Phidias, Zeuxis the painter.

[ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Ancient Greek art Chiaroscuro Hierarchy of genres Trompe-l'œil References [ edit ] ^ Chilvers, Ian (2003). "Zeuxis".

The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Art and Artists . Retrieved 7 November 2010 .

^ William Smith (1880).

A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology: Oarses-Zygia . J. Murray. p. 1325.

^ Matheson, Susan B. (2003).

"Zeuxis" .

Grove Art Online . Retrieved February 20, 2024 .

^ "Zeuxis: The Ancient Greek Painter & Master of Still Life" .

TheCollector . 2020-06-09 . Retrieved 2021-08-12 .

^ Mansfield, Elizabeth.

Too Beautiful to Picture: Zeuxis, Myth, And Mimesis . U of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 978-1-4529-0916-5 .

^ Xenophon Oec. 10 ^ Aristotle, Poetics 6.5 ^ Elsner, Jas (1996-06-27).

Art and Text in Roman Culture . CUP Archive. pp.

184– 186.

ISBN 978-0-521-43030-2 .

^ Clement, Clara Erskine (2024).

A History of Art for Beginners and Students: Painting, Sculpture, Architecture Painting: An Artistic Journey Through Time . New Delhi, India: Namasakr Books. p. 14.

ISBN 9782023122518 .

^ Dyer, Thomas Henry (1882).

On Imitative Art, with Preliminary Remarks on Beauty, Sublimity and Taste . London, England: George Bell and Sons. p. 280-281.

^ Gilman, Daniel Coit; Peck, Harry Thurston; Colby, Frank Moore, eds. (1906).

"Ionian" .

The New International Encyclopaedia . Vol. 10. New York, NY: Dood, Mead and Company. p. 734 . Retrieved September 10, 2023 .

^ Chilvers, Ian (2003). "Zeuxis".

The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Art and Artists . Retrieved 7 November 2010 .

^ Giuseppe Celsi, Zeusi e le modelle di Kroton, Gruppo Archeologico Krotoniate (GAK) https://www.gruppoarcheologicokr.it/zeusi-e-le-modelle-di-kroton/ ^ The Greek world, 479-323 BCE, By Simon Hornblower, Page 95 ISBN 0-415-15344-1 ^ Cicero , Marcus Tullius (2006).

De Inventione . Vol. II. ReadHowYouWant.com.

ISBN 9781425031824 .

^ Mansfield, Elizabeth (2007).

Too beautiful to picture: Zeuxis, myth, and mimesis . University of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 978-0-8166-4749-1 .

(see also: mimesis ) ^ Smith, William (ed.). "Zeuxis".

A Dictionary of Greek and Roman biography and mythology .

The story told of the manner of his death, namely, that he choked with laughing at a picture of an old woman which he had just painted (Festus, s.v.

Pictor ), furnishes another instance of those fictions which the ancient grammarians were so fond of inventing, in order to make the deaths of great men correspond with the character of their lives.

^ Festus, Sextus Pompeius .

De verborum significatione .

Pictor Zeuxis risui mortuus, dum ridet effuse pictam a se anum γραῦν.

^ a b Bark, Julianna (2007–2008). "The Spectacular Self: Jean-Etienne Liotard’s Self-Portrait Laughing".

^ "Zeuxis" .

Oxford Reference . Retrieved 20 December 2023 .

^ "Don Quixote - The Author's Preface" .

The Literature Network . Retrieved 2022-12-17 .

^ "The Innocents Abroad - Chapter 33" .

Project Gutenberg . Retrieved 2023-08-23 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Zeuxis .

Description of a painting by Zeuxis in "Zeuxis and Antiochus" by Lucian of Samosata (Vol. II) Gutenberg Project Reference to the painting technique of Zeuxis by Aristotle from The Poetics Gutenberg Project v t e Ancient Greek painters Agatharchus Anaxandra Androcydes Antiphilus Aglaophon Antidotus Antorides Apelles Apollodorus Aregon Aristarete Aristides of Thebes Aristoclides Aristolaos Ariston Aristophon Artemon Athenion of Maroneia Asclepiodorus Cimon of Cleonae Ctesilochus Echion Euphranor Eupompus Galaton Heraclides Melanthius Micon Mnasitheus of Sicyon Nealkes Nicomachus of Thebes Pamphilus Panaenus Parrhasius Pausias Peiraikos Philoxenus of Eretria Polyidus Polygnotus Protogenes Thales Theon of Samos Timanthes Timanthes of Sicyon Timarete Timomachus Zeuxis Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 FAST 2 National Germany United States Vatican 2 Israel Artists ULAN RKD Artists People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zeuxis_(painter)&oldid=1304156799 " Categories : Ancient Greek painters 5th-century BC Greek people Artists of Archelaus of Macedon Ancient Pella Deaths from laughter 5th-century BC painters Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 09:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Zeuxis (painter) 34 languages Add topic

