Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Content 2 Author and time of composition 3 Reception 4 Editions and translations 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Definitions (Plato) 9 languages العربية Deutsch Ελληνικά Français Íslenska Italiano 日本語 Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dictionary of 184 philosophical terms This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Definitions" Plato – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Definitions The oldest, surviving manuscript of Definitions : Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale, Gr. 1807 (9th century), first page Author Pseudo-Plato Language Ancient Greek Subject Philosophy The Definitions ( Ancient Greek : Ὅροι Horoi ; Latin : Definitiones [ 1 ] ) is a dictionary of 184 philosophical terms sometimes included in the corpus of Plato 's works. Plato is generally not regarded as the editor of all of Definitions . Some ancient scholars attributed Definitions to Speusippus .

[ 2 ] In modern scholarship, Definitions is thought to have little philosophical value. Given the sophistication of Plato's and Aristotle's efforts in the area of definition, this collection seems to be an elementary text produced by second-rate philosophical study.

[ citation needed ] Its early date, however, does give it some importance as a source for the history of ancient Platonism.

[ 3 ] Content [ edit ] Definitions is a list of 184 terms important in early Platonism together with one or more brief definitions. Though not in alphabetical or any other simple order, it is possible to discern some features of the organization of the collection. Definitions 1–20 consist chiefly of terms from natural philosophy. Definitions 21–107, the main section of the collection, contain concepts from ethics (affects and virtues), political theory, logic, grammar, and epistemology. Definitions 108–184 are a final appendix that contains a mixture of concepts which sometimes duplicate earlier terms and therefore was probably added at a later date. There are few terms drawn from metaphysics. It is probable that the collection underwent changes through the centuries since the number of definitions in the surviving manuscripts varies.

[ 4 ] Methodologically, Definitions is related to the Platonic Method of Division ( diairesis ) that progresses from the more general to the more specific, i.e., from 'above' to 'below.' Definitions were constructed by first giving the genus of the thing to be defined and then giving more and more of its special characteristics (its differentia) until it was fully distinguished from other members of the genus. Such a definition therefore gives the lowest species for the thing defined. In Definitions , for example, the word definition is defined as an expression that is composed of genus and differentia.

[ 5 ] Many definitions in Definitions follow these principles and define terms by giving their genus and distinguishing characteristics. A human, for example, is a two-footed animal without wings.

[ 6 ] Here, two-footed animal is the lowest genus that contains humans and without wings distinguishes humans from all the other two-footed animals, i.e., from birds. Other definitions, however, consist only of lists of characteristics or are trivial explanations of words. Many concepts are defined simply by giving the distinguishing characteristic. Humans, for example, are also defined as the only rational animal.

Author and time of composition [ edit ] Part of a series on Platonism Life Theory of forms Intelligible form Hyperuranion Theory of soul Nous Thumos Phren Epistemology Anamnesis Peritrope Dianoia Cardinal virtues Moral rationalism Political philosophy Mimesis Orthotes onomaton Euthyphro dilemma The Republic Allegory of the cave Analogy of the Sun Analogy of the divided line Form of the Good Noble lie Philosopher king Plato's number Ship of State Ring of Gyges Myth of Er Timaeus Atlantis Demiurge World soul Organicism Classical element Platonic solid Tertium quid Khôra Related articles Commentaries The Academy in Athens Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Pseudo-Platonica Related categories Plato Philosophy portal v t e There is a scholarly consensus that Definitions cannot be ascribed to Plato. However, many individual points rest on his doctrines and it is probable that the way of defining various concepts goes back to this teaching. It is thought certain that Definitions originated in the circles around the school of philosophy founded by Plato, i.e., in or around the Academy. The definitions were probably collected at the time of the Early Academy, and indeed in the period immediately following Plato's death, that is, in the second half of the fourth century or the first third of the third century BCE. Key Aristotelian terms such as 'potential' and 'actuality' are not conspicuous in Definitions .

It was conjectured that Definitions is a selection from a larger collection that was available in the Academy in that period, and may have been the foundation of a lost collection made by Speusippus , Plato's nephew and the second head of the Academy.

[ 7 ] Today, however, the hypothesis that the extant collection is related to Speusippus' is no longer defended.

[ 8 ] Whether Definitions is a compilation made from older collections is debated by scholars.

[ 9 ] Reception [ edit ] The existence of Definitions is first attested in the Roman imperial period. Until late antiquity, no one else but Plato was named as the author, [ 10 ] but the prevailing opinion was that the collection did not originate with him. It was not included in the tetralogical arrangement of Plato's works. The Anonymous Prolegomena to Platonic Philosophy which is dated to late antiquity, designates Speusippus as the author.

[ 11 ] The earliest, surviving manuscript is from the ninth century CE.

[ 12 ] Definitions was unknown to the Latin-speaking, scholarly world of the Middle Ages and was first rediscovered by Renaissance humanists . In the fifteenth century, the humanist Marsilio Ficino believed the collection's author was Speusippus.

[ 13 ] Ficino translated Definitions into Latin and published his translation in Venice in 1497 with Aldus Manutius , and named Speusippus as the author in the introduction.

[ 14 ] The first edition of the Greek text was brought out in Venice by Aldus Manutius in September 1513 as part of the complete works of Plato edited by Markos Musuros . This edition was the basis  for the Latin translation that the humanist Willibald Pirckheimer brought out in Nuremberg in 1523 with the printer Friedrich Peypus.

[ 15 ] Editions and translations [ edit ] The first printed edition of Definitions ,  Venice 1513, first page John Burnet (ed.).

Platonis Opera, vol. V, Oxford Classical Text (Oxford: Clarendon, 1907) (Greek only).

Douglas S. Hutchinson (translator).

Definitions* . In John M. Cooper (ed.): Plato. Complete Works , Hackett Publishing, Indianapolis/Cambridge 1997, ISBN 978-0872203495 , pp. 1677–1686 (only English translation).

Joseph Souilhé (ed.).

Platon: Œuvres complètes , v. 13, part 3: Dialogues apocryphes . 2nd edition, Les Belles Lettres, Paris 1962, pp. 151–173 (critical edition with French translation).

Franz Susemihl (translator).

Definitionen . In Erich Ludwig Loewenthal (ed.): Platon: Sämtliche Werke in drei Bänden , v. 3, unchanged reproduction of the 8th edition, Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt 2004, ISBN 3-534-17918-8 , pp. 787–798 (only German translation).

Hans Günter Zekl (translator).

Pseudo-Platon: Begriffsbestimmungen . In Hans Günter Zekl (ed.): Aristoteles: Organon , v. 2, Felix Meiner, Hamburg 1998, ISBN 3-7873-1313-3 , pp. LXIV–LXXII, 233–245 (only German translation).

Benati, Edoardo (2023).

Platone, Horoi: Saggio introduttivo, edizione critica, traduzione e commento a cura di Edoardo Benati (1st ed.). Baden-Baden: Academia.

ISBN 9783985720972 .

(critical edition with Italian translation) Notes [ edit ] ^ Henri Estienne (ed.), Platonis opera quae extant omnia , Vol. 3, 1578, p. 411 .

^ John Madison Cooper, D. S. Hutchinson (1997), Plato – Complete Works . Hackett Publishing. pp. 1677–1687.

^ Hans Günter Zekl (ed.): Aristoteles: Organon , v. 2, Hamburg 1998, pp. LXIV, LXX–LXXII.

^ Luc Brisson: Platon: Dialogues douteux et apocryphes . In Richard Goulet (ed.): Dictionnaire des philosophes antiques , v. 5, part 1, Paris 2012, pp. 833–841: 839; Joseph Souilhé (ed.): Platon: Œuvres complètes , v. 13, part 3, 2nd edition, Paris 1962, p. 157ff.

^ Definitions 415a.

^ Definitions 415a.

^ Hans Krämer: Die Ältere Akademie . In Hellmut Flashar (ed.): Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie. Die Philosophie der Antike , v. 3, 2nd edition, Basel 2004, pp. 1–165: 96; Hans Günter Zekl (ed.): Aristoteles: Organon , v. 2, Hamburg 1998, p. LXIX. Joseph Souilhé (ed.) argues for a later date: Platon: Œuvres complètes , v. 13, part 3, 2nd edition, Paris 1962, p. 157 ff.; cf. Margherita Isnardi: Nomos e basileia nell’Accademia antica . In La Parola del Passato 12, 1957, pp. 401–438: p. 429 and note 2; Heinz Gerd Ingenkamp: Untersuchungen zu den pseudoplatonischen Definitionen , Wiesbaden 1967, pp. 106–110.

^ Leonardo Tarán: Speusippus of Athens , Leiden 1981, p. 197.

^ This is maintained by Heinz Gerd Ingenkamp: Untersuchungen zu den pseudoplatonischen Definitionen , Wiesbaden 1967, pp. 110–112. Konrad Gaiser rejects this in his review of von Ingenkamp's work in Gymnasium (newspaper) 76, 1969, pp. 543–546: 544 ff.

^ Heinz Gerd Ingenkamp: Untersuchungen zu den pseudoplatonischen Definitionen , Wiesbaden 1967, p. 112 ff.

^ „Prolegomena zur Philosophie Platons“ 26, ed. by Leendert G. Westerink: Prolégomènes à la philosophie de Platon , Paris 1990, p. 38 ff.

^ Joseph Souilhé (ed.): Platon: Œuvres complètes , v. 13, part 3, 2nd edition, Paris 1962, p. 158 ff.

^ For Ficino's hypothesis see Antonio Carlini: Alcune considerazioni sulla tradizione testuale degli scritti pseudoplatonici . In Klaus Döring et al. (ed.): Pseudoplatonica , Stuttgart 2005, pp. 25–35: 31f; James Hankins: Plato in the Italian Renaissance , 3rd edition, Leiden 1994, p. 307.

^ James Hankins: Plato in the Italian Renaissance , 3rd edition, Leiden 1994, p. 742 ff.

^ For Pirckheimer's translation see Niklas Holzberg: Willibald Pirckheimer , München 1981, pp. 301–311.

References [ edit ] Heinz Gerd Ingenkamp: Untersuchungen zu den pseudoplatonischen Definitionen.

Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden 1967.

Hans Krämer: Die Ältere Akademie . In Hellmut Flashar (ed.): Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie. Die Philosophie der Antike , v. 3: Ältere Akademie – Aristoteles – Peripatos , 2nd edition, Schwabe, Basel 2004, pp. 1–165, 96, 109 ff., 158, ISBN 3-7965-1998-9 .

External links [ edit ] Definitions translated by George Burges Free public domain audiobook version of Definitions translated by George Burges Apocrypha public domain audiobook at LibriVox . Collection includes Definitions.

George Burges , translator (1855).

v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Sweden Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Definitions_(Plato)&oldid=1291007488 " Categories : Appendix Platonica Ancient Greek dictionaries Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2019 Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 18 May 2025, at 14:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Definitions (Plato) 9 languages Add topic

