Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 How it works 3 Patent information 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Haberman Feeder 3 languages العربية Català Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Specialty baby bottle This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Haberman Feeder" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A baby being fed using the Haberman Feeder. The upright sitting position allows gravity to help the baby swallow the milk The Haberman Feeder (a registered trademark ) is a speciality bottle named after its inventor Mandy Haberman for babies with impaired sucking ability (for example due to cleft lip and palate or Mobius syndrome ). The design of the feeder is to simulate breastfeeding .

Origin [ edit ] Mandy Haberman's research included contact with the Cleft Lip and Palate Association of Great Britain, and a study of cineradiographs of suckling infants, so that she might better comprehend the mechanics of feeding. She especially noted the differences between bottle feeding (which is primarily sucking) and breastfeeding (primarily pumping).

How it works [ edit ] The feeder's design enables the feeder to be activated by tongue and gum pressure, imitating the mechanics involved in breastfeeding, rather than by sucking. 
A one-way valve separates the nipple from the bottle. Before starting the feeding, air is squeezed out of the nipple and is automatically replaced by breastmilk or formula through the valve. Milk cannot flow back into the bottle and is replenished continuously as the baby feeds. A slit valve opening near the tip of the nipple shuts between jaw compressions, preventing the baby from being overwhelmed with milk. Stopping or reducing the flow of milk is controlled by rotation of the nipple in the baby's mouth. Usually the nipple is marked with lines that indicate zero flow, moderate flow, and maximum flow. For infants who need assistance with their feeding efforts, whoever's feeding the baby may apply a gentle pumping action to the body of the nipple.

The numbers in the cross section are listed below: Teat, this part is inserted into the baby's mouth.

Teat, this part is used to gently squeeze the milk into the baby's mouth and to keep the teat filled with milk.

Flexible part of the valve . The milk in the teat cannot flow back into the bottle, thus when squeezed the milk flows into the baby's mouth, at the same time milk is sucked into the teat Ring to keep the teat and valve on top of the bottle.

Standard sized babybottle (only top part shown).

Patent information [ edit ] United Kingdom patent GB2169210 covering the feeder was applied for on December 11, 1985 and granted on January 5, 1989 [1] Archived 2008-03-17 at the Wayback Machine .

United States patent US6102245A covering the feeder was applied for on October 18, 1996 and granted on August 15, 2000 2 .

External links [ edit ] Product page on mandyhaberman.com University of Missouri Children's Hospital, Pediatric Plastic Surgery Haberman Feeder instructions Seattle Children's Craniofacial team, infant feeding v t e Infants and their care Health ( pediatrics ) Baby food Birth weight Breast pump Breastfeeding Breastfeeding and medications Breastfeeding and mental health Bottle feeding Colic Cradle cap Esotropia Failure to thrive Immunization Infant and toddler safety Infant bathing Infant feeding Infant food safety Infant formula Infant massage Infant respiratory distress syndrome Infant sleep training Neonatal intensive care unit Newborn care and safety Oral rehydration therapy Pedialyte Preterm birth Shaken baby syndrome Soy formula SIDS Development Attachment parenting Baby-led weaning Baby talk Babbling Birth defect Childbirth Crawling Gestational age Infant visual development Irritant diaper dermatitis Infant cognitive development Infant crying Kangaroo care Mother Nursery rhyme Object permanence Parent Parenting Peekaboo Play Prenatal development Prenatal development table Teething Walking Weaning Socialization and culture Attachment Babysitting Child abuse Child care Child custody Children's rights UN Child rights Circumcision Foster care Grandparent visitation Infant swimming Milk bank Nanny Wet nurse Infant care and equipment Baby bouncer Baby gate Baby monitor / Hidden camera Baby powder Baby shampoo Baby toy Baby walker Bib Baby swing Baby transport Bassinet Car seat safety Child vehicular heat stroke deaths Cloth diaper Cradle board Diaper Diaper bag Baby wipes Haberman Feeder High chair Infant bed (American 'crib' and 'cradle', British 'cot') Infant carrier Infant clothing Pacifier Playpen Stroller Supplemental nursing system Swaddling Swim diaper Teether Travel cot Other topics Baby shower Babywearing Child neglect Closed adoption Cry room Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder Infant ear piercing Open adoption Prenatal cocaine exposure Neonatal withdrawal syndrome Parental child abduction Parental responsibility Parenting plan Paternity Paternity fraud Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Haberman_Feeder&oldid=1301777053 " Categories : Infant feeding 21st-century American women inventors 21st-century American inventors Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from January 2024 All articles lacking reliable references Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 16:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Haberman Feeder 3 languages Add topic

