Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nitrogen leaching 2 Phosphorus leaching 3 Health impacts 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Leaching (agriculture) 11 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch فارسی Français हिन्दी Igbo Nederlands Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Loss of water-soluble plant nutrients from soil due to rain and irrigation For other uses, see Leaching .

Agriculture History West Asia Ancient Egypt Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Austronesia Agricultural science Agricultural History Review Arab Agricultural Revolution Argentina Canada China Chile Columbian exchange Green Revolution Indian subcontinent Mesoamerica Middle Ages Neolithic Revolution Organic farming Palestine Peru United Kingdom British Agricultural Revolution Cheshire Scotland United States African-American California On land Agrivoltaic Animal husbandry cattle pigs poultry sheep Dairy Dryland Extensive Fertilizer Free-range Grazing Convertible husbandry Rotational grazing Hobby Intensive animals pigs crops Natural Monoculture Orchard Organic Paddy field Ranching Sharecropping Sowing Colonia Slash-and-burn Smallholding Terrace Steam sterilization Hydroculture Aquaculture Aquaponics Hydroponics Aeroponics Related Agribusiness Agricultural cooperative Agricultural supplies Agricultural science Agricultural engineering Agricultural technology Precision Biotechnology Agroforestry Agronomy Animal husbandry Animal-free agriculture Cash crop Cellular agriculture Cultural methods Contract farming Extensive farming Farm Farmhouse Feed ratio Free range Horticulture Intensive farming animals pigs crops Mechanised agriculture Organic farming Paludiculture Permaculture Plantation Polyculture Rice-duck farming Rice-fish system Sustainable agriculture Sustainable food system Universities and colleges Urban agriculture Lists Agriculturist profession Agricultural machinery Food origins Government ministries Universities and colleges Categories Agricultural machinery Agriculture by country Agriculture companies Biotechnology Cannabis cultivation History of agriculture Livestock Meat industry Poultry farming Agriculture and the environment Agriculture portal v t e In agriculture , leaching is the loss of water-soluble plant nutrients from the soil , due to rain and irrigation .

Soil structure , crop planting, type and application rates of fertilizers , and other factors are taken into account to avoid excessive nutrient loss. Leaching may also refer to the practice of applying a small amount of excess irrigation where the water has a high salt content to avoid salts from building up in the soil ( salinity control ).  Where this is practiced, drainage must also usually be employed, to carry away the excess water.

Leaching is a natural environment concern when it contributes to groundwater contamination . As water from rain, flooding , or other sources seeps into the ground, it can dissolve chemicals and carry them into the underground water supply. Of particular concern are hazardous waste dumps and landfills , and, in agriculture, excess fertilizer , improperly stored animal manure, and biocides (e.g.

pesticides , fungicides , insecticides and herbicides ).

Nitrogen leaching [ edit ] Nitrogen forms and pathways within an agricultural production system Nitrogen is a common element in nature and an essential plant nutrient. Approximately 78% of Earth's atmosphere is nitrogen (N 2 ). The strong bond between the atoms of N 2 makes this gas quite inert and not directly usable by plants and animals. As nitrogen naturally cycles through the air, water and soil it undergoes various chemical and biological transformations. Nitrogen promotes plant growth. Livestock then eat the crops producing manure, which is returned to the soil, adding organic and mineral forms of nitrogen. The cycle is complete when the next crop uses the amended soil.

[ 1 ] To increase food production, fertilizers, such as nitrate (NO 3 – ) and ammonium (NH 4 + ), which are easily absorbed by plants, are introduced to the plant root zone. However, soils do not absorb the excess NO 3 – ions, which then move downward freely with drainage water, and are leached into groundwater, streams and oceans.

[ 2 ] The degree of leaching is affected by: soil type and structure. For example, sandy soil holds little water while clay soils have high water-retention rates; the amount of water used by the plants/crops; how much nitrate is already present in the soil.

[ 3 ] The level of nitrous oxide (N 2 O) in the Earth's atmosphere is increasing at a rate of 0.2 to 0.3% annually.

Anthropogenic sources of nitrogen are 50% greater than from natural sources, such as soils and oceans. Leached agricultural inputs, i.e. fertilizers and manures, account for 75% of the anthropogenic sources of nitrogen.

[ 4 ] The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) estimates world demand for nitrogen fertilizers increased by 1.7% annually between 2011 and 2015, an increase of 7.5 million tonnes. Regional increases of nitrogen fertilizer use are expected to be 67% by Asia, 18% by the Americas, 10% by Europe, 3% by Africa, and 1% by Oceania.

[ 5 ] Phosphorus leaching [ edit ] Phosphorus (P) is a key nutrient regarding the eutrophication of surface waters and has been shown to limit algae growth in lake environments. Loss of P from agricultural fields has long been recognized as one of the major threats to surface water quality.

[ 6 ] Leaching is an important transport pathway for P losses from agricultural fields in predominantly flat areas with sandy soils or soils prone to preferential flow.

[ 7 ] As opposed to nitrogen phosphorus does interact with soil particles via adsorption and desorption . Important potential adsorption sites for P in soils are surfaces of iron and aluminum oxides or hydroxides such as gibbsite or ferrihydrite . Soils, especially those rich in such minerals do hence have a potential to store P added with fertilizer or manure. Adsorbed P stands in a complex equilibrium with P in the soil solution which is controlled by a multitude of different factors such as: the availability of adsorption sites; the concentration of phosphorus and other anions in the soil water solution; soil pH; soil redox potential .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Phosphorus will leach when this equilibrium is shifted such that either previously adsorbed P is released into the soil solution or additional P cannot be adsorbed anymore.  Many cultivated soils have been receiving fertilizer or manure P in amounts frequently exceeding the crop demand and this often over decades. Phosphorus added to such soils leaches simply because most of the potential adsorption sites are occupied by P input from the past, so called “legacy phosphorus”.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Leaching of P may also be caused by changing chemical conditions in the soil. A decrease in the soils redox potential due to prolonged water saturation may lead to reductive dissolution of ferric iron minerals that are important P sorption sites.  Phosphorus adsorbed to these minerals is consequently released into the soil solution as well and may be leached. This process is of special concern in the restoration of natural wetlands that have previously been drained for agricultural production.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Health impacts [ edit ] High levels of NO 3 in water can adversely affect oxygen levels for both humans and aquatic systems. Human health issues include methemoglobinemia and anoxia , commonly referred to as blue baby syndrome . As a result of these toxic effects, regulatory agencies limit the amount of NO 3 permissible in drinking water to 45 to 50 mg per liter.

Eutrophication , a decline in oxygen content of water, of aquatic systems can cause the death of fish and other marine species. Finally, leaching of NO 3 from acidic sources can increase the loss of calcium and other soil nutrients, thereby reducing an ecosystem 's productivity.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Leaching (pedology) Leaching model (soil) Soil salinity control (leaching requirement, leaching efficiency) SahysMod (spatial agro-hydro salinity, leaching and groundwater model) References [ edit ] ^ Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs.

Environmental Impacts of Nitrogen Use in Agriculture ^ a b Lin, BL; Sakoda, A; Shibasaki, R; Suzuki, M (2001). "A modelling approach to global nitrate leaching caused by anthropogenic fertilisation".

Water Research .

35 (8): 1961– 8.

Bibcode : 2001WatRe..35.1961L .

doi : 10.1016/s0043-1354(00)00484-x .

PMID 11337842 .

^ "WQ262 Nitrogen in the Environment: Leaching | University of Missouri Extension" . Extension.missouri.edu. Archived from the original on 2017-12-07 . Retrieved 2013-03-08 .

^ Mosier, A. R.; Duxbury, J. M.; Freney, J. R.; Heinemeyer, O.; Minami, K. (1996).

"Nitrous oxide emissions from agricultural fields: Assessment, measurement and mitigation" (PDF) .

Plant and Soil ( FTP ). pp.

95– 108.

Bibcode : 1996PlSoi.181...95M .

doi : 10.1007/BF00011296 .

S2CID 1137539 .

[ dead ftp link ] (To view documents see Help:FTP ) ^ FAO, Current world fertilizer trends and outlook to 2015 ^ Carpenter S. R., Caraco N. F., Correll D. L., Howarth R. W., Sharpley A. N., Smith V. H., 1998. Nonpoint pollution of surface waters with phosphorus and nitrogen. Ecological Applications 8, 559–568.

doi : 10.1890/1051-0761(1998)008 [0559:NPOSWW]2.0.CO;2 ^ a b Börling, Katarina (2003).

Phosphorus sorption, accumulation and leaching.

Diss. Sveriges lantbruksuniv., Acta Universitatis agriculturae Sueciae. Agraria, 1401-6249 ; 428 ^ Schoumans, O. (2015).

Phosphorus leaching from soils: process description, risk assessment and mitigation . Diss. Wageningen University and Research Centre.

^ Jarvie, H.P., Sharpley, A.N., Spears, B., Buda, A.R., May, L., Kleinman, P.J.A., 2013. Water Quality Remediation Faces Unprecedented Challenges from “Legacy Phosphorus.” Environ. Sci. Technol. 47, 8997–8998.

doi : 10.1021/es403160a ^ Schmieder, F., Bergström, L., Riddle, M., Gustafsson, J.-P., Klysubun, W., Zehetner, F., Condron, L., Kirchmann, H., 2018. Phosphorus speciation in a long-term manure-amended soil profile – Evidence from wet chemical extraction, 31P-NMR and P K-edge XANES spectroscopy. Geoderma 322, 19–27.

doi : 10.1016/j.geoderma.2018.01.026 ^ Shenker M., Seitelbach S., Brand S., Haim A., Litaor M. I., 2004. Redox reactions and phosphorus release in re‐flooded soils of an altered wetland. European Journal of Soil Science 56, 515–525.

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2389.2004.00692.x ^ Zak, D., Gelbrecht, J., 2007. The mobilisation of phosphorus, organic carbon and ammonium in the initial stage of fen rewetting (a case study from NE Germany). Biogeochemistry 85, 141–151.

doi : 10.1007/s10533-007-9122-2 External links [ edit ] International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) On line : [1] R.J.Oosterbaan, Water and salt balances in agricultural hydrology. Lecture notes, International Course on Land Drainage, ILRI, Wageningen, The Netherlands. On line : [2] R.J.Oosterbaan, 1997. " SaltMod : A tool for interweaving of irrigation and drainage for salinity control". In: W.B.Snellen (ed.), Towards integration of irrigation, and drainage management. ILRI Special report, p. 41–43. On line : [3] v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category v t e Soil science History Index Main fields Pedology Edaphology Soil biology Soil microbiology Soil zoology Soil ecology Soil physics Soil mechanics Soil chemistry Environmental soil science Agricultural soil science Soil topics Soil Pedosphere Soil morphology Pedodiversity Soil formation Soil erosion Soil contamination Soil retrogression and degradation Soil compaction Soil compaction (agriculture) Soil sealing Soil salinity Alkali soil Soil pH Soil acidification Soil health Soil life Soil biodiversity Soil quality Soil value Soil fertility Soil resilience Soil color Soil texture Soil structure Pore space in soil Pore water pressure Soil crust Soil horizon Soil biomantle Soil carbon Soil gas Soil respiration Soil organic matter Soil moisture Soil water (retention) Soil type v t e Soil classification World Reference Base for Soil Resources (1998–) Acrisols Alisols Andosols Anthrosols Arenosols Calcisols Cambisols Chernozem Cryosols Durisols Ferralsols Fluvisols Gleysols Gypsisols Histosol Kastanozems Leptosols Lixisols Luvisols Nitisols Phaeozems Planosols Plinthosols Podzols Regosols Retisols Solonchaks Solonetz Stagnosol Technosols Umbrisols Vertisols USDA soil taxonomy Alfisols Andisols Aridisols Entisols Gelisols Histosols Inceptisols Mollisols Oxisols Spodosols Ultisols Vertisols Other systems FAO soil classification (1974–1998) Unified Soil Classification System AASHTO Soil Classification System Référentiel pédologique (French classification system) Canadian system of soil classification Australian Soil Classification Polish Soil Classification 1938 USDA soil taxonomy List of U.S. state soils List of vineyard soil types PG-3 (Spanish classification system) Non-systematic soil types Sand Silt Clay Loam Topsoil Subsoil Soil crust Claypan Hardpan Gypcrust Caliche Parent material Pedosphere Laimosphere Rhizosphere Bulk soil Alkali soil Bay mud Blue goo Brickearth Brown earth Calcareous grassland Dark earth Dry quicksand Duplex soil Eluvium Expansive clay Fill dirt Fuller's earth Hydrophobic soil Loess Lunar soil Martian soil Mud Muskeg Paleosol Peat Prime farmland Quicksand Serpentine soil Spodic soil Stagnogley Subaqueous soil Takir Terra preta Terra rossa Tropical peat Yedoma Types of soil Applications Soil conservation Soil management Soil guideline value Soil survey Soil test Soil governance Soil value Soil salinity control Erosion control Agroecology Liming (soil) Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Geomorphology Geotechnical engineering Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Societies, Initiatives Australian Society of Soil Science Incorporated Canadian Society of Soil Science Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (India) German Soil Science Society Indian Institute of Soil Science International Union of Soil Sciences International Year of Soil National Society of Consulting Soil Scientists (US) OPAL Soil Centre (UK) Soil Science Society of Poland Soil and Water Conservation Society (US) Soil Science Society of America World Congress of Soil Science Scientific journals Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica B Journal of Soil and Water Conservation Plant and Soil Pochvovedenie Soil Research Soil Science Society of America Journal See also Land use Land conversion Land management Vegetation Infiltration (hydrology) Groundwater Crust (geology) Impervious surface / Surface runoff Petrichor Wikipedia:WikiProject Soil Category soil Category soil science List of soil scientists Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Leaching_(agriculture)&oldid=1305155430 " Categories : Horticulture Soil Hidden categories: Articles with dead FTP links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 10:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Leaching (agriculture) 11 languages Add topic

