Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Carleton College (1942–1957) 1.2 Carleton University (1957–present) 1.2.1 Rapid development and growth (1960–1969) 1.2.2 Steady expansion (1970–1999) 1.2.3 Contemporary developments (2000–present) 2 Organization and administration Toggle Organization and administration subsection 2.1 Governance 2.1.1 Board of Governors 2.1.2 Senate 2.2 Finances 3 Academics Toggle Academics subsection 3.1 Academic units 3.1.1 Arts and Social Sciences 3.1.2 Engineering and Design 3.1.3 Public Affairs 3.1.3.1 Norman Paterson School of International Affairs 3.1.4 Science 3.1.5 Sprott School of Business 3.2 Admissions 3.3 Scholarships and bursaries 3.4 Rankings and reputation 3.5 Affiliated institutions 4 Campus Toggle Campus subsection 4.1 Architecture 4.2 Tunnel system 4.3 Student housing 5 Library and collections Toggle Library and collections subsection 5.1 MacOdrum Library 5.1.1 Archives and Special Collections 5.2 Carleton University Art Gallery 5.3 Carleton Dominion-Chalmers Centre 6 Student life Toggle Student life subsection 6.1 Student union and services 6.1.1 Carleton University Students' Association 6.1.2 Rideau River Residence Association 6.1.3 Graduate Students' Association 6.2 Fraternities and sororities 6.2.1 Newspapers and magazines 6.2.2 Broadcasting 6.2.3 Theatre 7 Athletics Toggle Athletics subsection 7.1 Men's basketball 7.2 Women's basketball 7.3 Football 7.4 Other sports 8 Notable alumni and faculty Toggle Notable alumni and faculty subsection 8.1 Notable faculty 8.2 Chancellors 8.3 Notable alumni 9 Arms 10 See also 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Carleton University 29 languages العربية تۆرکجه Беларуская Cebuano Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Svenska Tagalog Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 45°22′59″N 75°41′51″W ﻿ / ﻿ 45.3831°N 75.6976°W ﻿ / 45.3831; -75.6976 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Public university in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada This article is about the university in Ontario, Canada. For the college in Minnesota, United States, see Carleton College . For the fictional diploma mill, see Fortress Besieged .

Carleton University Coat of arms Motto "Ours the Task Eternal" Type Public Established 1942 ; 83 years ago ( 1942 ) Academic affiliations AACSB , ASAIHL , APSIA , CARL , COU , Fields Institute , Universities Canada , UArctic Endowment C$370.2 million [ 1 ] Budget C$560 million [ 2 ] Chancellor Nik Nanos President Wisdom Tettey (also Vice-Chancellor) Administrative staff 5,328 Students 30,760 Undergraduates 25,722 Postgraduates 5,038 Address 1125 Colonel By Drive Ottawa, Ontario , Canada 45°22′59″N 75°41′51″W ﻿ / ﻿ 45.3831°N 75.6976°W ﻿ / 45.3831; -75.6976 Campus Urban, 62 ha (150 acres) Newspaper The Charlatan Colours Black, Red and White [ 3 ] Nickname Ravens Sporting affiliations U Sports , OUA , RSEQ Mascot Rodney the Raven Website carleton.ca Carleton University is an English-language public research university in Ottawa , Ontario , Canada. Founded in 1942 as Carleton College, the institution originally operated as a private, non-denominational evening college to serve returning World War II veterans.

[ 4 ] Carleton was chartered as a university by the provincial government in 1952 through The Carleton University Act, which was then amended in 1957, giving the institution its current name.

[ 4 ] The university is named after the now-dissolved Carleton County , which included the city of Ottawa at the time the university was founded.

Carleton is organized into five faculties and with more than 65 degree programs. It has several specialized institutions, including the Arthur Kroeger College of Public Affairs , the Norman Paterson School of International Affairs , the Carleton School of Journalism , the School of Public Policy and Administration , and the Sprott School of Business .

As of 2023, Carleton yearly enrols more than 25,000 undergraduate and 5,000 graduate students.

[ 5 ] Carleton has a 150-acre campus located west of Old Ottawa South , close to The Glebe and Confederation Heights . It is bounded to the North by the Rideau Canal and Dow's Lake and to the South by the Rideau River .

[ 6 ] Carleton has more than 180,000 alumni worldwide, seven have become Rhodes Scholars , [ 7 ] two Pulitzer Prize awardees, two Academy Award winners, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] eight Killam Prize winners, [ 11 ] and several recipients of the Order of Canada . The university is affiliated with over 50 Royal Society Fellows and members and 3 Nobel laureates .

[ 12 ] Carleton is also home to 35 Canada Research Chairs , [ 13 ] one Canada 150 Chair, 14 IEEE Fellows and 11 3M National Teaching Award winners.

[ 5 ] Carleton competes in the U Sports league as the Carleton Ravens . Over the past 20 seasons, the Ravens basketball program has won 20 national titles.

Carleton University campus in 2022 History [ edit ] Historical plaque commemorating the inaugural meeting of the Ottawa Association for the Advancement of Learning in December 1941 Henry Marshall Tory , first President of Carleton College Carleton College (1942–1957) [ edit ] Discussions on establishing a second post-secondary institution in Ottawa began in the fall of 1938 among a committee of members from the local YMCA chapter, to create a school accommodating the needs of Ottawa's non-Catholic population. While the Second World War ended the committee's activities, a new committee was organized by Henry Marshall Tory as the Ottawa Association for the Advancement of Learning at a meeting held in December 1941, with formal incorporation in June 1942.

[ 14 ] Established in 1942 as Carleton College, a non-denominational institution, the school began offering evening courses in rented classrooms at the High School of Commerce, now part of the Glebe Collegiate Institute . Classes offered during the first academic year included English, French , history , algebra , trigonometry , chemistry , physics , and biology .

[ 15 ] With the end of the war in 1945 and return of veterans from the frontlines, the college experienced an upsurge in student enrolment during the 1945–46 academic year, accepting 2,200 new students.

To accommodate them, the school rented facilities in various buildings throughout the city, including classrooms at the Lisgar Collegiate Institute , Ottawa Technical High School , and the basements of several local churches. The academic offerings expanded with the establishment of the Faculty of Arts and Science, and new coursework in journalism and engineering.

[ 16 ] In 1946, the college opened its first campus at the corner of Lyon Street and First Avenue in The Glebe neighbourhood. The four-story building was the former location of the Ottawa Ladies' College , which was purchased during the Second World War for use as barracks for the Canadian Women's Army Corps.

[ 17 ] Carleton's first degrees were conferred in 1946 to graduates of its Journalism and Public Administration programs.

[ 18 ] For nearly a decade, the college operated on a shoestring budget, using funds raised mainly through community initiatives and student fees. Fees during the school's first academic year from 1942 to 43 were about $10.00 per course for first-year students, equivalent to $192 in 2024 dollars.

[ 19 ] Fundraising efforts by the college's president, Henry Marshall Tory, raised $1 million from donors throughout the Ottawa area, with half of the proceeds going towards the purchase of the new building, and the other to endow the college.

[ 20 ] Carleton's faculty was composed largely of part-time professors who worked in the public service , some of whom eventually left the government for full-time tenure positions.

In 1952, the Carleton College Act was passed by the Ontario Legislature , changing the school's corporate name to Carleton College and conferring upon it the power to grant university degrees. Carleton thus became the province's first private, non-sectarian college.

[ 21 ] The governance system was modelled on the provincial University of Toronto Act of 1906 which established a bicameral system of university government consisting of a Faculty Senate, responsible for academic policy, and a Board of Governors composed of local community members, exercising exclusive control over the institution's finances and formal authority over all other matters. The President, appointed by the Board, was to provide a link between the two bodies and to perform institutional leadership.

[ 22 ] Though the acquisition of land tracts now part of the current campus began in 1947, it was only in 1952 that the college gained possession of the entire 150-acre property, a significant portion of which was donated by Harry Stevenson Southam , a prominent Ottawa business magnate.

[ 23 ] In March 1956, the college released a 75-year master plan for the development of the campus in stages, with the first stage costing an estimated $4.2 million, equivalent to $48.6 million in 2024 dollars, foreseeing the development of academic buildings, student residences, and athletic facilities on the new site.

In October 1956, the beginning of construction at the Rideau River campus was celebrated with a ceremonial sod-turning by Dana Porter , then Treasurer of Ontario .

[ 24 ] Carleton University (1957–present) [ edit ] Bronson entrance In 1957, the Carleton University Act was enacted [ 25 ] as an amendment to the Carleton College Act , granting Carleton nominal status as a public university and resulting in its current name, Carleton University.

[ 26 ] This did not result in substantive changes to the school's governance and academic organization as it had already been granted university powers through the existing legislation.

Rapid development and growth (1960–1969) [ edit ] The completion of initial construction at the Rideau River campus in 1959 saw the university move to its current location at the beginning of the 1959–60 academic year. Completed at a cost of $6.5 million, the first three buildings, the Maxwell MacOdrum Library, Norman Paterson Hall and the Henry Marshall Tory Building became the centre for academic life at Carleton, with Paterson Hall and Tory Building respectively serving the arts and sciences disciplines.

[ 27 ] The 1960s saw meteoric growth in student enrolment, with the number of full-time students ballooning from 857 to 7,139 within the decade, [ 28 ] which coincided with a sharp uptick in financial support from the provincial and federal governments towards post-secondary institutions.

An increasing share of these students came to the school from outside the National Capital Region , prompting the university to open its first purpose-built residence halls, Lanark and Renfrew Houses in the fall of 1962. The residences were initially segregated by sex, with Lanark House reserved for male students and Renfrew for female students. However, Carleton did away with the practice of mandatory sex segregation in 1969 in favour of co-educational housing, becoming the first university in North America to adopt this practice. By the end of the decade, the increased need for space to accommodate the growing faculty and student body saw the completion of several major academic buildings, including the Loeb Building in 1967 and the Mackenzie Building in 1968.

In 1967, a Catholic liberal arts college , Saint Patrick's College, became affiliated with Carleton. Saint Patrick's College was founded by the Missionary Oblates of Mary Immaculate to meet the higher educational needs of Ottawa's growing English-speaking Catholic population. Originally housed in a separate building Old Ottawa East, now the campus of Immaculata High School , a new building for the school was erected on the north end of the Carleton campus in 1973.

Steady expansion (1970–1999) [ edit ] The arrival of a new decade ushered in the inauguration of the long-awaited Nideyinàn (formerly University Centre), designed to be the linchpin for student life on campus, housing a student-operated pub and other administrative services. With growing restrictions in physical space, the university hailed the completion of Dunton Tower , then referred to as the Arts Tower, in September 1972, which was the then-tallest academic building in Canada.

Rising attention towards recreation and fitness, coupled with generous grants from the provincial government, spurred the construction of the Athletics Centre in 1974, housing a multiplicity of different sports facilities, including a pool, squash courts, and gymnasium.

[ 29 ] In 1979, Saint Patrick's College was dissolved and merged into Carleton with Gerald Clarke, a professor at the school since 1954, serving as its final Dean. While Carleton is a secular institution, the name of the St. Patrick's Building was kept as a nod to Carleton's historical relationship to the Catholic institution.

[ 30 ] Although Carleton experienced a temporary decline in student enrolment toward the latter half of the 1970s, the 1980s saw a resurgence in the number of students attending the school, representing an increase of 76%, or 5,582 students over the course of the decade, leading to overcrowding in many of the school's buildings.

[ 31 ] Responding to the demands of a larger student population during the 1980s, the university built the Life Sciences Research Centre, the Minto Centre of Advanced Studies in Engineering (CASE), and funded an extension to MacOdrum Library.

Following renovations led by Toronto-based architect Michael Lundholm, 1992 saw the opening of the Carleton University Art Gallery in the St. Patrick's Building, supported by a fundraising drive within the local community and the bequest of several pieces of Canadian art from the estate of Frances and Jack Barwick.

[ 32 ] In fall 1994, a new computing system was introduced at Carleton, extending Internet and e-mail access to all students and faculty, where this had previously been only accessible to graduate and undergraduate students in specific courses.

[ 33 ] Contemporary developments (2000–present) [ edit ] Health Sciences Building, completed in 2019 The new millennium brightened prospects for Carleton's finances, allowing it to fund the construction of several new buildings during the 2000s. These include, inter alia , the $30-million construction of new athletics facilities, the $22-million, 9,011 m 2 (97,000 ft 2 ) Human Computer Interaction (HCI) Institute Facility and Centre for Advanced Studies in Visualization and Simulation (V-SIM), and the $17-million upgrade and expansion to Nideyinàn. In 2008, a sustainably-designed residence hall was added named Frontenac House, primarily serving returning second-year students.

[ 34 ] During this decade, Carleton inaugurated its first female President and Vice Chancellor, Roseann Runte in 2008, who served in this position until 2017, resigning to fulfill a new position as president and CEO of the Canada Foundation for Innovation. Runte's leadership also pushed forward the planning and construction of three new academic buildings, Canal Building (2010), and River Building (2011; renamed Richcraft Hall in 2016), and the Health Sciences Building (2018), as well as a new residence building, Lennox and Addington House in 2011.

Green wall installed in Richcraft Hall At the behest of Runte's successor, Benoit-Antoine Bacon, Carleton has continued to pursue several major construction projects, notably the Advanced Research and Innovation and Smart Environments (ARISE) Building, replacing the existing Life Sciences Building, to house applied research in smart technology.

In 2018, Carleton purchased the Dominion-Chalmers United Church located in Ottawa's Centretown neighbourhood to serve as a community and cultural hub, and host to artistic performances and academic lectures.

[ 35 ] The facility represents Carleton's first building situated in Ottawa's downtown area.

In 2021, Carleton completed construction on the Nicol Building, the new home of the Sprott School of Business. Located in the heart of Carleton's campus, the Nicol Building was designed by Hariri Pontarini Architects and provides 115,000 square feet of new, collaborative learning space.

[ 36 ] The cost of the building was estimated at $65 million, but was offset through a sizeable donation of $10 million from the late Ottawa real estate developer Wes Nicol, for whom the building is namesake.

[ 37 ] Organization and administration [ edit ] Governance [ edit ] The university's governing framework is established through the Carleton University Act, 1952 , enabling legislation which sets out the basic legal obligations and purposes of the institution.  The Act establishes Carleton as a bicameral institution, governed by a Board of Governors and Senate.

[ 38 ] The Act establishes the objects and purpose of the university as the advancement of learning; the dissemination of knowledge; the intellectual, social, and moral development of its members and the community at large; and the establishment of a non-sectarian institution within the City of Ottawa.

Board of Governors [ edit ] The Board of Governors oversees the corporate affairs of the institution, including finances, real property, risk management, and strategic direction.

[ 38 ] The Board is also responsible for appointing the President and Chancellor, and determines the compensation of staff, faculty, and members of the senior administration.  The Board of Governors is composed of 36 members, with 18 members derived from the students, staff, and administration of Carleton.  These include four students, two faculty members, two members of the University Senate, two alumni, two staff, as well as the President and Chancellor, who are ex-officio members of the Board.

[ 39 ] The remainder of the representatives are selected from the local community at large.

To support its mandate and oversight function, the Board has six standing committees, with each Governor holding membership in one or two of these committees over the course of a year.  These standing committees include Executive, Audit & Risk, Building Program, Advancement and University Relations, Governance, and Finance.

[ 40 ] The Board is led by the board chair, who presides over meetings, evaluates executive performance, advises senior administration, and represents the university's interests to government. The current board chair is Beth Creary , former Senior Vice-President, Legal & Compliance at Ligado Networks.

Senate [ edit ] The Senate comprises 86 members, including 40 faculty members, two contract instructors, 10 undergraduate students, three graduate students, 23 ex-officio members, four members of the Board of Governors, and up to four special appointments.

[ 41 ] Finances [ edit ] For the 2023-24 academic year, Carleton reported a proposed budget of $525 million.

[ 42 ] The largest annual sources of revenue for Carleton are tuition fees, which generate 50% of the university's income, representing $336 million in earnings, and provincial government funding, representing 26% of the university's income, or $174 million.

[ 43 ] In 2023–24, Carleton received $116 million in research funding.

[ 44 ] Carleton has an endowment fund of $353 million as of April 2021, with an increase of $54.4 million over the previous year.

[ 45 ] Academics [ edit ] Carleton is a mid-sized comprehensive and research-intensive public university, and is part of several pan-institutional bodies, including Universities Canada and the Association of Commonwealth Universities . As of the 2020–21 academic year, Carleton received 23,544 applications, producing a first-year cohort of 6,227 [ 46 ] In 2023, the school reported an enrolment of 30,760 students, comprising 25722 undergraduate and 5,038 graduate students, supported by 1062 faculty members and 861 contract instructors.

[ 44 ] Carleton's graduation rate within seven years is approximately 70.4% as of the 2017–18 academic year, with a graduate employment rate of 92.7% within two years of graduation.

[ 47 ] Among Carleton graduates, 87.7% are employed in a field related to their degrees.

[ 48 ] Faculties of Carleton University Faculties [ 49 ] Established Faculty of Arts & Social Science 1997 [ 50 ] Faculty of Engineering & Design 1963 [ 51 ] Faculty of Public and Global Affairs 1997 Faculty of Science 1963 Sprott School of Business 2006 [ 52 ] Academic units [ edit ] Arts and Social Sciences [ edit ] The Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences (FASS) offers 27 majors and 16 minors leading to the Bachelor of Arts (BA), Bachelor of Arts (Honours), Bachelor of Arts (Combined Honours), Bachelor of Cognitive Science (B.Cog.Sci.), Bachelor of Global and International Studies (B.GINS) degrees, and Bachelor of Humanities (B.Hum.) degrees. The faculty oversees a variety of disciplines in the humanities and social science fields, including African studies , anthropology , English, French, geography, history, music, psychology , and sociology .

The Faculty also houses the College of the Humanities , one of Canada's few Great Books programs, which leads to a B.Hum (Bachelor of Humanities) degree, [ 53 ] and Carleton's Institute of Cognitive Science , which offers the only fully structured PhD program in Cognitive Science in the country, as well as undergraduate and masters programs. There is also a collaborative M.A. in Digital humanities , one of the first in Canada. The Public History Program is known nationally for its innovative teaching and research, [ 54 ] having recently won national prizes.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] FASS offers, in total, 14 master's and nine doctoral programs.

Engineering and Design [ edit ] Minto Centre for Advanced Studies in Engineering (CASE), one of several buildings housing departments in the Faculty of Engineering and Design The Faculty of Engineering and Design is among the oldest within the university, with the first engineering courses offered in 1945, and four-year engineering degrees being offered by the school beginning in 1956.

[ 57 ] The Faculty of Engineering and Design has since developed a broad range of coursework in the fields of engineering , architecture , industrial design , and information technology housing 20 distinct undergraduate programs [ 58 ] under the Bachelor of Engineering (BEng), Bachelor of Architectural Studies (BAS), Bachelor of Industrial Design (BID), Bachelor of Information Technology (BIT), and Bachelor of Media Production and Design (BMPD), along with 37 graduate programs at the master's and PhD level.

[ 59 ] As of the fall 2019 semester, more than 5,800 undergraduate and 1,200 graduate students are enrolled in the Faculty.

[ 60 ] The Faculty also houses one of Canada's first undergraduate programs focusing on aerospace engineering , and is considered to be one of the flagship offerings of the Faculty and the university at large.  The program itself divides students into four streams, enabling students to specialize in a particular field within the broader spectrum of aerospace engineering. This includes Stream A: aerodynamics, propulsion, and vehicle performance, Stream B: aerospace structures, systems and vehicle design, Stream C: aerospace electronics and systems, and Stream D: space systems design.

[ 61 ] Within the faculty the Azrieli School of Architecture and Urbanism houses undergraduate and graduate programs in the field of Architecture. Students in the Bachelor of Architectural Studies can specialize one of three areas: Design, Urbanism, and Conversation and Sustainability.

[ 62 ] Carleton's Bachelor of Information Technology programs are offered jointly with Algonquin College , while the university's Bachelor of Media Production and Design is offered jointly between the School of Information Technology and the Faculty of Public and Global Affairs’ School of Journalism and Communication.

Public Affairs [ edit ] The Faculty of Public and Global Affairs, formerly the Faculty of Public Affairs, houses the university's academic disciplines that deal directly with government, civil society, and the relationship between them, comprising twelve academic units, offering 12 undergraduate programs and 21 graduate programs in criminology , economics , European studies , legal studies , journalism , political science , and public policy . In 2024, the Faculty of Public Affairs officially changed its name to the Faculty of Public and Global Affairs. The new name captures the global nature of its programs and the work of its researchers, students and alumni.

[ 63 ] Many of Carleton's flagship offerings are housed in the Faculty of Public and Global Affairs. This includes the School of Journalism and Communication , which offers the university's Bachelor of Journalism and Master of Journalism programs.

[ 64 ] The Norman Paterson School of International Affairs (NPSIA), which houses Canada's oldest foreign affairs graduate program. NPSIA, founded in 1965, is a member of the Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs (APSIA).

[ 65 ] The School of Public Policy and Administration is the oldest such academic division in Canada and one of the most respected, with the university's first graduate degree in the discipline being granted in 1946. Carleton's Arthur Kroeger College of Public Affairs offers two unique honours degrees: the Bachelor of Public Affairs and Policy Management (BPAPM) and the multidisciplinary Bachelor of Global and International Studies (BGInS). The college is also home to the Clayton H. Riddell Graduate Program in Political Management.

[ 66 ] In September 2006, Carleton was designated a European Union Centre of Excellence by the European Commission in Brussels and was the first university to offer a BA (Honours) in European and Russian Studies and MA in European, Russian and Eurasian Studies. Its Department of Law & Legal Studies offers a BA (Honours) in Law and M.A and Ph.D. programs in Legal Studies, and is Canada's oldest legal department to take an epistemic , rather than professional approach to studying the influence of law within civil society. The faculty also features the Institute of Political Economy, the Institute of Criminology and Criminal Justice and African Studies , and is home to the School of Social Work and Department of Economics.

In 2019, Carleton ranked 101–150 in the world for politics and international studies, placing it within the top one percent of global universities in this field.

[ 67 ] Norman Paterson School of International Affairs [ edit ] Richcraft Hall, home of the Norman Paterson School of International Affairs The Norman Paterson School of International Affairs is a professional school of international affairs at Carleton University. Founded in 1965, the school has distinguished itself as Canada's leading school in the field of international affairs , producing graduates that have progressed onward into key leadership positions within the federal government, think tanks, and academia.  Established during a 'golden age' of Canadian diplomacy, the school adopts an interdisciplinary approach to the study of global issues, divided into seven clusters organized according to different areas of study under the umbrella of international affairs. NPSIA is the only full Canadian member, as well as a founding member, of the Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs, a group of the world's top schools in international affairs.

Science [ edit ] Carleton University's Institute for Advanced Research and Innovation in Smart Environments (ARISE) The Faculty of Science offers 86 undergraduate and 39 graduate programs across various fields including biology , chemistry , physics , health sciences , mathematics , computer science , neuroscience , and earth sciences , with over 6,500 students enrolled, served by 177 faculty members.

[ 68 ] Initial coursework on biology, chemistry, geology, and mathematics was first introduced in 1942 as night classes. In 1947, the school introduced its first undergraduate degrees in science, graduating its first cohort of honours degrees by 1950.

[ 69 ] The Faculty of Science is divided into eleven departments, each with distinct teaching and research focuses. Departments are housed in several buildings across campus, including Herzberg Laboratories, Steacie Building, Tory Building, the Nesbitt Biology Building, and the Health Sciences Building.

[ 70 ] Each of these buildings house laboratories and other facilities for faculty and students alike to conduct research. The Nesbitt Biology Building contains several climate-controlled greenhouses that are host to an annual Butterfly Show in late September to early October, attracting visitors throughout the National Capital Region.

[ 71 ] The National Wildlife Research Centre, a research facility of Environment and Climate Change Canada is also located on campus, and is home to the National Wildlife Specimen Bank, a repository of over 12,000 specimens of wildlife native to Canada. The centre conducts important research on the effects of toxic substances on wildlife, international migratory bird patterns, and the effects of human activities on wildlife.

[ 72 ] Sprott School of Business [ edit ] Nicol Building, the home of the Sprott School of Business Carleton first began offering a Bachelor of Commerce (B.Com.) degree beginning in 1949, and functioned as a department-level academic unit under the Faculty of Arts & Sciences, the Faculty of Social Sciences, and lastly the Faculty of Public Affairs and Management before its establishment as a separate faculty in 2006.

[ 52 ] The School currently offers two undergraduate programs,  the Bachelor of Commerce and Bachelor of International Business with various concentrations like marketing and entrepreneurship, in addition to five graduate-level programs and several certificate programs for professionals. As of the 2023–24 academic year, Sprott programs are attended by 2,043 undergraduate students, served by a full-time faculty of 64.

[ 73 ] Sprott is accredited internationally by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business and by the Network of International Business Schools.  The school has been the first in Canada to offer a Bachelor of International Business (BIB).

[ 74 ] Its principal undergraduate offering, however, is the four-year Bachelor of Commerce (Honours) degree, and at the postgraduate level, MBA and PhD programs are offered.

[ 75 ] The Sprott School has won the Overall Institution Performance Award, for its research contribution, at the Administrative Sciences Association of Canada (ASAC), in 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2010, and 2012 [ 76 ] among business schools at Canadian comprehensive universities.

Admissions [ edit ] For the 2018–2019 academic year, Carleton admitted 5,988 first-year undergraduate students.

[ 77 ] For the 2022–2023 academic year, the average undergraduate entrance grade was 87.3%.

[ 42 ] Undergraduate admission averages and requirements vary by academic program, with some specialized and limited enrolment offerings (e.g., B.Sc., Bachelor of Journalism, B.Hum., B.P.A.P.M. and Aerospace Engineering) requiring admissions averages markedly higher (i.e., in the A/A+ range) compared to their counterparts in other faculties  (generally in the B+/A- range).

[ 78 ] Scholarships and bursaries [ edit ] During the 2022–23 academic year, more than 15,000 scholarships and bursaries totaling over $31.9 million were awarded to undergraduate students.

[ 79 ] Students admitted from high school with an academic average above 80% qualify for an entrance scholarship starting at $4,000 over four years, with $1,000 disbursed annually. The amount students receive increases incrementally with their admission average, with students entering with an average above 95% receiving $16,000 over four years.

[ 80 ] Nevertheless, students must maintain a minimum 10.0 CGPA (A-) year-to-year in order to retain their scholarship [ 81 ] Rankings and reputation [ edit ] University rankings World rankings ARWU World [ 82 ] 501–600 QS World [ 83 ] 741–750 THE World [ 84 ] 501–600 USNWR World [ 85 ] 617 Canadian rankings ARWU National [ 82 ] 19–20 QS National [ 83 ] 24 THE National [ 84 ] 21–24 USNWR National [ 85 ] 20 Maclean's Comprehensive [ 86 ] 4 Maclean's Reputation [ 87 ] 21 Carleton has been included in several Canadian and international college and university rankings . The 2022 international Academic Ranking of World Universities ranked the university in the 501–600 range.

[ 82 ] In the 2023 international QS World University Rankings , Carleton ranked in the 601–650 range, and 21st in Canada.

[ 83 ] According to the international 2023 listings for the Times Higher Education World University Rankings , Carleton ranks in the 601–800 range.

[ 84 ] In the 2022–23 U.S. News & World Report Best Global University Ranking , the university was ranked 526th in the world, and 20th in Canada.

[ 85 ] In a 2009 worldwide survey of academics, which sought to determine the best professional Master's programs in International Affairs , Carleton's Norman Paterson School of International Affairs (NPSIA) was the only Canadian school to rank, and ranked 14th in the world.

[ 88 ] This was followed by a more recent domestic survey of International Relations academics, which, in 2015, recommended Carleton as the best choice for students seeking a career in policy.

[ 89 ] Maclean's is a Canadian magazine that publishes an annual ranking of Canadian universities, which is intended to measure a university's overall "undergraduate experience." [ 90 ] In its 2025 edition, Carleton ranked fourth in the comprehensive category.

[ 91 ] In 2015, Maclean's began publishing program rankings for biology, business, computer science, education, engineering, mathematics, medicine, nursing, and psychology.

[ 92 ] As of 2019, Carleton is ranked 7th in Canada for engineering, [ 93 ] 10th in computer science, [ 94 ] 10th in mathematics [ 95 ] and 14th in psychology.

[ 96 ] Carleton does not offer nursing, medicine, or education programs, specifically; however, it does have a Health Sciences faculty, which includes a biomedicine program and a disability and chronic illness program, and does have, in its Arts faculty, a Childhood and Youth Studies program originally rooted in Early Childhood Education (ECE).

85 Carleton researchers, past and present, were included on the 2024 Stanford-Elsevier list of the world’s most-cited scholars. This places these researchers in the world’s top 2% most-cited scholars.

[ 97 ] In 2024, Carleton was recognized as one of Canada’s Top 100 Employers for the third consecutive year.

[ 98 ] It was also recognized as a Top Employer for Canadians Over 40 for the second consecutive year and as one of the National Capital Region’s Top Employers for the 10th consecutive year.

[ 99 ] Affiliated institutions [ edit ] Dominican University College : An independent, bilingual Roman Catholic institution issuing undergraduate and graduate degrees in philosophy and theology located in the Centretown West neighbourhood of Ottawa. The school has been affiliated with Carleton since 2012.

[ 100 ] Campus [ edit ] Carleton University campus Parking garage near Bronson Avenue entrance Architecture Building, housing the Azrieli School of Architecture and Urban Design Richcraft Hall, formerly known as River Building, home of Carleton's journalism, public policy, and international affairs programs Nideyinàn, formerly University Centre, containing various student service centres and classrooms Southam Hall and Loeb Building View of the main academic quadrangle, facing MacOdrum Library Dunton Tower viewed from Hartwells Locks Carleton University campus as seen from the south Carleton's campus is situated on 153 acres (62 ha) bounded to the west by Colonel By Drive and the Rideau Canal , to the east by Bronson Avenue , and the south by the Rideau River .   The campus is situated adjacent to the Dominion Arboretum and the Central Experimental Farm .

During its initial construction in 1959, the campus consisted of three buildings, the MacOdrum Library, the Tory Building, and Paterson Hall, forming a quadrangle situated at the heart of the university's academic buildings. Since then, the university has expanded to forty-eight buildings, the newest addition being the Nicol Building, which was inaugurated in 2021.

The campus is accessible to road traffic through two entrances respectively located at Bronson Avenue and Colonel By Drive. Carleton's campus contains a series of surface roads to facilitate traffic in and out of the university, the most heavily used of them being Campus Avenue, which was converted to a single-direction road in 2019 to ease congestion.

Several OC Transpo bus lines, including the 7, 10, and 111, serve the campus directly, in addition to the O-Train's Carleton station , located at the centre of campus.

The campus is bisected by O-Train Line 2 , with several pedestrian and vehicular bridges and tunnels facilitating access between either side. The majority of the university's academic and residential buildings are situated on the western side of campus, while the eastern side contains the university's athletics facilities and administrative offices.

Architecture [ edit ] The prevalence of modernist and brutalist architecture in the design of the earliest academic buildings on the Carleton campus represented a stylistic departure from traditional collegiate architecture in North America, which historically emulated the Gothic style dominant in many European universities. The decision to incorporate modernism into the campus' design was intentional, presenting Carleton as an egalitarian, progressive, and forward-thinking institution.

[ 101 ] Architectural critics have looked to Carleton as a leading example of modernist collegiate architecture in Canada. The campus became the subject of Modern U, an exhibition by local artist Adrian Gröllner that sought to highlight the late modernist architecture embodied by many of Carleton's early buildings.

[ 102 ] Tunnel system [ edit ] Junction between tunnels near the Health Sciences Building. Note the alphabetic wayfinding signage distinguishing tunnel routes.

Buildings on campus, with a few exceptions, are connected by a five kilometre-long system of underground pedestrian tunnels. The Carleton University tunnel system is the most extensive network of tunnels at a Canadian university or college campus. The tunnels were initially built as part of the second phase of initial construction on campus in the 1960s. Originally conceived as a maintenance crawl space connecting heating and ventilation between campus buildings,  a suggestion by a staff member transformed them into accessible pedestrian tunnels [ 4 ] for students and faculty to use when travelling between different buildings on campus. The tunnels receive heightened usage during the winter months due to the severity of winters in Ottawa. Maintenance staff use modified golf carts in the tunnels to transport personnel, supplies, and mail to different locations on campus.

In 2019, Carleton introduced a new wayfinding system to assist students, faculty, and visitors in navigating the tunnel networking, using a metro-style map to display the network.

Student housing [ edit ] In 1969, the university introduced the first co-educational dormitories in North America.

[ 4 ] Since then, the university has gradually expanded the number of dormitories as enrolment has risen. On-campus housing at Carleton is configured in traditional and suite-style residences, with the latter offering students a kitchenette shared between four students. Unlike most collegiate dormitories, bathroom facilities are usually shared between two rooms, in contrast to the typical communal bathrooms.  Residence floors are staffed by dedicated Residence Fellows , upper-year students hired by the university's Department of Housing and Residence Life Services to provide personal and academic support to students.

Library and collections [ edit ] Main facade of MacOdrum Library, renovated in 2013 View of study carrels on the second floor of MacOdrum Library MacOdrum Library [ edit ] One of the three original buildings on the Carleton campus, the MacOdrum Library has served as Carleton's central library and archives. The library is named for former Carleton President and Vice-Chancellor Murdoch Maxwell MacOdrum . As of 2022, the Library maintains a collection of approximately 1.2 million print monographs, 2.7 million e-books , and over 260,000 e-journals.

[ 103 ] During final exam periods, the library extends its operating hours to twenty-four hours to accommodate students preparing for their examinations or completing assignments.

[ 104 ] On an annual basis, the library receives upwards of 1.6 million visits from students, faculty, and researchers.

[ 105 ] In 2013, the library inaugurated the Discovery Centre for Undergraduate Research, a multi-purpose space containing meeting tables, multimedia collaborative spaces, video game laboratories, as well as 3D printers .

[ 106 ] In 2023, the fourth floor of the MacOdrum Library, including the Discovery Centre, was transformed into a newly designed space called the Future Learning Lab, which includes spaces for studying, events and workshops, along with an XR (mixed-reality) equipped space.

[ 107 ] The library regularly hosts exhibitions on the second floor, covering a broad spectrum of topics and academic disciplines. The second floor is also home to the Book Arts Lab, an experiential and multidisciplinary learning space dedicated to hands-on learning about typesetting, letterpress printing, bookbinding, decorative paper techniques and illustrations, such as wood cuts.

[ 108 ] Archives and Special Collections [ edit ] The MacOdrum Library maintains extensive archives and research collections of documents, artifacts, and other materials related to specific academic disciplines, as well as the personal effects of various persons of historical significance. Notable collections include the W. McAllister Johnson Collection, containing artwork and other documents pertaining to French art history in the 17th and 18th centuries, [ 109 ] The Uganda Collection, which houses newspaper clippings, documents, and artifacts related to the expulsion of Uganda's South Asian minority under the rule of Idi Amin , [ 110 ] as well as Carleton University heritage material, including yearbooks, student newspapers, photographs, and ephemera significant to the history of the university itself.

Carleton University Art Gallery [ edit ] Carleton University Art Gallery, second floor exhibitions Since 1992, the Carleton University Art Gallery (CUAG), located in a 9,255 sq ft (859.8 m 2 ) facility in the St. Patrick's Building at the north end of campus, has served as a community hub for the visual arts at Carleton. CUAG contains three distinctive galleries on two floors, offices, collection storage vaults, and exhibition preparation room.

Admission to the gallery is free, and is open from Tuesday to Sunday weekly, with the exception of statutory holidays. In addition to its main exhibitions, the CUAG has a Curatorial Laboratory dedicated to installations curated by members of the Carleton community.

[ 111 ] Past notable exhibitions include The Other NFB , which featured photography taken by the now-defunct Still Photography Division of the National Film Board of Canada during World War II and through the post-war years, [ 112 ] Here Be Dragons , which sought to display new experimental forms of protest art, [ 113 ] and Dorset Seen , showcasing Inuit printmaking and its relation to the Inuit experience with the Canadian identity .

[ 114 ] CUAG also oversees the university's art collection, which focuses on twentieth-century Canadian art after 1950, European prints and drawings from the 16th to 19th centuries, as well as Inuit and First Nations art.

[ 115 ] Carleton Dominion-Chalmers Centre [ edit ] Carleton Dominion-Chalmers Centre In 2018, Carleton purchased Dominion-Chalmers United Church , securing a future rehearsal and performance space for its Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences. Renamed, the Carleton Dominion-Chalmers Centre (CDCC), it is now Carleton's arts, performance and learning centre.

[ 116 ] The CDCC is the Carleton's first downtown Ottawa building and is managed by the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences. The centre is about 37,000 square feet with a seating capacity of approximately 1,000. It continues to host religious services for the church's congregation as well as serve a variety of user groups from the community at large in addition to providing programing and experiential learning opportunities in arts and performance.

Student life [ edit ] Demographics of student body (2015–16) [ 117 ] Undergraduate Graduate Male 52.7% 51.5% Female 47.3% 48.5% Canadian student 88.6% 78.8% International student 11.4% 21.2% Dunton Tower , the tallest building on campus, measuring 22 floors Student union and services [ edit ] Carleton University Students' Association [ edit ] All undergraduate students are members of the Carleton University Students' Association (CUSA), Canadian Federation of Students Local 1.

[ 118 ] The organization was established in 1942 and has a long history of being a nucleus of political activity on campus.

[ 119 ] The organization advocates for the interests of undergraduate students to the university's administration, organizes and delivers the annual Orientation Week in conjunction with the university, certifies and financially supports student-run clubs and societies and provides a variety of services to students.

CUSA is led by a six-member executive body comprising the President and Vice Presidents of Finance, Internal, Student Issues, Student Services, and Student Life, who are elected annually by the undergraduate student body.

[ 120 ] Undergraduate students also elect twenty-eight Councillors allocated proportionately to each faculty, with 2 seats to Business, 4 to Engineering & Design, 4 to Arts and Social Sciences, 8 to Public Affairs, and 3 to Science, in addition to ex-officio representatives from RRRA and the GSA.

[ 121 ] The organization administers a number of student centres designed to cater to the safety and well-being of various members of the student body; these are the Mawandoseg Centre, the Carleton Disability Awareness Centre, Food Centre, Foot Patrol, Gender and Sexuality Resource Centre, the Racialized and International Student Experience Centre and the Women's Learning, Advocacy, and Support Centre.

[ 119 ] CUSA also runs a number of businesses: Oliver's Pub and Patio, an undergraduate student pub located on the first floor of Nideyinàn which in addition to serving traditional pub fare, hosts a range of student events throughout the year; [ 122 ] Rooster's Coffeehouse, a café located in Nideyinàn that primarily serves coffee, baked goods, and light meals; [ 123 ] Haven Books, a discount bookstore and coffeehouse located off-campus in the Old Ottawa South neighbourhood, [ 124 ] and The Wing, a pop-up convenience store located in the Nideyinàn Atrium, adjacent to Rooster's.

Rideau River Residence Association [ edit ] Undergraduate students living in the university's residence facilities are also members of the Rideau River Residence Association (RRRA). Founded in 1968 and incorporated in 1976, students elect a three-member executive consisting of a President and Vice Presidents for Programming and Administration respectively, in addition to floor representatives to the RRRA Council, which endeavours to represent the interests of Carleton's undergraduate residents.

[ 125 ] RRRA hosts a variety of events for students in residence, including an annual formal, [ 126 ] and runs Abstentions, a convenience store located in Teraanga Commons.

[ 127 ] Graduate Students' Association [ edit ] All of the university's graduate students are members of the Carleton University Graduate Students' Association (GSA), Canadian Federation of Students Local 78.

[ 118 ] Graduate students elect an executive and council members to represent their respective interests within the organization, which in turn advocates on their behalf and provides a variety of services that cater to postgraduates, which include the operation of a Grad Lounge and Mike's Place, a student pub located in Nideyinàn specializing in Anglo-Indian cuisine , namesake of late Prime Minister and former Chancellor Lester B. Pearson . The GSA is also responsible for the provision of access to a variety of office services for graduate students.

[ 128 ] Fraternities and sororities [ edit ] Since 2007, most Greek activities at Carleton are overseen by the Carleton University Greek Council (CUGC), a student-led organization which plans and coordinates social, philanthropic, and academic events throughout the school year between fraternities and sororities.

[ 129 ] Three international sororities, Phi Sigma Sigma, Alpha Omicron Phi, and Delta Phi Epsilon are governed separately by the Carleton Panhellenic Council, which fulfills a mandate parallel to that of the CUGC.

[ 130 ] Newspapers and magazines [ edit ] Carleton's primary undergraduate student newspaper is The Charlatan , which was founded in 1945 and known as The Carleton until 1971.  Until 2019, the newspaper published print editions on a bi-weekly basis when budgetary restraints forced the paper to reduce its frequency to once monthly.  The Charlatan's operations are overseen by a volunteer Board of Directors, composed of representatives from the newspaper's staff, students, faculty, and the community at large.

[ 131 ] Carleton is also served by The Leveller , a monthly newspaper established in 2009, representing student voice throughout the National Capital Region . The publication is characterized by its radical left editorial stance toward social issues.

[ 132 ] During the school year, the School of Journalism publishes a community newspaper, Centretown News , which reports on the Centretown neighbourhood of Ottawa, and an online newspaper, Capital News Online.

The Department of English Language and Literature supports the student-run writers' zine, In/Words, featuring creative writing and short stories from Carleton students. Engineering students are similarly are served by The Iron Times , which is published by the Carleton Student Engineering Society.

Broadcasting [ edit ] Carleton is home to a community radio station, CKCU-FM . Since its first broadcast in November 1975,  CKCU-FM was the first licensed community-based campus radio station in Canada.

[ 133 ] CKCU-FM broadcasts a broad range of student and multicultural programming, featuring genres such as world music , avant-garde music , indie pop , and blues .  In addition to an optional student-levy, CKCU-FM relies largely relies on donations from the local community and program sponsorships for financial support.

[ 134 ] Theatre [ edit ] The Sock 'n' Buskin Theatre Company, [ 135 ] which was founded in 1943, is Carleton's amateur theatre company, having distinguished itself as one of Carleton's most important cultural fixtures. The Company puts on diverse showcase of theatrical productions each year, with recent productions including The Crucible , As You Like It , Twelfth Night ., and Angels in America .

Sock 'n' Buskin is entirely run and governed by student volunteers, who also comprise the actors and stage managers involved in each production.

[ 136 ] Athletics [ edit ] Main article: Carleton Ravens Carleton competes as the Carleton Ravens , participating in intercollegiate competitions at both the national and provincial levels. Carleton is a member of both U Sports and Ontario University Athletics , with some teams competing in the RSEQ , encompassing 13 varsity sports.

Men's basketball [ edit ] Basketball game between the Carleton Ravens and Ottawa Gee-Gees, 2005 Carleton is recognized for the strength of its men's basketball team, The Ravens.  Between 1999 and 2019, Dave Smart served as the head men's basketball coach at Carleton, and is credited for building the team's capacity to its current reputation of repeated success.  Smart resigned from his position in 2019 to serve as Carleton's director of basketball operations.

[ 137 ] Women's basketball [ edit ] The Ravens' basketball strength continues to the women's side with Carleton being home to the 2018, 2023 and 2024 U SPORTS National Championship.

[ 138 ] The team, previously coached by now men's coach Taffe Charles, is coached by Dani Sinclair.

The Ravens women's team has helped to develop a number of professional players including Marlee Ball, Nicole Gilmore, Alyssa Cerino and Catherine Traer.

Football [ edit ] Main article: Carleton Ravens football Carleton established a football team during the 1945–46 academic year, losing 15–0 to Macdonald College during its debut match.

[ 139 ] In tandem with basketball and hockey, Carleton's football matches transformed into a staple of student life at Carleton during the early years of the school, securing funding for sports equipment early in the school's history.

[ 140 ] In 1959, Carleton's move to the Rideau campus provided the team with updated facilities, including a field, training room, and equipment room.

[ 141 ] In 1955, the football team began competing in the much-celebrated annual Panda Game against their rivals, the Ottawa Gee-Gees . The game evolved into an iconic highlight within student life at Carleton, gaining a sordid reputation for heavy drinking and outlandish parties.

[ 142 ] In 1999, the cancellation of Carleton's football program placed the game on indefinite hiatus, though was eventually revived in 2013. Since 2014, the game has taken place at TD Place in Lansdowne Park . While Ottawa holds a historical advantage over Carleton in terms of Panda Game victories, the current iteration of the Panda Game saw four consecutive victories for Carleton between 2014 and 2017.

Other sports [ edit ] The Carleton Ravens men's ice hockey team plays within the Ontario University Athletics conference of U Sports .

[ 143 ] Carleton also maintains a rivalry with the University of Ottawa in this field, having competed in the annual Colonel By Classic at TD Place Arena since the tradition began during the 2016–17 academic year for the men's team, and during the 2018–19 academic year for women.

The Ravens women's hockey team plays within the RSEQ.

Carleton is also home to a highly successful soccer program which recently won silver at the 2021 U SPORTS Men's Soccer Championship.

[ 144 ] The men's soccer team has won silver three times, 2021, 2002 and 1984. Recent success has seen the team reach the final-eight tournament in four consecutive tournaments from 2017 to 2021.

[ citation needed ] Carleton's men's and women's fencing teams compete on the OUA circuit. The men's team won its most recent championship in 2015, while the women's team won its most recent championship in 2013.

[ 145 ] In 2024, the women's nordic ski team camptured the programs second CCUNC Championship at the Nordique Canada Championships. A dynasty in its own right, the team has won seven of the last eight OUA Women's Championships.

[ 146 ] Notable alumni and faculty [ edit ] Main article: List of Carleton University people Lester B. Pearson , 14th Prime Minister of Canada Greg Fergus , Speaker of the House of Commons of Canada John Manley , former Deputy Prime Minister of Canada Omar Sharmarke , former Prime Minister of Somalia Peter MacKay , former Minister of National Defense of Canada Marit Stiles , Leader of the Opposition in Ontario Rob Ford , former Mayor of Toronto Jim Watson , former Mayor of Ottawa Paul Okalik , former Premier of Nunavut Arielle Kayabaga , Leader of the Government in the House of Commons of Canada Peter Grünberg , Nobel laureate in physics Lawrence Krauss , theoretical physicist and New York Times bestselling author Dan Aykroyd , Academy Award –nominated actor Shane Smith , founder of Vice Media David Azrieli , Canadian real estate tycoon Notable faculty [ edit ] Past faculty include three Nobel laureates (pioneering scientists in physics and chemistry Gerhard Herzberg and Peter Grünberg and the former Prime Minister of Canada , Lester B. Pearson ) as well as six Order of Canada recipients.

Chancellors [ edit ] The Right Honourable Herb Gray , Canada's longest-serving continuous Member of Parliament, former Cabinet minister in the Trudeau, Turner, and Chrétien governments, former Deputy Prime Minister, and acting Leader of the Opposition, was the 10th Chancellor of the university.

[ 147 ] Gray was succeeded as Chancellor by Charles Chi (BEng '88), a venture capitalist and executive chairman of Lytro . His company has designed a revolutionary new camera that uses light field technology.

[ 148 ] Yaprak Baltacioğlu , former Secretary of Treasury Board Secretariat , was named the university's 12th Chancellor in December 2018.

[ 149 ] In 2022, Chancellor Professor Lenore Fahrig was awarded the prestigious Herzberg Prize for outstanding contributions in the field of conservation biology . She is the first Carleton faculty member to win the award.

[ 150 ] Notable alumni [ edit ] Carleton has produced notable graduates across numerous disciplines, including politicians, journalists, lawyers, entrepreneurs, architects and entertainers.  Journalism being one of Carleton's traditional fortes, many of its alumni have gone on to leading positions in Canadian and international media outlets. These include Rosemary Barton and Andrew Chang , co-anchors of The National , Paul Watson , Pulitzer Prize–winning photojournalist, Greg Ip , chief economics commentator for The Wall Street Journal , Trina McQueen , founding president of the Discovery Channel , media mogul Conrad Black , Robert MacNeil , news anchor and journalist, Peter Worthington , Canadian News Hall of Fame inductee, Arthur Kent , Emmy Award –winning war correspondent, Nahlah Ayed , Middle East correspondent for the CBC , and Edward Greenspon , former Editor-in-Chief of The Globe and Mail .

[ 151 ] Moreover, Chairman of Vice Media Shane Smith founded the media company alongside alumnus Gavin McInnes .

[ 152 ] Alumnus Scott Burnside received the Elmer Ferguson Memorial Award for his career in ice hockey journalism.

[ 153 ] Carleton alumni have served at all levels of government of Canada. These include the Speaker Greg Fergus of the House of Commons, the former Deputy Prime Minister John Manley , the former Premier Paul Okalik of Nunavut, the former Minister Peter MacKay of National Defence, the former Mayor Rob Ford of Toronto, and former Mayor Jim Watson of Ottawa.

In architecture, Gregory Henriquez of Vancouver is well known for his inclusive mixed-use rezonings and UNHCR social justice work.

Paul Denham Austerberry , who graduated from Carleton's BArch program in 1989, won the Academy Award as well as the BAFTA Award for Best Production Design on Guillermo del Toro 's 2017 film The Shape of Water .

[ 8 ] Another notable alumnus, Israeli-Canadian real-estate billionaire and architect David Azrieli , is the donor of the Azrieli Pavilion and the Azrieli Theater on campus.

[ 154 ] Dan Aykroyd attended Carleton but did not graduate. In 1994, Aykroyd was conferred an honorary Doctor of Letters degree by the university. Comedian Norm Macdonald and journalist Peter Jennings also attended the university. Jennings was bestowed with an honorary doctorate in 1997.

[ 155 ] [ 156 ] Other alumni in entertainment include the Canadian rapper k-os , Eisner Award –winning comics author Ryan North , YouTube personality Cristine Rotenberg , pop singer Mia Martina , actress Melody Anderson , and Grammy Award –winning setar player Kayhan Kalhor . While in the legal field, Louise Charron , a Puisine Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada , is also a Carleton alumna.

Arms [ edit ] Coat of arms of Carleton University Notes Granted 5 November 1992 Crest A phoenix Gules quilled and beaked Or issuing from flames Proper.

Escutcheon Sable a maple leaf Gules irradiated and charged with an open book Argent.

Supporters On a grassy mount on either side a raven Sable beaked and membered Or armed Gules.

Motto Ours The Task Eternal Badge On a sun in splendour Argent a maple leaf Gules charged with an open book Proper bound Or edged Bleu-Celeste.

[ 157 ] See also [ edit ] Ontario portal Canadian government scientific research organizations Canadian industrial research and development organizations Canadian university scientific research organizations Carleton Ravens Carleton School of Journalism Carleton O-Train Station Carleton University Students' Association The Charlatan , student newspaper CKCU-FM Radio Carleton Dominion-Chalmers United Church Higher education in Ontario List of Carleton University people List of colleges and universities named after people List of Ontario Universities Ontario Student Assistance Program Rideau River Residence Association U Sports References [ edit ] ^ "Financial Report to the Board of Governors 2023-24 |" (PDF) . Retrieved 17 February 2025 .

^ Board of Governors Chair’s Report 2023-2024 (PDF) , retrieved 17 February 2025 ^ "Colours" .

Carleton Brand Guidelines . Carleton University . Retrieved 19 November 2024 .

^ a b c d Neatby, H. Blair; McEown, Donald C. (2002).

Creating Carleton: The Shaping of a University . McGill-Queen's University Press. p. xi.

ISBN 077352486X .

^ a b "Facts and Figures Carleton University" .

^ Gall, Gwendolyn.

"About Old Ottawa South" . Old Ottawa South Community Association. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012 . Retrieved 27 February 2012 .

^ "Carleton Graduate Awarded One of Two Ontario Rhodes Scholarships" .

Carleton Newsroom Archives . 28 November 2017 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ a b "And the Oscar Goes to" .

^ "Paul Watson" . 3 November 2022.

^ "Carleton MJ grad Andrew Chung among Pulitzer winners at Reuters" . 3 November 2022.

^ "Killam Awards" .

Research . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ "Royal Society of Canada" .

Research . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ "Canada Research Chairs" .

Research . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ "Carleton College: First Annual Calendar" . Carleton University . Retrieved 24 September 2019 .

^ "Carleton College: First Annual Calendar" . Carleton University . Retrieved 24 September 2019 .

^ "Carleton College: Fifth Annual Calendar" . Carleton University . Retrieved 24 September 2019 .

^ "Carleton College: Fifth Annual Calendar" . Carleton University . Retrieved 24 September 2019 .

^ J. Paul Green; Philip M. Wults; Sarah Church.

"Carleton University" .

The Canadian Encyclopedia . Retrieved 18 August 2019 .

^ "Carleton College: First Annual Calendar" . Carleton University . Retrieved 24 September 2019 .

^ "Carleton College: First Annual Calendar" . Carleton University . Retrieved 24 September 2019 .

^ "Excellence Accessibility Responsibility > Ministry of Education" . Edu.gov.on.ca . Retrieved 10 March 2011 .

^ Anisef, P.; Axelrod, P.; Lennards, J. (20 July 2015).

"Universities in Canada (Canadian Universities)" . The Canadian Encyclopedia . Retrieved 18 August 2019 .

^ "The Carleton:1955-56" . Carleton University . Retrieved 26 September 2019 .

^ "The President's Report: Carleton University, 1956-57" . Carleton University . Retrieved 26 September 2019 .

^ "Our History" . Carleton University . Retrieved 15 March 2019 .

^ "Carleton University Act" . University Secretariat . Retrieved 5 November 2011 .

^ "The President's Report: Carleton University, 1959-60" . Carleton University . Retrieved 26 September 2019 .

^ "The President's Report: Carleton University, 1960-61" . Carleton University. 1969 . Retrieved 26 September 2019 .

^ "The Charlatan: 1978-79" . Carleton University. 1979 . Retrieved 26 September 2019 .

^ MacDougall, H.A.

"St. Patrick's College (Ottawa) (1929–1979) Ethnicity and the Liberal Arts in Catholic Education" . Retrieved 16 March 2013 .

^ "Advancing into the Second Half-Century" . Carleton University. 1993 . Retrieved 26 September 2019 .

^ "History" . Carleton University Art Gallery. Archived from the original on 21 October 2019 . Retrieved 29 September 2019 .

^ "Survival at Carleton, 1994-95" . Carleton University. 1994 . Retrieved 30 September 2019 .

^ "Frontenac House" . Carleton University . Retrieved 27 February 2012 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Carleton in the Community: Dominion-Chalmers United Church" . Carleton University. 24 May 2018 . Retrieved 26 September 2019 .

^ "The Nicol Building" .

Sprott School of Business . Retrieved 21 January 2022 .

^ "Major Capital Projects" . Carleton University . Retrieved 26 September 2019 .

^ a b "Governance Framework at Carleton University:An Overview" . Carleton University . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ "About: Board Composition" . Carleton University . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ "Board Committees" . Carleton University . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ "Senate Report to the Board, 2018-19" (PDF) . Carleton University . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ a b "Carleton University Institutional Overview" .

^ "Carleton 20-21 Financial Report: August 30, 2021 Signed" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 January 2022.

^ a b "Facts" .

About Carleton . Retrieved 6 August 2024 .

^ "Financial Report to the Board of Governors 2020-2021" (PDF) .

^ "President's Report to the Board Sept 2021" (PDF) .

^ "CCarleton's MAESD Key Performance Indicators (KPI) – 2017/18" (PDF) . Carleton University. 2019 . Retrieved 29 September 2019 .

^ "Carleton University Institutional Overview" (PDF) .

^ "Departments & Faculties Listing" . Carleton University. 2019.

^ "About FASS" . Carleton University. 2019 . Retrieved 28 September 2019 .

^ "Our History: Selected Milestones from the Faculty of Engineering and Design" . Carleton University. 2019 . Retrieved 28 September 2019 .

^ a b "Carleton University Magazine, Fall 2006" . Carleton University. 2006 . Retrieved 28 September 2019 .

^ "Bachelor of Humanities" . Carleton University . Retrieved 16 March 2013 .

^ "Rideau Timescapes" .

Canadian Heritage . Archived from the original on 29 September 2016 . Retrieved 2 May 2017 .

^ Roche, Kelly (6 June 2016).

"Carleton University students win award for Rideau Canal app" .

Ottawa Sun . Retrieved 2 May 2017 .

^ "Changes on the Rideau Canal captured in award-winning app" .

Metro . 10 June 2013. Archived from the original on 18 May 2014 . Retrieved 17 May 2014 .

^ "The President"s Report, 1956-57" . Retrieved 26 September 2019 .

^ "Undergraduate Program Listing - Faculty of Engineering and Design" . Carleton University . Retrieved 10 October 2019 .

^ "Graduate Program Listing - Faculty of Engineering and Design" . Carleton University . Retrieved 10 October 2019 .

^ "Future Students - Faculty of Engineering and Design" . Carleton University . Retrieved 10 October 2019 .

^ "Aerospace Engineering" . Carleton University . Retrieved 26 September 2019 .

^ "Undergraduate Programs" . Carleton University . Retrieved 26 September 2019 .

^ "Faculty of Public and Global Affairs" .

21564577.hs-sites.com . Retrieved 6 August 2024 .

^ "Journalism" . Carleton University . Retrieved 23 April 2013 .

^ "Members Schools APSIA" . APSIA . Retrieved 23 August 2012 .

^ "Arthur Kroeger College" . Arthur Kroeger College . Retrieved 17 September 2018 .

^ "Carleton University Achieves Outstanding Global Ranking in Politics and International Studies" .

Carleton University . 28 February 2019 . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ "Innovate, Collaborate, Excel - Faculty of Science" .

carleton.ca . Carleton University. 2018 . Retrieved 5 March 2019 .

^ "Carleton Science, Then and Now - Faculty of Science" .

carleton.ca . Carleton University. 2018 . Retrieved 5 March 2019 .

^ "Departments, Schools and Institutes - Faculty of Science" .

carleton.ca . Carleton University. 2018 . Retrieved 5 March 2019 .

^ "Annual Biology Butterfly Show" .

carleton.ca . Carleton University. 2018 . Retrieved 5 March 2019 .

^ "Environmental science centres across Canada" .

canada.ca . Environment and Climate Change Canada. 2019 . Retrieved 5 March 2019 .

^ "About Sprott" .

Sprott School of Business . Retrieved 6 August 2024 .

^ "Bachelor of International Business" . .carleton.ca. Archived from the original on 31 July 2012 . Retrieved 27 August 2012 .

^ "Our Programs – Sprott School of Business" . .carleton.ca. Archived from the original on 31 July 2012 . Retrieved 27 August 2012 .

^ "Sprott School receives top honour at ASAC 2012" . .carleton.ca. Archived from the original on 31 July 2012 . Retrieved 27 August 2012 .

^ "Table AD1-1: First-Year Undergraduate Students in Degree Programs, 2019-20" .

Carleton University . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ "Carleton University Viewbook" (PDF) . .carleton.ca. 24 August 2012 . Retrieved 10 March 2011 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Undergraduate Admissions" . Retrieved 6 August 2024 .

^ "Entrance Scholarships - Awards and Financial Aid" . Carleton University. 2019 . Retrieved 18 February 2019 .

^ "Rules and Regulations - Awards and Financial Aid" . Carleton University. 2019 . Retrieved 18 February 2019 .

^ a b c "2024 Academic Ranking of World Universities" . ShanghaiRanking Consultancy. 2024 . Retrieved 15 August 2024 .

^ a b c "QS World University Rankings - 2025" . QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. 2025 . Retrieved 4 June 2024 .

^ a b c "World University Rankings 2025" .

Times Higher Education . TES Global. 2024 . Retrieved 9 October 2024 .

^ a b c "Best Global Universities in Canada" .

U.S. News & World Report . U.S. News & World Report, L.P. 24 June 2024 . Retrieved 24 June 2024 .

^ "Canada's Best Comprehensive Universities for 2025" .

Maclean's . Rogers Media. 10 October 2024 . Retrieved 10 October 2024 .

^ "Canada's Best Universities in 2025 by National Reputational Ranking" .

Maclean's . Rogers Media. 10 October 2024 . Retrieved 10 October 2024 .

^ "Teaching, Research, and International Policy (TRIP)" .

^ "Canada's IR scholars: who they are and where they think you should go to school" . 12 February 2015.

^ "University Rankings 2019 - Macleans.ca" .

www.macleans.ca . Retrieved 15 May 2019 .

^ Maclean's (10 October 2024).

"Canada's Best Comprehensive Universities for 2025" .

Macleans.ca . Retrieved 27 November 2024 .

^ "Maclean's 2016 Ranking of University Programs" .

www.macleans.ca . Retrieved 15 May 2019 .

^ "Best engineering universities in Canada: 2019 ranking - Macleans.ca" .

www.macleans.ca . Retrieved 15 May 2019 .

^ "Best computer science universities in Canada: 2019 ranking - Macleans.ca" .

www.macleans.ca . Retrieved 15 May 2019 .

^ "Best mathematics universities in Canada: 2019 ranking - Macleans.ca" .

www.macleans.ca . Retrieved 15 May 2019 .

^ "Best psychology universities in Canada: 2019 ranking - Macleans.ca" .

www.macleans.ca . Retrieved 15 May 2019 .

^ "Carleton Researchers Listed Among World's Top 2% Most-Cited Scholars" .

Carleton Newsroom . 15 October 2024 . Retrieved 27 November 2024 .

^ "Carleton Recognized as One of Canada's Top 100 Employers for Third Consecutive Year" .

Carleton Newsroom . 15 November 2024 . Retrieved 27 November 2024 .

^ "Carleton Named a Top Employer in National Capital Region for 10th Consecutive Year" .

Carleton Newsroom . 6 February 2024 . Retrieved 6 August 2024 .

^ Dominicanu.ca ^ "Construction U" . Carleton University. 2018 . Retrieved 18 February 2019 .

^ "Modern U" . Carleton University. Archived from the original on 7 August 2010 . Retrieved 24 August 2012 .

^ "Overview of the Collection" .

carleton.ca . Retrieved 25 May 2023 .

^ "Library Hours | MacOdrum Library" .

library.carleton.ca . Retrieved 19 February 2024 .

^ "At A Glance: Carleton University Library" (PDF) .

carleton.ca . Retrieved 18 February 2019 .

^ "Discovery Centre - Carleton University" .

carleton.ca . Retrieved 16 January 2016 .

^ "Future Learning Lab Brings Immersive Environments to Carleton" .

Carleton Newsroom . Retrieved 26 May 2023 .

^ "Book Arts Lab | MacOdrum Library" .

library.carleton.ca . Retrieved 26 May 2023 .

^ "The W. McAllister Johnson Collection - Archives and Special Collections" .

carleton.ca . Retrieved 18 February 2019 .

^ "Uganda Collection - Carleton University" .

^ "History" .

Carleton University Art Gallery . Archived from the original on 21 October 2019 . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ "The Other NFB: The National Film Board of Canada's Still Photography Division, 1941-1971" .

Carleton University Art Gallery . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ "Here Be Dragons / Attention, dragons!" .

Carleton University Art Gallery . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ "Dorset Seen" .

Carleton University Art Gallery . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ "Collection History" .

Carleton University Art Gallery . Archived from the original on 21 October 2019 . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ "Carleton in the Community: Dominion-Chalmers United Church" .

Carleton Newsroom . 24 May 2018 . Retrieved 28 January 2022 .

^ "Common University Data Ontario (2016) Carleton University" . Carleton University. 2018 . Retrieved 4 March 2018 .

^ a b "Member Local Students' Unions" . Canadian Federation of Students. Archived from the original on 10 October 2007 . Retrieved 24 August 2012 .

^ a b "Carleton University Students Association" . Carleton University Students Association . Retrieved 24 August 2012 .

^ "Executive" . Carleton University Students Association . Retrieved 8 October 2019 .

^ "Councillors" . Carleton University Students Association . Retrieved 8 October 2019 .

^ "Olivers" . Carleton University Students Association . Retrieved 24 August 2012 .

^ "Rooster's" . Carleton University Students Association . Retrieved 24 August 2012 .

^ "CUSA" . CUSA . Retrieved 24 August 2012 .

^ "About" . Rideau River Residence Association. Archived from the original on 24 July 2012 . Retrieved 24 August 2012 .

^ "Events" . Rideau River Residence Association. Archived from the original on 24 July 2012 . Retrieved 24 August 2012 .

^ "Businesses" . Rideau River Residence Association. Archived from the original on 24 July 2012 . Retrieved 24 August 2012 .

^ "Carleton University Graduate Students Association" . Carleton University Graduate Students Association. Archived from the original on 29 July 2012 . Retrieved 24 August 2012 .

^ "Carleton University Greek Council" .

CUSA Hub . Retrieved 8 October 2019 .

^ "Exhibitors List 2019" .

Carleton University . Retrieved 8 October 2019 .

^ "Board" .

The Charlatan . Retrieved 9 October 2019 .

^ "About" .

The Leveller . Retrieved 9 October 2019 .

^ "About CKCU-FM" . CKCU-FM Radio . Retrieved 10 April 2012 .

^ "About" .

CKCU-FM 93.1 . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ "Sock 'n' Buskin Theatre Company" . Sock n Buskin . Retrieved 6 May 2016 .

^ "About" .

Sock 'n' Buskin Theatre Company . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ "Winning Carleton coach stepping aside" .

CBC News .

^ "Carleton Ravens beat Saskatchewan Huskies to win national women's basketball title | Globalnews.ca" .

Global News . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ "The Carleton, Volume 1" . Carleton University . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ "The Carleton, Volume 1" . Carleton University . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ "The Raven, 1960" . Carleton University. 1960 . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ "The Charlatan, 1987-88" . Carleton University . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ "Former Penguins draft pick to suit up for Ravens next season" . Retrieved 28 August 2015 .

^ "Montreal defeats Carleton Ravens to win U Sports men's soccer championship" .

CTV News Ottawa . 21 November 2021 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ "Fencing Champions - Ontario University Athletics (OUA)" .

Ontario University Athletics . Retrieved 29 December 2024 .

^ "Celebrating Carleton Champions: Join us in Honoring the Ravens Women's Basketball and Nordic Skiing Teams" .

Carleton Newsroom . 15 March 2024 . Retrieved 25 April 2024 .

^ "The Right Honourable Herb Gray, P.C., C.C., Q.C. Named Carleton University Chancellor" . .carleton.ca. 28 November 2008. Archived from the original on 26 April 2014 . Retrieved 10 March 2011 .

^ "Charles Chi Named Next Carleton University Chancellor" . carleton.ca. 29 August 2011. Archived from the original on 25 March 2014 . Retrieved 17 March 2012 .

^ "Yaprak Baltacioğlu Named Carleton University's New Chancellor" .

carleton.ca . 4 December 2018.

^ "Top Canadian Science and Engineering Prizes For Carleton Researchers" . 25 October 2022.

^ "Graduates educated at Carleton, making waves at home and abroad" .

^ "Shane Smith Bio" . Hbo.com. Archived from the original on 13 January 2015 . Retrieved 16 January 2015 .

^ "Book will tell tale of township's memories" .

Windsor Star . 23 August 1983. p. 15.

; Holmes-Hill, Millar (15 November 2024).

"Ex-Windsor Star sports journalist inducted into Hockey Hall of Fame" .

Windsor Star . Retrieved 8 May 2025 .

^ "David Azrieli Donates $5.5 Million to Carleton University's School of Architecture to "Make It the Best in Canada" " . 30 January 2008.

^ "Standup for a steady job – TheYYSCENE" . 6 February 2014 . Retrieved 25 December 2021 .

^ Dare, Patrick (June 14, 1997). "Impatient broadcaster savours Carleton honour".

The Ottawa Citizen through LexisNexis Academic , p. C3. Retrieved on January 3, 2007.

^ "Carleton University" . Canadian Heraldic Authority. 12 November 2020 . Retrieved 27 August 2021 .

Further reading [ edit ] Axelrod, Paul (1982).

Scholars and Dollars: Politics, Economics, and the Universities of Ontario 1945–1980 . Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 0-8020-5609-1 .

Neatby, Blair (2002).

Creating Carleton: The Shaping of a University . Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press.

ISBN 077352486X .

Mesley, Roger J. (1989).

Art Carleton: Carleton University Art Collection . Ottawa: Carleton University Press.

ISBN 0-88629-083-X .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Carleton University .

Official website Athletics website Carleton University Students' Association (archived) v t e Carleton University Academics Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences Sprott School of Business Faculty of Science Faculty of Engineering and Design Faculty of Public Affairs Arthur Kroeger College of Public Affairs School of Journalism and Communication Institute of Criminology and Criminal Justice Norman Paterson School of International Affairs School of Public Policy and Administration Athletics Teams Basketball (m) Basketball (w) Football Ice hockey (m) Ice hockey (w) Other TAAG Park Carleton–Ottawa Rivalry Panda Game Capital Hoops Classic Colonel By Classic Student government Carleton University Students' Association Rideau River Residence Association Sprott Business Students' Society Student life The Charlatan CKCU-FM Maxwell MacOdrum Library Other Dominican University College List of Carleton University people O-Train station Category v t e Presidents of Carleton University Tory (1942–1947) MacOdrum (1947–1955) Gibson * (1955–1956) Bissell (1956–1958) Dunton (1958–1972) Oliver (1972–1978) Downey * (1979) Beckel (1979–1989) Farquhar (1989–1996) Van Loon (1996–2005) Atkinson (2005–2006) Mahmoud * (2006–2008) Runte (2008–2017) Bacon (2017–2023) Tomberlin * (2023–2025) Tettey (2025–present) * indicates interim president Links to related articles v t e Universities and colleges in Ottawa Public universities Carleton Dominican Ottawa Saint Paul Public colleges Algonquin La Cité Private colleges Augustine List of schools in Ottawa v t e Post-secondary education in Ontario Degree-granting institutions Public universities [1] Algoma Brock Carleton Guelph Hearst ‡ Lakehead Laurentian/Laurentienne * Laurier McMaster Nipissing NOSM * OCAD U Ontario Tech Ottawa * Queen's RMC/CMR * Sudbury * TMU Toronto Trent UOF ‡ Waterloo Western Windsor York Private universities [2] Canada Christian Emmanuel FaithWay Baptist Great Lakes Heritage Huntington Institute for Advanced Judaic Studies Institute for Christian Studies Master's Our Lady Seat of Wisdom Redeemer St. Philip's Talpiot Thorneloe Toronto Baptist Tyndale Yeshivas Ner Yisroel Public universities grant degrees under the authority of an Act of the Legislative Assembly or a Royal Charter .

[3] Private universities grant degrees under the authority of an Act of the Legislative Assembly or may provide individual degree programs with the consent of the Minister of Training, Colleges and Universities .

[4] Degree programs offered under Ministerial Consent Adler Toronto CCNM CMCC Glenn Gould RCC/Yorkville Affiliated/federated schools Assumption Canterbury Concordia Conrad Grebel Glendon * Huron Iona King's Martin Luther OAC Renison Saint Paul * St. Jerome's United ‡ French-language institution; * bilingual institution (English/French).

[5] Colleges Colleges of applied arts and technology Algonquin † Boréal ‡ Cambrian † Canadore Centennial † Confederation † Durham Fanshawe † Fleming † George Brown † Georgian † La Cité †‡ Lambton † Loyalist † Mohawk † Niagara † Northern St. Clair † St. Lawrence † Sault Seneca † Institutes of technology and advanced learning Conestoga † Humber † Sheridan † Defunct Grands-Lacs ‡ † Degree programs offered ‡ French-language institution [5] Other recognized institutions Specialist institutions Michener Institute Aboriginal institutes Anishinabek FNTI Kenjgewin Teg Iohahi:io Akwesasne Negahneewin Ogwehoweh Oshki-Pimache-O-Win Seven Generations Shingwauk Kinoomaage Gamig Six Nations Polytechnic v t e Shad Valley host campuses Current British Columbia Calgary Carleton Dalhousie Lakehead McGill McMaster Memorial New Brunswick Prince Edward Island Queen's Saskatchewan Toronto Metropolitan Waterloo Former Acadia Bark Lake/Trent Laval Manitoba Queen's ISC St. Andrew's Sherbrooke Strathclyde Trent v t e The Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs Member schools North America American University American University School of International Service Boston University Pardee School of Global Studies Carleton University Norman Paterson School of International Affairs Columbia University School of International and Public Affairs, Columbia University Duke University Sanford School of Public Policy Florida International University Steven J. Green School of International and Public Affairs George Washington University Elliott School of International Affairs Georgetown University Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service Georgia Institute of Technology Sam Nunn School of International Affairs [ 1 ] Harvard University John F. Kennedy School of Government [ 2 ] Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies Pennsylvania State University Penn State School of International Affairs [ 3 ] Princeton University Princeton School of Public and International Affairs Stanford University Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies Syracuse University Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs Texas A&M University The Bush School of Government and Public Service Tufts University The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy University of California, San Diego UC San Diego School of Global Policy and Strategy University of Denver Josef Korbel School of International Studies University of Maryland, College Park University of Maryland School of Public Policy University of Michigan Ford School of Public Policy University of Minnesota Humphrey School of Public Affairs University of Pittsburgh University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public and International Affairs University of Southern California USC Master of Public Diplomacy program The University of Texas at Austin Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs University of Toronto Munk School of Global Affairs and Public Policy University of Washington Henry M. Jackson School of International Studies Yale University Yale Jackson School of Global Affairs [ 4 ] Europe Geneva Graduate Institute Hertie School Stockholm School of Economics University of St. Gallen Master International Affairs and Governance program Sciences Po Paris School of International Affairs IE University School of Politics, Economics, and Global Affairs Moscow State Institute of International Relations Saint Petersburg State University School of International Relations Asia Yonsei University Graduate School of International Studies Seoul National University Graduate School of International Studies Korea University Graduate School of International Studies National University of Singapore Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy Ritsumeikan University Graduate School of International Relations National Chengchi University College of International Affairs South America Africa Oceania University of Queensland Affiliate member schools North America Arizona State University Thunderbird School of Global Management Balsille School of International Affairs University of Waterloo Wilfrid Laurier University Centre for International Governance Innovation Baruch College Marxe School of Public and International Affairs Brandeis University The Heller School for Social Policy and Management Carnegie Mellon University Institute for Politics and Strategy DePaul University International Studies Program Fordham University Graduate Program in International Political Economy and Development George Mason University Schar School of Policy and Government New York University Wagner Graduate School of Public Service North Carolina State University School of Public and International Affairs Pepperdine University School of Public Policy San Francisco State University Department of International Relations Seton Hall University School of Diplomacy and International Relations University of Georgia University of Georgia School of Public and International Affairs University of Miami Master of Arts in International Administration program University of Oregon Department of International Studies Middlebury College Middlebury Institute of International Studies at Monterey College of William & Mary South America Universidad Austral Escuela de Política, Gobierno y Relaciones Internacionales Universidad Externado de Colombia Europe University of Trento School of International Studies Diplomatic Academy of Vienna - Vienna School of International Studies Prague University of Economics and Business Jan Masaryk Centre for International Studies Institut Barcelona d'Estudis Internacionals - IBEI Barcelona Centre for International Affairs Pompeu Fabra University University of Barcelona Autonomous University of Barcelona Polytechnic University of Catalonia Open University of Catalonia University of Geneva Africa Al Akhawayn University Asia ADA University School of Public and International Affairs Waseda University Graduate School of Asia-Pacific Studies Utsunomiya University Graduate School of International Studies International University of Japan Graduate School of International Relations Nanyang Technological University S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies Fudan University School of International Relations and Public Affairs Oceania Monash University Master of International Relations program University of Sydney ^ "Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs | Sam Nunn School of International Affairs" .

inta.gatech.edu . Retrieved 16 July 2023 .

^ "Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs (APSIA) Online Graduate School Fair" .

Harvard FAS | Mignone Center for Career Success . 12 July 2023 . Retrieved 16 July 2023 .

^ "APSIA Member – Penn State School of International Affairs" .

www.sia.psu.edu . Retrieved 16 July 2023 .

^ "Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs (APSIA)" .

Office of Career Strategy – Yale University . 7 June 2023 . Retrieved 16 July 2023 .

v t e Association of Southeast Asian Institutions of Higher Learning Southeast Asia Brunei Brunei Darussalam Cambodia Build Bright Phnom Penh Cambodia International Indonesia Airlangga Andalas Bandung Technology IPB Bogor Brawijaya Cenderawasih Diponegoro Gadjah Mada Hasanuddin Indonesia Education IKIP Padang Syarif Hidayatullah State Islamic Jakarta Jember Lampung Manado State Muhammadiyah Magelang Padjadjaran Riau Sebelas Maret Sriwijaya North Sumatera Islamic Studies State Semarang STIE Perbanas Surabaya Surabaya State Tadulako Tanjungpura Sepuluh Nopember Technology Udayana Alauddin Islamic State Merdeka Malang Yogyakarta State Bengkulu Indonesia North Sumatra Malaysia INTI International International Islamic Malaysia Multimedia Malaysia Taylor's Malaysia Perlis Malaysia Sarawak Malaysia Sabah Malaysia Terengganu Putra Malaysia Sains Malaysia Technology Malaysia Teknologi Petronas Tenaga Nasional Teknikal Malaysia Melaka Utara Malaysia Tun Abdul Razak Malaya UNITAR Myanmar Yangon Philippines Adamson Baliuag Benguet State Bicol Central Philippines Centro Escolar De La Salle De La Salle – Dasmariñas Emilio Aguinaldo Eulogio "Amang" Rodriguez Science and Technology Far Eastern José Rizal La Consolacion Manila La Consolacion Bacolod La Consolacion Philippines Lyceum of the Philippines Mindanao State National Philippine Normal Philippine Women's Polytechnic Philippines Rizal Technological Saint Louis Saint Mary's Quezon City St. Paul Quezon City St. Scholastica's Manila San Beda San Sebastian – Recoletos Technological Philippines Technological Philippines Batangas Iloilo Manila Perpetual Help System DALTA Santo Tomas City of Manila East Philippines Singapore Nanyang Technological Singapore National Thailand Asian Technology Assumption Bangkok Burapha Chiang Mai Chulalongkorn Dhurakij Pundit Hatyai Kasem Bundit Kasetsart Khon Kaen King Mongkut's Technology North Bangkok King Mongkut's Technology Thonburi Maejo Mahasarakham Mahidol Mae Fah Luang Naresuan Nakhon Phanom Development Administration Payap Prince of Songkla Ramkhamhaeng Rangsit Siam Silpakorn Srinakharinwirot Sripatum Sukhothai Thammathirat Open Suranaree Technology Thaksin Thammasat Chamber of Commerce Ubon Ratchathani Walailak Vietnam National Hanoi East Asia Hong Kong Chinese City Lingnan Baptist Poly Shue Yan Science and Technology Hong Kong Japan Keio Kyoto Sōka Ryukyus Taiwan Taiwan South Asia India Karnatak Lingayat Education Iran Islamic Azad Sri Lanka Colombo Kelaniya Oceania Australia Australian National Curtin Deakin Edith Cowan Griffith Macquarie Monash Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology Swinburne Technology Western Australia Adelaide Canberra Queensland Southern Queensland Sydney Tasmania Technology Sydney Wollongong New Zealand Auckland Technology Lincoln Massey Otago Waikato Europe Belgium Groep T France Montpellier 2 Sweden Lund North America Canada Carleton British Columbia United States Baylor Cal State Long Beach Kansas State Keuka Pittsburg State Hawaiʻi Maryland Global v t e Ontario University Athletics Full members Brock Badgers Carleton Ravens Guelph Gryphons Lakehead Thunderwolves Laurentian Voyageurs McMaster Marauders Nipissing Lakers Ontario Tech Ridgebacks Ottawa Gee-Gees Queen's Golden Gaels Royal Military Paladins TMU Bold Toronto Varsity Blues Trent Excalibur Waterloo Warriors Western Mustangs Wilfrid Laurier Golden Hawks Windsor Lancers York Lions Associate members Concordia Stingers 1 McGill Redbirds 1 UQTR Patriotes 1 Championships Wilson Cup ( men's basketball ) Critelli Cup ( women's basketball ) Yates Cup ( football ) Queen's Cup ( men's ice hockey ) McCaw Cup ( women's ice hockey ) Blackwood Cup ( men's soccer ) Soccer Championship ( women's soccer ) Forsyth Cup ( men's volleyball ) Quigley Cup ( women's volleyball ) See also U Sports 1 men's ice hockey Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic 2 Norway Poland Israel Geographic MusicBrainz place Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nn7dx
Cached time: 20250817045650
Cache expiry: 1278196
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.938 seconds
Real time usage: 2.266 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14845/1000000
Revision size: 99836/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 629748/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 111215/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 25/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 643214/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.165/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11036540/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1862.863      1 -total
 50.29%  936.862      2 Template:Reflist
 42.86%  798.346    154 Template:Cite_web
 10.80%  201.213     19 Template:Navbox
  9.15%  170.477      1 Template:Infobox_university
  9.12%  169.876      2 Template:Infobox
  5.94%  110.740      1 Template:Navboxes
  5.43%  101.115      1 Template:Carleton_University
  4.21%   78.370      1 Template:Short_description
  3.49%   65.025      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:209134:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045650 and revision id 1306125203. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Carleton_University&oldid=1306125203 " Categories : Carleton University Universities and colleges established in 1942 1942 establishments in Ontario Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2018 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2019 Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using gallery without a media namespace prefix All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2022 Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 02:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Carleton University 29 languages Add topic

