Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Subsistence 2 Deserts 3 Wildlife 4 Political geography 5 Aridoamerica cultures 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References Toggle the table of contents Aridoamerica 14 languages Беларуская Català Español Esperanto Français Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Português Русский Српски / srpski Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ecological region of North America Aridoamerica region of North America Aridoamerica is a cultural and ecological region spanning Northern Mexico and the Southwestern United States , defined by the presence of the drought-resistant, culturally significant staple food , the tepary bean ( Phaseolus acutifolius ).

[ 1 ] Its dry, arid climate and geography stand in contrast to the verdant Mesoamerica of present-day central Mexico into Central America [ 2 ] to the south and east, and the higher, milder "island" of Oasisamerica to the north. Aridoamerica overlaps with both.

[ 1 ] Because of the relatively hard conditions, the pre-Columbian people in this region developed distinct cultures and subsistence farming patterns. The region has only 120 mm (4.7 in) to 160 mm (6.3 in) of annual precipitation. The sparse rainfall feeds seasonal creeks and waterholes.

[ 3 ] The term was introduced by American anthropologist Gary Paul Nabhan in 1985, [ 4 ] building on prior work by anthropologists A. L. Kroeber and Paul Kirchhoff to identify a "true cultural entity" for the desert region. Kirchhoff first introduced the term 'Arid America' in 1954, and wrote: "I propose for that of the gatherers the name 'Arid America' and 'Arid American Culture,' and for that of the farmers 'Oasis America' and 'American Oasis Culture'".

[ 5 ] Mexican anthropologist Guillermo Bonfil Batalla notes that although the distinction between Aridoamerica and Mesoamerica is "useful for understanding the general history of precolonial Mexico," that the boundary between the two should not be conceptualized as "a barrier that separated two radically different worlds, but, rather, as a variable limit between climatic regions." The inhabitants of Aridoamerica lived on "an unstable and fluctuating frontier" and were in "constant relations with the civilizations to the south." [ 6 ] Subsistence [ edit ] Distribution of tribes called Chichimeca , ca. 1550 Aridoamerica The Chichimeca , an umbrella term for several tribes used by the Nahua people , were hunter-gatherers in Aridoamerica grasslands. They gathered magueys , yucca flowers , mesquite beans, chia seeds , and cacti , including the paddles of fruits of nopal cactus. The century plant ( Agave americana ) is a particularly important resource in the region.

[ 7 ] Despite dry conditions, Aridoamerica boasts the greatest diversity of wild and domesticated tepary beans ( Phaseolus acutifolius ) and is a possible site of their domestication.

[ 1 ] Maize cultivation reached Aridoamerica by about 2100 BCE.

[ 8 ] Archaeologists disagree whether the plant was introduced by Uto-Aztecan migrants from Mesoamerica or spread either northward or southward from other groups by cultural borrowing.

[ 8 ] In Baja California , fishing and hunting provided food, as did harvesting acorns, nopal, pine nuts , and other native plants.

[ 9 ] Historically, people of Aridoamerica coppiced willows, that is, tree trunks were cut to a stump to encourage the growth of slender shoots. These willow shoots were woven tightly to produce waterproof, cooking baskets. Fire-heated rocks were plunged into a gruel in the baskets to cook.

[ 3 ] Deserts [ edit ] The Chihuahuan desert terrain mainly consists of basins broken by numerous small mountain ranges .

The elevation in the Chihuahuan Desert varies from 1970 to 5500 feet, as there are several smaller mountain ranges contained in the area, namely the San Andres , Doña Anas , and Franklin Mountains . The Chihuahuan is a " rain shadow " desert, formed between two mountain ranges (the Sierra Madre Occidental on the west and the Sierra Madre Oriental on the east) which block oceanic precipitation from reaching the area.

[ 10 ] The Chihuahuan Desert is considered the "most biologically diverse desert in the Western Hemisphere and one of the most diverse in the world", and includes more species of cacti than any other desert in the world.

[ 11 ] The most prolific plants in this region are agave, yucca, and creosote bushes, [ 12 ] in addition to the ubiquitous presence of various cacti species.

Saguaro cactus in the Sonoran Desert.

When people think of the desert southwest, the landscape of the Sonoran Desert is what mostly comes to mind.

[ 12 ] The Sonoran Desert makes up the southwestern portion of the Southwest. Rainfall averages between 4–12 inches per year, and the desert's most widely known inhabitant is the saguaro cactus , which is unique to the desert.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] It is bounded on the northwest by the Mojave Desert, to the north by the Colorado Plateau and to the east by the Arizona Mountains forests and the Chihuahuan Desert.

[ 15 ] Aside from the trademark saguaro, the desert has the most diverse plant life of any desert in the world, [ 13 ] and includes many other species of cacti, including the organ-pipe, senita, prickly pear, barrel, fishhook, hedgehog, cholla, silver dollar, and jojoba.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The most northwest portion of Aridoamerica is covered by the Mojave Desert . In terms of topography, the Mojave is very similar to the Great Basin Desert , which lies just to its north.

[ 12 ] The Mojave gets less than six inches of rain annually, and its elevation ranges from 3000 to 6000 feet above sea level.

[ 16 ] The most prolific vegetation is the tall Joshua tree , which grow as tall as 40 feet, and are thought to live almost 1000 years.

[ 14 ] Other major vegetation includes the Parry saltbush and the Mojave sage, both only found in the Mojave, as well as the creosote bush.

[ 17 ] Wildlife [ edit ] This article may contain excessive or irrelevant examples .

Please help improve it by removing less pertinent examples and elaborating on existing ones.

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Roadrunner The region has an extremely diverse bird population, with hundreds of species being found in Aridoamerica. In the Chiricahua Mountains alone, in southeastern Arizona, there can be found more than 400 species. Species include Canada ( Branta canadensis ) and snow geese , sandhill cranes ( Grus canadensis ), [ 18 ] and the roadrunner , the most famous bird in the region.

[ 19 ] Birds of prey include the red-tailed hawk ( Buteo jamaicensis ), Cooper's hawk ( Accipiter cooperii ), osprey ( Pandion haliaetus ), golden eagle ( Aquila chrysaetos ), Harris's hawk ( Parabuteo unicinctus ), [ 20 ] common black hawk ( Buteogallus anthracinus ), zone-tailed hawk ( Buteo albonotatus ), bald eagle ( Haliaeetus leucocephalus ), Swainson's hawk ( Buteo swainsoni ), American kestrel ( Falco sparverius ), prairie falcon ( Falco mexicanus ), peregrine falcon ( Falco peregrinus ), [ 21 ] gray hawk ( Buteo plagiatus ), [ 22 ] barn owl ( Tyto alba ), the western screech owl ( Megascops kennicottii ), whiskered screech-owl ( Megascops trichopsis ), great horned owl ( Bubo virginianus ), long-eared owl ( Asio otus ), elf owl ( Micrathene whitneyi ), ferruginous pygmy-owl ( Glaucidium brasilianum ), and burrowing owl , ( Athene cunicularia ).

[ 23 ] among many others.

[ 24 ] Other bird species include the turkey vulture ( Cathartes aura ) and black vulture ( Coragyps atratus ); [ 25 ] the northern cardinal ( Cardinalis cardinalis ) and its close relative the pyrrhuloxia ( Cardinalis sinuous ); the blue grosbeak ( Passerina caerulea ) [ 26 ] and black-headed grosbeak ( Pheucticus melanocephalus ); the varied bunting ( Passerina versicolor ), house finch ( Carpodacus mexicanus ), and lesser goldfinch ( Spinus psaltria ); [ 27 ] the broad-billed hummingbird ( Cynanthus latirostris ), black-chinned hummingbird ( Archilochus alexandri ), Costa's hummingbird ( Calypte costae ), [ 28 ] Anna's hummingbird ( Calypte anna ), Rivoli's hummingbird ( Eugenes fulgens ), blue-throated mountain-gem ( Lampornis clemenciae ), and lucifer hummingbird ( Calothorax lucifer ); and the Gambel's quail ( Callipepla gambelii ), [ 29 ] common raven ( Corvus corax ), [ 30 ] Gila woodpecker ( Melanerpes uropygialis ), gilded flicker ( Colaptes chrysoides ), [ 31 ] cactus wren ( Campylorhynchus brunneicapillus ), rock wren ( Salpinctes obsoletus ), [ 32 ] and many oriole ( Icterus ), thrasher ( Toxostoma ), gnatcatcher ( Polioptila ), dove ( Columbidae ), rail ( Rallidae ), and tyrant-flycatcher ( Tyrannidae ) species.

[ 24 ] Mammal species include the bobcat ( Lynx rufus ), coyote ( Canis latrans ), collared peccary ( Pecari tajacu ), black bear ( Ursus americanus ), black-tailed jackrabbit ( Lepus californicus ), desert cottontail ( Sylvilagus audubonii ), desert bighorn sheep ( Ovis canadensis nelsoni ), mule deer ( Odocoileus hemionus ), Coues' white-tailed deer ( Odocoileus virginianus couesi ), elk ( Cervus canadensis ), feral horse ( Equus caballus ), ringtail ( Bassariscus astutus ), gray fox ( Urocyon cinereoargenteus ), kit fox ( Vulpes macrotis ), mountain lion ( Puma concolor ), river otter ( Lontra canadensis ), long-tailed weasel ( Neogale frenata ), western spotted skunk ( Spilogale gracilis ), pronghorn antelope ( Antilocapra americana ), raccoon ( Procyon lotor ), numerous kangaroo rat ( Dipodomys ), woodrat ( Neotoma ), and pocket mouse ( Chaetodipus ) species, white-nosed coati ( Nasua narica ), jaguar ( Panthera onca ), and Mexican wolf ( Canis lupus baileyae ). There is also a great diversity of bat species in the region.

[ 33 ] There is a large contingent of snakes native to the region. Among them include: the rosy boa ( Lichanura trivirgata ); several sub-species of the glossy snake ( Arizona elegans ); the Trans-Pecos ratsnake ( Bogertophis subocularis ); several sub-species of shovel-nosed snakes; several sub-species of kingsnake, including the desert kingsnake ( Lampropeltis getula splendida ) and the Arizona mountain kingsnake ( Lampropeltis pyromelana ); the Arizona coral snake ( Micruroides euryxanthus ); the western diamondback rattlesnake ( Crotalus atrox ); the Trans-Pecos copperhead ( Agkistrodon contortrix pictigaster ); the Sonoran sidewinder ( Crotalus cerastes cercobombus ); the Arizona black rattlesnake ( Crotalus oreganus cerberus ); the western rattlesnake ( Crotalus viridis ); the Grand Canyon rattlesnake ( Crotalus oreganus abyssus ), found only in Arizona; several sub-species of the ridge-nosed rattlesnake ( Crotalus willardi ), and the desert massasauga ( Sistrurus catenatus edwardsii ).

[ 34 ] Other reptiles in the region include lizards and turtles. Lizards are highly represented in the region, the most distinctive denizen being the Gila monster , native only to the American Southwest and the state of Sonora in Mexico. Other lizards include: Sonoran collared lizard ( Crotaphytus nebrius ); several types of geckos, including western banded gecko ( Coleonyx variegatus ), the barefoot banded gecko ( Coleonyx switaki ), and the Mediterranean house gecko ( Hemidactylus turcicus ), the latter species being non-native to the region and confined to developed areas; the desert iguana ( Dipsosaurus dorsalis ); the chuckwalla ( Sauromalus ater ); the greater earless lizard ( Cophosaurus texanus scitulus ); several sub-species of horned lizards ( Phrynosoma ); numerous species of spiny lizards ( Sceloporus ); Gilbert's skink ( Plestiodon gilberti ); the western skink ( Plestiodon skiltonianus ); Trans-Pecos striped whiptail ( Aspidoscelis inornata heptagrammus ); and the Arizona night lizard ( Xantusia arizonae ).

[ 35 ] Turtles are less numerous than their other reptilian counterparts, but several are found in the region, including: the western painted turtle ( Chrysemys picta bellii ); the Rio Grande cooter ( Pseudemys gorzugi ); the desert box turtle ( Terrapene ornata luteola ); the Big Bend slider ( Trachemys gaigeae gaigeae ); the Sonora mud turtle ( Kinosternon sonoriense ); and the desert tortoise ( Gopherus agassizii ).

[ 36 ] Amphibians include numerous toads and frogs. Toads which can be found in the region include: the Great Plains toad ( Anaxyrus cognatus ); the green toad ( Anaxyrus debilis ); the Arizona toad ( Anaxyrus microscaphus ); the New Mexico spadefoot ( Spea multiplicata stagnalis ); and the Colorado River toad ( Incilius alvarius ), also known as the Sonoran Desert toad. Frog representation includes: western barking frog ( Craugastor augusti ); the canyon tree frog ( Hyla arenicolor ); the Arizona treefrog ( Hyla wrightorum ); the western chorus frog ( Pseudacris triseriata ); Chiricahua leopard frog ( Lithobates chiricahuensis ); and the relict leopard frog ( Lithobates onca ). There are quite a few salamanders throughout the region, including: the Arizona tiger salamander ( Ambystoma mavortium nebulosum ) and the painted ensatina ( Ensatina eschscholtzii picta ).

[ 37 ] Political geography [ edit ] The current Mexican states that lie in Aridoamerica are: Aguascalientes Baja California Baja California Sur Coahuila Chihuahua Durango Nayarit Nuevo León San Luis Potosí Sinaloa Sonora Tamaulipas Zacatecas The northern parts of: Hidalgo Guanajuato Querétaro Jalisco The southern portions of the United States that lie within Aridoamerica are: Arizona California Nevada New Mexico Texas Aridoamerica cultures [ edit ] Map of Indigenous peoples in Baja California Acaxee Aranama ( Hanáma , Hanáme , Chaimamé , Chariname , Xaraname , Taraname ), coastal Texas Caxcane Coahuiltecan , Texas, northern Mexico Cochimí , Baja California [ 9 ] [ 38 ] Cocopá ( Cocopah ), Baja California [ 9 ] Comecrudo , Texas, northern Mexico Cotoname ( Carrizo de Camargo ) Guachichil Guachimontone Guamare Guaycura , Baja California [ 9 ] Huarijio [ 38 ] Huichol [ 38 ] Jumanos , Texas Karankawa , coastal Texas Kiliwa , Baja California [ 9 ] Kumiai ( Kumeyaay ), Baja California [ 9 ] La Junta , Texas, Chihuahua Mamulique , Texas, northern Mexico Manso , Texas, Chihuahua Mayo [ 38 ] Mogollon culture , ca. 200–1500 CE, also Oasisamerica Monqui , Baja California Opata Otomi Pai Pai , Baja California [ 9 ] Pame Pericúe ( Pericú ), Baja California [ 9 ] Pima Bajo , [ 38 ] Chihuahua and Sonora Quems , Coahuila and Texas Solano , Coahuila and Texas Seri [ 38 ] Tamique , Texas Tarahumara [ 38 ] Tecuexe Tepecano Tepehuán [ 38 ] Teuchitlan tradition Toboso , Chihuahua and Coahuila Western Mexico shaft tomb tradition Yaqui [ 38 ] ( Yoeme ), Arizona, Sonora Zacateco See also [ edit ] North America portal Classification of indigenous peoples of the Americas Great Mural Rock Art, Baja California Mesoamerica Oasisamerica Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Pratt and Nabhan 419 ^ Cordell and Fowler 85 ^ a b Bye and Linares 273 ^ Nabhan, G.B. (October 1985).

"Native crop diversity in Aridoamerica: Conservation of regional gene pools" .

Economic Botany .

39 (4): 387– 99.

Bibcode : 1985EcBot..39..387N .

doi : 10.1007/bf02858746 .

S2CID 23223873 . Retrieved 3 July 2017 .

^ Paul Kirchhoff, "Gatherers and farmers in the Greater Southwest: a problem in classification", in American Anthropologist , 56 (1954) (Special Southwest Issue), pp. 529–50, see map p. 544.

^ Bonfil Batalla, Guillermo (1996).

Mexico Profundo: Reclaiming a Civilization . Translated by Dennis, Philip A. University of Texas Press. pp.

9 .

ISBN 9780292708433 .

^ Bye and Linares 256 ^ a b Herr, Sara A. "The Latest Research on the Earliest Farmers." Archaeology Southwest Vol. 23, No. 1, Winter 2009, p.1 ^ a b c d e f g h Schmal, John P.

"Indigenous Baja" .

History of Mexico . Houston Institute for Culture . Retrieved 16 November 2015 .

^ "The Chihuahuan Desert" . New Mexico State University. Archived from the original on December 27, 2012 . Retrieved July 6, 2015 .

^ "Chihuahuan Desert" . National Park Service . Retrieved July 6, 2015 .

^ a b c "Deserts of Southwest USA" . The American Southwest . Retrieved July 6, 2015 .

^ a b c "Southern North America: Southwestern United States into northwestern Mexico" . World Wildlife Fund . Retrieved July 6, 2015 .

^ a b c Green, Kim & Don (October 1, 2001).

"The American Southwest; Footsteps of the Ancients Expedition" . Lonely Planet . Retrieved July 6, 2015 .

^ "The Geologic Origin of the Sonoran Desert" . Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum . Retrieved July 6, 2015 .

^ "What & Where is the Mojave Desert?" . Digital-Desert . Retrieved July 6, 2015 .

^ "Mojave Desert" . National Park Service. Archived from the original on March 4, 2015 . Retrieved July 6, 2015 .

^ Sharp, Jay W.

"Looking for Birds in the Southwest" . DesertUSA . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ "Greater Roadrunner" . Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ "Hawks & Eagles" . Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ "Caracaras & Falcons" . Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ "Gray Hawk" . Cornell Lab of Ornithology . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ "Owls" . Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ a b "Observations" .

^ "Vultures" . Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ "Cardinals & Grosbeaks" . Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ "Finches" . Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ "Hummingbirds" . Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ "Quail" . Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ "Common Raven" . Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ "Woodpeckers" . Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ "Wrens" . Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ "Observations" .

^ "Snakes of the American Southwest" . Southwestern Center for Herpetological Research. Archived from the original on March 14, 2016 . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ "Lizards of the American Southwest" . Southwestern Center for Herpetological Research. Archived from the original on March 14, 2016 . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ "Turtles of the American Southwest" . Southwestern Center for Herpetological Research. Archived from the original on July 13, 2015 . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ "Amphibians of the American Southwest" . Southwestern Center for Herpetological Research. Archived from the original on March 14, 2016 . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ a b c d e f g h i "Mexico: Map" . Ethnologue . Retrieved 16 November 2015 .

References [ edit ] Bye, Robery A.; Linares, Edelmira (2007).

"Botanical Symmetry and Asymmetry in the Mapa de Cuauhtinchan No. 2" . In Carrasco, David; Sessions, Scott (eds.).

Cave, City, and Eagle's Nest: An Interpretive Journey through the Mapa de Cuauhtinchan No. 2 . Albuquerque: University of New Mexico. pp.

255– 280.

ISBN 978-0-8263-4283-6 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 .

Cordell, Linda S.; Fowler, Don D., eds. (2005).

Southwest Archaeology in the Twentieth Century . Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.

ISBN 978-0-87480-825-4 .

Pratt, Richard C.; Nabhan, Gary Paul (1988).

"Evolution and Diversity of Phaseolus acutifolius Genetic Resources" . In Gepts, Paul (ed.).

Genetic Resources of Phaseolus Beans: Their maintenance, domestication, evolution and utilization . Kluwer. p. 419.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-009-2786-5_17 .

ISBN 978-94-009-2786-5 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 .

v t e Cultural areas of Indigenous North Americans Arctic Subarctic Northwest Coast Plateau California Great Basin Plains Eastern Woodlands Northeastern Southeastern Southwest Caribbean Mexico Aridoamerica Mesoamerica v t e Pre-Columbian North America Periods Lithic Archaic Formative Classic Post-Classic Archaeological cultures Adena Alachua Ancient Beringian Ancestral Pueblo (Anasazi) Anishinaabe Avonlea Baytown Belle Glade Buttermilk Creek complex Caborn-Welborn Cades Pond Calf Creek Caloosahatchee Clovis Coles Creek Comondú Deptford Folsom Fort Ancient Fort Walton Fremont Glacial Kame Glades Hohokam Hopewell List of Hopewell sites La Jolla Las Palmas Maritime Archaic Mississippian List of Mississippian sites Mogollon Monongahela Old Cordilleran Oneota Paleo-Arctic Paleo-Indians Patayan Plano Plaquemine Poverty Point Red Ocher Safety Harbor Santa Rosa-Swift Creek St. Johns Steed-Kisker Suwannee Valley Tchefuncte Troyville Weeden Island Archaeological sites Angel Mounds Anzick site Bandelier National Monument Bastian Benson Blue Spring Shelter Bluefish Caves The Bluff Point Stoneworks Brewster Cahokia Candelaria Cave Carlisle Fort Casa Grande Chaco Canyon Coso Rock Art District Crystal River Cuarenta Casas Cueva de la Olla Cutler Eaker El Fin del Mundo El Vallecito Effigy Mounds Etowah Indian Mounds Eva Folsom Fort Ancient Fort Center Fort Juelson Four Mounds Gila Cliff Dwellings Glenwood Grimes Point Helen Blazes Holly Bluff Hopewell Culture National Historical Park Horr's Island Huápoca Key Marco Kimball Village Kincaid Mounds Kolomoki Mounds Lake Jackson Mounds Lehner Mammoth-Kill Site L'Anse aux Meadows Lynch Quarry Site Marksville Marmes Rockshelter Meadowcroft Rockshelter Mesa Verde Moaning Cavern Moorehead Circle Morrison Mounds Moundville Mummy Cave Nodena site Ocmulgee Mounds Old Stone Fort Orwell site Paquime Painted Bluff Parkin Park Pinson Mounds Plum Bayou Mounds Portsmouth Earthworks Poverty Point Pueblo Bonito Rassawek Recapture Canyon River Styx Roberts Island Rock Eagle Rock Hawk Rosenstock Village Russell Cave Salmon Ruins Serpent Mound Sierra de San Francisco Shell ring sites Spiro Mounds Stallings Island SunWatch Taos Pueblo Town Creek Indian Mound Turkey River Mounds Upward Sun River Velda Mound West Oak Forest Earthlodge Wickiup Hill Windover Winterville Wupatki Human remains Anzick-1 Arlington Springs Man Buhl Woman Kennewick Man La Brea Woman Leanderthal Lady Melbourne Man Minnesota Woman Peñon woman Spirit Cave mummy Vero man Miscellaneous Aridoamerica Ballgame Black drink Ceremonial pipe Chanunpa Chunkey Clovis point Container Revolution Eastern Agricultural Complex Eden point Effigy mound Falcon dancer Folsom point Green Corn Ceremony Horned Serpent Kiva Medicine wheel Metallurgy Mi'kmaq hieroglyphic writing Mound Builders N.A.G.P.R.A.

Norse colonization of North America Oasisamerica Piasa Projectile point Southeastern Ceremonial Complex Stickball Three Sisters agriculture Thunderbird Transoceanic contact Underwater panther Water glyphs Related Genetic history Pre-Columbian era v t e Earth 's primary regions and subregions Worlds Down Under New World Old World Three/Four Worlds First World Second World Third World Fourth World Hemispheres Eastern Land Hemisphere Northern Southern Water Hemisphere Western Landmasses Africa-Eurasia Eurasia Americas Antarctica Australia Zealandia submerged Tectonic plates Continents Africa North Maghreb Sub-Saharan Central East Horn Great Lakes Southern West Antarctica East Antarctica Antarctic Plateau Transantarctic Mountains West Antarctica Antarctic Peninsula Asia East Northeast Southeast Mainland Maritime Central Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea North Siberia Ural Russian Far East Northeast South Indian subcontinent Subregions West Arabian Peninsula Caucasus South Caucasus Levant Dead Sea Levantine corridor Levantine Sea Near East Other regions Himalayan Himalayan states Indian region Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Europe Eastern Balkans Caucasus North Caucasus South Caucasus Southern Russia European Russia Southeastern Northern Baltic British Isles Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Southern Mediterranean Middle East Italy Italian peninsula South-eastern Balkan Peninsula South-western Iberian Peninsula Western Atlantic Low Countries Northwestern Other regions Central Europe By language Celtic Germanic Romance Slavic Macaronesia North America Northern America Greenland Great Lakes Pacific Northwest United States Appalachia Bible Belt Eastern East Coast Northern Southeast Southwest U.S. Census regions Northeastern New England Mid-Atlantic Midwest South Western Mountain Pacific Canada Atlantic Canadian Prairies Central Eastern Northern Western Middle America Aridoamerica Greater Caribbean Caribbean West Indies Central Am.

Mesoamerica Northern Mexico Oceania Australasia Australia Mainland Australia New Guinea Tasmania Zealandia Melanesia Island Melanesia Micronesia Near Oceania Polynesia Remote Oceania South America Amazon Plain Amazon Basin Amazon Rainforest Andean States Brazilian Highlands Caribbean South America The Guianas Southern Cone Patagonia Geopolitical regions Global East Heartland North Northeast Northwest South Southeast Southwest West Asia–Pacific Far East Pacific Asia Sinosphere Greater China Indosphere Greater India Europe, the Middle East and Africa Mediterranean Greater Middle East Middle East and North Africa Middle East Arab world Mashriq Maghreb Greater Iran Iranian plateau Americas Anglo Dutch French Latin America and the Caribbean Latin Ibero Hispanic Portuguese Islands By continent Africa Americas North America Caribbean Central America South America Antarctica Asia Europe by area by population Oceania Australia New Zealand By ocean Arctic Atlantic Baltic Sea Black Sea Caribbean Sea Irish Sea Mediterranean Sea Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Ionian Sea Indian Persian Gulf Pacific East China Sea South China Sea Southern Oceans Antarctic/Southern Antarctic Convergence Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Great Barrier Reef Mariana Trench Challenger Deep Ring of Fire World Ocean Other waterbodies Lakes lists Rivers Seas Rim Arctic Atlantic Indo-Mediterranean Indian Ocean Mediterranean Pacific Polar Antarctic Arctic Continents of Earth / List of seas / Physical Earth NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐qsn64
Cached time: 20250812023720
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.626 seconds
Real time usage: 0.789 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3156/1000000
Revision size: 26850/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 207819/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1653/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 149013/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.340/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8701549/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  594.071      1 -total
 37.19%  220.907      1 Template:Reflist
 27.32%  162.316     15 Template:Navbox
 19.54%  116.081     30 Template:Cite_web
 12.19%   72.426      1 Template:Cite_journal
 11.32%   67.264      1 Template:Short_description
 11.25%   66.821      1 Template:Cultural_areas_of_indigenous_North_Americans
  9.76%   57.981      9 Template:Main_other
  8.86%   52.613      1 Template:Excessive_examples
  7.48%   44.412      1 Template:Coord_missing Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4845957:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812023720 and revision id 1293688975. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aridoamerica&oldid=1293688975 " Categories : Aridoamerica Indigenous peoples in Mexico Pre-Columbian cultural areas Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Mexico articles missing geocoordinate data All articles needing coordinates Articles missing coordinates without coordinates on Wikidata Articles with too many examples from August 2024 All articles with too many examples Wikipedia articles with style issues from August 2024 This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 04:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aridoamerica 14 languages Add topic

