Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Classical pragmatism 1.2 Early analytic philosophy 1.3 Later analytic philosophy 1.4 The later Wittgenstein and language games 1.5 Continental philosophy 2 Richard Rorty and anti-representationalism 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Neopragmatism 10 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی 日本語 Português Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical position developed by Richard Rorty Neopragmatism [ a ] is a 20th-century revival of classical pragmatism that states that language is best understood as a problem-solving tool, and traditional philosophical problems are the result of contingent vocabularies. This is in direct opposition to traditional philosophy, which sees the mind or language as a mirror representing a mind-independent reality, and traditional philosophical problems as eternal problems concerning the mind or language's mirroring capacity.

It is characterized in opposition to a number of longstanding philosophical positions, most notably foundationalism , essentialism , representationalism , and the correspondence theory of truth . It is a nominalist position that denies the existence of independently existing Forms, Ideas, essences, etc. It also denies the existence of an autonomous mind or self, instead holding that the mind/self is a linguistic construct.

Neopragmatism was originally developed by American philosopher Richard Rorty in his influential book Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (1979). The position articulated in the book is essentially a synthesis of formal arguments from analytic philosophy with the pragmatic hope of William James and especially John Dewey , who was Rorty's philosophical hero. Rorty uses such arguments to effectively dissolve analytic philosophy from within and create a kind of postanalytic philosophy .

Another notable philosopher who identified as a neopragmatist later in his career was Hilary Putnam . While Donald Davidson , who was a major influence on and close friend of Rorty, never publicly identified as a neopragmatist, he did notice that his views did not differ that much from Rorty's, with there being more difference between them in terms of style and attitude.

[ 1 ] The following contemporary philosophers are also often considered to be neopragmatists: Nicholas Rescher (a proponent of methodological pragmatism and pragmatic idealism ), Jürgen Habermas , Susan Haack , Robert Brandom , and Cornel West (the latter two being Rorty's students at Princeton ).

Background [ edit ] Classical pragmatism [ edit ] Neopragmatists, particularly Rorty and Putnam, draw on the ideas of classical pragmatists such as Charles Sanders Peirce , William James, and John Dewey. Putnam, in Words and Life (1994), enumerates the ideas in the classical pragmatist tradition which neopragmatists find most compelling. To paraphrase Putnam: [ 2 ] Rejection of skepticism (pragmatists hold that doubt requires justification just as much as belief); Fallibilism (the view that there are no metaphysical guarantees against the need to revise a belief); Anti-dualism about "facts" and "values" ; That practice, properly construed, is primary in philosophy.

Neopragmatism is distinguished from classical pragmatism (the pragmatism of Peirce, James, and Dewey) primarily due to the influence of the linguistic turn in philosophy that occurred in the early 20th century. The linguistic turn reduced talk of mind, ideas, and the world to language and the world. Philosophers stopped talking about the ideas in one's mind that are used to think about the world, and instead started talking about the words in one's language that are used to talk about the world.

Early analytic philosophy [ edit ] In the early 20th century, philosophers of language (e.g.

Bertrand Russell , G. E. Moore , the early Wittgenstein , and the logical positivists ) believed that analyzing language would bring about the arrival of meaning, objectivity, and ultimately truth concerning external reality, and so they initiated the linguistic turn. In this tradition, it was thought that truth was obtained when linguistic terms stood in a proper correspondence relation to non-linguistic objects (this can be called "representationalism"). The idea was that in order for a statement or proposition to be true, it must represent or correspond to a state of affairs which is actually present in reality. This is the basis behind the correspondence theory of truth and is essentially what neopragmatism formed in opposition to.

Later analytic philosophy [ edit ] In the mid-20th century, there were many arguments raised against the methods and assumptions just outlined of the early analytic philosophers. Of particular importance for Rorty are the arguments of W. V. O. Quine , Wilfrid Sellars , Thomas Kuhn , and Donald Davidson.

Quine argued in his famous 1951 essay Two Dogmas of Empiricism that the analytic–synthetic distinction (the distinction between sentences true by virtue of meaning alone and sentences true by virtue of both meaning and fact) is untenable, instead replacing it with his metaphor of the web of belief . This means that the meanings of words are contaminated by the science of the day, and thus a pure, objective science of meaning that the early analytic philosophers wished to create is impossible.

[ 3 ] Sellars argued in his 1956 essay Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind that the "Myth of the Given" (the foundationalist idea that something can be self-justified in experience and also justify other knowledge) is untenable, challenging the early analytic assumption that beliefs are justified by standing in a certain causal relation with the world. Sellars instead proposed that beliefs are justified by standing in a certain normative relation with other beliefs (what he called the "logical space of reasons").

[ 4 ] Kuhn argued in his landmark 1962 book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions that the notion of linear "scientific progress" is mistaken, instead replacing it with his idea of the paradigm shift and his view of science as more of a problem-solving activity. This challenged the early analytic view of science as an authoritative, objective voice on what exists in a "mind-independent reality".

[ 5 ] Davidson argued in his 1974 essay On the Very Idea of a Conceptual Scheme that scheme–content dualism (the idea that there exist an organizing mind or language and an unorganized world or experience), as well as the related concept of conceptual relativism, is unintelligible, undermining the early analytic dualism between mind/language and the world. He instead believed that knowledge and truth presuppose a shared, objective world populated by language users who are able to make sense of each other.

[ 6 ] The upshot of all of these arguments, according to Rorty, is that we can abandon the old metaphysical, Cartesian - Kantian view of the mind as a mirror of a mind-independent world, with accurate mirrorings of the world counting as knowledge, justification as coming from how the world is, and truth being what actually exists in the world.

We can instead just switch to a naturalistic , Darwinian view of humans as highly intelligent and social animals who have evolved language in order to help them solve problems and survive in the world better. As a consequence, the mind ceases to exist as a unified, immaterial entity, and so the corresponding notion of a mind-independent world becomes unintelligible. Humans are simply animals living in a world.

On this view, philosophy becomes a kind of cultural politics akin to religion and poetry, its ultimate aim being to sustain interesting conversations in society. This is the central thesis of neopragmatism, at least of the Rortyan variety, that Rorty lays out in Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature .

The later Wittgenstein and language games [ edit ] The later Wittgenstein in Philosophical Investigations (1953) argues contrary to his earlier views in Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) that the role of language is not to represent reality but rather to perform certain actions in communities. The language game is the concept Wittgenstein uses to emphasize this. Wittgenstein believed roughly that: Languages are used to obtain certain ends within communities.

Each language has its own set of rules and objects to which it refers.

Just as board games have rules guiding what moves may be made, so do languages within communities where the moves to be made within a language game are the types of objects that may be talked about intelligibly.

Two people participating in two different language games cannot be said to communicate in any relevant way.

Many of the themes found in the later Wittgenstein are found in neopragmatism. Wittgenstein's emphasis on the importance of "use" in language to accomplish communal goals and the problems associated with trying to communicate between two different language games finds much traction in neopragmatist writings.

Continental philosophy [ edit ] While Rorty was originally trained as an analytic philosopher, continental philosophers such as Martin Heidegger , Hans-Georg Gadamer , Michel Foucault , and Jacques Derrida and their views on language have been highly influential for him.

In Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature , he employs a genealogical method inspired by Nietzsche and Foucault in order to trace the contingent and historically situated origins of contemporary philosophical problems. In Part Three of the same book, he explicitly draws on the existentialist and hermeneutic traditions of Gadamer and Jean-Paul Sartre to develop his concept of "edifying philosophy".

[ 7 ] He also published a collection of essays under the title Essays on Heidegger and Others (1991) in which he explores the similarities and differences between his own neopragmatist philosophy and the views espoused by various continental philosophers.

[ 8 ] Richard Rorty and anti-representationalism [ edit ] As Rorty read his biggest influences (James, Dewey, Wittgenstein, Quine, Sellars, Kuhn, Davidson, Derrida, Heidegger), he started to believe that they were all, in one way or another, trying to hit on the thesis that our language does not represent reality in any metaphysically relevant way. Rather than situating our language in ways in order to get things right or correct, he says in the introduction to Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth (1990) that we should believe that beliefs are only habits which we use to react and adapt to the world. To Rorty, getting things right as they are "in themselves" is useless if not downright meaningless.

[ 9 ] In 1995, Rorty wrote, "I linguisticize as many pre-linguistic-turn philosophers as I can, in order to read them as prophets of the utopia in which all metaphysical problems have been dissolved, and religion and science have yielded their place to poetry." [ 10 ] This "linguistic turn" strategy aims to avoid what Rorty sees as the essentialisms ("truth," "reality," "experience") still extant in classical pragmatism. Rorty wrote, "Analytic philosophy, thanks to its concentration on language, was able to defend certain crucial pragmatist theses better than James and Dewey themselves. [...] By focusing our attention on the relation between language and the rest of the world rather than between experience and nature, post-positivistic analytic philosophy was able to make a more radical break with the philosophical tradition." [ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Pragmatism Confirmation holism Fallibilism Linguistic turn Postanalytic philosophy Two Dogmas of Empiricism The Structure of Scientific Revolutions Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature , the foundational text of the tradition Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity , another influential book by Rorty Notes [ edit ] ^ Sometimes called post-Deweyan pragmatism, analytic pragmatism, or linguistic pragmatism.

References [ edit ] ^ Philosophy Overdose (2022-05-18).

Donald Davidson Interview: Language, Interpretation, & Philosophy (1993) . Retrieved 2025-05-12 – via YouTube.

^ Putnam, H. (1994).

Words and Life . Harvard University Press. p. 152 ^ Quine, W. V. (1951). Two Dogmas of Empiricism.

The Philosophical Review .

60 (1): 20–43.

^ Sellars, W. (1956). Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind. In H. Feigl & M. Scriven (eds.), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science (pp. 253–329). University of Minnesota Press.

^ Kuhn, T. S. (1962).

The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . University of Chicago Press.

^ Davidson, D. (1974). On the Very Idea of a Conceptual Scheme.

Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association .

47 (1): 5–20.

^ Rorty, R. (1979).

Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature . Princeton University Press. p. 11 ^ Rorty, R. (1991).

Essays on Heidegger and Others . Cambridge University Press.

^ Rorty, R. (1990).

Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth . Cambridge University Press. pp. 1–18 ^ Rorty, R. (1995). Response to Charles Hartshorne. In H. J. Saatkamp (ed.), Rorty and Pragmatism: The Philosopher Responds to His Critics (pp. 29–36). Vanderbilt University Press. p. 35 ^ Rorty, R. (1985). Comments on Sleeper and Edel.

Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society .

21 (1): 39–48.

Further reading [ edit ] Malachowski, Alan (ed.) (1990).

Reading Rorty . Wiley-Blackwell.

Brandom, Robert (ed.) (2000).

Rorty and His Critics . Wiley-Blackwell.

Malachowski, Alan (2002).

Richard Rorty . Princeton University Press.

External links [ edit ] Pragmatism – The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Pragmatism – The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Richard Rorty – The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Richard Rorty – The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Richard Rorty Books Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (1979) Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity (1989) Achieving Our Country (1998) Philosophy and Social Hope (1999) Philosophy as Cultural Politics (2007) Concepts Ironism Neopragmatism Works about Richard Rorty: Contemporary American Thinkers (2012 book) Authority control databases : National Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐7lmb4
Cached time: 20250812005719
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.277 seconds
Real time usage: 0.393 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1124/1000000
Revision size: 14800/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 60550/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1221/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 31688/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.165/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4405683/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  324.469      1 -total
 33.47%  108.603      6 Template:Navbox
 31.21%  101.274      2 Template:Reflist
 30.83%  100.026      1 Template:Analytic_philosophy
 27.03%   87.688      1 Template:Cite_AV_media
 21.26%   68.994      1 Template:Short_description
 13.38%   43.410      2 Template:Pagetype
  9.16%   29.719      1 Template:Authority_control
  4.81%   15.604      7 Template:Main_other
  4.00%   12.988      1 Template:SDcat Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1847648:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812005719 and revision id 1304429585. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neopragmatism&oldid=1304429585 " Categories : Epistemological theories Pragmatism Metatheory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 00:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neopragmatism 10 languages Add topic

