Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Competitive shooting 2 Hunting with guns 3 Weapons 4 Restrictions 5 Shooting positions Toggle Shooting positions subsection 5.1 Prone 5.2 Sitting 5.3 Kneeling 5.4 Standing (or offhand) 5.5 Rice paddy squat in rifle shooting 5.6 Back (or supine) 5.7 Lying on one's side 5.8 Leaning 6 Slings 7 Competitions 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Shooting 36 languages العربية Avañe'ẽ বাংলা Български Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kurdî Latina Lietuvių മലയാളം မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Simple English Slovenščina Svenska Tyap Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Act or process of firing firearms or other projectile weapons For other uses, see Shooting (disambiguation) .

Glenn Eller surgery at 2008 Summer Olympics double trap finals Olympic competitive air rifle shooting by Nancy Johnson in Sydney 2000 Shooting is the act or process of discharging a projectile from a ranged weapon (such as a gun , bow , crossbow , slingshot , or blowpipe ). Even the acts of launching flame , artillery , darts , harpoons , grenades , rockets , and guided missiles can be considered acts of shooting.  When using a firearm , the act of shooting is often called firing as it involves initiating a combustion ( deflagration ) of chemical propellants .

Shooting can take place in a shooting range or in the field, in shooting sports , hunting , or in combat .  The person involved in the shooting activity is called a shooter .  A skilled, accurate shooter is a marksman or sharpshooter , and a person's level of shooting proficiency is referred to as their marksmanship .

Competitive shooting [ edit ] Main article: Shooting sports P. E. Svinhufvud , the third President of the Republic of Finland , at shooting range of Kuopio in 1934.

Shooting has inspired competition, and in several countries rifle clubs started to form in the 19th century.

[ 1 ] Soon international shooting events evolved, including shooting at the Summer and Winter Olympics (from 1896) and World Championships (from 1897).

[ 2 ] The International Shooting Sport Federation still administers Olympic and non-Olympic rifle, pistol, shotgun, and running target shooting competitions, although there is also a large number of national and international shooting sports controlled by unrelated organizations.

[ 2 ] Shooting technique differs depending on factors like the type of firearm used (from a handgun to a precision rifle ); the distance to and nature of the target ; the required precision; and the available time. Breathing and position play an important role when handling a handgun or a rifle. Some shooting sports, such as IPSC shooting [ 3 ] and biathlon also include movement. The prone position, kneeling position, and standing position offer different amounts of support for the shooter.

Hunting with guns [ edit ] Main article: Hunting and shooting in the United Kingdom Edward Hacker (1813–1905), after Abraham Cooper , RA, (1787–1868), print of shooting, UK.

In the United Kingdom shooting often refers to the activity of hunting game birds such as grouse or pheasants , or small game such as rabbits , with guns.

[ 4 ] A shooter is sometimes referred to as a "gun".  Shooting may also refer to the culling of vermin with guns.

Clay pigeon shooting is meant to simulate shooting pigeons released from traps after live birds were banned in the United Kingdom in 1921.

[ 5 ] Weapons [ edit ] Shooting most often refers to the use of a gun ( firearm or air gun ), although it can also be used to describe discharging of any ranged weapons like a bow , crossbow , slingshot , or even blowpipe .

[ 4 ] The term "weapon" does not necessarily mean it is used as a combat tool, but as a piece of equipment to help the user best achieve the hit on their intended targets.

[ 6 ] Shooting is also used in warfare , self-defense , crime , and law enforcement .

Duels were sometimes held using guns. Shooting without a target has applications such as celebratory gunfire , 21-gun salute , or firing starting pistols , incapable of releasing bullets.

Restrictions [ edit ] See also: Gun violence In many countries, there are restrictions on what kind of firearm can be bought and by whom, leading to debate about how effective such measures are and the extent to which they should be applied.  For example, attitudes towards guns and shooting in the United States are very different from those in the United Kingdom and Australia .

[ 7 ] Shooting positions [ edit ] This article contains instructions or advice .

Wikipedia is not a guidebook; please help rewrite the content to make it more encyclopedic or move it to Wikiversity , Wikibooks , or Wikivoyage .

( November 2022 ) The National Rifle Association of America defines four basic "competition" or "field" shooting positions. In order of steadiness/stability (the closer you get to the ground, the steadier you are), they are prone , sitting , kneeling , and standing (also called "offhand").

[ 8 ] Hythe positions (Hythe School of Musketry was formed in 1853 to teach the army how to use the rifle in kneeling and standing positions), American and French positions were known variations of the kneeling and standing positions utilised by their respective armies.

[ 9 ] Another common, but aided, shooting position is the bench shooting position . There are also numerous shooting aids from monopods to tripods to sandbags and complete gun cradles.

[ 8 ] Prone [ edit ] Athletes fires from the prone position at a Biathlon competition The steadiest and by far the easiest to master. Done correctly, it can be as steady as shooting from a bench rest.

[ 8 ] Probably the least used in the field because all too often, vegetation gets in the way and obscures the view.

[ 8 ] Variations: [ 8 ] classic – with the body at an angle (left for right-handed people, right for left-handed) modern – with the body more directly behind the rifle with the shooter's strong side leg slightly bent.

Test for correct body position: wrap your arm into the hasty sling and drop down into prone, sighting at the target. Close your eyes. When you open them, you should still be aiming at the target. Otherwise, your position is off. Also, if the shooter's sight picture returns after the firm kicks to each muzzle, then body alignment is good. If not, adjustment is needed.

[ 8 ] The usual advice is to use a sling for this position [ 10 ] Aided prone position – prone with pack or bipod Sitting [ edit ] An athlete fires from the sitting position at a Field Target (FT) shooting event This position is relatively easy to get into but more difficult to get out of quickly. It also provides clearance for low- or medium-height obstacles that would interfere with the prone position.

The proper sitting position is extremely difficult to master.

[ 8 ] Variations: [ 8 ] open leg cross leg (aka pretzel style) – the steadiest sitting position.

[ 8 ] cross ankle The test for correct body position is the same as prone.

[ 8 ] The usual advice is to use a sling for this position.

[ 10 ] Aided sitting position – sitting with tripod Kneeling [ edit ] Sagen Maddalena kneeling in the 50m rifle 3-position rifle event at the 2020 Summer Olympic Games There were numerous variations of the position throughout history.

[ 9 ] Best for shooters needing to shoot quickly, but it is a bit too far (or he is breathing a bit too hard) to risk a shot from the standing position.

[ 8 ] Considerably steadier than standing position.

For most people, this is not nearly as steady as sitting but is much faster to get into and out of.

[ 8 ] For some people, this position can be almost as steady as the prone position.

[ 10 ] Strong-side knee is on the ground, weak-side knee and foot are pointing at the target, and weak-side knee is supporting the elbow (it is important for the bony tip of the elbow not to be planted on top of the knee cap since bone-on-bone contact allows for too much movement, or it can slip).

Variations: [ 8 ] sitting on strong-side foot with strong-side foot flat sitting on the strong-side foot's heel with the toes grounded The usual advice is to use a sling for this position.

[ 10 ] Aided kneeling position – kneeling with crossed sticks or tripod Standing (or offhand) [ edit ] The quickest position to assume and is useful for quick shots and for shooting over objects.

[ 10 ] By far, it is the least steady of all positions. A common trait is a bit of sway in this position. The trick is learning to control the sway and fire when the shooter is at his steadiest. Breathing exercises help in maintaining the balance of the body in this position.

The most difficult position to shoot from and to master. Mostly common among both air pistol and air rifle shooters shooting from different ranges (10 m, 25 m, 50 m).

Stock fit is essential in standing, perhaps more than in any other position. The shooter needs to have his cheek firmly welded to the stock.

Variations: [ 11 ] squared toward the target – advantages of this technique are that it allows the shooter to absorb the rifle's recoil much more effectively, to run the bolt and get back on target quickly, which also places the shooter in a more aggressive stance that allows him to move in just about any direction, as his target requires.

bladed stance of the rifle marksman The usual advice is not to use the sling for support in this position.

[ 10 ] Aided standing position Standing with sticks and stones Three-legged shooting sticks are almost universal in Africa.

Whatever the shooter's comfortable range is for offhand shooting, sticks should double it.

[ 8 ] Rice paddy squat in rifle shooting [ edit ] Main article: Squatting position The rice paddy squat (or rice paddy prone) position is a moderately stable position that supports both elbows, which makes it more stable than kneeling but keeps a high level of mobility. Its higher center of gravity is still be stable than sitting or prone. It was a traditionally-taught marksmanship position but lost popularity after the Korean War .

[ 12 ] Back (or supine) [ edit ] The position was sometimes referred to as the Creedmoor position and has a number of variations. It was known in the latter half of the 18th century and later revived by a small number of shooters in the 1860s with the introduction of competitive long range shooting at the NRA [ which?

] rifle meetings. It continued in use into the 20th century for match riflemen. The position was really developed during the 1870s as a consequence of great interest in long-range shooting associated with the international matches. Back position provided the most stable platform for the rifle in those competitions where no artificial support, including slings, was permitted. It was even superior to shooting prone unsupported.

[ 13 ] Lying on one's side [ edit ] Lying on one's side is not a normally-chosen position but may be a used when reacting to a threat, when  may be used behind a barricade to present a very small target since only the gun hand and a piece of one's face are normally exposed, with the rest covered by the barricade.

[ 14 ] Leaning [ edit ] Theis positon ivolves a shooter leaning on something like a wall, a tree or post. The rifle barrel should not be rested against it because it is steadier to lean the body.

[ 15 ] It's usually combined with standing and kneeling positions.

Slings [ edit ] Shooting sling A sling is visible around the athlete's left wrist, allowing the arm to relax and let the sling carry the rifle's weight The sling is used to create isometric pressure to increase steadiness. While the use of a sling is of questionable value in shooting from the standing position, it is very much worth using from kneeling, sitting, or prone. It is also used in back position, and the sling is then looped around the foot and takes the recoil.

[ 13 ] Proper use of the sling locks the rifle into the body and enhances that solid foundation so critical to delivering an accurate shot.

Hasty sling A type of shooting sling. All positions are strengthened through the use of a hasty sling . The formal tight sling is detached from the rear sling swivel and tightened above the bicep of the supporting arm. Almost any carrying strap can be used in the hasty sling mode. There is often a compromise between the most comfortable "carry" length for shooter's sling and the ideal tension for a hasty sling . The steadiness achieved is almost as good as a tight competition sling , and it is much faster.

[ 8 ] [ 11 ] Competitions [ edit ] In ISSF shooting events, 3 out of 7 shooting positions are used. Positions not used are supine, sitting, rice paddy squat, and side position.

WBSF governs benchrest shooting .

IPSC shooting events use prone, offhand and supported shooting positions.

There are some competitions, such as felthurtigskyting , in which shooting position is freestyle. That means that the shooter decides which one of the four positions they'll use.

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to People shooting firearms .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Shooting .

Look up shooting in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Direct fire Indirect fire History of the firearm Shooting targets ISSF World Cup Shootout References [ edit ] ^ Minshall, David (2005).

"Wimbledon & the Volunteers" . researchpress.co.uk. Archived from the original on 23 April 2012 . Retrieved 17 December 2013 .

^ a b "The ISSF History" . ISSF . Retrieved 17 December 2013 .

^ "Constitution of the International Practical Shooting Confederation" (PDF) . IPSC. January 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 September 2013 . Retrieved 17 December 2013 .

^ a b "Shooting" . dictionary.reference.com . Retrieved 17 December 2013 .

^ "The Clay Pigeon Shooting Association (CPSA)" . Clay Pigeon Shooting Association. Archived from the original on 10 September 2013 . Retrieved 17 December 2013 .

^ "Shooter" . dictionary.reference.com . Retrieved 17 December 2013 .

^ Casciani, Dominic (2 November 2010).

"Gun control and ownership laws in the UK" .

BBC News . Retrieved 17 December 2013 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Boddington, Craig (October 30, 2015).

"Basic Shooting Positions Every Hunter Should Master" .

Petersen's Hunting .

^ a b Le Neve Foster, P.; MacGregor, John; Scott, Wentworth L.; Rule, Barrow (1861).

"Journal of the Society for Arts, Vol. 9, no. 443" .

The Journal of the Society of Arts .

9 (443): 473– 490.

JSTOR 41334509 .

^ a b c d e f Krieger, Aaron (October 2, 2012).

"Four Basic Shooting Positions" .

welikeshooting.com . Retrieved 2021-05-26 .

^ a b Wilson, Jim (2016-03-24).

"Getting the Most Out of Field Shooting Positions" .

americanrifleman.org . Retrieved 2021-05-26 .

^ "How to Shoot a Rifle in the Squatting Position" .

everydaymarksman.co . July 14, 2020.

^ a b Minshall, David.

"The Back Position" .

Research Press .

^ C, Adam (November 7, 2013).

"4 Unconventional Shooting Positions You Must Practice" .

Off The Grid News .

^ "Firing positions | Best Practice Guidance" . 27 January 2018.

v t e Martial arts List of styles History Timeline Records Hard and soft Classification Regional origin China Europe India Indonesia Italian Ireland Japan Okinawa Korea Mainland Southeast Asia Philippines Russia Vietnam Unarmed techniques Arm strikes Chokehold Punch Elbow strike Clinch Ground Headbutt Leg strikes Footwork Kick Flying Knee strike Stomp Grappling Hold Joint lock Sweep Takedown Throw Stand-up Weapons Duel Melee weapons Knife fighting Stick-fighting Swordsmanship Archery Shooting Training Kata Boxing glove Practice weapon Punching bag Pushing hands Randori Sparring Grappling Barróg Brazilian jiu-jitsu Judo ( Para judo ) Jujutsu Luta Livre esportiva Malla-yuddha Pehlwani Sambo Shuai jiao Sumo Wrestling catch Cornish folk freestyle Greco-Roman Mongolian oil shoot Striking Bando Boxing Capoeira Chess boxing Choi Kwang Do Dambe Karate Kickboxing Kun Khmer Lethwei Muay Thai Northern Praying Mantis Russian boxing Sanda Shaolin kung fu Shoot boxing Savate Taekwondo Tang Soo Do Tien Shan Pai Vovinam Wudangquan Yoshukai Karate Internal Aikido Daitō-ryū Aiki-jūjutsu Baguazhang Tai chi Xingyiquan Full contact / combat sports Professional boxing Kickboxing Full contact karate Mixed martial arts Pankration Shootfighting Submission wrestling Vale Tudo Self-defense / combatives Arnis Bartitsu Hapkido Kajukenbo Jieitaikakutōjutsu Krav Maga MCMAP Pencak silat Pencak Silat Harimau Suffrajitsu Systema Street fighting Taekkyon To-Shin Do Wing Chun Silat Melayu Eclectic / hybrids American Kenpo Angampora Chun Kuk Do Hokutoryu Ju-Jutsu Jeet Kune Do Shooto Shorinji Kempo Unifight Qwan Ki Do Battlefield Banshay Bokator Historical European martial arts Huiyen Lallong Jujutsu Kalaripayattu Krabi–krabong Krav Maga Mardani khel Marine Corps Martial Arts Program Pencak Silat Harimau Entertainment Fighting game Martial arts film ( Chanbara ) Professional wrestling Stage combat Tricking Wuxia International games Martial arts at the Summer Olympics Boxing Fencing Judo Karate Taekwondo Wrestling ( freestyle , Greco-Roman ) Demonstration sports Budō Pistol dueling Glima Savate Martial arts at the World Games Ju-jitsu Karate Kickboxing Muay Thai Sumo Former official sports Sambo Taekwondo Invitational sports Aikido Wushu Martial arts at the Pan American Games Boxing Fencing Judo Karate Taekwondo Wrestling Martial arts at the Asian Games Boxing Fencing Judo Ju-jitsu Karate Kurash Taekwondo Wrestling Wushu 2018 Only Pencak silat Sambo Martial arts at the African Games Boxing Fencing Judo Karate Taekwondo Wrestling Martial arts at the European Games Boxing Fencing Judo Karate Muaythai Sambo Taekwondo Wrestling Portal Outline v t e Firearms ( list , glossary , and topics ) Firearm lists Gun History Safety War Weapon Types of firearms Breechloader versus muzzleloader Combination weapons Combination Elephant Flare gun Line thrower Long gun Carbine Musket Takedown Multiple-barrel ( list ) Needler Net gun Pen gun Riot gun Rotary Single-shot Sleeve gun Smoothbore Spring-gun Underwater firearm Handguns Cane gun Derringer Duelling Pistol list Machine Pepper-box Pocket Revolver list Semi-automatic pistol list Pistol caliber Personal defence weapon Submachine gun Starting Wallet gun Rifles ( list ) Anti-materiel Anti-tank Assault list Automatic Battle list Carbine list Double Hunting Buffalo Elephant Express Punt Varmint Marksman Rifling Polygonal Repeating Sniper list Machine guns General purpose Light Medium Heavy SAW Shotguns ( list ) Automatic shotgun Coach gun Combat shotgun Double-barreled Pump action Riot Sawed-off Boomstick Ammunition 20-gauge shotgun Breaching round Dragon's breath Shotgun shell .410 bore Shot Slug Historic or famous AK-47 AR-15 M16 M4 Antique firearms Barrett M82 Gatling gun Winchester rifle Browning machine gun M1 Garand Mauser rifles TEC-9 Tommy Gun MP 40 MAC-10 Uzi Colt Peacemaker Calico M1911 Glock Mechanics and components Components Barrel Feed ramp Slug Threads Trunnion Bayonet Belt Blank-firing adapter Breechblock Breechface Bolt Rotating Telescoping Flapper Roller Tilting Bump stock Chamber Cocking handle Cylinder Extractor Firing pin Flash suppressor Fluting Forward assist Freebore Forearm Foregrip Hammer Half-cock Linear Striker Lock Flintlock Wheellock Magazine Bottom metal Clip Drum High-capacity Speedloader Stripper clip Muzzle brake Muzzle shroud Pistol grip Pistol slide Rail system Receiver Recoil pad Rim Safety Sear Auto sear Shroud Silencer Squeeze bore Choke Stock Synchronization gear Tapering Trigger guard Sights Diopter Finderscope Globe Holographic Iron Laser Reticle Reflex Red dot Magnifier Scope mount Tang Telescopic Night vision Thermal Zeroing Actions Blowback Blow-forward Bolt Boxlock Breechloading Break Open bolt Closed bolt Electronic Gas-operated Lever Muzzleloading Out-of-battery Pump Push/Controlled feed Recoil-operated Repeating Revolver Self-loading Single-shot Slamfire Physics Ballistics Ballistic coefficient External Terminal Transitional Physics of firearms Rangefinding/keeping Mathematics Stadiametric Metrics Accurizing Bore axis Caliber Circular error probable Effective range Gauge Gun chronograph Gun harmonisation Headspace Length of pull Lock time Match grade Mean time between failures Minute of Angle (MOA) Muzzle Energy Rise Velocity Penetration Power factor Precision-guided Rate of fire Recoil Group Stock measurements Stopping power Handgun effectiveness Twist rate Shooting and ammunition Gunshot Dry fire Firing (Shooting) Gunshot Firefight Maintenance Field strip Fouling Malfunction Cooking off Hang fire Squib load Ricochet Ignition Fire forming Obturation Primer Gunpowder Percussion cap Rimfire Tubes and Primers Propellant Ball propellant Cordite Improved Military Rifle Ramrod Smokeless powder Ammunition Cannelure Dummy round Snap cap Flechette Gas check Overpressure ammunition PCA Sabot Wadding Bullets Armour piercing Cast Expanding Full metal jacket Frangible Green Incendiary High explosive HEIAP Projectile Raufoss Round shot SLAP Soft point Supercavitating Total metal jacket Tracer Hollow base Hollow point Minié Meplat Plastic tipped ABCBC Snake shot Spitzer VLD Cartridges Blank Caseless Centrefire Handloading Rifle cartridge Fully powered Intermediate list Paper Pinfire Wildcat Society , safety , industry , and laws Society Celebratory gunfire Civilian gun ownership Household ownership rates Exhibition shooting Gun cultures United States Gun shows State firearms Hunting Jungle style Pistol duelling Politics Shooting sports Civilian Marksmanship Program Gun violence and safety in the United States Assassinations Deaths Forensics Gunfighter Gun safety Firearm industry 3D printed firearm list Firearm brands Firearms by country Gun shops list Gunsmith Improvised firearm Most-produced Privately made Small arms trade Arms control Arms and Gun control Disarmament Campaign Against Arms Trade Featureless rifles Gun laws Air travel Assault weapons Concealed carry in the U.S.

License High-capacity magazine ban Right to bear arms Small Arms & Light Weapons (SALW) United States Gun Laws ( by U.S. state ) Legislation Politics Federal Assault Weapons Ban Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐d49c7db49‐xvwtf
Cached time: 20250815051533
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.543 seconds
Real time usage: 0.731 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3032/1000000
Revision size: 18612/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 227122/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2977/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 88083/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.297/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7366139/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  521.834      1 -total
 28.41%  148.249      1 Template:Reflist
 22.47%  117.273     13 Template:Cite_web
 15.27%   79.698      1 Template:Martial_arts
 14.92%   77.849      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 11.83%   61.735      2 Template:Commons_category
 11.80%   61.578      3 Template:Sister_project
 11.51%   60.065      3 Template:Side_box
 10.82%   56.471      1 Template:Short_description
  8.36%   43.604     10 Template:Military_navigation Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:28495:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815051533 and revision id 1305973976. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shooting&oldid=1305973976 " Categories : Shooting Projectile weapons Marksmanship Combat Hunting methods Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from November 2022 All pages needing cleanup Articles containing how-to sections All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2022 Commons category link is locally defined Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 05:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shooting 36 languages Add topic

