Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of asymptomatic carriers 2 Significance in disease transmission 3 Possible explanations Toggle Possible explanations subsection 3.1 A biological mechanism utilizing Salmonella 4 Asymptomatic bacteriuria 5 Infectious diseases Toggle Infectious diseases subsection 5.1 Typhoid fever 5.1.1 Typhoid Mary 5.2 HIV 5.3 Epstein–Barr virus 5.4 Clostridioides difficile 5.5 Cholera 5.6 Chlamydia 5.7 Poliomyelitis 5.8 Tuberculosis 5.9 COVID-19 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Asymptomatic carrier 34 languages العربية Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Pangcah Polski Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Türkçe Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Organism which has become infected with a pathogen but displays no symptoms Typhoid Mary in a 1909 newspaper illustration. Mary Mallon was an asymptomatic carrier of Salmonella typhi who is thought to have infected 53 others with typhoid fever while continuing her work as a cook.

An asymptomatic carrier is a person or other organism that has become infected with a pathogen , but shows no signs or symptoms .

[ 1 ] Although unaffected by the pathogen, carriers can transmit it to others or develop symptoms in later stages of the disease. Asymptomatic carriers play a critical role in the transmission of common infectious diseases such as typhoid , HIV , C. difficile , influenzas , cholera , tuberculosis , and COVID-19 , [ 2 ] although the latter is often associated with "robust T-cell immunity " in more than a quarter of patients studied.

[ 3 ] While the mechanism of disease-carrying is still unknown, researchers have made progress towards understanding how certain pathogens can remain dormant in a human for a period of time.

[ 4 ] A better understanding of asymptomatic disease carriers is crucial to the fields of medicine and public health as they work towards mitigating the spread of common infectious diseases.

Types of asymptomatic carriers [ edit ] Asymptomatic carriers can be categorized by their current disease state.

[ 5 ] When an individual transmits pathogens immediately following infection but prior to developing symptoms, they are known as an incubatory carrier. Humans are also capable of spreading disease following a period of illness. Typically thinking themselves cured of the disease, these individuals are known as convalescent carriers. Viral diseases such as hepatitis and poliomyelitis are frequently transmitted in this manner. "Healthy carriers" never exhibit signs or symptoms of the disease, yet are capable of infecting others, and are often considered to be the "classic" asymptomatic carriers.

[ 5 ] While the mechanism of disease carrying is still unknown, researchers have made progress towards understanding how certain pathogens can remain dormant in a human for a period of time.

[ 4 ] Significance in disease transmission [ edit ] The limited information on the prevalence of asymptomatic carriers creates a considerable difficulty when planning public health initiatives. Given that disease surveillance is dependent on estimates for both the asymptomatic rates and symptomatic rates of disease, the lack of information on the prevalence of carriers can lead to insufficient initiatives for the mitigation of common public health concerns such as C. difficile or influenza.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Researchers have expressed the desire to better predict transmission methods in order to determine the appropriate public health response.

[ 8 ] For example, a disease with a known low asymptomatic rate may lead to increased surveillance of symptomatic cases, whereas a higher asymptomatic rate could lead to more aggressive methods such as travel bans and compulsory quarantines, since the number of infectious, asymptomatic cases would be unknown.

[ 6 ] Possible explanations [ edit ] While an exact explanation for asymptomatic carriage is unknown, researchers have been dedicating their efforts towards understanding how specific bacteria thrive in human hosts in the hopes of determining a universal understanding of asymptomatic transmission.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] A biological mechanism utilizing Salmonella [ edit ] Numerous research publications have demonstrated how salmonella is able to remain in immune cells and alter their metabolic systems in order to further transmit the disease.

[ 11 ] Utilizing a closely related strand of bacterium ( S. typhimurium ), scientists have been able to create a mouse model that mimics the persistent salmonella cases seen in carriers of typhoid. Knowing that the bacterium can reside in mice for their entire lives, researchers have been able to determine that the bacterium tends to reside in macrophages . Further examination of the gut lymph nodes of the mice reveals that S. typhimurium changes the inflammatory response of the macrophages.

[ 12 ] Instead of eliciting an inflammatory response from the attack cells, the bacterium is able to convert them into an anti-inflammatory macrophage, allowing for optimal survival conditions. In the words of lead scientist Denise Monack , "It wasn't that inflammatory macrophages were invulnerable to infection, but rather that, having infected a macrophage, S. typhimurium was much more able to replicate in the anti-inflammatory type".

[ 12 ] Investigators have also found that the presence of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) correlated to the presence of salmonella bacterium. PPARs, thought of as roaming genetic switches, are responsible for the fat metabolism needed to sustain anti-inflammatory macrophages in which S. typhimurium hides.

[ 11 ] Asymptomatic bacteriuria [ edit ] Asymptomatic bacteriuria is a condition that typically impacts 3–5% of women, with the most vulnerable populations being the elderly and those diagnosed with diabetes.

[ 13 ] Within the female population, the risk of bacteriuria increases with age.

Escherichia coli is the most common organism found during urine analysis, though the variety of potentially infectious organisms is diverse and can include Enterobacteriaceae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa , Enterococcus species, and group B streptococcus.

[ 14 ] The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality has issued a set of screening recommendations as well as offered some insight into the mechanism of bacteriuria.

[ 14 ] Results of the meta-analysis produced no clear explanation for asymptomatic carriage, but did yield new evidence that strengthened the support for screening for asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregnant women only.

[ 14 ] Infectious diseases [ edit ] Asymptomatic carriers have furthered the spread of many infectious diseases. A common principle in epidemiology, the 80–20 rule , speculates that 80% of the disease transmission is conducted by only 20% of people in a population.

[ 15 ] Typhoid fever [ edit ] Typhoid fever is an ailment caused by the bacterium Salmonella enterica ser. Typhi. An individual can acquire this infection from consuming risky foods or drinks, or by consuming foods or drinks prepared by an infected individual. Those who recover from this infection can still carry the bacteria in their cells, and therefore be asymptomatic.

[ 16 ] Typhoid Mary [ edit ] Typhoid Mary in a New York Hospital Mary Mallon , known as "Typhoid Mary", was an asymptomatic carrier of Salmonella enterica serovar typhi, the causative agent of typhoid fever .

[ 11 ] She was a cook for several families and soldiers in New York City during the late 1800s, and several cases of typhoid fever were traced to her by the Health Department. At the time, there was no way of eradicating the disease, and it was spread primarily through fecal-oral transmission. Most of Mary Mallon's transmission risk was thought to arise from her continued involvement in occupations involving food preparation and handling. New York City's public health officials initially sought to merely restrict her from such employment rather than permanently quarantining her. When she continued to be non-compliant, the Health Commission ordered that she be quarantined on one of the islands surrounding Manhattan. She remained there until her death.

[ 17 ] Despite appearing perfectly healthy, it is estimated that Mallon infected about 50 people before she was quarantined on North Brother Island .

[ 18 ] Scientists calculate that between 1% and 6% of individuals infected with Salmonella typhi become chronic, asymptomatic carriers like Mary.

[ 11 ] HIV [ edit ] Main article: Long-term nonprogressor HIV infection has a long period during which the person is asymptomatic .

[ 19 ] Although the host may not be experiencing symptoms, the virus can still be passed on to others. It is also possible for the infection to become symptomatic after this incubation period. Whether the host is showing symptoms or not, opportunistic infections can take advantage of the weakened immune system and cause further complications.

[ 20 ] Epstein–Barr virus [ edit ] Many carriers are infected with persistent viruses such as Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), a member of the herpes virus family. Studies show that about 95% of adults have antibodies against EBV, which means they were infected with the virus at some point in their life.

[ 21 ] Clostridioides difficile [ edit ] Clostridioides difficile has also been shown to be spread by asymptomatic carriers, and poses significant problems in home-care settings.

[ 6 ] Reports indicating that over 50% of long-term patients present with fecal contamination despite a lack of symptoms have led many hospitals to extend the period of contact precautions until discharge.

[ 6 ] Cholera [ edit ] For cholera the estimates of the ratio of asymptomatic to symptomatic infections have ranged from 3 to 100.

[ 22 ] Chlamydia [ edit ] Chlamydia , an STI that affects both men and women, can also be asymptomatic in most individuals. Although the infection may not yield any obvious symptoms, it can still damage the reproductive system. If the infection goes unnoticed for a long time, infected individuals are at risk of developing pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). Like chlamydia, PID can also be asymptomatic.

[ 23 ] Poliomyelitis [ edit ] A small number of asymptomatic carriers of polio (referred to as chronic excretors ) continue to produce active virus for years (or even decades) after their initial exposure to the oral Sabin vaccine .

[ 24 ] Carriers of the attenuated virus unintentionally spread the attenuated virus, inoculating others, giving them contact immunity ; however some adults with weak immune systems have contracted paralytic polio from contact with recently immunized children. Carriers of virulent strains spread polio, increasing the difficulty of poliomyelitis eradication .

[ 25 ] Tuberculosis [ edit ] Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious disease usually caused by the bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB). Tuberculosis generally affects the lungs , but can also affect other parts of the body.

[ 26 ] Active or symptomatic tuberculosis is spread from person to person through the air through bacterium spores that are released into the air following a cough or sneeze. Some individuals may be infected with the tuberculosis mycobacterium but never display symptoms.

[ 27 ] Called latent tuberculosis , these cases, while uncontagious, are particularly problematic from a public health perspective, since approximately 10% of those diagnosed with latent TB will go on to develop an active (and contagious) case.

[ 27 ] COVID-19 [ edit ] A 2021 paper estimated that at least 50% of SARS-CoV-2 infections were a result of exposure to asymptomatic carriers.

[ 28 ] See also [ edit ] Vector (epidemiology) Viral load Virulence Jennie Barmore , "Typhoid Jennie" References [ edit ] ^ "Dictionary Definition" .

Medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com . Retrieved 20 August 2013 .

^ Lai, Chih-Cheng; Liu, Yen Hung; Wang, Cheng-Yi; Wang, Ya-Hui; Hsueh, Shun-Chung; Yen, Muh-Yen; Ko, Wen-Chien; Hsueh, Po-Ren (2020-03-04).

"Asymptomatic carrier state, acute respiratory disease, and pneumonia due to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2): Facts and myths" .

Journal of Microbiology, Immunology and Infection .

53 (3): 404– 412.

doi : 10.1016/j.jmii.2020.02.012 .

ISSN 1684-1182 .

PMC 7128959 .

PMID 32173241 .

^ Sekine, Takuya; Perez-Potti, André; Rivera-Ballesteros, Olga; Strålin, Kristoffer; Gorin, Jean-Baptiste; Olsson, Annika; Llewellyn-Lacey, Sian; Kamal, Habiba; Bogdanovic, Gordana; Muschiol, Sandra; Wullimann, David J.; Kammann, Tobias; Emgård, Johanna; Parrot, Tiphaine; Folkesson, Elin; Rooyackers, Olav; Eriksson, Lars I.; Henter, Jan-Inge; Sönnerborg, Anders; Allander, Tobias; Albert, Jan; Nielsen, Morten; Klingström, Jonas; Gredmark-Russ, Sara; Björkström, Niklas K.; Sandberg, Johan K.; Price, David A.; Ljunggren, Hans-Gustaf; Aleman, Soo; Buggert, Marcus (2020).

"Robust T cell immunity in convalescent individuals with asymptomatic or mild COVID-19" .

Cell .

183 (1): 158–168.e14.

doi : 10.1016/j.cell.2020.08.017 .

PMC 7427556 .

PMID 32979941 .

^ a b "Denise M. Monack" . WikiGenes . Retrieved 2016-02-14 .

^ a b "Carrier" .

www.encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 2018-11-12 .

^ a b c d Riggs MM, Sethi AK, Zabarsky TF, Eckstein EC, Jump RL, Donskey CJ (October 2007). "Asymptomatic carriers are a potential source for transmission of epidemic and nonepidemic Clostridium difficile strains among long-term care facility residents".

Clinical Infectious Diseases .

45 (8): 992– 998.

doi : 10.1086/521854 .

PMID 17879913 .

^ Furuya-Kanamori L, Cox M, Milinovich GJ, Magalhaes RJ, Mackay IM, Yakob L (June 2016).

"Heterogeneous and Dynamic Prevalence of Asymptomatic Influenza Virus Infections" .

Emerging Infectious Diseases .

22 (6): 1052– 1056.

doi : 10.3201/eid2206.151080 .

PMC 4880086 .

PMID 27191967 .

^ Perlman W (May 2016).

"Asymptomatic Influenza Infection Rates Deserve More Attention" .

Contagion Live . Retrieved October 30, 2018 .

^ "Asymptomatic Infection - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics" .

^ Oran, Daniel P.; Topol, Eric J. (2020).

"Prevalence of Asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 Infection" .

Annals of Internal Medicine .

173 (5): 362– 367.

doi : 10.7326/M20-3012 .

PMC 7281624 .

PMID 32491919 .

^ a b c d "Scientists get a handle on what made Typhoid Mary's infectious microbes tick" .

Med.stanford.edu . Archived from the original on 18 August 2013 . Retrieved 20 August 2013 .

^ a b Hersh, David; Monack, Denise M.; Smith, Mark R.; Ghori, Nafisa; Falkow, Stanley; Zychlinsky, Arturo (1999-03-02).

"The Salmonella invasin SipB induces macrophage apoptosis by binding to caspase-1" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

96 (5): 2396– 2401.

Bibcode : 1999PNAS...96.2396H .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.96.5.2396 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 26795 .

PMID 10051653 .

^ "Evidence Summary: Asymptomatic Bacteriuria in Adults: Screening" .

US Preventive Services Task Force . Archived from the original on 2018-11-13 . Retrieved 2018-11-12 .

^ a b c Colgan R, Nicolle LE, McGlone A, Hooton TM (September 2006).

"Asymptomatic bacteriuria in adults" .

American Family Physician .

74 (6): 985– 990.

PMID 17002033 .

^ "Zeroing in on 'super spreaders' and other hidden patterns of epidemics" .

EurekAlert!

. Archived from the original on 2016-02-26 . Retrieved 2018-11-12 .

^ "CDC – Typhoid Fever: General Information – NCZVED" . Cdc.gov . Retrieved 2016-02-14 .

^ "Who Was Typhoid Mary?" .

Forbes .

^ von Csefalvay, Chris (2023), "Simple compartmental models" , Computational Modeling of Infectious Disease , Elsevier, pp.

19– 91, doi : 10.1016/b978-0-32-395389-4.00011-6 , ISBN 978-0-323-95389-4 , retrieved 2023-03-06 ^ Siliciano, Robert F. (2011).

"HIV Latency" .

Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine .

1 (1). Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press: a007096.

doi : 10.1101/cshperspect.a007096 .

PMC 3234450 .

PMID 22229121 . Retrieved 20 August 2013 .

^ "Asymptomatic HIV infection: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia" . Nlm.nih.gov. 2016-02-02 . Retrieved 2016-02-14 .

^ "The Broad Spectrum of Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) Disease on" . Medicinenet.com . Retrieved 2016-02-14 .

^ King AA, Ionides EL, Pascual M, Bouma MJ (August 2008).

"Inapparent infections and cholera dynamics" (PDF) .

Nature .

454 (7206): 877– 880.

Bibcode : 2008Natur.454..877K .

doi : 10.1038/nature07084 .

hdl : 2027.42/62519 .

PMID 18704085 .

S2CID 4408759 .

^ "STD Facts – Chlamydia" . cdc.gov . Retrieved 2016-02-14 .

^ Ousmane M. Diop; Cara C. Burns; Roland W. Sutter; Steven G. Wassilak; Olen M. Kew (2015).

"Update on Vaccine-Derived Polioviruses – Worldwide, January 2014–March 2015" .

Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report .

64 (23): 640– 646.

PMC 4584736 .

PMID 26086635 .

^ "Chapter 18: Poliomyelitis" . 17 August 2021.

^ "Tuberculosis (TB)" .

World Health Organization . Retrieved 2018-11-12 .

^ a b "Latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI)" .

World Health Organization . Retrieved 2018-11-12 .

^ Johansson, Michael A.; Quandelacy, Talia M.; Kada, Sarah; Prasad, Pragati Venkata; Steele, Molly; Brooks, John T.; Slayton, Rachel B.; Biggerstaff, Matthew; Butler, Jay C. (7 January 2021).

"SARS-CoV-2 Transmission From People Without COVID-19 Symptoms" .

JAMA Network Open .

4 (1): e2035057.

doi : 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.35057 .

ISSN 2574-3805 .

PMC 7791354 .

PMID 33410879 .

v t e Concepts in infectious disease ( Outline ) Determinants Agent Biofilm Germ theory of disease Infectivity Infectious dose Pathogenesis Pathogenicity Attack rate Quorum sensing Virulence Endotoxin Exotoxin Case fatality rate factors Antimicrobial resistance Drug resistance Horizontal gene transfer Multidrug-resistant bacteria Host tropism Host Burn Comorbidity Diabetes Host–pathogen interaction Immune response Immunodeficiency Immunosuppression Immunopathology Cytokine storm Microbiome health Opportunistic infection Risk of infection Susceptible individual Age Gender Nutrition status Vaccination status Genetic predisposition Behavioral/lifestyle factors Smoking Pregnancy Stress levels Environment Access to water, sanitation, and hygiene Air quality Biodiversity loss Climate change Climate zones El Niño Tropical diseases Commerce Deforestation Ecology Humidity Injection drug use Natural disaster Flood Poultry and livestock Poverty Travel Urbanization Vector control War and conflict Transmission Basic concepts Asymptomatic carrier Chain of infection Fomite Host Incubation period Index case Infectious period Latent period Natural reservoir Opportunistic infection Silent/Subclinical infection Superinfection Transmission heterogeneity Super-spreader Viral load Window period Modes Endogenous Endogenous overgrowth Normal flora overgrowth Endogenous reactivation Microbial translocation Endogenous seeding Biofilm formation Exogenous Cross-species Spillover infection Vector Zoonosis Reverse zoonosis Human-to-human /Cross-infection Contagious disease Source Nosocomial/Hospital Iatrogenic/Medical care Generational difference Vertical/Congenital Prenatal Perinatal Neonatal Horizontal Breakthrough infection Environment- to-human Sapronosis Routes Respiratory Air Bioaerosol Aerosol-generating procedure Dental aerosol Respiratory droplet Linked to Vascular system Blood-borne disease Percutaneous inoculation Injection site Intravenous line Insect bite Animal bite Surgical intervention Postoperative wound Surgical site infection Vector-borne Mosquito Tick Gastrointestinal Food Contamination Breastmilk Water Feces Cutaneous Burn Fomite Soil Open wound Genitourinary Sex Trans-placental Prenatal Cervico-vaginal Perinatal Other Ocular (Eye) mucosal membrane Modelling Agent-based model Animal disease model Attack rate Basic reproduction number Compartmental models in epidemiology Critical community size Force of infection Herd immunity Infection rate Machine learning Multiplicity of infection Serial interval WAIFW matrix Occurrence in population Cluster Endemic Epidemic Curve Farr's laws Geographic distribution Holoendemic Hyperendemic Incidence Inequality Mesoendemic Outbreak Pandemic Prevalence Seasonality Social factors Sporadic Syndemic Twindemic Anatomical location Respiratory Ear-Nose-Throat/Upper respiratory tract Chest/Lower respiratory tract Gastrointestinal Intestinal Genitourinary Nervous system Skin Soft tissue Bone Joint Cardiovascular Systemic/Generalized Blood Tooth Mouth Fetus Eye Prevention and Control measures Pharmaceutical Antibiotic prophylactic Antifungal Anthelmintic Ascaricide Antimicrobial Antimicrobial stewardship Antiseptic Antiviral Asepsis Combination Drug safety Immunization Immunotherapy Monoclonal antibody therapy Inoculation Phage therapy Pre-exposure prophylaxis Post-exposure prophylaxis Repurposed drugs Vaccination efficacy/effectiveness booster hesitancy resistance Vaccine-preventable disease Ring vaccination Non- pharmaceutical Contact tracing Cordon sanitaire Disease surveillance Disinfection Flattening the curve Hygiene Food hygiene Hand washing Gloves Isolation Barrier nursing Lockdown Notification list Protective sequestration Public health Community health services Health communication Health education Outbreak response Quarantine Respiratory source control N95 respirator Surgical mask PPE Safe sex Sanitation Screening Social distancing Sterilization Transmission-based precautions Travel restrictions Universal precautions Vector control Wastewater surveillance Zoning Emerging infections Antigenic drift Antigenic shift Antimicrobial resistance surveillance EARS-Net Biosecurity CRISPR Disease X Emergent virus Evolutionary epidemiology Genetic epidemiology Global Health Initiatives Microbial phylogenetics One Health Model Genomic reassortment Re-emerging disease Reverse zoonosis Selection pressure Synthetic biology Viral phylodynamics Other Discovery Disease ecology Eradication Economics of Infectious Diseases Infectious disease (medical specialty) Infectious disease informatics Microbial bioterrorism Pandemic prevention Tropical disease Tropical medicine v t e Public health General Auxology Biological hazard Chief medical officer Cultural competence Deviance Environmental health Eugenics History of Liberal Euthenics Genomics Globalization and disease Harm reduction Health economics Health literacy Health policy Health system Health care reform Housing First Human right to water and sanitation Management of depression Public health law National public health institute Health politics Labor rights Maternal health Medical anthropology Medical sociology Mental health ( Ministers ) Occupational safety and health Pharmaceutical policy Pollution Air Water Soil Radiation Light Prisoners' rights Public health intervention Public health laboratory Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to rest and leisure Right to sit Security of person Sexual and reproductive health Social psychology Sociology of health and illness Unisex changing rooms Unisex public toilets Workers' right to access the toilet Preventive healthcare Behavior change Theories Drug checking Family planning Harm reduction Health promotion Human nutrition Healthy diet Preventive nutrition Hygiene Food safety Hand washing Infection control Oral hygiene Needle and syringe programmes Occupational safety and health Human factors and ergonomics Hygiene Controlled Drugs Injury prevention Medicine Nursing Patient safety Organization Pharmacovigilance Reagent testing Safe sex Sanitation Emergency Fecal–oral transmission Open defecation Sanitary sewer Waterborne diseases Worker School hygiene Smoking cessation Supervised injection site Vaccination Vector control Population health Biostatistics Child mortality Community health Epidemiology Global health Health impact assessment Health system Infant mortality Open-source healthcare software Multimorbidity Public health informatics Social determinants of health Commercial determinants of health Health equity Race and health Social medicine Biological and epidemiological statistics Case–control study Randomized controlled trial Relative risk Statistical hypothesis testing Analysis of variance (ANOVA) Regression analysis ROC curve Student's t -test Z -test Statistical software Infectious and epidemic disease prevention Asymptomatic carrier Epidemics List Notifiable diseases List Public health surveillance Disease surveillance Quarantine Sexually transmitted infection Social distancing Tropical disease Vaccine trial WASH Food hygiene and safety management Food Additive Chemistry Engineering Microbiology Processing Safety Safety scandals Good agricultural practice Good manufacturing practice HACCP ISO 22000 Health behavioral sciences Diffusion of innovations Health belief model Health communication Health psychology Positive deviance PRECEDE–PROCEED model Social cognitive theory Social norms approach Theory of planned behavior Transtheoretical model Organizations, education and history Organizations Caribbean Caribbean Public Health Agency China Center for Disease Control and Prevention Europe Centre for Disease Prevention and Control Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Russia Rospotrebnadzor India Ministry of Health and Family Welfare Canada Health Canada Public Health Agency U.S.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Health departments in the United States Council on Education for Public Health Public Health Service World Health Organization World Toilet Organization ( Full list ) Education Health education Higher education Bachelor of Science in Public Health Doctor of Public Health Professional degrees of public health Schools of public health History History of public health in the United Kingdom History of public health in the United States History of public health in Australia Sara Josephine Baker Samuel Jay Crumbine Carl Rogers Darnall Joseph Lister Margaret Sanger John Snow Typhoid Mary Radium Girls Germ theory of disease Social hygiene movement Category Commons WikiProject Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Asymptomatic_carrier&oldid=1306055139 " Categories : Infectious diseases Medical terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 17:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Asymptomatic carrier 34 languages Add topic

