Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Education 3 Career 4 Work Toggle Work subsection 4.1 Geographica 4.2 Geology 4.3 Fossil formation 4.4 Volcanism 5 Editions 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Notes 7.2 Citations 7.3 Bibliography 7.4 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Strabo 92 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Ποντιακά Português Română Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Tarandíne ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek geographer, philosopher and historian (64/63 BC–c.24 AD) This article is about the Greek geographer. For other people called "Strabo", see Strabo (disambiguation) .

Strabo Στράβων 16th-century engraving of Strabo Born 64 or 63 BC Amaseia , Pontus ( modern-day Amasya , Turkey) Died c.

AD 24 (aged c. 87) Roman Empire Occupation Geographer Strabo [ n 1 ] ( / ˈ s t r eɪ b oʊ / ; Greek : Στράβων Strábōn ; 64 or 63 BC – c.

24 AD ) was an ancient Greek geographer who lived in Asia Minor during the transitional period of the Roman Republic into the Roman Empire . He is best known for his work Geographica , which presented a descriptive history of people and places from different regions of the world known during his lifetime.

[ 1 ] Additionally, Strabo authored historical works, but only fragments and quotations of these survive in the writings of other authors.

Early life [ edit ] Title page from Isaac Casaubon 's 1620 edition of Geographica Strabo was born to an affluent family from Amaseia in Pontus in around 64 BC.

[ 2 ] His family had been involved in politics since at least the reign of Mithridates V .

[ 3 ] Strabo was related to Dorylaeus on his mother's side. Several other family members, including his paternal grandfather, had served Mithridates VI during the Mithridatic Wars . As the war drew to a close, Strabo's grandfather had turned several Pontic fortresses over to the Romans.

[ 4 ] Strabo wrote that "great promises were made in exchange for these services", and as Persian culture endured in Amaseia even after Mithridates and Tigranes were defeated, scholars have speculated about how the family's support for Rome might have affected their position in the local community, and whether they might have been granted Roman citizenship as a reward.

[ 3 ] Education [ edit ] Strabo studied under several prominent teachers of various specialities throughout his early life. He mentions all or most of his teachers as prominent citizens of their own respective cities, at different stops during his Mediterranean travels. The first chapter of his education took place in Nysa (modern Sultanhisar , Turkey) under the master of rhetoric Aristodemus , the grandson of the famous Posidonius , whose influence is manifest in Strabo's Geography . Aristodemus had formerly taught the sons of the Roman general who had taken over Pontus. This also highlights the international trend of the era that Greek intellectuals would often instruct the Roman elite. Aristodemus was the head of two schools of rhetoric and grammar, one in Nysa and one in Rhodes .  The school in Nysa possessed a distinct intellectual curiosity in Homeric literature and the interpretation of the ancient Greek epics. Strabo was an admirer of Homer 's poetry, perhaps as a consequence of his time spent in Nysa with Aristodemus.

He was influenced by Hecataeus and Aristotle .

[ 5 ] At around the age of 21, Strabo moved to Rome, in 44 BC, and stayed there, studying and writing, until at least 31 BC.  He studied philosophy with the Peripatetic Xenarchus , a highly respected tutor in Augustus's court. Despite Xenarchus's Aristotelian leanings, Strabo later showed evidence of developing his own Stoic inclinations, largely influenced by his future teacher Athenodorus, who was also the tutor of Augustus . In Rome, he also learned grammar under the wealthy and renowned scholar Tyrannion of Amisus . Thus completing his traditional Greek aristocratic education in rhetoric, grammar, and philosophy. Tyrannion was known to have befriended Cicero and taught his nephew, Quintus. Although Tyrannion was also a Peripatetic, he was more relevantly a respected authority on geography, a fact of some significance considering Strabo's future contributions to the field.

The final noteworthy mentor to Strabo was Athenodorus Cananites , a philosopher who had spent his life since 44 BC in Rome forging relationships with the Roman elite. Athenodorus passed onto Strabo his philosophy, his knowledge and his contacts. Unlike the Aristotelian Xenarchus and Tyrannion who preceded him in teaching Strabo, Athenodorus was a Stoic and almost certainly the source of Strabo's diversion from the philosophy of his former mentors. Moreover, from his own first-hand experience, Athenodorus provided Strabo with information about regions of the empire which Strabo would not otherwise have known about.
The first of Strabo's major works, Historical Sketches ( Historica hypomnemata ), written while he was in Rome ( c.

20 BC ), is nearly completely lost. Meant to cover the history of the known world from the conquest of Greece by the Romans, Strabo quotes it himself and other classical authors mention that it existed, although the only surviving document is a fragment of papyrus now in the possession of the University of Milan (renumbered [Papyrus] 46).

Career [ edit ] Strabo as depicted in the Nuremberg Chronicle Strabo's life was characterized by extensive travels. He journeyed to Egypt and Kush , as far west as the coastal region of Tuscany , and as far south as Ethiopia , in addition to his travels in Asia Minor and the time he spent in Rome . Travel throughout the Mediterranean and Near East, especially for scholarly purposes, was popular during this era and was facilitated by the relative peace enjoyed throughout the reign of Augustus (27 BC – AD 14).  In 29 BC, on his way to Corinth (where Augustus was at the time), he visited the island of Gyaros in the Aegean Sea. Around 25 BC, he sailed up the Nile until he reached Philae , [ n 2 ] after which point there is little record of his travels until AD 17.

Statue of Strabo in his hometown (modern-day Amasya , Turkey) It is not known precisely when Strabo's Geography was written, though comments within the work itself place the finished version within the reign of Emperor Tiberius . Some place its first drafts around 7 BC, [ 6 ] others around AD 17 [ 7 ] or AD 18.

[ 6 ] The latest passage to which a date can be assigned is his reference to the death in AD 23 of Juba II , king of Maurousia ( Mauretania ), who is said to have died "just recently".

[ 1 ] He probably worked on the Geography for many years and revised it steadily, but not always consistently. It is an encyclopaedic chronicle and consists of political, economic, social, cultural, and geographic descriptions covering almost all of Europe and the Mediterranean: Britain and Ireland, the Iberian Peninsula, Gaul, Germania, the Alps, Italy, Greece, Northern Black Sea region, Anatolia, Middle East, Central Asia and North Africa. The Geography is the only extant work providing information about both Greek and Roman peoples and countries during the reign of Augustus.

[ 8 ] On the presumption that "recently" means within a year, Strabo stopped writing that year or the next (AD 24), at which time he is thought to have died.

Work [ edit ] Geographica [ edit ] This section may be too long to read and navigate comfortably .

Consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding subheadings . Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page .

( March 2025 ) Main article: Geographica Map of the world according to Strabo Strabo is best known for his work Geographica ("Geography"), which presented a descriptive history of people and places from different regions of the world known during his lifetime.

[ 1 ] Map of Europe according to Strabo Although the Geographica was rarely used by contemporary writers, a multitude of copies survived throughout the Byzantine Empire . It first appeared in Western Europe in Rome as a Latin translation issued around 1469. The first printed edition was published in 1516 in Venice .

[ 9 ] Isaac Casaubon , classical scholar and editor of Greek texts, provided the first critical edition in 1587.

Although Strabo cited the classical Greek astronomers Eratosthenes and Hipparchus , acknowledging their astronomical and mathematical efforts covering geography, he claimed that a descriptive approach was more practical, such that his works were designed for statesmen who were more anthropologically than numerically concerned with the character of countries and regions.

[ 10 ] As such, Geographica provides a valuable source of information on the ancient world of his day, especially when this information is corroborated by other sources. He travelled extensively, as he says: "Westward I have journeyed to the parts of Etruria opposite Sardinia; towards the south from the Euxine [Black Sea] to the borders of Ethiopia; and perhaps not one of those who have written geographies has visited more places than I have between those limits." [ 11 ] It is not known when he wrote Geographica , but he spent much time in the famous library in Alexandria taking notes from "the works of his predecessors". A first edition was published in 7 BC and a final edition no later than 23 AD, in what may have been the last year of Strabo's life. It took some time for Geographica to be recognized by scholars and to become a standard.

[ 12 ] Alexandria itself features extensively in the last book of Geographica , which describes it as a thriving port city with a highly developed local economy.

[ 13 ] Strabo notes the city's many beautiful public parks, and its network of streets wide enough for chariots and horsemen. "Two of these are exceeding broad, over a plethron in breadth, and cut one another at right angles ... All the buildings are connected one with another, and these also with what are beyond it." [ 14 ] Underside of a female indian flying lisard showing the "wing" or patagium that is usually supported by six elongated ribs.

Lawrence Kim observes that Strabo is [ 15 ] "... pro-Roman throughout the Geography. But while he acknowledges and even praises Roman ascendancy in the political and military sphere, he also makes a significant effort to establish Greek primacy over Rome in other contexts." In Europe , Strabo was the first to connect the Danube (which he called Danouios) and the Istros – with the change of names occurring at "the cataracts," the modern Iron Gates on the Romanian/Serbian border.

[ 16 ] In India , a country he never visited, Strabo described small flying reptiles that were long with snake-like bodies and bat-like wings (this description matches the Indian flying lizard Draco dussumieri ), winged scorpions, and other mythical creatures along with those that were actually factual.

[ 17 ] Geology [ edit ] Charles Lyell , in his Principles of Geology , wrote of Strabo: [ 18 ] Strabo…enters largely, in the Second Book of his Geography , into the opinions of Eratosthenes and other Greeks on one of the most difficult problems in geology, viz ., by what causes marine shells came to be plentifully buried in the earth at such great elevations and distances from the sea.

He notices, amongst others, the explanation of Xanthus the Lydian, who said that the seas had once been more extensive, and that they had afterwards been partially dried up, as in his own time many lakes, rivers, and wells in Asia had failed during a season of drought. Treating this conjecture with merited disregard, Strabo passes on to the hypothesis of Strato , the natural philosopher, who had observed that the quantity of mud brought down by rivers into the Euxine [Black Sea] was so great, that its bed must be gradually raised, while the rivers still continued to pour in an undiminished quantity of water. He therefore conceived that, originally, when the Euxine was an inland sea, its level had by this means become so much elevated that it burst its barrier near Byzantium, and formed a communication with the Propontis [Sea of Marmara], and this partial drainage had already, he supposed, converted the left side into marshy ground, and that, at last, the whole would be choked up with soil. So, it was argued, the Mediterranean had once opened a passage for itself by the Columns of Hercules into the Atlantic, and perhaps the abundance of sea-shells in Africa, near the Temple of Jupiter Ammon , might also be the deposit of some former inland sea, which had at length forced a passage and escaped.

But Strabo rejects this theory as insufficient to account for all the phenomena, and he proposes one of his own, the profoundness of which modern geologists are only beginning to appreciate. 'It is not,' he says, 'because the lands covered by seas were originally at different altitudes, that the waters have risen, or subsided, or receded from some parts and inundated others. But the reason is, that the same land is sometimes raised up and sometimes depressed, and the sea also is simultaneously raised and depressed so that it either overflows or returns into its own place again. We must, therefore, ascribe the cause to the ground, either to that ground which is under the sea, or to that which becomes flooded by it, but rather to that which lies beneath the sea, for this is more moveable, and, on account of its humidity, can be altered with great celerity. It is proper,' he observes in continuation, ' to derive our explanations from things which are obvious, and in some measure of daily occurrences, such as deluges, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and sudden swellings of the land beneath the sea; for the last raise up the sea also, and when the same lands subside again, they occasion the sea to be let down. And it is not merely the small, but the large islands also, and not merely the islands, but the continents, which can be lifted up together with the sea; and both large and small tracts may subside, for habitations and cities, like Bure, Bizona, and many others, have been engulfed by earthquakes.' In another place, this learned geographer [Strabo], in alluding to the tradition that Sicily had been separated by a convulsion from Italy, remarks, that at present the land near the sea in those parts was rarely shaken by earthquakes, since there were now open orifices whereby fire and ignited matters and waters escaped; but formerly, when the volcanoes of Etna , the Lipari Islands , Ischia , and others, were closed up, the imprisoned fire and wind might have produced far more vehement movements. The doctrine, therefore, that volcanoes are safety valves, and that the subterranean convulsions are probably most violent when first the volcanic energy shifts itself to a new quarter, is not modern.

Fossil formation [ edit ] Strabo commented on fossil formation mentioning Nummulite (quoted from Celâl Şengör ): [ 1 ] One extraordinary thing which I saw at the pyramids must not be omitted. Heaps of stones from the quarries lie in front of the pyramids. Among these are found pieces which in shape and size resemble lentils. Some contain substances like grains half peeled. These, it is said, are the remnants of the workmen's food converted into stone; which is not probable. For at home in our country (Amaseia), there is a long hill in a plain, which abounds with pebbles of a porous stone, resembling lentils. The pebbles of the sea-shore and of rivers suggest somewhat of the same difficulty [respecting their origin]; some explanation may indeed be found in the motion [to which these are subject] in flowing waters, but the investigation of the above fact presents more difficulty. I have said elsewhere, that in sight of the pyramids, on the other side in Arabia, and near the stone quarries from which they are built, is a very rocky mountain, called the Trojan mountain; beneath it there are caves, and near the caves and the river a village called Troy, an ancient settlement of the captive Trojans who had accompanied Menelaus and settled there.

Volcanism [ edit ] Strabo commented on volcanism ( effusive eruption ) which he observed at Katakekaumene (modern Kula , Western Turkey).  Strabo's observations predated Pliny the Younger who witnessed the eruption of Mount Vesuvius on 24 August AD 79 in Pompeii : [ 19 ] …There are no trees here, but only the vineyards where they produce the Katakekaumene wines which are by no means inferior from any of the wines famous for their quality. The soil is covered with ashes, and black in colour as if the mountainous and rocky country was made up of fires. Some assume that these ashes were the result of thunderbolts and subterranean explosions, and do not doubt that the legendary story of Typhon takes place in this region. Ksanthos adds that the king of this region was a man called Arimus. However, it is not reasonable to accept that the whole country was burned down at a time as a result of such an event rather than as a result of a fire bursting from underground whose source has now died out. Three pits are called "Physas" and separated by forty stadia from each other. Above these pits, there are hills formed by the hot masses burst out from the ground as estimated by a logical reasoning. Such type of soil is very convenient for viniculture , just like the Katanasoil which is covered with ashes and where the best wines are still produced abundantly. Some writers concluded by looking at these places that there is a good reason for calling Dionysus by the name ("Phrygenes").

Editions [ edit ] Meineke, Augustus , ed. (1877).

Strabonis Geographica . Lipsiae: B.G. Teubneri.

Strabo (1852). Kramer, Gustav (ed.).

Strabonis Geographica. Recens. G. Kramer. Ed. minor .

Radt, Stefan, ed. (2002–2011).

Strabons Geographika: mit Übersetzung und Kommentar . Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.

Volumes 1–4 text and translation ( Vol 1 , Vol 2 ), Volumes 5–8 commentary ( Vol 6 , Vol 7 , Vol 8 ), Volume 9 text of the Epitome and of the Chrestomathy ( Vol 9 ), Volume 10 index.

Jones, H. L., transl. (1917).

The Geography of Strabo . London: Heinemann. In eight volumes: Vol 1 ; Vol 2 ; Vol 3 ; Vol 4 ; Vol 5 ; Vol 6 ; Vol 7 ; Vol 8 .

Strabo's Geography in three volumes as translated by H.C. Hamilton and W. Falconer, ed. by H.G. Bohn, 1854–1857 See also [ edit ] De situ orbis from Albi References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Strabo (meaning "squinty", as in strabismus ) was a term employed by the Romans for anyone whose eyes were distorted or deformed. The father of Pompey was called " Pompeius Strabo ". A native of Sicily so clear-sighted that he could see things at great distance as if they were nearby was also called "Strabo".

^ Accompanied by prefect of Egypt Aelius Gallus, who had been sent on a military mission to Arabia.

Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c d Strabo (1949). "34".

Geography . Vol. VIII Book XVII. Translated by Horace Leonard Jones. London: William Heinemann. p. 95.

^ Purcell, Nicholas (2014).

"Strabo" . In Hornblower, Simon; Spawforth, Antony; Eidinow, Esther (eds.).

The Oxford Companion to Classical Civilization . Oxford University Press. p. 757.

ISBN 978-0-19-870677-9 .

^ a b Bianchetti, Serena; Cataudella, Michele; Gehrke, Hans-Joachim (4 December 2015).

Brill's Companion to Ancient Geography: The Inhabited World in Greek and Roman Tradition . Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-28471-5 .

^ Mayor, Adrienne (March 2011).

The Poison King: The Life and Legend of Mithradates, Rome's Deadliest Enemy . Princeton University Press. pp. 9–.

ISBN 978-0-691-15026-0 .

^ "Strabo | Greek geographer and historian" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

^ a b Strabo (1917).

Geography . Vol. I. Translated by Horace Leonard Jones. London: William Heinemann. p. xxv–xxvi.

^ Sarah Pothecary, When was the Geography written?

^ Strabo (n.d.).

Strabo, Geography, Volume I: Books 1–2 . W. Heinemann.

ISBN 9780674990555 . Retrieved 8 September 2018 .

^ Geographie, Band 1, Strabo, S.17, Strabo, Karl Kärcher, Gottlieb Lukas Friedrich Tafel, Christian Nathanael Osiander, Gustav Schwab, Verlag Metzler, 1831.

^ Dueck, Daniela, ed. (2017).

The Routledge Companion to Strabo . Abingdon: Routledge. p. 2.

ISBN 978-1-31744-586-9 .

^ "LacusCurtius • Strabo's Geography — Book II Chapter 5 (§§ 1‑17)" .

penelope.uchicago.edu . Retrieved 2022-03-28 .

^ "Strabo Critical Essays - eNotes.com" .

eNotes .

^ Strabo, Geography 17.1.6, 7, 8, 13; translated by Brent Shaw. Attained from: E.A. Pollard, C. Rosenberg, and R.L. Tignor, et al. Worlds Together, Worlds Apart, Concise, Volume One: Beginnings through the Fifteenth Century (W.W. Norton, 2015) Pg. 228 ^ Davis, William Stearns (1912).

Reading in Ancient History . Vol. I: Greece and the East. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. pp.

325– 329.

^ Kim, Lawrence (2010).

Homer between History and Fiction in Imperial Greek Literature . Cambridge University Press. p. 83.

ISBN 978-1-139-49024-5 .

^ Roller, Duane W. (27 August 2015).

Ancient Geography: The Discovery of the World in Classical Greece and Rome . Bloomsbury.

ISBN 9780857725660 .

^ "Chapter 1 – Account of India by the Greek Writer Strabo" .

^ Lyell, Charles (1832).

Principles of Geology .

John Murray . pp.

20 –21.

^ Strabo (1950). "11".

Geography . Vol. VI Book XIII. Translated by Horace Leonard Jones. London: William Heinemann. p. 183.

Bibliography [ edit ] "Biography of Strabo" . Tufts.

"Strabo".

Encyclopædia Britannica (15th ed.). 1998. pp.

296– 297.

Diller, A. (1975).

The Textual Tradition of Strabo's Geography . Amsterdam: Hakkert.

Dueck, Daniela (2000).

Strabo of Amasia: Greek Man of Letters in Augustan Rome . New York: Routledge.

Dueck, D.; H. Lindsay; S. Pothecary, eds. (2005).

Strabo's Cultural Geography: The Making of a Kolossourgia . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Lindberg, David C. (2008).

The Beginnings of Western Science The European Scientific Tradition in Philosophical, Religious, and Institutional Context, Prehistory A.D. 1450 (2nd ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Roller, Duane (2014).

The Geography of Strabo: An English Translation, with Introduction and Notes . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Further reading [ edit ] Biraschi, Anna Maria; Salmieri, Giovanni (eds) (2005).

Strabone e l'Asia Minore.

Studi di Storia e di Storiografia. Naples: Edizione Scientifiche Italiane.

Braund, David. 2006. "Greek Geography and Roman Empire: The Transformation of Tradition in Strabo's Euxine." In Strabo's Cultural Geography: The Making of a Kolossourgia.

Edited by Daniela Dueck, Hugh Lindsay, and Sarah Pothecary, 216–234. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.

Clarke, Katherine. 1997. "In Search of the Author of Strabo's Geography." Journal of Roman Studies 87:92–110.

Diller, Aubrey. 1975.

The Textual Tradition of Strabo's Geography.

Amsterdam: Hakkert.

Engels, Johannes (1999).

Augusteische Oikumenegeographie und Universalhistorie im Werk Strabons von Amaseia [Augustean oikumene geography and universal history in the work of Strabon of Amaseia]. Geographica Historica, vol. 12. Stuttgart: Steiner, ISBN 3-515-07459-7 .

Kuin, Inger N.I. 2017. "Rewriting Family History: Strabo and the Mithridatic Wars." Phoenix 71.1-2: 102–118.

Lightfoot, Jessica (2025).

Strabo . London: Bloomsbury.

Olshausen, Eckart (2022).

Strabon von Amaseia .

Hildesheim: Olms, ISBN 978-3-487-16269-0 .

Pfuntner, Laura. 2017. "Death and Birth in the Urban Landscape: Strabo on Troy and Rome." Classical Antiquity 36.1: 33–51.

Pothecary, Sarah. 1999. "Strabo the Geographer: His Name and its Meaning." Mnemosyne , 4th ser. 52.6: 691–704 Richards, G. C. 1941. "Strabo: The Anatolian who Failed of Roman Recognition." Greece and Rome 10.29: 79–90.

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Strabo Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Strabo Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Media related to Strabo at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Strabo at Wikiquote Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article: Στράβων Geography (Loeb Classical Library, H. L. Jones translation) Geography, Volume I — Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press Geography, Volume II — Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press Geography, Volume III — Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press Geography, Volume IV — Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press Geography, Volume V — Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press Geography, Volume VII — Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press Geography, Volume VIII — Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press Works by Strabo at Perseus Digital Library Biography of Strabo Works by Strabo at Project Gutenberg Map of the Toponyms in the Geography of Strabo Archived 2023-01-31 at the Wayback Machine Works by or about Strabo at the Internet Archive v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy v t e Amasya District Municipalities Amasya Ziyaret Villages Abacı Aksalur Aktaş Akyazı Alakadı Albayrak Ardıçlar Avşar Aydınca Aydınlık Aydoğdu Bağlarüstü Bağlıca Bayat Beke Beldağı Boğaköy Böke Bulduklu Çatalçam Çavuşköy Çengelkayı Çiğdemlik Çivi Dadıköy Damudere Değirmendere Direkli Doğantepe Duruca Eliktekke Ermiş Eskikızılca Ezinepazar Gerne Gökdere Gözlek Halifeli Hasabdal İbecik İlgazi İlyas İpekköy Kaleboğazı Kaleköy Kapıkaya Karaali Karaçavuş Karaibrahim Karakese Karaköprü Karataş Karsan Kayabaşı Kayacık Kayrak Keçili Keşlik Kızılca Kızılkışlacık Kızoğlu Kızseki Köyceğiz Küçükkızılca Kutu Kuzgeçe Mahmatlar Meşeliçiftliği Musaköy Oluz Ormanözü Ortaköy Ovasaray Özfındıklı Saraycık Sarayözü Sarıalan Sarıkız Sarımeşe Sarıyar Sazköy Sevincer Şeyhsadi Sıracevizler Soma Tatar Tuzsuz Ümük Uygur Yağcıabdal Yağmur Yassıçal Yavru Yeşildere Yeşilöz Yıkılgan Yıldızköy Yolyanı Yuvacık Yuvaköy Landmarks Amasya University Archaeological Museum of Amasya Bayezid II Mosque Burmali Minare Mosque Büyük Aga Medrese Farhad and Shirin Monument Harsene Kalesi İstasyon Bridge Seljuk Burmali Mosque Tombs of the kings of Pontus History Amasya Circular Amasya Protocol Amasya trials Central Army Peace of Amasya Notable people Strabo Amirdovlat Amasiatsi Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐6qjf2
Cached time: 20250817043823
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.813 seconds
Real time usage: 0.946 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4516/1000000
Revision size: 31606/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 109792/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7971/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 114831/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.510/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21245109/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  808.526      1 -total
 20.91%  169.079     21 Template:Cite_book
 13.26%  107.248      1 Template:Infobox_person
 12.97%  104.867      1 Template:Langx
 12.54%  101.419      2 Template:Navbox
 12.08%   97.710      2 Template:Reflist
 11.16%   90.207      1 Template:Greek_astronomy
  6.47%   52.274      1 Template:Short_description
  5.57%   45.030      1 Template:Authority_control
  3.80%   30.723      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:52121:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043823 and revision id 1305164526. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Strabo&oldid=1305164526 " Categories : 60s BC births 24 deaths 1st-century BC historians Ancient Greek geographers Ancient Roman geographers Greek-language historians from the Roman Empire Ancient Pontic Greeks People from Amasya Roman Pontus Historians from Roman Anatolia 1st-century geographers 1st-century BC geographers 1st-century historians Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Greek-language text Articles that may be too long from March 2025 All articles that may be too long Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 12:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Strabo 92 languages Add topic

