Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Ernst Platner 5 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German anthropologist, physician and philosopher Not to be confused with his son, Ernst Zacharias Platner Ernst Platner Portrait by Anton Graff Born 11 June 1744 Leipzig , Electorate of Saxony Died 27 December 1818 Leipzig, Electorate of Saxony Education Education University of Leipzig ( M.D.

, 1767) Philosophical work Era 18th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Rationalism [ 1 ] Main interests History of philosophy , medicine Notable ideas The Unconscious Pragmatic history Psychosomatic medicine Ernst Platner in 1812 by Friedrich Overbeck , Albertinum , Dresden Ernst Platner ( / ˈ p l ɑː t n ər / ; German: [ˈplatnɐ] ; 11 June 1744 – 27 December 1818) was a German anthropologist , physician and Rationalist [ 1 ] philosopher , born in Leipzig . He was the father of painter Ernst Zacharias Platner (1773–1855).

Life [ edit ] Following the death of his father in 1747, the philologist Johann August Ernesti became his foster father. He received his early education at the gymnasium in Altenburg , the Thomasschule in Leipzig and at the gymnasium in Gera .

[ 3 ] Afterwards, he studied at the University of Leipzig , where in 1770 he became an associate professor of medicine. Later at Leipzig, he was appointed a full professor of physiology (1780) and philosophy (1811). In 1783/84 and 1789/90 he served as university rector .

[ 3 ] Work [ edit ] Platner was a follower of the teachings of Leibniz . He was the author of Anthropologie für Aerzte und Weltweise , one of the more important anthropological works of the Spätaufklärung (an epoch of German literature). This work was influential to scholars that included Johann Gottfried Herder , Friedrich Schiller and Karl Philipp Moritz . He believed in treating modern anthropology as a medical-philosophical science of the whole individual — a viewpoint that can be considered as a precursor of psychosomatic medicine .

[ 4 ] Platner is credited with originally coining the term Unbewußtseyn ( unconscious ).

[ 5 ] He is also credited for coining the phrase " pragmatic history of the human faculty of cognition" ( pragmatische Geschichte des menschlichen Erkentnißvermogens ), [ 6 ] later appropriated by Johann Gottlieb Fichte as "pragmatic history of the human spirit" ( pragmatische Geschichte des menschlichen Geistes ).

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] == Selected publications == Anthropologie für Aerzte und Weltweise (Anthropology for Physicians and the Worldwise), 1772 Neue Anthropologie für Aerzte und Weltweise (New Anthropology for Physicians and the Worldwise), 1790 Über den Atheismus. Ein Gespräch (About Atheism . An Interview), 1783 Philosophische Aphorismen nebst einigen Anleitungen zur philosophischen Geschichte (Philosophical Aphorisms with Some Principles for a History of Philosophy), Vol. 1: 1776, Vol. 2: 1782 (second edition: 1784, third edition: 1793) Quaestiones physiologicae (Questions of Physiology), 1794 Quaestiones medicinae forensis (Questions of Forensic Medicine ), 1797–1817 Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Frederick Beiser , The Fate of Reason: German Philosophy from Kant to Fichte , Harvard University Press, 2009, p. 214.

^ John H. Zammito, Kant, Herder, and the Birth of Anthropology , University of Chicago Press, 2002, p. 250.

^ a b Prof. Dr. med. Ernst Platner Professorenkatalog der Universität Leipzig ^ Plat(t)ner, Ernst at NDB/ADB Deutsche Biographie.

^ Ernst Platner, Philosophische Aphorismen nebst einigen Anleitungen zur philosophischen Geschichte , Vol. 1 (Leipzig: Schwickertscher Verlag, 1793 [1776]), p. 86; Angus Nicholls and Martin Liebscher, Thinking the Unconscious: Nineteenth-Century German Thought (2010), Cambridge University Press, 2010, p. 9.

^ Ernst Platner, Philosophische Aphorismen nebst einigen Anleitungen zur philosophischen Geschichte , Vol. 1 (Leipzig: Schwickertscher Verlag, 1793 [1776]), p. 9.

^ Gesamtausgabe I/2: 364–65; Daniel Breazeale , "Fichte's Conception of Philosophy as a "Pragmatic History of the Human Mind" and the Contributions of Kant, Platner, and Maimon," Journal of the History of Ideas , 62 (4), Oct. 2001, pp. 685–703; Günter Zöller, Fichte's Transcendental Philosophy: The Original Duplicity of Intelligence and Will , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998, p. 130 n. 30; Sally Sedgwick, The Reception of Kant's Critical Philosophy: Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007, p. 144 n. 33; Daniel Breazeale and Tom Rockmore (eds.), Fichte, German Idealism, and Early Romanticism , Rodopi, 2010, p. 50 n. 27: "Α »history of the human mind« is a genetic account of the self-constitution of the I in the form of an ordered description of the various acts of thinking that are presupposed by the act of thinking the I"; Ezequiel L. Posesorski, Between Reinhold and Fichte: August Ludwig Hülsen's Contribution to the Emergence of German Idealism . Karlsruhe: Karlsruher Institut Für Technologie, 2012, p. 81: " Pragmatische Geschichte des menschlichen Geistes designates reason's timeless course of production of the different levels of the a priori system of all knowledge, which are exclusively uncovered and portrayed genetically by personal self-conscious reflection"; Daniel Breazeale, Thinking Through the Wissenschaftslehre: Themes from Fichte's Early Philosophy , Oxford: Oxford UP, 2013, p. 72.

^ g References [ edit ] This article incorporates translated text from an article at the German Wikipedia , whose sources include: Plat(t)ner, Ernst at NDB/ADB Deutsche Biographie .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy 2 Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Greece Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Artists FID People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ernst_Platner&oldid=1276413810 " Categories : German anthropologists 18th-century German philosophers 19th-century German philosophers Physicians from Leipzig Academic staff of Leipzig University Rectors of Leipzig University 1744 births 1818 deaths German male writers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Pages with German IPA This page was last edited on 18 February 2025, at 18:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ernst Platner 5 languages Add topic

