Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Kierkegaard and philosophy and theology 2 Kierkegaard and psychology 3 Kierkegaard and literature 4 Kierkegaard after World War I 5 Kierkegaard and feminism 6 International reception Toggle International reception subsection 6.1 In France 6.2 In Germany 7 Notes 8 References 9 Sources Toggle the table of contents Influence and reception of Søren Kierkegaard 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1902 oil painting of Kierkegaard, by Luplau Janssen.

Søren Kierkegaard was a Danish philosopher whose influence and reception varied widely and may be roughly divided into various chronological periods. Reactions were anything but uniform, and proponents of various ideologies attempted to appropriate his work quite early.

Kierkegaard's reputation as a philosopher was first established in his native Denmark with his work Either/Or .

[ 1 ] Henriette Wulff, in a letter to Hans Christian Andersen , wrote, " Recently a book was published here with the title Either/Or ! It is supposed to be quite strange, the first part full of Don Juanism, skepticism, et cetera, and the second part toned down and conciliating, ending with a sermon that is said to be quite excellent. The whole book attracted much attention. It has not yet been discussed publicly by anyone, but it surely will be. It is actually supposed to be by a Kierkegaard who has adopted a pseudonym....

" [ 1 ] Kierkegaard's fame in Denmark increased with each publication of his philosophical works, including Fear and Trembling and Philosophical Fragments , and culminating in his magnum opus , the Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments . However, Kierkegaard's attack upon Christendom , represented by the Danish National Church near the end of his life, did not endear him to many in the clergy and theological circles. After his death, his original manuscripts were bequeathed by his one-time fiancée, Regine Olsen for posterity. She later donated most of his writings to the Danish Royal Library where they continue to be stored.

Kierkegaard's thought gained a wider audience with the translation of his works into German , French , and English .

Kierkegaard and philosophy and theology [ edit ] The Søren Kierkegaard Statue in the Royal Library Garden in Copenhagen Many 20th-century philosophers , both theistic and atheistic, drew concepts from Kierkegaard, including the notions of angst, despair, and the importance of the individual. His fame as a philosopher grew tremendously in the 1930s, in large part because the ascendant existentialist movement pointed to him as a precursor, although later writers celebrated him as a highly significant and influential thinker in his own right.

[ 2 ] Since Kierkegaard was raised as a Lutheran , [ 3 ] he was commemorated as a teacher in the Calendar of Saints of the Lutheran Church on 11 November and in the Calendar of Saints of the Episcopal Church with a feast day on 8 September.

Philosophers and theologians influenced by Kierkegaard include Hans Urs von Balthasar , Karl Barth , Simone de Beauvoir , Niels Bohr , Dietrich Bonhoeffer , Emil Brunner , Martin Buber , Rudolf Bultmann , Albert Camus , Martin Heidegger , Abraham Joshua Heschel , Karl Jaspers , Gabriel Marcel , Maurice Merleau-Ponty , Reinhold Niebuhr , Franz Rosenzweig , Jean-Paul Sartre , Gilles Deleuze , Joseph Soloveitchik , Paul Tillich , Malcolm Muggeridge , Thomas Merton , Miguel de Unamuno .

[ 4 ] Paul Feyerabend 's epistemological anarchism in the philosophy of science was inspired by Kierkegaard's idea of subjectivity as truth.

Ludwig Wittgenstein was immensely influenced and humbled by Kierkegaard, [ 5 ] claiming that "Kierkegaard is far too deep for me, anyhow. He bewilders me without working the good effects which he would in deeper souls".

[ 5 ] Karl Popper referred to Kierkegaard as "the great reformer of Christian ethics, who exposed the official Christian morality of his day as anti-Christian and anti-humanitarian hypocrisy".

[ 6 ] Kierkegaard and psychology [ edit ] Kierkegaard had a profound influence on psychology . He is widely regarded as the founder of Christian psychology and of existential psychology and therapy .

[ 7 ] Existentialist (often called "humanistic") psychologists and therapists include Ludwig Binswanger , Viktor Frankl , Erich Fromm , Carl Rogers , and Rollo May . May based his The Meaning of Anxiety on Kierkegaard's The Concept of Anxiety . Kierkegaard's sociological work Two Ages: The Age of Revolution and the Present Age critiques modernity .

[ 8 ] Ernest Becker based his 1974 Pulitzer Prize book, The Denial of Death , on the writings of Kierkegaard, Freud and Otto Rank . Kierkegaard is also seen as an important precursor of postmodernism .

[ 9 ] Kierkegaard and literature [ edit ] Kierkegaard influenced 19th-century literature writers as well as 20th-century literature .

August Strindberg (1843-1912) found inspiration in Kierkegaard and the famous Norwegian dramatist and poet Henrik Ibsen (1828-1906) clearly seems to have been inspired by the Dane in famous works such as Brand . The other great Norwegian national writer and poet Bjornstjerne Bjornson (1832-1910) was also deeply inspired by Kierkegaard.

[ 10 ] Finally the celebrated Norwegian artist Edvard Munch (1863-1944) closely studied key concepts such as anxiety, and this influence is notable in some of his iconic paintings such as The Scream.

[ 11 ] Other figures deeply influenced by his work include W. H. Auden , Jorge Luis Borges , Don DeLillo , Hermann Hesse , Franz Kafka , [ 12 ] David Lodge , Flannery O'Connor , Walker Percy , Rainer Maria Rilke , J.D. Salinger and John Updike .

[ 13 ] Kierkegaard's work The Diary of a Seducer has been re-published several times, including Princeton University Press' translation with John Updike's foreword and Penguin Books ' series Great Loves .

Kierkegaard after World War I [ edit ] Kierkegaard's present stature in the English-speaking world owes much to the exegetical writings and improved Kierkegaard translations by the American theologian Walter Lowrie, the University of Minnesota philosopher David F. Swenson, and the Danish translators Howard and Edna Hong .

Anthony Rudd 's book Kierkegaard and the Limits of the Ethical and Alasdair MacIntyre 's discussion of Kierkegaard in After Virtue and A Short History of Ethics did much to facilitate Kierkegaard's legacy in ethical thought in analytic philosophy .

Kierkegaard's influence on continental philosophy increased dramatically after the First and Second World Wars, especially among the German existenz thinkers and French existentialists.

Jean-Paul Sartre , Emmanuel Levinas , and Karl Barth all owe a heavy debt to Kierkegaard.

Paul Ricoeur and Judith Butler wrote monographs drawing new attention to Kierkegaard's work, and a 1964 UNESCO colloquium on Kierkegaard in Paris ranks as one of the most important events for a generation's reception of Kierkegaard, which included a keynote speaker, Sartre who gave his lecture The Singular Universal , which solidified Kierkegaard's influence over existentialism.

[ 14 ] In America, interest in Kierkegaard was revived from the 1980s onwards, particularly by the American philosopher and curator of the Kierkegaard Library at St. Olaf College Gordon Marino, who has devoted several books and essays to Kierkegaard. In Kierkegaard's native Denmark, the Danish people hosted his 200th anniversary of Kierkegaard's birth in Copenhagen in May 2013.

[ 15 ] Kierkegaard has also influenced members of the analytical philosophy tradition, most notably Ludwig Wittgenstein , who considered Kierkegaard to be "the most profound thinker of the [nineteenth] century. Kierkegaard was a saint." [ 16 ] To some degree, Kierkegaard can be seen as one of the few philosophers to whom the simple analytic/continental divide does not fully apply.

Kierkegaard predicted his posthumous fame, and foresaw that his work would become the subject of intense study and research. In his journals, he wrote: "What the age needs is not a genius—it has had geniuses enough, but a martyr, who in order to teach men to obey would himself be obedient unto death. What the age needs is awakening. And therefore someday, not only my writings but my whole life, all the intriguing mystery of the machine will be studied and studied. I never forget how God helps me and it is therefore my last wish that everything may be to his honour." [ 17 ] Kierkegaard and feminism [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( April 2020 ) Kierkegaard's relationship to feminism is a troublesome one, Kierkegaard has been described as misogynistic, making "snide comments about woman’s nature, mocking with utmost irony her “great abilities” and sneering at the possibility of her emancipation" although Dera Sipe of Villanova University states that viewing Kierkegaard as a "straight misogynist is highly problematic".

[ 18 ] In her paper Kierkegaard and Feminism: A Paradoxical Friendship, Sipe commends Kierkegaard for taking "a hammer to the cold foundations of traditional Western philosophy" and introducing existentialism which feminism has adopted and thrived in .

[ 18 ] She then states that due to Kierkegaard's rampant use of Pseudonyms one must separate Kierkegaard from his Pseudonyms.

[ a ] Sipe argues that it "would be of more benefit to feminism not to read Kierkegaard in search of his own personal stance on the woman question, but rather to read him in an exploratory manner as one who has exposed new avenues of thought, new ways of examining the woman question".

[ 18 ] Sipe, after examining his essay on the suffragette movement and the seducer's diary and their misogynistic content, then pivots towards Kierkegaard's view on the Virgin Mary, mother of Jesus, the young daughter of Raguel and Edna both of whom Kierkegaard considers to be knights of faith.

[ 18 ] She states that from these examples it is clear that Kierkegaard (or at least Johannes de Silentio) did hold great respect for women.

[ 18 ] International reception [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( December 2015 ) In France [ edit ] Kierkegaard was first mentioned in a French publication in 1856 in Revue des deux mondes (English: Review of the Two Worlds ) in an article detailing the state of Danish politics and culture which described his influence on the Danish church as having "bewildered many minds and troubled many weak or fearful consciences". The article also detailed the controversy around his funeral.

[ 19 ] The first translation of Kierkegaard into French was published in 1886 by Johannes Gøtzsche, with a preface by the theologian Hans-Peter Kofoed-Hansen. The work translated was Two Minor Ethical-Religious Essays ( French : En quoi l'homme de génie diffère-t-il de l'apôtre? Traité éthique-religieux ).

[ 19 ] Subsequent translations of Kierkegaard into French include those produced by Paul Petit , who produced a French translation of the Concluding Unscientific Postscript in 1941, as well as a translation of the Philosophical Fragments , published posthumously in 1947.

[ 19 ] In Germany [ edit ] The earliest mentions of Kierkegaard's work in German publications were written by Andreas Frederik Beck , himself Danish and one of the attendees at Kierkegaard's oral dissertation defence. There was an anonymous German review of Philosophical Fragments published in 1845 which subsequent scholarship believes was written by Beck. Kierkegaard responded to Beck's criticisms in a footnote published in the followup to the Fragments , the Concluding Unscientific Postscript . Another early mention of Kierkegaard in German is from Johann Georg Theodor Grässe , who included Kierkegaard briefly in an 1848 review of European literature.

[ 20 ] In 1856, the Bavarian-born conservative politician and historian Joseph Edmund Jörg wrote an article discussing religious movements and events in Scandinavian history. The Catholic Jörg praised Kierkegaard's relentless attack on the Danish Lutheran Church, but suggests that Kierkegaard should perhaps have seen Catholicism as a final step in his religious development.

[ 20 ] Early translations of Kierkegaard into German were restricted to his post-1850 material ( The Moment , the attack on the Lutheran Church) and appeared in the 1860s. The Tübingen-trained pastor, Albert Bärthold , studied Kierkegaard under Johann Tobias Beck and published translations of a number of Kierkegaard's works.

[ 20 ] Hjalmar Hjorth Boyesen (1848-1895) recognized Georg Brandes article on Soren Kierkegaard, as well as The Corsair in his March, 1888 article Scandinavian Literature in The Chautauquan . He notes that both Either/Or and Stages on the Path of Life had already been translated into German by that time.

[ 21 ] The most significant translation work was conducted by Christoph Schrempf , another student of J.T. Beck. Schrempf's first translations appeared in 1890 and by 1922, he had completed translations of the entire set of Kierkegaard's published writings. His translations have been criticised repeatedly as unreliable: Heiko Schulz referred to them as "repeatedly revised, highly idiosyncratic, and at times breathtakingly free renditions of the Kierkegaardian texts". Schrempf also spread a view of Kierkegaard significantly out-of-step from the mainstream, interpreting Kierkegaard's "subjectivity as truth" as a justification for his own religious disbelief.

[ 20 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Or as they're described in the paper as "players in a drama" with Kierkegaard as the director.

[ 18 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Garff, Joakim.

Søren Kierkegaard: A Biography . Trans. Bruce H. Kirmmse. Princeton, 2005, 0-691-09165-X ^ Weston 1994 ^ Hampson 2001 ^ Unamuno refers to Kierkegaard in his book The Tragic Sense of Life , Part IV, "In The Depths of the Abyss" ^ a b Creegan 1989 ^ Popper 2002 ^ Ostenfeld & McKinnon 1972 ^ Kierkegaard 2001 ^ Matustik & Westphal 1995 ^ See In God's Way , by Bjornson In God's Way .

Bjornson names one of his characters Soren Pedersen. Kierkegaard's father's name was Michael Pedersen Kierkegaard.

^ Kierkegaard's Influence on Literature, Criticism and Art: The Germanophone World Feb 28, 2013, by Jon Stewart p. xii ^ McGee 2006 ^ Updike 1997 ^ Matuštík, M. (1995), Kierkegaard in Post/Modernity , Indiana University Press, p. 18.

^ Kierkegaard in 2013 Archived 2013-01-31 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Notes on Wittgenstein's Reading of Kierkegaard by Jens Glebe-Moeller" . Archived from the original on 2018-01-30 . Retrieved 2012-09-17 .

^ Dru 1938 , p. 224 ^ a b c d e f Sipe, Dera; Petti, Edward.

"Kierkegaard and Feminism: A Paradoxical Friendship" (PDf) . Department of Philosophy Villanova University . Retrieved April 16, 2020 .

^ a b c Stewart, Jon (2007). "France: Kierkegaard as a Forerunner of Existentialism and Poststructuralism". In Stewart, Jon (ed.).

Kierkegaard's International Reception I: Northern and Western Europe . Aldershot: Ashgate. pp.

421– 474.

ISBN 9780754664963 .

^ a b c d Schulz, Heiko (2007). "Germany and Austria: A Modest Head Start". In Stewart, Jon (ed.).

Kierkegaard's International Reception I: Northern and Western Europe . Aldershot: Ashgate. pp.

307– 419.

ISBN 9780754664963 .

^ Hjalmer Hjorth Boyesen Scandinavian Literature , The Chautauquan: organ of the Chautauqua Literary and Scientific Circle. March, 1888 volume 8 Number 6 p. 336-337  V 8 Oct 1887-Jul 1888 Sources [ edit ] Creegan, Charles (1989).

"Wittgenstein and Kierkegaard" .

Routledge . Archived from the original on 22 August 2010 . Retrieved 1 March 2010 .

Dru, Alexander (1938).

The Journals of Søren Kierkegaard . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Hampson, Daphne (2001).

Christian Contradictions: The Structures of Lutheran and Catholic Thought . Cambridge.

ISBN 9780521604352 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Kierkegaard, Søren (2001).

A Literary Review . London: Penguin Classics.

ISBN 0140448012 .

McGee, Kyle.

"Fear and Trembling in the Penal Colony" .

Kafka Project . Retrieved 2013-04-26 .

Matustik, Martin Joseph; Westphal, Merold , eds. (1995).

Kierkegaard in Post/Modernity . Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

ISBN 0253209676 .

Ostenfeld, Ib; McKinnon, Alastair (1972).

Søren Kierkegaard's Psychology . Waterloo: Wilfrid Laurer University Press.

ISBN 0889200688 .

Popper, Sir Karl R (2002).

The Open Society and Its Enemies Vol 2: Hegel and Marx . London: Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-29063-5 .

Updike, John (1997). "Foreword".

The Seducer's Diary by Søren Kierkegaard . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0691017379 .

Weston, Michael (1994).

Kierkegaard and Modern Continental Philosophy . London: Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-10120-4 .

v t e Søren Kierkegaard Influence and reception Philosophy Theology Works 1841–1846 On the Concept of Irony with Continual Reference to Socrates Either/Or De omnibus dubitandum est Two Upbuilding Discourses, 1843 Repetition Three Upbuilding Discourses, 1843 Fear and Trembling Four Upbuilding Discourses, 1843 Two Upbuilding Discourses, 1844 Three Upbuilding Discourses, 1844 Philosophical Fragments Prefaces The Concept of Anxiety Four Upbuilding Discourses, 1844 Eighteen Upbuilding Discourses Three Discourses on Imagined Occasions Stages on Life's Way Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments Two Ages: A Literary Review 1847–1854 Edifying Discourses in Diverse Spirits Works of Love Christian Discourses The Crisis and a Crisis in the Life of an Actress The Lily of the Field and the Bird of the Air Two Minor Ethical-Religious Essays The Sickness unto Death Three Discourses at the Communion on Fridays Practice in Christianity The Book on Adler For Self-Examination Posthumous The Point of View of My Work as an Author Judge for Yourselves!

The Journals Writing Sampler Ideas Angst Anguish Authenticity Double-mindedness Indirect communication Infinite qualitative distinction Knight of faith Leap of faith Levelling Present age Ressentiment Rotation method Despair People Regine Olsen Peter Kierkegaard Hans Lassen Martensen Jacob Peter Mynster J. L. Heiberg Thomasine Christine Gyllembourg-Ehrensvärd Adolph Peter Adler Related topics Danish Golden Age Søren Kierkegaard Research Center Howard V. and Edna H. Hong Kierkegaard Library Prayers of Kierkegaard Kierkegaard Studies Yearbook Nytorv 27 (birthplace) Rosenborggade 7–9 Skindergade 38 (last home) Statue of Søren Kierkegaard The Central European Institute Søren Kierkegaard v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐x8srl
Cached time: 20250815092137
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.842 seconds
Real time usage: 1.058 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7035/1000000
Revision size: 20291/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 355904/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8908/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 41/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 77521/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.444/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26281705/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  793.777      1 -total
 36.54%  290.041     18 Template:Navbox
 25.17%  199.767      1 Template:Historiography
 24.75%  196.456      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 19.92%  158.119      2 Template:Reflist
 13.69%  108.681     36 Template:Ill
 12.23%   97.088      1 Template:Lang
 11.69%   92.762      4 Template:Cite_web
 11.19%   88.856      1 Template:Short_description
  9.92%   78.775      1 Template:Søren_Kierkegaard Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:37040005:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815092137 and revision id 1295060415. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Influence_and_reception_of_Søren_Kierkegaard&oldid=1295060415 " Categories : Søren Kierkegaard Reception of writers Cultural influence by writer Cultural depictions of Danish people Cultural depictions of philosophers Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles to be expanded from April 2020 All articles to be expanded Articles to be expanded from December 2015 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text CS1 maint: location missing publisher This page was last edited on 11 June 2025, at 12:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Influence and reception of Søren Kierkegaard 1 language Add topic

