Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Personal life 3 Work Toggle Work subsection 3.1 Robinson projection 4 See also 5 Publications 6 References Toggle the table of contents Arthur H. Robinson 12 languages العربية भोजपुरी Deutsch Eesti Español Français Italiano مصرى Polski Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American geographer and cartographer For the British geographer, see Adrian Henry Wardle Robinson .

Arthur H. Robinson Born ( 1915-01-05 ) January 5, 1915 Montreal , Quebec, Canada Died October 10, 2004 (2004-10-10) (aged 89) Madison , Wisconsin, U.S.

Occupation(s) Geographer , cartographer Arthur H. Robinson (January 5, 1915 – October 10, 2004) was an American geographer and cartographer , [ 1 ] who was professor in the Geography Department at the University of Wisconsin–Madison from 1947 until he retired in 1980. He was a prolific writer and influential philosopher on cartography, and one of his most notable accomplishments is the Robinson projection of 1961.

Biography [ edit ] Arthur H. Robinson was born in Montreal , Quebec, Canada, to American parents, James Howard Robinson and Elizabeth (Peavey) Robinson. He lived in Great Britain while he was young, and received his post-secondary education in the United States. His undergraduate work was done at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio , obtaining a B.A. degree in 1936. During his undergraduate work he became especially interested in cartography, and received some practice drawing maps for faculty textbooks [ 2 ] while earning a master's degree in geography from the University of Wisconsin–Madison in 1938, and he earned his Ph.D. degree from Ohio State University in 1947.

[ 3 ] While at Ohio State, Robinson worked to solve problems in the Map communication model .

During World War II, Robinson served as director of the map division of the Office of Strategic Services (OSS). In 1941, when Robinson joined OSS, there were no cartographers as we know them today. Robinson engaged geographers with some interest in mapping and the group developed their techniques on the job.

[ 4 ] Led by Robinson, the OSS cartographers designed a massive 50-inch globe for President Franklin Roosevelt , which became known as "The President's Globe." [ 5 ] A copy of the globe was given to Winston Churchill as a gift and a third globe was provided for the use of George Marshall and Henry Stimson.

[ 6 ] While serving with the OSS, Robinson oversaw the creation of 5,000 hand-drawn maps and attended the Allied conferences at Quebec and Cairo in 1943 and in 1944, he served as chief U.S. map officer. For his efforts Robinson received the Legion of Merit from the United States Army in 1946.

[ 7 ] President Roosevelt studies the 50-inch globe produced by Arthur Robinson and the OSS In 1947 Robinson subsequently joined the geography department at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, where he spent his career in academia and research. Robinson sought to establish cartography as a recognized discipline and ultimately the university granted both undergraduate and master's degrees in cartography.

[ 4 ] The Wisconsin cartography program has conferred more than 100 masters and 20 doctoral degrees, and many of the doctoral recipients created respected cartography programs at other universities.

[ 8 ] Today the map library at the University of Wisconsin–Madison is named in his honor.

[ 9 ] Detail of the cartouche on "The President's Globe" Robinson served as president of the International Cartographic Association (1972–76), and as vice president and president of the Association of American Geographers . He was awarded the Carl Mannerfelt Gold Medal by the International Cartographic Association in 1980.

Personal life [ edit ] Robinson married Mary Elizabeth Coffin (1910–-1992), daughter of John R. Coffin and Bessie Morris Coffin, on December 23, 1938, in Franklin County, Ohio.  They had two children, a son and a daughter.  After the death of his first wife, Robinson remarried in 1993.  His second wife was Martha Elizabeth Rodabaugh Phillips (1914–2010), a widow, with whom he had attended school in Oxford, Ohio.

Work [ edit ] Robinson was a prolific writer and influential philosopher on cartography: [ 7 ] According to Robinson, “the aim of cartographic design is to present the geographical data in such a fashion that the map, as a whole, appears as an integrated unit and so that each item included is clear, legible, and neither more nor less prominent than it should be.” [ 10 ] Like Richard Edes Harrison , another successful wartime cartographer, Robinson warned against the dangers of blindly accepting conventions in map design, such as always putting north at the top of the map. Robinson wrote that neither logic nor educational value required placing north at the top of the map.

[ 11 ] In The Look of Maps (1952) which was based on his doctoral research, Robinson urged cartographers to consider the function of a map as an integral part of the design process.

In the text In The Nature of Maps (1976), Robinson and co-author Barbara Bartz Petchenik created the term map percipient , a map user who interacts with a map in a discerning way and not merely as a casual observer. The authors stressed that ... the nature of the map as an image and the manner in which it functions as a communication device between the cartographer and percipient need much deeper consideration and analysis than they have yet received.

[ 12 ] Robinson also co-authored a widely used textbook, Elements of Cartography , the sixth and last edition of which was published in 1995.

Robinson projection [ edit ] The Robinson projection is an example of a pseudocylindrical projection.

One of Robinson's most notable accomplishments is the Robinson projection . In 1961, Rand McNally asked Robinson to choose a projection for use as a world map that, among other criteria, was uninterrupted, [ 13 ] had limited distortion , and was pleasing to the eye of general viewers.

[ 14 ] Robinson could not find a projection that satisfied the criteria, so Rand McNally commissioned him to design one.

Robinson proceeded through an iterative process to create a pseudo-cylindrical projection that intends to strike a compromise between distortions in areas and in distances, in order to attain a more natural visualization. The projection has been widely used since its introduction. In 1988, National Geographic adopted it for their world maps but replaced it in 1998 with the Winkel tripel projection .

See also [ edit ] Biography portal United States portal Rand McNally Nicolas Auguste Tissot David Woodward Geographers on Film Publications [ edit ] Robinson produced over 60 articles for professional publications, as well as fifteen books and monographs.

[ 7 ] Books: 1952.

The Look of Maps . Madison:University of Wisconsin Press.

[ 15 ] 1976.

The Nature of Maps . With B. Petchenik. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

1982.

Early Thematic Mapping in the History of Cartography .

1995.

Elements of Cartography (6th Edition) . With A. Robinson, J. Morrison, P. Muehrke, A. Kimmerling & S. Guptill. New York: Wiley.

References [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Arthur H. Robinson .

^ Wilford, John Noble (November 15, 2004).

"Arthur H. Robinson, 89, Geographer Who Reinterpreted World Map, Dies" .

NY Times .

^ Robinson legacy Archived February 16, 2013, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved September 2, 2008.

^ Gregory H. Chu (2004). "Great geographers: Arthur H. Robinson.(Obituary)". In: Focus on Geography . December 22, 2004.

^ a b Robinson, A. (1979).

Geography and Cartography then and now . Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 69(1), 97–102.

^ Robinson, Arthur H. (1997).

"The President's Globe" .

Imago Mundi .

49 : 143– 152.

doi : 10.1080/03085699708592865 .

ISSN 0308-5694 .

JSTOR 1151340 .

^ Rhodes, Andrew (2020). "The Geographic President: How Franklin D. Roosevelt Used Maps to Make and Communicate Strategy".

The Portolan Journal (Washington Map Society) .

107 .

^ a b c Current Biography Yearbook . (1996). Arthur H. Robinson, 467–471.

^ Slocum, T.; McMaster, R.; Kessler, F.; & Howard, H. (2005) Thematic Cartography and Geographic Visualization (2nd Edition) . Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall. p. 24.

^ Map library Archived April 4, 2006, at the Wayback Machine at the University of Wisconsin–Madison .

^ Arthur H. Robinson and Randall D. Sale, Elements of Cartography (3rd Edition), New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1969, 250.

^ Robinson, Arthur (1952).

The Look of Maps . Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. pp.

62– 63.

ISBN 0-299-00950-5 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Robinson, A. & Petchenik, B. (1976).

The Nature of Maps . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press., p. 20.

^ Map Projection: Interrupted Maps, progonos.com — A flattened global map has separated gores to limit the distortion involved.

^ Robinson, A. (1974). "A New Map Projection: Its Development and Characteristics". In: International Yearbook of Cartography , pp. 145–155. pp. 147–148.

^ Harris, Elizabeth (October 1987). "Review of The Look of Maps: An Examination of Cartographic Design by Arthur H. Robinson".

Technology and Culture .

28 (4): 863– 865.

doi : 10.2307/3105198 .

JSTOR 3105198 .

v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arthur_H._Robinson&oldid=1292702371 " Categories : 1915 births 2004 deaths American cartographers Anglophone Quebec people Canadian emigrants to the United States Ohio State University alumni Scientists from Montreal Recipients of the Legion of Merit Presidents of the American Association of Geographers University of Wisconsin–Madison College of Letters and Science alumni 20th-century American geographers 20th-century cartographers Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2021 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 10:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Arthur H. Robinson 12 languages Add topic

