Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Variations in plant species 2 References 3 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 3.1 Books 3.2 Websites 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Hypanthium 23 languages العربية Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Latina Nederlands Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Structure in angiosperms where basal portions form a cup-shaped tube In a pomegranate flower, Punica granatum , the petals , except for their fused bases, soon fall. The hypanthium with sepal lobes and stamens still attached develops to form the outer layer of the fruit.

In angiosperms , a hypanthium or floral cup [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] is a structure where basal portions of the calyx , the corolla , and the stamens form a cup-shaped tube. It is sometimes called a floral tube , a term that is also used for corolla tube and calyx tube .

[ 4 ] It often contains the nectaries of the plant. It is present in many plant families, although varies in structural dimensions and appearance.

[ 5 ] This differentiation between the hypanthium in particular species is useful for identification . Some geometric forms are obconic shapes, as in toyon ( Heteromeles ), whereas some are saucer-shaped, as in Mitella caulescens .

Its presence is diagnostic of many families , including the Rosaceae , Grossulariaceae , and Fabaceae . In some cases, it can be so deep, with such a narrow top, that the flower can appear to have an inferior ovary – the ovary is below the other attached floral parts. The hypanthium is known by different common names in differing species. In the eucalypts , it is referred to as the gum nut ; in roses it is called the hip .

Variations in plant species [ edit ] Ovary superior to hypanthium In Spiraea , the hypanthium supports a nectar-producing "disk" which is ring-shaped and may have lobes as it does here. The stamens arise between the petals and the disk.

Hypanthium in Rosa Narcissus pseudonarcissus , showing from the upper bend to the tip of the flower: spathe , ovary, hypanthium, tepals , corona In myrtles , the hypanthium can either surround the ovary loosely or tightly; in some cases, it can be fused to the walls of the ovary. It can vary in length. The rims around the outside of the hypanthium contain the calyx lobes or free sepals, petals and either the stamen or multiple stamen that are attached at one or two points.

The flowers of the rose family ( Rosaceae )  always have some type of hypanthium or at least a floral cup from which the sepals, petals and stamens all arise, which is lined with tissue known as nectaries , which produce nectar , a sweet substance that attracts to the flower birds and bees, which receive pollen from the lining of the hypanthium, subsequently transferring it to the next flower they visit, usually a neighbouring plant, facilitating pollination .

[ 6 ] The stamens borne on the hypanthium are the pollen-producing reproductive organs of the flower. The hypanthium helps in many ways with the reproduction pathways of most plants. It provides weather protection and a medium to sustain the lost pollen, increasing the probability of fertility and cross-pollination.

[ 7 ] The retained pollen can then attach to pollinators such as birds, bees, moths, beetles, bats, butterflies and other animals. Wind can act as an instigator for fertilisation . The hypanthium is also an adaptive feature for structural support. It helps the stem fuse with the flower, in turn strengthening the bond and overall stability and integrity.

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ Foster 2014 , Hypanthium .

^ Beentje, H.; Williamson, J. (2010).

The Kew Plant Glossary: an Illustrated Dictionary of Plant Terms . Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew: Kew Publishing.

^ Hickey, M.; King, C. (2001).

The Cambridge Illustrated Glossary of Botanical Terms . Cambridge University Press.

^ "Lecture 7 – Pharmacognosy and Botany (1st Semester)" Azerbaijan Medical University , n.d. Accessed May 9, 2025.

^ Cronquist 1981 .

^ Givnish 1997 .

^ Clarke 2004 .

^ Snow 2003 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Cronquist, Arthur (1981), An integrated system of classification of flowering plants , Columbia University Press, ISBN 978-0-231-03880-5 Givnish, Thomas J (1997), Molecular evolution and adaptive radiation , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-57329-0 Snow, Neil Wilton (2003), Systematics of Austromyrtus, Lenwebbia, and the Australian species of Gossia (Myrtaceae) , American Society of Plant Taxonomists, ISBN 978-0-912861-65-4 Faegri, Knut; Iversen, Johannes, 1904- (1975), Textbook of pollen analysis (3rd rev. ed.), Hafner Press , retrieved 8 November 2013 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) Clarke, Andrew (2004).

The AgLaw papers . Armidale, N.S.W: Australian Centre for Agriculture and Law.

ISBN 9781863898737 .

Websites [ edit ] Foster, Tony.

"Botany Word of the Day" .

Phytography . Retrieved 27 November 2014 .

External links [ edit ] Hypanthium images on MorphBank , a biological image database v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hypanthium&oldid=1295606813 " Category : Plant morphology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 20:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hypanthium 23 languages Add topic

