Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical hypotheses Toggle Historical hypotheses subsection 1.1 Writings of Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus 2 Materials Toggle Materials subsection 2.1 Third through Fifth dynasties 2.2 Middle Kingdom and onward 2.3 Mortar 3 Quarrying 4 Transport of stone blocks Toggle Transport of stone blocks subsection 4.1 Ramps 4.2 Levering 4.3 Waterways 5 Pyramid building experiments Toggle Pyramid building experiments subsection 5.1 Yoshimura 5.2 Nova 6 Great Pyramid Toggle Great Pyramid subsection 6.1 Internal ramp hypothesis 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Construction of the Egyptian pyramids 8 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Egyptian pyramid construction techniques ) The three main pyramids at Giza , together with subsidiary pyramids and the remains of other ancient structures The construction of the Egyptian pyramids can be explained with well-established scientific facts; however, there are some aspects that even today are considered controversial hypotheses. The construction techniques used seem to have developed over time; later pyramids were not constructed in the same way as earlier ones. It is believed that huge stones were carved from quarries with copper chisels, and these blocks were then dragged and lifted into position. Disagreements chiefly concern the methods used to move and place the stones.

In addition to the many unresolved arguments about the construction techniques, there have been disagreements as to the kind of workforce used. The Greeks , many years after the event, believed that the pyramids were built by slave labour . Archaeologists now believe that the Great Pyramid of Giza (at least) was built by tens of thousands of skilled workers who camped near the pyramids and worked for a salary or as a form of tax payment (levy) until the construction was completed, pointing to workers' cemeteries discovered in 1990.

[ 1 ] For the Middle Kingdom pyramid of Amenemhat II , there is evidence from the annal stone of the king that foreigners from Canaan were employed.

[ 2 ] The pseudoscientific field of pyramidology includes many archaeological fringe theories attempting to explain how the pyramids were built.

Historical hypotheses [ edit ] Writings of Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus [ edit ] The first historical accounts of the construction of these monuments came centuries after the era of pyramid construction, by Herodotus in the 5th century BC and Diodorus Siculus in the 1st century BC. Herodotus's account claims that the Egyptians used a machine (now commonly referred to as the " Herodotus Machine "), stating: [ 3 ] A machine lifting a large stone column, by Leonardo da Vinci . Believed to be sketched based on Herodotus' description [ 4 ] This pyramid was made like stairs, which some call steps and others, tiers. When this, its first form, was completed, the workmen used short wooden logs as levers to raise the rest of the stones; they heaved up the blocks from the ground onto the first tier of steps; when the stone had been raised, it was set on another lever that stood on the first tier, and the lever again used to lift it from this tier to the next. It may be that there was a new lever on each tier of steps, or perhaps there was only one lever, quite portable, which they carried up to each tier in turn; I leave this uncertain, as both possibilities were mentioned. But this is certain, that the upper part of the pyramid was finished off first, then the next below it, and last of all the base and the lowest part.

Diodorus Siculus's account states: [ 5 ] And it's said the stone was transported a great distance from Arabia, and that the edifices were raised utilizing earthen ramps since machines for lifting had not yet been invented in those days; and most surprising it is, that although such large structures were raised in an area surrounded by sand, no trace remains of either ramps or the dressing of the stones, so that it seems not the result of the patient labour of men, but rather as if the whole complex were set down entire upon the surrounding sand by some god. Now Egyptians try to make a marvel of these things, alleging that the ramps were made of salt and natron and that, when the river was turned against them, it melted them clean away and obliterated their every trace without the use of human labour. But in truth, it most certainly was not done this way! Rather, the same multitude of workmen who raised the mounds returned the entire mass to its original place; for they say that three hundred and sixty thousand men were constantly employed in the prosecution of their work, yet the entire edifice was hardly finished at the end of twenty years.

Diodorus Siculus's description of the shipment of the stone from Arabia is correct since the term "Arabia" in those days implied the land between the Nile and the Red Sea [ 6 ] where the limestone blocks have been transported from quarries across the river Nile.

Materials [ edit ] This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Construction of the Egyptian pyramids" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Third through Fifth dynasties [ edit ] During the earliest period, pyramids were constructed wholly of stone. Locally quarried limestone was the material of choice for the main body of these pyramids, while a higher quality of limestone quarried at Tura (near modern Cairo ) was used for the outer casing. The limestone originated from different outcrops of the Eocene -aged Mokattam Formation .

[ 7 ] Granite, quarried near Aswan , was used to construct some architectural elements, including the portcullis (a type of gate) and the roofs and walls of the burial chamber. Occasionally, granite was used in the outer casing as well, such as in the Pyramid of Menkaure . In the early pyramids, the layers of stone (called courses ) forming the pyramid body were laid sloping inwards; however, this configuration was found to be less stable than simply stacking the stones horizontally on top of each other. The Bent Pyramid at Dahshur seems to indicate acceptance of a new technique at a transition between these two building techniques. Its lower section is built of sloping courses while in its upper section the stones are laid horizontally.

[ citation needed ] Middle Kingdom and onward [ edit ] During the Middle Kingdom , pyramid construction techniques changed again. Most pyramids built then were little more than mountains of mud-brick encased in a veneer of polished limestone. In several cases, later pyramids were built on top of natural hills to further reduce the volume of material needed in their construction. The materials and methods of construction used in the earliest pyramids have ensured their survival in a generally much better state of preservation than for the pyramid monuments of the later pharaohs.

[ citation needed ] Mortar [ edit ] The stones forming the core of the pyramids were roughly cut, especially in the Great Pyramid . To fill the gaps, huge quantities of gypsum and rubble were needed.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] : 72, 80 The filling has almost no binding properties, but it was necessary to stabilize the construction. To make the gypsum mortar, it had to be dehydrated by heating which requires large quantities of wood. According to Egyptologists, the findings of both the 1984 and 1995 David H. Koch Pyramids Radiocarbon Projects [ 10 ] [ 11 ] may suggest that Egypt had to strip its forest and scrap every bit of wood it had to build the pyramids of Giza and other even earlier 4th Dynasty pyramids. Carbon dating samples from core blocks and other materials revealed that dates from the 1984 study averaged 374 years earlier than currently accepted and the 1995 dating averaging 100–200 years. As suggested by team members, "We thought that it was unlikely that the pyramid builders consistently used centuries-old wood as fuel in preparing mortar. The 1984 results left us with too little data to conclude that the historical chronology of the Old Kingdom was wrong by nearly 400 years, but we considered this at least a possibility". Egyptologists propose that the old wood problem is responsible for the discrepancy, claiming the earlier dates were possibly derived from recycling large amounts of centuries-old wood and other earlier materials.

[ 12 ] Quarrying [ edit ] There is good information concerning the location of the quarries, some of the tools used to cut stone in the quarries, transportation of the stone to the monument, leveling the foundation, and leveling the subsequent tiers of the developing superstructure. Workmen probably used copper chisels, drills, and saws to cut softer stone, such as most of the limestone. The harder stones, such as granite, granodiorite, syenite, and basalt, cannot be cut with copper tools alone; instead, they were worked with time-consuming methods like pounding with dolerite , drilling, and sawing with the aid of an abrasive, such as quartz sand. This occurred in a process known as sand abrasion.

[ 13 ] : 229 [ 14 ] Blocks were transported by sledge likely lubricated by water.

[ 15 ] : 196 [ 16 ] Leveling the foundation may have been accomplished by use of water-filled trenches as suggested by Mark Lehner and I. E. S. Edwards or through the use of a crude square level and experienced surveyors.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] : 13–14 Transport of stone blocks [ edit ] A transport of a large statue on a sledge One of the major problems faced by the early pyramid builders was the need to move huge quantities of stone. The Twelfth Dynasty tomb of Djehutihotep has an illustration of 172 men pulling an alabaster statue of him on a sledge. The statue is estimated to weigh 60 tons and Denys Stocks estimated that 45 workers would be required to start moving a 16,300 kg (35,900 lb) lubricated block, or eight workers to move a 2,750 kg (6,060 lb) block.

[ 14 ] : 196–197 Dick Parry and Mladjov and Mladjov have suggested a method for rolling the stones, using a cradle-like machine that had been excavated in various new kingdom temples.

[ 19 ] Four of those objects could be fitted around a block so it could be rolled easily. Experiments done by the Obayashi Corporation, with concrete blocks 0.8 metres (2 ft 7 in) square by 1.6 metres (5 ft 3 in) long and weighing 2.5 tonnes (5,500 lb), showed how 18 men could drag the block over a 1-in-4 incline ramp, at a rate of 18 metres per minute (1 ft/s; 1 km/h). This idea was previously described by John Bush in 1977, [ 20 ] and is mentioned in the Closing Remarks section of Parry's book.

Vitruvius in De architectura [ 21 ] described a similar method for moving irregular weights. It is still not known whether the Egyptians used this method but the experiments indicate it could have worked using stones of this size.

Egyptologists generally accept this for the 2.5 ton blocks mostly used but do not agree over the methods used for the 15+ ton and several 70 to 80 ton blocks.

The diary of Merer , logbooks written more than 4,500 years ago by an Egyptian official and found in 2013 by a French archeology team under the direction of Pierre Tallet in a cave in Wadi al-Jarf , describes the transportation of limestone blocks from the quarries at Tura to Giza by boat.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Ramps [ edit ] Example of a large straight ramp. This method was likely not used in pyramid construction according to current expert consensus (see text).

From left to right: Zig-zagging ramp ( Uvo Hölscher ), ramp using the incomplete part of the superstructure ( Dieter Arnold ), and a spiraling ramp supported by the superstructure ( Mark Lehner ) Four-spiral ramps ( Dows Dunham ) Most Egyptologists acknowledge that ramps are the most tenable of the methods to raise the blocks, yet they acknowledge that it is an incomplete method that must be supplemented by another device. Archaeological evidence for the use of ramps has been found at the Great Pyramid of Giza [ 24 ] and other pyramids. The method most accepted for assisting ramps is levering.

[ 25 ] : 215–223 The archaeological record gives evidence of only small ramps and inclined causeways, not something that could have been used to construct even a majority of the monument. To add to the uncertainty, there is considerable evidence demonstrating that non-standardized or ad hoc construction methods were used in pyramid construction.

[ 18 ] : 98–99 [ 25 ] : 215–223 Therefore, there are many proposed ramps and there is a considerable amount of discrepancy regarding what type of ramp was used to build the pyramids.

[ 26 ] One of the widely discredited ramping methods is the large straight ramp, and it is routinely discredited on functional grounds for its massive size, lack of archaeological evidence, huge labor cost, and other problems.

[ 27 ] Other ramps serve to correct these problems of ramp size, yet run into critiques of either functionality or limited archaeological evidence. Zig-zagging ramps, straight ramps using the incomplete part of the superstructure (Arnold 1991), spiraling ramps supported by the superstructure and spiraling ramps leaning on the monument as a large accretion have been proposed.

Mark Lehner speculated that a spiraling ramp, beginning in the stone quarry to the southeast and continuing around the exterior of the pyramid, may have been used. However, spiral ramps would have covered the building for decades fully and would not allow the regular layout of the exact pyramid square in equal distance to each base cornerstone as the only method to keep the exact geometric shape of the edges and side mantles. Ramp models with several ramp paths, which are positioned on the inner step pyramid require relatively less material.

[ 25 ] : 215–223 The stone blocks may have been drawn on sleds along the ramps lubricated by water.

[ 28 ] As a recent study shows that the challenge was not just to account for the route the transported stones had to take but to account for the size and frequency of stones being moved—circa 1 ton being put in place every 2–3 minutes by human draw teams on a ramp of maximum 10%—to enable building of the Great Pyramid within 30 years. The special case of the pyramid extensions E2 and E3 in Meydum of ring-shaped extensions only 5 metres (16 ft) wide around the previous building core shows the ramp system was effective and small in volume which applies for tangential ramps of 10 cubits or 5 metre width. The challenge was the geometry of the pyramid that provides shorter side lengths the higher the building grows, increases the necessity to turn maneuvers and allows less space for ramps leaning on the masonry. The slope change of the Bent Pyramid is probably the result of the discovery this can not be solved with steep gradients. Also essential was the effective organization of the building site by a module that allowed the work division of the teams along plots and the transport causeways between ramp and workplace, including the return of pulling crews and sleds, probably by a second ramp system. The problem of building the mantle at the ramp arrival point could be solved by bypass-systems.

[ citation needed ] Levering [ edit ] Levering methods are considered to be the most tenable solution to complement ramping methods, partially due to Herodotus's description; and partially to the shadoof , a lever-enabled irrigation device first depicted in Egypt during the New Kingdom and found concomitantly with the Old Kingdom in Mesopotamia. In Lehner's point of view, levers should be employed to lift the top 3% of the material of the superstructure. It is important to note that the top 4% of this material comprises 1 ⁄ 3 of the total height of the monument. In other words, in Lehner's view, levers should be employed to lift a small amount of material and a great deal of vertical height of the monument.

[ 25 ] : 215–223 In the milieu of levering methods, there are those that lift the block incrementally, as in repeatedly prying up alternating sides of the block and inserting wooden or stone shims to gradually move the stone up one course; and there are other methods that use a larger lever to move the block up one course in one lifting procedure. Since the discussion of construction techniques to lift the blocks attempts to resolve a gap in the archaeological and historical record with a plausible functional explanation, the following examples by Isler, Keable, and Hussey-Pailos [ 29 ] list experimentally tested methods. Isler's method (1985, 1987) is an incremental method and, in the Nova experiment (1992), used wooden shims or cribbing. Isler [ 30 ] was able to lift a block up one tier in approximately one hour and 30 minutes. Peter Hodges's and Julian Keable 's [ 31 ] method is similar to Isler's method and instead used small manufactured concrete blocks as shims, wooden pallets, and a pit where their experimental tests were performed. Keable was able to perform his method in approximately 2 minutes. Scott Hussey-Pailos's (2005) method uses a simple levering device to lift a block up a course in one movement.

[ 29 ] This method was tested with materials of less strength than historical analogs (tested with materials weaker than those available in ancient Egypt), a factor of safety of 2, and lifted a 1,100 kg (2,500 lb) block up one course in under a minute. This method is presented as a levering device to work complementary with Mark Lehner's idea of a combined ramp and levering techniques.

Waterways [ edit ] Egyptians used the now-disappeared branch of the Nile to transport the tons of construction materials. A 2012 study led by geographer Hader Sheisha at Aix-Marseille University proposed that the former waterscapes and higher river levels around 4,500 years ago facilitated the construction of the Giza Pyramid Complex .

[ 32 ] The Nile's present waterways have receded too far from the pyramid sites to be of use.

[ 32 ] A new study published in May 2024 mapped an extinct branch of the Nile, Ahramat Branch, which once flowed near Egypt's Great Pyramid and other Giza monuments. Using satellite imaging and sediment core analysis, researchers found the 64 kilometres (40 mi) waterway was crucial for transporting materials and labor for pyramid construction. The branch which was about 0.5 kilometres (0.31 mi) wide with a depth of at least 25 metres (82 ft) disappeared likely due to drought and desertification .

[ 33 ] In 2024, archaeologists using radar satellite imagery, in conjunction with geophysical data and deep soil coring identified segments of a major extinct Nile branch  running to the foothills of the Western Desert Plateau, where the majority of the pyramids lie, which they named " The Ahramat Branch . They suggested that The Ahramat Branch played a role in the monuments’ construction and that it was used to transport workmen and building materials to the pyramids’ sites.

[ 33 ] It has been suggested that locks were used to elevate barges along waterways leading to pyramid construction sites, but there is a lack of evidence of any on-site use of hydraulic force.

[ 34 ] Pyramid building experiments [ edit ] Yoshimura [ edit ] In 1978, Nippon TV funded the pyramid building project conceived by archaeologist Sajuki Yoshimura. It was originally planned as a 1 to 5 scale model of the Great Pyramid. Because of the limited budget, the size had to be drastically reduced when the price of limestone rose as the project gained publicity. A concrete foundation had to be poured as the selected site offered no bedrock basis. With the help of two cranes and a forklift, the pyramid was built to reach a height of 11 metres (36 ft), with a 15 metres (49 ft) base. The structure was ultimately dismantled and hauled away.

[ 35 ] Nova [ edit ] In 1992, [ 30 ] Egyptologist Mark Lehner and stonemason Roger Hopkins conducted a three-week pyramid-building experiment for a Nova television episode. They built a pyramid 6 metres (20 ft) high by 9 metres (30 ft) wide, consisting of a total of 162 cubic metres (5,700 cu ft), or about 405 tons. It was made out of 186 stones weighing an average of 2.2 tons each. Twelve quarrymen carved 186 stones in 22 days, and the structure was erected using 44 men. They used iron hammers, chisels and levers (this is a modern shortcut, as the ancient Egyptians were limited to using copper and later bronze and wood ).

[ 14 ] : 58–63 But Lehner and Hopkins did experiments with copper tools, noting that they were adequate for the job in hand, provided that additional manpower was available to constantly resharpen the ancient tools. They estimated they would have needed around 20 extra men for this maintenance. Another shortcut taken was the use of a front-end loader or fork lift truck, but modern machinery was not used to finish the construction. They used levers to lift the capstone to a height of 20 feet (6.1 m). Four or five men were able to use levers on stones less than one ton to flip them over and transport them by rolling, but larger stones had to be towed. Lehner and Hopkins found that by putting the stones on wooden sledges and sliding the sledges on wooden tracks, they were able to tow a two-ton stone with 12 to 20 men. The wood for these sledges and tracks would have to have been imported from Lebanon at great cost since there was little, if any, wood in ancient Egypt. While the builders failed to duplicate the precise jointing created by the ancient Egyptians, Hopkins was confident that this could have been achieved with more practice.

[ 30 ] [ 25 ] : 202–225 Great Pyramid [ edit ] Further information: Diary of Merer Some research suggests other estimates to the accepted workforce size. For instance, physicist Kurt Mendelssohn calculated that the workforce may have been 50,000 men at most, while Ludwig Borchardt and Louis Croon placed the number at 36,000.

[ citation needed ] According to Miroslav Verner , a workforce of no more than 30,000 was needed in the Great Pyramid's construction.

[ citation needed ] Evidence suggests that around 5,000 were permanent workers on salaries with the balance working three- or four-month shifts in lieu of taxes while receiving subsistence "wages" of ten loaves of bread and a jug of beer per day.

[ citation needed ] Zahi Hawass believes that the majority of workers may have been volunteers. Most archaeologists agree that only about 4,000 of the total workforce were labourers who quarried the stone, hauled blocks to the pyramid, and set the blocks in place. The vast majority of the workforce provided support services such as scribes, toolmakers, and other backup services. The tombs of supervisors contain inscriptions regarding the organisation of the workforce. There were two crews of approximately 2,000 workers sub-divided into named gangs of 1,000. The gangs were divided into five phyles of 200 which were in turn split into groups of around 20 workers grouped according to their skills, with each group having their own project leader and a specific task.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] A construction management study carried out by the firm Daniel, Mann, Johnson, & Mendenhall in association with Mark Lehner , and other Egyptologists, estimates that the total project required an average workforce of 14,567 people and a peak workforce of 40,000. Without the use of pulleys, wheels, or iron tools, they used critical path analysis to suggest the Great Pyramid was completed from start to finish in approximately 10 years.

[ 38 ] Their study estimates the number of blocks used in construction was between 2 and 2.8 million (an average of 2.4 million), but settles on a reduced finished total of 2 million after subtracting the estimated volume of the hollow spaces of the chambers and galleries.

[ 38 ] Most sources agree on this number of blocks somewhere above 2.3 million.

[ 39 ] Their calculations suggest the workforce could have sustained a rate of 180 blocks per hour (3 blocks/minute) with ten-hour workdays for putting each individual block in place. They derived these estimates from modern third-world construction projects that did not use modern machinery, but conclude it is still unknown exactly how the Great Pyramid was built.

[ 38 ] As Dr. Craig Smith of the team points out: The logistics of construction at the Giza site are staggering when you think that the ancient Egyptians had no pulleys, no wheels, and no iron tools. Yet, the dimensions of the pyramid are extremely accurate and the site was leveled within a fraction of an inch over the entire 13.1-acre base. This is comparable to the accuracy possible with modern construction methods and laser leveling. That's astounding. With their 'rudimentary tools', the pyramid builders of ancient Egypt were about as accurate as we are today with 20th-century technology.

[ 40 ] Average core blocks of the Great Pyramid weigh about 1.5 tons each, and the granite blocks used to roof the burial chambers are estimated to weigh up to 80 tons each.

The entire Giza Plateau is believed [ by whom?

] to have been constructed over the reign of five pharaohs in less than a hundred years, which generally includes: the Great Pyramid, Khafre and Menkaure's pyramids, the Great Sphinx, the Sphinx, and Valley Temples, 35 boat pits cut out of solid bedrock, and several causeways, as well as paving nearly the entire plateau with large stones. This does not include Khafre's brother Djedefre's northern pyramid at Abu Rawash, which would have also been built during this time frame of 100 years. In the hundred years prior to Giza—beginning with Djoser , who ruled from 2687 to 2667 BC, and amongst dozens of other temples, smaller pyramids, and general construction projects—four other massive pyramids were built: the Step pyramid of Saqqara (believed to be the first Egyptian pyramid), the pyramid of Meidum , the Bent Pyramid , and the Red Pyramid . Also during this period (between 2686 and 2498 BC) the Sadd el-Kafara dam, which used an estimated 100,000 cubic meters of rock and rubble, was built.

[ 41 ] In October 2018, a team of archaeologists from the Institut Français d'Archéologie Orientale and University of Liverpool announced the discovery of the remains of a 4,500-year-old ramp contraption at Hatnub , excavated since 2012. This method, which aided in lifting the heavy alabaster stones up from their quarries, may have been used to build Egypt's Great Pyramid as well.

[ 42 ] Yannis Gourdon, co-director of the joint mission at Hatnub, said: [ 42 ] This system is composed of a central ramp flanked by two staircases with numerous post holes, using a sled which carried a stone block and was attached with ropes to these wooden posts, ancient Egyptians were able to pull up the alabaster blocks out of the quarry on very steep slopes of 20 percent or more ... As this system dates back at least to Khufu 's reign, that means that during the time of Khufu, ancient Egyptians knew how to move huge blocks of stone using very steep slopes. Therefore, they could have used it for the construction [of] his pyramid.

Internal ramp hypothesis [ edit ] Main article: Jean-Pierre Houdin Houdin's father was an architect who, in 1999, thought of a construction method that, it seemed to him, made more sense than any existing method proposed for building pyramids. To develop this hypothesis, Jean-Pierre Houdin, also an architect, gave up his job and set about drawing the first fully functional CAD architectural model of the Great Pyramid of Giza .

[ 43 ] External and internal ramp His scheme involves using a regular external ramp to build the first 30% of the pyramid, with an "internal ramp" taking stones up beyond that height.

[ 44 ] The stones of the external ramp are re-cycled into the upper stories, thus explaining the otherwise puzzling lack of evidence for ramps.

After four years working alone, Houdin was joined by a team of engineers from the French 3D software company Dassault Systèmes , who used the most modern computer-aided design technology available to further refine and test the hypothesis, making it (according to Houdin) the only one proven to be a viable technique.

[ 45 ] Houdin published his theory in the books Khufu: The Secrets Behind the Building of the Great Pyramid in 2006 [ 46 ] and The Secret of the Great Pyramid , co-written in 2008 with Egyptologist Bob Brier .

[ 9 ] In Houdin's method, each ramp inside the pyramid ended at an open space, a notch temporarily left open in the edge of the construction.

[ 47 ] This 10-square-meter clear space housed a crane that lifted and rotated each 2.5-ton block, to ready it for eight men to drag up the next internal ramp. There is a notch of sorts in one of the right places, and in 2008 Houdin's co-author Bob Brier, with a National Geographic film crew, entered a previously unremarked chamber that could be the start of one of these internal ramps.

[ 48 ] In 1986 a member of the French team (see below) saw a desert fox at this notch, rather as if it had ascended internally.

Houdin's thesis remains unproven and in 2007, Egyptologist David Jeffreys from the University College London described the internal spiral hypothesis as "far-fetched and horribly complicated", while Oxford University's John Baines , declared he was "suspicious of any theory that seeks to explain only how the Great Pyramid was built".

[ 49 ] Houdin has another hypothesis developed from his architectural model, one that could finally explain the internal "Grand Gallery" chamber that otherwise appears to have little purpose. He believes the gallery acted as a trolley chute/guide for counterbalance weights. It enabled the raising of the five 60-ton granite beams that roof the King's Chamber. Houdin and Brier and the Dassault team are already credited with proving for the first time that cracks in beams appeared during construction, were examined and tested at the time and declared relatively harmless.

[ 50 ] See also [ edit ] Ancient Egyptian technology List of megalithic sites Seven wonders of the world References [ edit ] ^ Rangus, Eric (29 August 2005).

"Egyptologist tells story of commoner pyramid builders" .

Emory Report .

58 (1) . Retrieved 22 April 2024 .

^ Moussa, Ahmed M.

(1991).

Altenmüller, Hartwig (ed.). "Die Inschrift Amenemhets II. aus dem Ptah-Tempel von Memphis. Vorbericht" [The inscription of Amenemhet II. From the temple of Ptah of Memphis].

Studien zur Altägyptischen Kultur (in German).

18 : 36.

^ Godley, A. D. ed. (1920) Herodotus, The Histories . Harvard University Press. Book 2 Chapter 125.

^ "Niccolai, Gabriele. Leonardo da Vinci a Genius and His Secrets" (PDF) . European Commission Apr 2011.

^ Murphy, Edwin. (1990) The Antiquities of Egypt: A Translation with Notes of Book I of the Library of History of Diodorus Siculus . Transaction Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-88738-303-8 ^ See also Strabo (17.1.34) .

^ Aly, Nevin; Gomez-Heras, Miguel; Alveraz de Burgo, Monica; Hamed, Ayman; Soliman, Farouk Ahmed (2014).

"Describing differential decay in Mokattam formation limestone used in World Heritage Sites: the cases of the Great Sphinx – Giza and Historic Cairo, Egypt" .

YOCOCU 2014 Youth in the Conservation of Cultural Heritage .

^ Romer, John (2007).

The Great Pyramid: ancient Egypt revisited . Cambridge University Press. pp.

157– 158.

ISBN 978-0-521-87166-2 .

^ a b Brier, Bob; Jean-Pierre Houdin (2008).

The Secret of the Great Pyramid: How One Man's Obsession Led to the Solution of Ancient Egypt's Greatest Mystery . Smithsonian. p.

[1] .

ISBN 978-0-06-165552-4 .

^ Bonani, Georges; Haas, Herbert; Hawass, Zahi; Lehner, Mark; Nakhla, Shawki; Nolan, John; Wenke, Robert; Wölfli, Willy (2001).

"Radiocarbon Dates of Old and Middle Kingdom Monuments in Egypt" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 July 2013 . Retrieved 9 November 2015 .

^ "Dating the Pyramids" .

Archaeology Magazine . Retrieved 9 November 2015 .

^ "How Old Are the Pyramids | Mark Lehner's Team Finds Out |" . Aeraweb.org . Retrieved 16 November 2011 .

^ Isler, Martin.

Sticks, stones, and shadows: building the Egyptian pyramids . University of Oklahoma Press 2001 ISBN 978-0-8061-3342-3 [[iarchive:sticksstonesshad00mart/page/229|]] ^ a b c Stocks, Denys A.

Experiments in Egyptian archaeology: stoneworking technology in ancient Egypt . Routledge, July 2003 ISBN 978-0-415-30664-5 ^ An illustration of a large statue weighing about 60 tonnes being pulled by a sledge with a liquid being poured ahead of it is described in Stocks, Denys A.

Experiments in Egyptian archaeology: stoneworking technology in ancient Egypt . Routledge, July 2003 ISBN 978-0-415-30664-5 ^ Nicholson, Paul T; Shaw, Ian.

Ancient Egyptian materials and technology . Cambridge University Press (23 March 2000) ISBN 978-0-521-45257-1 p.18 ^ Edwards, Iorwerth Eiddon Stephen; Rose, John Cruikshank.

The Pyramids of Egypt 1947 p.9 [2] ^ a b Arnold, Dieter (1991).

Building in Egypt: Pharaonic Stone Masonry . New York, New York: Oxford University Press.

^ Parry, Dick "Engineering the Pyramids" The History Press 2013 ISBN 978-0-750-93415-2 ; Mladjov, Roumen, and Ian Mladjov, "This Side Up: A New Theory about Pyramid Building," Discovering Archaeology (May/June 1999) 90-93 online .

^ Bush, John D. (1977).

"The Rolling Stones" (PDF) .

Engineering and Science . Retrieved 11 June 2016 .

^ "LacusCurtius • Vitruvius on Architecture – Book X" . Retrieved 9 November 2015 .

^ "World's Oldest Harbor Discovered in Egypt" .

LiveScience . 16 April 2013 . Retrieved 11 September 2017 .

^ Stille, Alexander.

"The World's Oldest Papyrus and What It Can Tell Us About the Great Pyramids" .

Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved 26 June 2018 .

^ Hawass, Zahi (1998). "Pyramid Construction. New Evidence Discovered at Giza". In Guksch, Heike; Polz, Daniel (eds.).

Stationen. Beiträge zur Kulturgeschichte Ägyptens Rainer Stadelmann gewidmet (PDF) . Mainz: Philipp von Zabern.

ISBN 3-8053-2526-6 .

^ a b c d e Lehner, Mark (1997).

The Complete Pyramids . New York: Thames and Hudson.

^ Hawass, Zahi (2006).

"Building a Pyramid" . Archived from the original on 14 February 2009 . Retrieved 9 November 2015 .

^ Isler, Martin "On Pyramid Building II". In Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt . XXII: 95–112. 2001.

Sticks, Stones, and Shadows: Building the Egyptian Pyramids . University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

^ Fakhry, Ahmed (1961).

The Pyramids . University of Chicago Press. p. 12 . Retrieved 20 November 2022 .

^ a b Hussey-Pailos, Robert Scott (2005).

Construction of the Top of the Egyptian Pyramids: An Experimental Test of a Levering Device (PDF) (M.A.). Gainesville, FL: University of Florida . Retrieved 23 December 2016 .

^ a b c "This Old Pyramid - PBS" .

PBS . Retrieved 9 November 2015 .

^ Hodges, Peter. (Julian Keable ed.) 1989.

How the Pyramids Were Built . Dotesios Printers Ltd. Trowbridge, Wiltshire.

^ a b "A now-dry branch of the Nile helped build Egypt's pyramids, new study says" . CNN. 2 September 2022 . Retrieved 29 October 2022 .

^ a b Ghoneim, Eman; Ralph, Timothy J.; Onstine, Suzanne; et al. (16 May 2024).

"The Egyptian pyramid chain was built along the now abandoned Ahramat Nile Branch" .

Nature .

5 (233).

Bibcode : 2024ComEE...5..233G .

doi : 10.1038/s43247-024-01379-7 .

^ Landreau, Xavier; Piton, Guillaume; Morin, Guillaume; Bartout, Pascal; Touchart, Laurent; Giraud, Christophe; Barre, Jean-Claude; Guerin, Cyrielle; Alibert, Alexis; Lallemand, Charly (5 August 2024).

"On the possible use of hydraulic force to assist with building the step pyramid of saqqara" .

PLOS ONE .

19 (8): e0306690.

Bibcode : 2024PLoSO..1906690L .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0306690 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 11299825 .

PMID 39102411 .

^ "Japanese 'Pyramid' Rises in Egypt" .

The New York Times . 8 March 1978.

^ Joyce Tyldesley .

"The Private Lives of the Pyramid-builders" .

BBC , 17 February 2011 ^ "Great Pyramid tombs unearth 'proof' workers were not slaves" .

The Guardian . Associated Press. 11 January 2010 . Retrieved 11 June 2016 .

^ a b c Smith, Craig B. (June 1999).

"Program Management B.C." Civil Engineering . Archived from the original on 8 June 2007 . Retrieved 9 November 2015 .

^ "Khufu's Inside Story" .

Nova online . PBS. 1997 . Retrieved 13 April 2007 .

^ "DMJM Solves the Riddle of the Sphinx... Okay, Well, Its Neighbor; Global Architecture/Engineering Firm Uses Technology to Solve 4,500-Year-Old Mystery" .

The Free Library .

Business Wire . 5 February 1999 . Retrieved 11 June 2016 .

^ Kamil, Jill (16–22 September 2004).

"The World's Oldest Dam" .

Al-Ahram . No. 708. Archived from the original on 17 September 2004 . Retrieved 1 November 2018 .

^ a b "This 4,500-Year-Old Ramp Contraption May Have Been Used to Build Egypt's Great Pyramid" .

Live Science . 31 October 2018.

^ Discover Jean-Pierre Houdin's Theory in Real-Time 3D Archived 20 September 2010 at the Wayback Machine download, graphics card recommended. Dassault Systems. c.2002-2009.

^ "Mystery of Great Pyramid 'solved ' " . BBC. 31 March 2007.

^ "French architect Houdin turns the pyramid theory inside out" Archived 22 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine . 2600 B.C. Lean Manufacturing (Tech Trends Feature) - Cadalyst AEC. 1 July 2007.

^ Khufu: The Secrets Behind the Building of the Great Pyramid by Jean-Pierre Houdin, ISBN 978-977-17-3061-3 , Farid Atiya Press, 2006.

^ "Pyramid room" .

National Geographic .

[ dead link ] ^ Bob Brier (2009) "Update: Return to the Great Pyramid" Archaeology 62(4): 27–29 ^ Secrets of a lost world Archived 19 November 2008 at the Wayback Machine The Engineer , 8 May 2007.

^ Great Pyramid Mystery Solved? | National Geographic , 31 October 2008 , retrieved 22 May 2021 External links [ edit ] How to Build a Pyramid, Archaeology Magazine, May/June 2007 Archived 21 February 2010 at the Wayback Machine Engineering the Pyramids - Materials Science and Engineering @ Drexel University Rope pull hypothesis - alternative hypothesis by Heribert Illig and Franz Löhner Collection of alternative construction essays Did the Great Pyramid Have an Elevator? The Structural Engineer, April 2009 The main problems / drawbacks of all ramp systems 3D Unveils Great Pyramid's Mystery - illustrates hypothesis of Houdin and Brier.

Did the Egyptians create a canal and a port to bring stone to the Great Pyramid?

A Device for Lifting Pyramid Stones v t e Egyptian pyramids List of Egyptian pyramids ( Lepsius ) Commons Period Dynasty Pyramids Old Kingdom (2686–2181 BC) III Djoser Buried Layer Lepsius I Athribis Elephantine Edfu South el-Kula Naqada Zawyet el-Maiyitin Sinki IV Seila Meidum Bent Red Khufu Djedefre Unfinished Northern Pyramid of Zawyet el'Aryan Khafre Menkaure Khentkaus I Mastabet el-Fara'un G1-a G1-b G1-c G1-d G2-a G3-a G3-b G3-c Lepsius L V Userkaf Neferhetepes Sahure Neferirkare Khentkaus II Neferefre Unfinished Nyuserre Lepsius XXIV Double Headless Djedkare-Isesi Unas VI Teti Pepi I Merenre Pepi II Sesheshet 1 st Intermediate Period (2181–2040 BC) VIII Ity Neferkare Neby Ibi Khui X Merikare Middle Kingdom (2040–1650 BC) XI Reherishefnakht XII Amenemhat I Senusret I White Senusret II Senusret III Black Hawara Neferuptah [ de ] Central Dahshur [ de ] South Mazghuna North Mazghuna XIII Ameny Qemau Khendjer Southern South Saqqara SAK S 3 SAK S 7 [ de ] South Dahshur A [ de ] South Dahshur B [ de ] DAS 46 DAS 49 DAS 50 DAS 51 DAS 53 [ de ] S 9 S 10 Merneferre Ay Second Intermediate (1650–1570 BC) XVII Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II Sekhemre-Wepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom (1570–1070 BC) XVIII Ahmose Step pyramid Construction techniques Seked Texts Pyramidion Pyramidology v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Ancient Egyptian race controversy Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Population history of Egypt Pottery Prehistoric Egypt Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade Egypt–Mesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐5sjvr
Cached time: 20250812014509
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.994 seconds
Real time usage: 1.157 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13916/1000000
Revision size: 46245/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 476228/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 18743/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 55/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 180813/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.499/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11769891/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  914.777      1 -total
 37.69%  344.776     25 Template:Navbox
 33.95%  310.529      1 Template:Reflist
 15.33%  140.227      1 Template:Historiography
 15.09%  137.999      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 13.10%  119.811      6 Template:Cite_journal
 13.02%  119.131      1 Template:Egyptian_pyramids
  9.28%   84.857     36 Template:Ill
  7.11%   65.027     14 Template:Cite_web
  6.81%   62.326     12 Template:Rp Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3245297:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014509 and revision id 1305146190. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Construction_of_the_Egyptian_pyramids&oldid=1305146190 " Categories : Ancient Egyptian pyramids History of construction Ancient Egyptian technology Egyptian inventions Hypotheses Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2022 Articles needing additional references from August 2023 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2021 This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 09:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Construction of the Egyptian pyramids 8 languages Add topic

