Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Scholarly career 3 In politics 4 Views on current issues Toggle Views on current issues subsection 4.1 Art and music 4.2 Political views 4.3 Nuclear weapon 4.4 Other 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Abdollah Javadi Amoli 13 languages العربية Azərbaycanca فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Malagasy مصرى Bahasa Melayu Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Русский Simple English Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Abdollah Javadi-Amoli ) Iranian grand ayatollah (born 1933) Abdollah Javadi Amoli Javadi Amoli in 2018 Member of the Assembly of Experts for Constitution In office 15 August 1979 – 15 November 1979 Constituency Mazandaran Province Majority 450,173 (60.1%) Personal details Born ( 1933-05-05 ) 5 May 1933 (age 92) Amol , Iran Political party Society of Seminary Teachers of Qom Website Official website Theological work Religion Islam Denomination Twelver Shīʿā Main interests Islamic philosophy , Tafsir , Mysticism , Fiqh and Hadith Abdollah Javadi Amoli ( Persian : عبدالله جوادی آملی ; born 5 May 1933) is an Iranian Twelver Shi'a Marja . He is a conservative and political moderate politician, philosopher and one of the prominent Islamic scholars of the Iran . The official website for his scientific foundation, Isra, states that his ideas and views have been guidance to the Islamic Republic of Iran since the 1979 Islamic Revolution, and that "his strategic and enlightening guidance" has been "extremely constructive" during the past three decades. He is known as one of the biggest critics of the banking system in Iran.

[ 1 ] Early life [ edit ] He was born in 1933 in Amol , northern Iran to a clerical family. After finishing elementary school he joined Amol seminary in 1946 to seek religious studies. His father, Mirza Abul Hassan Vaez Javadi Amoli, was one of the scholars of Amol city.

[ 2 ] Scholarly career [ edit ] For five years, he studied the preliminary seminary courses as well as part of the intermediate courses under the supervision of his father Mirza Abul Hassan Vaez Javadi Amoli among other scholars. The foundations of his moral and spiritual development were also laid in Imam Hasan al-Askari mosque.

[ citation needed ] In 1950 he emigrated to Tehran to attend classes of some of the great intellectual figures of the time such as Ayatollah Sheikh Muhammad Taqi Amoli , Allama Sheikh Abul Hasan Sha'rani and Muhammad Hussein Fazil Tuni where in addition to fiqh and principles, he endeavored in philosophy and mysticism.

[ citation needed ] In 1955, he emigrated to Qom to attend the last levels of the most advanced scholarly disciplines under such scholars as Ayatollah Hossein Borujerdi , Ayatollah Mostafa Mohaghegh Damad , Ayatollah Mirza Hashem Amoli , Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini , Grand Ayatollah Taqi Bahjat Foumani and Allama Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i .

[ 3 ] Among different Islamic disciplines, he has been specially dedicated to the exegesis of the Quran. His exegesis courses started in 1976 and has been ongoing to date.

[ 2 ] In politics [ edit ] Javadi Amoli was the leader of Ayatollah Khomeini 's mission to Mikhail Gorbachev , the leader of the Soviet Union in January 1988.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] On 27 November 2009, he announced his resignation from an influential position as the Friday Prayer Leader in Qom, saying that one should not hold such a position if one has not proven helpful.

[ 6 ] He had previously protested unethical approaches to election campaigns.

[ 7 ] During his farewell address, Amoli clearly pointed out that his resignation was not due to differences with the government but for health reasons. He continues to attend Friday congregational prayers in the city of Qom even after resigning as the Friday prayer leader.

[ 8 ] Views on current issues [ edit ] Art and music [ edit ] In response to a question about the impact of mainstream music on soul, Javadi Amoli said "sometimes a supplication arouses a young Muslim and sometimes a ghazal or a qasida but the pleasure of a ghazal is never found in songs since songs cause only a false pleasure, but ode is a nectar that results in true permanent pleasure. Such are the ghazals by Hafez and Saadi ." He further said that there are plays that "awake animalistic temper in man" but that he also knows ones that "revive man's angelic mood inducing detachment from lust and anger." [ 9 ] In answer to another question about permissibly of "spiritual and mystical music," Javadi Amoli argued that man's practical reason can find true softness when it becomes occupied with prayer, supplication and ritual crying, becoming as a result obedient to man's theoretical reason —  which is cultivated in turn by philosophy and theology — thus abstaining deeds disliked by God. Reciting and composing pleasant poems and prose are highly influential in softening the practical reason to this end whereas musical instruments causes only a "false" softness: "there's a difference when one cries for the oppression bore by Imam Husayn compared to when one shed tears only as a result of hearing the beats of mourning plays." This is the hazard posed by the so-called "mystical" music, Javadi argued.

[ 10 ] Political views [ edit ] Abdollah Javadi Amoli In a meeting with members of the national conference on legal alliance of the Muslim world, Amoli argued that Muslim unity is not achieved merely through preaching, but requires distinguishing the nature of disagreement to find out whether it is in beliefs or merely a difference in inclinations. He referred to history of Shia when different denominations avoided clashes despite different views and united with each other based on jurisprudence as a shared asset. He further argued that "Qur’an and Logic can be counted as the sole factor for alliance of all Muslims." [ 11 ] In another meeting with Maulana Hatem Zeky al Din, a senior cleric of Indian Ismailis, held in Asra International Institute, Javadi Amoli stated that the core of unity among Muslim community is the Quran as well as the Ahl ul-Bayt adding, "Both the holy Quran and Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s) brought the message of monotheism to mankind and invited them to worship Allah; If the Muslim community truly adheres to Ahl ul-Bayt and Quranic teachings their actions will lead to Islamic unity and there will be no discord among the Muslim Ummah." [ 12 ] In a meeting on 5 February 2016 with Monsignor Liberio Andreatta, the head of the Vatican Pilgrimage Organization on Wednesday, Grand Ayatollah Abdollah Javadi Amoli stated that if the followers of the Abrahamic religions properly follow their prophets, there wouldn't be any conflict between them. He described Takfiri ideology, terrorist groups and proxy wars as creation of "the arrogant powers" hinting at Israel and the United States.

[ 13 ] On another occasion he stated that since Divine-inspired prophets have all confirmed their successors, thus approving other faiths, followers of all monotheist faiths have always had peaceful coexistence in Iran which is "a model for the global community."  He further added that civil society will never be established at gun point. "Relying on waging wars and accumulating warfare, the mankind will never manage to build an exalted civilization, as all civilizations throughout history have been established under the umbrella of divine revelations, knowledge, and briefly speaking, the pen,' said the ayatollah.

[ 14 ] From the point of view of Abdullah Javadi Amoli, reason is not against religion; It is the beacon of religion, and on the other hand, it can be used to understand the doctrinal, moral, jurisprudential and legal teachings of religion.

[ 15 ] Nuclear weapon [ edit ] Regarding the Nuclear weapons in February 2014, he said in a video message that the official message of religion and humanity is that weapons of mass destruction should not be produced.

[ 16 ] In a meeting with Secretary General, Mr. Mohammad Javad Hasheminejad from Habilian Association, an Iranian NGO specializing in terrorism research, Javadi Amoli criticized the West's classification of the Lebanese Shia resistant organization Hezbollah as terrorist  while "depicting some Takfiri groups as freedom fighters," arguing that the West's definition of terrorism is based on its own interests and passion, whereas "we believe divine sources must be relied upon and used to bring justice. So we will never have double standards. We never consider terrorists as freedom fighters neither will we take defenders of national sovereignty as terrorists. While they [West] support one side of the conflict today and name them as terrorists tomorrow, if their interests necessitate it.” [ 17 ] Other [ edit ] In a meeting with a member of Iranian parliament, Javad Amoli criticized the structure of Iran's economy, saying that an economy based on exporting raw materials such as crude oil is not right. "We must process the oil through various means and then export it,” the ayatollah added.

[ 18 ] In a meeting on May 12, 2016, Javadi Amoli lamented the low rate of per capita book reading in Iran despite being "a country of wisdom and rationality" with its people being "socially aware." [ 19 ] Javadi Amoli has repeatedly protested the usury of some banking activities under the guise of Islamic banking . His speech with hatred and tears in the classroom about usury had wide repercussions. Among other criticisms, in December 2016 he said, Bank of Iran sucks [the] blood [of] people.

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Iran portal Shia Islam portal Biography portal Fatemeh Javadi Ruhollah Khomeini's letter to Mikhail Gorbachev Lists of maraji List of members in the First Term of the Council of Experts References [ edit ] ^ "Esra International foundation for Revealed Science" .

www.portal.esra.ir . Archived from the original on 2016-08-17 . Retrieved 2017-05-30 .

^ a b "معرفی حضرت استاد - دفتر" .

javadi.esra.ir (in Persian). Archived from the original on 2021-01-28 . Retrieved 2017-05-31 .

^ Dahlén, Ashk (2003), Islamic Law, Epistemology and Modernity. Legal Philosophy in Contemporary Iran , New York: Routledge, chapter 5b, ISBN 9780415945295 ^ Study Islam, Khomeini Suggests to Gorbachev ^ Ayatollah Khomeini's massage to Gorbachev ^ Iranian cleric, Ayatollah Amoli resigns his position ^ Ayatollah Javadi-Amoli criticizes unethical approaches in election campaign, Islamic Republic News Agency Archived June 7, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ The Last Friday Congregational Led by Ayatollah Javadi Amoli Archived December 1, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ "انواع موسیقی و تفاوت غزل با ترانه از نگاه آیت‌الله جوادی آملی" .

www.khabaronline.ir (in Persian). 21 June 2011 . Retrieved 2017-05-31 .

^ "موسیقی عرفانی از نگاه آیت‌الله جوادی‌آملی" .

ایسنا (in Persian). 2013-07-03 . Retrieved 2017-05-31 .

^ "Ayatollah Javadi Amoli: Qur'an, sole way towards unity among Muslims" .

Hawzah News . 2017-05-02 . Retrieved 2017-05-30 .

^ Hawzah (2016-10-30).

"Ayatollah Javadi Amoli: Adherence to Ahlul Bayt fosters Muslims' unity" . Retrieved 2017-05-30 .

^ "Ayatollah Javadi-Amoli calls on unity in meeting with Vatican official | Shafaqna English" .

en.shafaqna.com . 5 February 2016 . Retrieved 2017-05-30 .

^ "Peaceful coexistence with all faiths in Iran a model for world" .

www.irna.ir . Retrieved 2017-05-30 .

^ Vaezi, "Religious science from the perspective of Ayatollah Javadi Amoli", page 10 ^ Ayatollah Javadi Amoli's message to the National Nuclear Conference [ permanent dead link ] ^ "West's definition of terrorism serves its interests" .

Mehr News Agency . 2016-04-27 . Retrieved 2017-05-30 .

^ NR, Reporter.

"Ayatollah Javadi Amoli: Iran safe, powerful while neighbours suffer from terrorism" . Archived from the original on 2016-08-05 . Retrieved 2017-05-30 .

^ Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance.

"Ayatollah Javadi Amoli in meeting Minister of Culture: Saudis must know that holy sites are not their monopoly" .

www.farhang.gov.ir . Archived from the original on 2017-12-01 . Retrieved 2017-05-30 .

^ Ayatollah Javadi Amoli criticizes banking system External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Abdollah Javadi Amoli .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Abdollah Javadi Amoli .

Isra research institute (Persian) Biography [ permanent dead link ] Abdollah Javadi Amoli on Twitter v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany Netherlands People DDB Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abdollah_Javadi_Amoli&oldid=1286290779 " Categories : 1933 births Living people Iranian grand ayatollahs Shia Islamists People from Amol Islamic philosophers Iranian Muslim mystics Society of Seminary Teachers of Qom members Members of the Assembly of Experts for Constitution Iranian ayatollahs Iran's Book of the Year Awards recipients Farabi International Award recipients Marja' Hidden categories: CS1 Persian-language sources (fa) Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Persian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 April 2025, at 23:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abdollah Javadi Amoli 13 languages Add topic

