Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historiography 2 Religious architecture 3 Secular architecture 4 Notable examples 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Renaissance architecture in Portugal Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Renaissance architecture in Portugal" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The architecture of the Portuguese Renaissance intimately linked to Gothic architecture and gradual in its classical elements. The Manueline style (circa 1490–1535) was a transitional style that combined Renaissance and Gothic ornamental elements to buildings that were architectonically closer to Gothic architecture, as is the Isabelline style of Spain. Manueline was succeeded by a brief Early Renaissance phase (c. 1530–1550), closer to Classical canons, followed by the adoption of Mannerist (late Renaissance) forms. Portuguese Mannerism, specially in secular architecture, is characterised by simplicity in the organisation of façades and relative lack of decoration, being often referred to as Estilo Chão (plain style). Even with the arrival of Baroque architecture in the late 17th century, Portuguese architecture continued to use Mannerist forms well into the 18th century.

Historiography [ edit ] Two important works on Portuguese post–medieval architecture included Albrecht Haupt's Die Baukunst der Renaissance in Portugal , which was published in two volumes in 1890 and 1895, and Francisco de Sousa Viterbo's study of Portuguese builders and designers, dated 1899 to 1922.

[ 1 ] Religious architecture [ edit ] Manueline nave of the Jerónimos Monastery in Lisbon One of the most important examples of Manueline style is the Jerónimos Monastery at Lisbon , in which Renaissance ornaments decorate portals, church columns and cloisters. The definitive abandonment of Gothic architecture and the first "pure" Renaissance structures appear later in the 16th century, under King John III , like the Chapel of Nossa Senhora da Conceição in Tomar (1532–40), the Porta Especiosa of Coimbra Cathedral and the Graça Church at Évora (c. 1530-1540), as well as the cloisters of the Cathedral of Viseu (c. 1528-1534) and Convent of Christ in Tomar (John III Cloisters, 1557–1591).

Manueline churches like that of Jerónimos Monastery anticipated the unification of inner space (see Hall Church ) that would characterise Renaissance churches like the Mercy Church of Santarém (after 1559), the Santo Antão Church of Évora (1557–63) and the cathedrals of Leiria (after 1550) and Portalegre (after 1556).

São Roque Church (1565–87) and the Mannerist Monastery of São Vicente de Fora (1582–1629), both located in Lisbon , heavily influenced religious architecture in both Portugal and its colonies overseas in the next centuries. Mannerist churches influenced by these include the Jesuit churches of Coimbra ( New Cathedral of Coimbra , started 1598) and Salvador da Bahia , in Brazil (now Cathedral of Salvador , second half of the 17th century).

Secular architecture [ edit ] Casa dos Bicos , Lisbon An important and rare example of urban palace of the Renaissance is the Casa dos Bicos (c. 1525) in Lisbon, with a façade covered with diamond reliefs in Italian fashion. During the first half of the 16th century, the Portuguese nobility built various quintas ( manor houses ) in the area surrounding Lisbon. Among these, the Quinta da Bacalhoa (1528–1554), near Setúbal , is the most important, although recently ruined and degraded after its sale to a winery. In contrast to Portuguese mediaeval palaces like the Royal Palace at Sintra , the façades of Bacalhoa have a symmetrical arrangement of windows, loggias and towers and the building is surrounded by an artificial lake and geometrical gardens, an ensemble that reveals Italian inspiration. Also near Setúbal is located the Quinta das Torres (c. 1560), also characterised by its symmetrical façades and a pavilion in the middle of its artificial lake.

The Ribeira Palace of Lisbon, a royal palace built in the early 16th century in Manueline style by King Manuel I , was remodelled towards the end of the 16th century by the orders of Philip I (Philip II of Spain). At this time the façade of the palace was modernised and a large Renaissance-style tower with a dome was built by the Tagus river . The palace and its prominent tower dominated the cityscape of Lisbon until 1755, when the Great Lisbon earthquake destroyed it. With the royal palace destroyed, perhaps the most important late Renaissance palace in Portugal is the Ducal Palace of Vila Viçosa , built between the late 16th and early 17th centuries for the Dukes of Braganza .

Notable examples [ edit ] Façade of Graça Church in Évora (1530–40) Chapel of Nossa Senhora da Conceição in Tomar (1532–40) Cloisters of the Convent of Christ in Tomar (1557–1591) Main chapel of Jerónimos Monastery church (after 1563) Interior of São Roque Church (1565–87) in Lisbon Ribeira Palace (16th century) of Lisbon on an 18th-century engraving Mannerist façade of São Vicente de Fora in Lisbon (1582–1629) Ducal Palace of Vila Viçosa (late 16th-17th centuries) Saint Paul Church in Braga (after 1566) Porta Especiosa of Coimbra Cathedral (1530s) See also [ edit ] Renaissance architecture References [ edit ] ^ Wohl, Hellmut (March 1975).

"Review: Recent Studies in Portuguese Post-Mediaeval Architecture" .

Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians .

34 (1): 67– 73.

doi : 10.2307/988958 .

JSTOR 988958 .

v t e Renaissance General Renaissance Greek scholars in the Renaissance High Renaissance Mannerism Northern Mannerism Outline of the Renaissance Renaissance studies By field Architecture Brick Central and Eastern Europe French Italian domes Palladian Plateresque Portuguese Purism Spanish Venetian Art Early Netherlandish painting Dutch and Flemish painting Italian painting Sculpture Italian sculpture Dance Humanism France Northern Europe Latin Literature Dutch French Spanish Magic Medicine Music Philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Science Scientific Revolution Technology Theatre Warfare By region Italian Renaissance Bergamo and Brescia Ferrara Florence Lombardy Rome Papacy Sicily Urbino Venice Northern Renaissance England France Germany Saxony Weser Low Countries Poland Scotland Iberian peninsula Portugal Spain Spanish Golden Age Lists Composers Figures Humanists Structures Related Cloak and dagger Medieval renaissances Carolingian Ottonian 12th century Reenactment v t e Portuguese architecture Styles Romanesque Gothic Manueline Renaissance Plain Baroque Rococo Pombaline Neo-Manueline Neo-Mudéjar Summer architecture Soft Portuguese style Structures Airports Bridges Castles Cathedrals Football stadiums Hospitals Reservoirs and dams Tallest buildings and structures Elements Azulejo Gilding Lioz Pavement Colonial Portuguese Colonial architecture Sino-Portuguese architecture Sobrado Seven Wonders of Portuguese Origin in the World Others Architects Monuments Housing IGESPAR Seven Wonders of Portugal Category Portuguese Renaissance Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Renaissance_architecture_in_Portugal&oldid=1292603289 " Categories : Renaissance architecture in Portugal Portuguese Renaissance Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles needing additional references from June 2024 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 21:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Renaissance architecture in Portugal Add languages Add topic

