Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure 2 Freigeld 3 Monetary theory 4 References 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Freiwirtschaft 11 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français Magyar 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Türkçe Volapük 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economic theory and proposal by Silvio Gesell You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in German .

(April 2025) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the German article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Silvio Gesell]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|de|Silvio Gesell}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Silvio Gesell (1862–1930), the founder of Freiwirtschaft and Freigeld Freiwirtschaft ( German for "free economy") is an economic theory and proposal founded by the German-Argentine economist Silvio Gesell in his 1916 book, The Natural Economic Order ( German : Die natürliche Wirtschaftsordnung durch Freiland und Freigeld ). Some of the basic economic ideas of Freiwirtschaft were also independently published in 1890 by the Hungarian-Austrian economist Theodor Hertzka in his novel Freiland - ein soziales Zukunftsbild [ 1 ] ( Freeland - A Social Anticipation ).

[ 2 ] Structure [ edit ] Freiwirtschaft consists of three central aspects, usually summed up as the Three Fs: Freigeld ('free money') All money is issued for a limited period by constant value (neither inflation , nor deflation ).

Long-term saving requires investment in bonds or stocks .

Freigeld is 'free' because it's free (libre) from hoarding and interest .

[ 3 ] Freiland ('free land') All land is commonly owned or else the property of public institutions and can only be rented from the community or from government, respectively, not purchased ( see also Georgism ).

Freihandel ('free trade') Unrestrained free trade supported by an international currency union as paper standard to maintain stable exchange rates and abolition of the gold standard in foreign trade.

[ 4 ] Freigeld [ edit ] Main article: Demurrage currency Freigeld is particularly unique to Silvio Gesell's economic proposals.
Freigeld has several special properties: It is maintained by a monetary authority to be spending-power stable (no inflation or deflation ) by means of printing more money or withdrawing money from circulation.

It is cash flow safe (a scheme is put in place to ensure that the money is returned into the cash flow – for example, by stamp scrip – requiring stamps to be purchased and periodically attached to the money to keep it valid).

It is convertible into other currencies .

It is localized to a certain area (it is a local currency ).

In theory, since Freigeld would automatically lose its value after some time, there would be no incentive to store or hoard it .
As a result, Freigeld would encourage bankers to lend money without charging interest rates , thus leading to an interest-free economy .

[ 5 ] Monetary theory [ edit ] According to Gesell, all human-produced goods are subject to expensive storage, whereas money is not: grain loses its weight, metal products rust, housing deteriorates. Therefore, money has a supreme advantage over all other goods.

John Maynard Keynes renamed the concept of basic interest articulated in Gesell's book The Natural Economic Order with the more familiar term liquidity preference . Being "liquid" – having money – is a great advantage to anybody, much more so than having comparable amounts (past utility ) of any product. The result is that people will not even provide zero-risk, inflation-corrected credits unless a certain interest rate is offered.

Freigeld simply reduces this "primordial" interest rate, which is estimated to be somewhere around 3% to 5%, by an absolute, in order to lower the average interest rate to a value around 0.

Freiwirtschaft claims that current monetary systems are flawed. In mainstream economics, prices convey information. For example, dropping prices on a product mean that there is less demand or more supply of that product. This leads to a buyer's buying more, or a seller's/producer's starting to sell/produce something else, thereby reducing the supply of that product. As a reaction, assuming constant desirability, the price of the product rises again. So, the price, together with the market participants, builds up a feedback loop around a stable, "ideal" price. At this stable price, the market is ideal, no one pays too much or earns too little, and there are no tendencies from either party to change that price. The "wobbling" around that ideal price is called self-stabilizing .

The key error of the current system, according to Gesell, is the ill-transported information in the price. Money is nothing but a claim for goods and services, usable in the economies that accept money in exchange for the former. In a weak economy, money is worth less in goods. But instead of an inflation , the result is a deflation as described above, and less money can now buy the same goods. This feedback loop is self-destabilizing , according to the Freiwirtschaft theory.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ Theodor Hertzka: Freiland - ein soziales Zukunftsbild , Leipzig 1890 – Summary on the website of the Otto-Lilienthal-Museum .

^ Theodor Hertzka: Freeland - A Social Anticipation , St. Loyes, Bedford, June, 1891.

Book online at Project Gutenberg .

^ Baynham, Jacob (14 November 2023).

"What If Money Expired?" .

Noema Magazine . Berggruen Institute . Retrieved 26 April 2025 .

^ "4.6-3. International Trade: Stabilisation of the International Exchanges. The International Valuta Association" .

www.community-exchange.org . Retrieved 2023-05-18 .

^ Rosalsky, Greg (27 August 2019).

"The 'Strange, Unduly Neglected Prophet' " .

NPR . Retrieved 25 April 2025 .

^ Norbert Rost: Eine experimentelle Überprüfung der Aussagen der Freiwirtschaftslehre (An experimental check of the statements of the Freiwirtschaft) (diploma thesis, Dresden, 2003), p. 25ff.

Sources [ edit ] Helmut Creutz, The Money Syndrome – Towards a Market Economy Free from Crises , Upfront Publishing 2010.

Günter Bartsch, Die NWO-Bewegung Silvio Gesells – Geschichtlicher Grundriß 1891-1992/93 . Gauke, Lütjenburg 1994.

Knulp Goeke, Die verteilungspolitische Problematik der Freiwirtschaftslehre . Cologne 1961.

Johannes Heinrichs, Sprung aus dem Teufelskreis. Sozialethische Wirtschaftstheorie Vol. I, Munich 2005.

Kennedy, Margrit (1995).

Interest and inflation free money: Creating an exchange medium that works for everybody and protects the earth . Philadelphia, PA: New Society Publishers.

ISBN 0-86571-319-7 .

OCLC 32201872 .

Hans-Joachim Werner, Geschichte der Freiwirtschaftsbewegung. 100 Jahre Kampf für eine Marktwirtschaft ohne Kapitalismus . Waxmann, Münster 1990.

External links [ edit ] Introduction to Freiwirtschaft [ usurped ] Materialien zur Geld-, Zins- und Schuldenproblematik (in German, partly English) Fairconomy (in German, partly English) v t e Schools of economic thought Pre-modern Ancient schools Medieval Islamic Scholasticism Modern era Early modern Cameralism Mercantilism Physiocrats School of Salamanca Late modern American (National) Austrian Birmingham Classical Ricardian Distributist English historical Freiwirtschaft French liberal Georgism German historical Malthusian Manchester Marginalism Marxist economics Marxian critique of political economy Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne Socialist Contemporary (20th and 21st centuries) Behavioral Buddhist Capability approach Carnegie Chartalism Modern Monetary Theory Chicago Constitutional Cracovian Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiburg Geneva Institutional Keynesian Neo- Neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis New Post- Circuitism Keynes–Marx synthesis Monetarism Market Neo-Malthusian Neo-Marxian Neo-Ricardian Neo-Schumpeterian Neoliberalism New classical Rational expectations theory Real business-cycle theory New institutional New neoclassical synthesis Organizational Public choice Regulation Saltwater/freshwater Stockholm Structuralist Supply-side Technocracy movement Thermoeconomics Virginia Social credit Related Critique of political economy History of economic thought History of macroeconomic thought Economics Political economy Mainstream economics Heterodox economics Post-autistic economics Degrowth World-systems theory Economic systems Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Freiwirtschaft&oldid=1304125047 " Categories : Freiwirtschaft Local currencies Economic ideologies Schools of economic thought Monetary reform Left-libertarianism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Government and politics articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 03:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Freiwirtschaft 11 languages Add topic

