Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Academic career Toggle Academic career subsection 2.1 Contributions to economics 2.1.1 Efficiency wage models 2.1.2 Reproductive technology shock 3 Federal Reserve (1994–1997) 4 Council of Economic Advisers (1997–1999) 5 Return to the Federal Reserve (2004–2018) Toggle Return to the Federal Reserve (2004–2018) subsection 5.1 Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 5.2 Vice Chair of the Federal Reserve 5.3 Chair of the Federal Reserve 6 After the Federal Reserve (2018–2020) Toggle After the Federal Reserve (2018–2020) subsection 6.1 Paid corporate speaking 7 Secretary of the Treasury (2021–2025) Toggle Secretary of the Treasury (2021–2025) subsection 7.1 Nomination and confirmation 7.2 Tenure 7.2.1 Proposed international tax reform 7.2.2 Debt ceiling crisis 7.2.3 Sanctions against Russia and oil price cap 7.2.4 Digital Assets Regulation 7.2.5 Friendshoring of supply chains 7.2.6 Comments on Roe v. Wade overturning 7.2.7 Internal Revenue Service reforms 7.2.8 Visit to Ukraine 7.2.9 Banking crisis 7.2.10 Economic approach to China 8 Economic philosophy 9 Honors and awards Toggle Honors and awards subsection 9.1 Academic 9.2 Memberships and fellowships 9.3 Awards 9.4 Other recognition 10 Personal life 11 In popular culture 12 Selected works Toggle Selected works subsection 12.1 Books 12.2 Articles 13 See also 14 References 15 External links Toggle External links subsection 15.1 Official 15.2 Other Toggle the table of contents Janet Yellen 64 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch डोटेली Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kapampangan ქართული Latina Latviešu Magyar मैथिली Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American economist and government official (born 1946) Janet Yellen Official portrait, 2021 78th United States Secretary of the Treasury In office January 26, 2021 – January 20, 2025 President Joe Biden Deputy Wally Adeyemo Preceded by Steven Mnuchin Succeeded by Scott Bessent 15th Chair of the Federal Reserve In office February 3, 2014 – February 3, 2018 President Barack Obama Donald Trump Deputy Stanley Fischer Preceded by Ben Bernanke Succeeded by Jerome Powell 19th Vice Chair of the Federal Reserve In office October 4, 2010 – February 3, 2014 President Barack Obama Preceded by Donald Kohn Succeeded by Stanley Fischer Member of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors In office October 4, 2010 – February 3, 2018 President Barack Obama Donald Trump Preceded by Mark W. Olson Succeeded by Lisa D. Cook In office August 12, 1994 – February 17, 1997 President Bill Clinton Preceded by Wayne Angell Succeeded by Edward Gramlich 11th President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco In office June 14, 2004 – October 4, 2010 Preceded by Robert T. Parry Succeeded by John Williams 18th Chair of the Council of Economic Advisers In office February 18, 1997 – August 3, 1999 President Bill Clinton Preceded by Joseph Stiglitz Succeeded by Martin Neil Baily Personal details Born Janet Louise Yellen ( 1946-08-13 ) August 13, 1946 (age 79) New York City , New York , U.S.

Political party Democratic [ 1 ] Spouse George Akerlof ​ ( m.

1978) ​ Children 1 Education Brown University ( BA ) Yale University ( MA , PhD ) Signature Scientific career Fields Macroeconomics Labor economics New Keynesian economics Institutions Harvard University London School of Economics University of California, Berkeley National Bureau of Economic Research Brookings Institution Thesis Employment, Output and Capital Accumulation in an Open Economy: A Disequilibrium Approach (1971) Doctoral advisor James Tobin Other academic advisors Joseph Stiglitz Doctoral students Charles Engel Website Information at IDEAS / RePEc Yellen's voice Yellen on the importance of raising the debt ceiling Recorded March 23, 2023 Janet Louise Yellen (born August 13, 1946) is an American economist who served as the 78th United States secretary of the treasury from 2021 to 2025. She also served as chair of the Federal Reserve from 2014 to 2018. She was the first woman to hold either position, and has also led the White House Council of Economic Advisers . Yellen is the Eugene E. and Catherine M. Trefethen Professor of Business Administration and Economics at the University of California, Berkeley .

Born and raised in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn , Yellen graduated from Brown University in 1967 and earned a Ph.D.

in economics from Yale University in 1971. She taught as an assistant professor at Harvard University from 1971 to 1976, was a staff economist for the Federal Reserve Board from 1977 to 1978, and was a faculty member at the London School of Economics from 1978 to 1980. Yellen is professor emeritus at the Haas School of Business at the University of California, Berkeley , where she has been a faculty member since 1980 and became the Eugene E. and Catherine M. Trefethen Professor of Business Administration and Professor of Economics.

Yellen served as a member of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors from 1994 to 1997 and was nominated to the position by President Bill Clinton , who then named her chair of the Council of Economic Advisers from 1997 to 1999. She subsequently returned to academia, before serving as president and chief executive officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco from 2004 until 2010. Afterward, President Barack Obama chose her to replace Donald Kohn as vice chair of the Federal Reserve from 2010 to 2014 before nominating her to succeed Ben Bernanke as chair of the Federal Reserve three years later. She was succeeded by Jerome Powell after President Donald Trump declined to renominate her for a second term. Following her departure from the Federal Reserve, Yellen joined the Brookings Institution as a distinguished fellow in residence from 2018 until 2020, when she again went into public service.

[ 2 ] On November 30, 2020, President-elect Joe Biden nominated Yellen to serve as secretary of the treasury; she was confirmed by the U.S. Senate on January 25, 2021, and was sworn in by Vice President Kamala Harris the following day.

[ 3 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Yellen was born on August 13, 1946, [ 4 ] to a family of Polish Jewish [ 5 ] ancestry in the Bay Ridge, Brooklyn , neighborhood of New York City, and grew up there.

[ 6 ] Her mother was Anna Ruth (née Blumenthal; 1907–1986), an elementary school teacher who gave up her teaching job to become a stay-at-home mother. Her father was Julius Yellen (1906–1975), a family physician who worked from the ground floor of their house. Janet has an older brother, John (born 1942), who is a program director for archaeology at the National Science Foundation .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In a speech at the POLIN Museum of the History of Polish Jews , Yellen said that her father's family immigrated to the United States from Sokołów Podlaski , a small town about 50 miles outside of Warsaw. She said further that nearly the entirety of its Jewish population, including many of her relatives, was deported or murdered during the Holocaust .

[ 9 ] Yellen attended the local Fort Hamilton High School , where she was an honor society member and participated in the booster club, the psychology club, and the history club.

[ 8 ] She also served as editor-in-chief of The Pilot , the school newspaper, which continued its 13-year streak as the first-place winner of the prestigious Columbia Scholastic Press Association contest under her leadership.

[ 10 ] She earned a National Merit commendation letter and was admitted to a selective science honors program at Columbia University to voluntarily study mathematics on Saturday mornings. Yellen was one of 30 students to win state Regents scholarships for college and one of a select few to win the mayor's citation for a scholarship.

[ 10 ] She graduated in 1963 as the valedictorian of her class. In line with school tradition, for the editor to interview the valedictorian, she interviewed herself in the third person .

[ 11 ] [ 8 ] [ 10 ] Yellen enrolled at Pembroke College in Brown University , initially intending to study philosophy. During her freshman year, she switched her planned major to economics and was particularly influenced by professors George Herbert Borts and Herschel Grossman .

[ 12 ] In the spring of 1964, she also joined the business staff of The Brown Daily Herald , but soon afterward she left the paper to focus on her academic studies.

[ 13 ] Yellen graduated summa cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa with a bachelor's in economics from Brown University in 1967, [ 14 ] and earned her master's and PhD in economics from Yale University in 1971.

[ 15 ] Her dissertation was titled Employment, Output and Capital Accumulation in an Open Economy: A Disequilibrium Approach under the supervision of James Tobin , [ 16 ] a noted economist who would later receive the Nobel Memorial Prize.

[ 17 ] As a teaching assistant, Yellen was so meticulous in her note-taking during Tobin's macroeconomics class that her notes became the unofficial textbook and were referred to as "Yellen Notes" while being circulated among generations of graduate students.

[ 17 ] Her former professor and Nobel Prize in Economics laureate, Joseph Stiglitz , has called her one of his brightest and most memorable students.

[ 18 ] She later described Yale professors Tobin and William Brainard as "lifelong mentors" who laid the intellectual groundwork for her economic views.

[ 19 ] Yellen was the only woman among the two dozen economists who earned their doctorates from Yale in 1971.

[ 18 ] Academic career [ edit ] After receiving her Ph.D., Yellen obtained the position of assistant professor of economics at Harvard University , where she taught from 1971 to 1976.

[ 20 ] At that time, she was one of only two female faculty members in Harvard's economics department; the other woman was Rachel McCulloch . The pair struck up a close friendship and went on to write several academic papers together.

[ 18 ] In 1977, Yellen took a job within the Federal Reserve's Board of Governors after failing to win tenure at Harvard; she was recruited as a staff economist for the Board of Governors by Edwin M. Truman , who had known her from Yale. Truman was a junior professor when he heard Yellen's oral exam and was then about to take over the Fed's Division of International Finance. She was assigned to research international monetary reform.

[ 21 ] While at the Fed, she met her husband, economist George Akerlof , in the bank's cafeteria; they married in 1978, less than a year later.

[ 21 ] By the time of their marriage, Akerlof had already accepted a teaching position at the London School of Economics (LSE). Yellen left her post at the Fed to accompany him and was given a tenure-track lectureship by LSE. The couple stayed in the United Kingdom for two years before returning to the United States, in part due to identity issues because they felt American, not English.

[ 22 ] In 1980, Yellen joined the faculty of the University of California, Berkeley , where she taught at the Haas School of Business to conduct macroeconomics research and teach undergraduate and MBA students for more than two decades. She earned the Haas School's outstanding teaching award twice, in 1985 and 1988.

[ 23 ] Yellen became just the second woman at Berkeley-Haas to earn tenure in 1982, as well as the title of full professor in 1985.

[ 23 ] She was named the Bernard T. Rocca Jr. Professor of International Business and Trade in 1992.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] From 1994 to 1999, Yellen took a leave of absence from Berkeley to go into public service. After returning to academia, she resumed her teaching assignment at Haas and received a joint appointment with Berkeley's Department of Economics.

[ 26 ] She was appointed the Eugene E. and Catherine M. Trefethen Professor of Business Administration and Professor of Economics in 1999 [ 24 ] and remained an active faculty member until she was appointed president and chief executive officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco in 2004.

[ 27 ] Yellen was awarded the title of professor emeritus at UC Berkeley in 2006.

[ 25 ] Throughout her career, Yellen served as an adviser to the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), the Brookings Panel on Economic Activity, and the National Science Foundation 's Panel in Economics. She was also a research associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research from 1999 to 2010.

[ 25 ] In 2025, she joined the board of advisors for Angeleno Group, a private equity and venture capital firm focused on sustainable energy investments.

[ 28 ] Contributions to economics [ edit ] Yellen's academic career has largely focused on the analysis of the mechanisms of unemployment and labor markets, monetary and fiscal policies, and international trade. She has written a few widely cited papers, often collaborating on research with her husband, Professor George Akerlof.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Efficiency wage models [ edit ] Since the 1980s, Yellen and Akerlof have addressed what's known in the economics literature as "efficiency wage theory" – the idea that paying people more than the market wage does increase their productivity. Their 1990 paper, entitled "The Fair-Wage Effort Hypothesis and Unemployment", coined "the fair wage effort hypothesis" and was considered by economists to be a significant contribution to the topic: "A precursor to the efficiency wage literature...it had an influence, although the work on efficiency wage theory has had a bigger influence." [ 31 ] Akerlof and Yellen introduced the gift-exchange game , which argues that workers who are paid less than what they consider to be a fair wage will purposefully work less hard to exact revenge on their employer.

[ 31 ] [ 29 ] Reproductive technology shock [ edit ] Another work, "An Analysis of Out-of-Wedlock Childbearing in the United States", co-written with Akerlof and Michael Katz and published in 1996, aims to explain why out-of-wedlock births have grown considerably in previous decades in the United States. A research study led to a theory called "reproductive technology shock", arguing that the increased availability of both abortion and contraception in the late 1960s and early 1970s, amidst the sexual revolution , eroded the social norms surrounding sex, pregnancy, and marriage, leading to a sharp decline in the stigma of unwed motherhood.

[ 32 ] At the same time, this transformation encouraged biological fathers to reject notions of marital and paternal obligations.

[ 33 ] Federal Reserve (1994–1997) [ edit ] On April 22, 1994, President Bill Clinton announced his intention to nominate Yellen as a member of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors , alongside Alan Blinder , who has been designated as vice chairman. They were the first Democratic appointees to the Board since 1980.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] In an issued statement, the president praised her as "one of the most prominent economists of her generation on the intersection of macroeconomics and labor markets." [ 36 ] President Clinton played an indirect role in the selection process, delegating most of the responsibility to NEC Director Robert Rubin , Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen , and CEA Chair Laura Tyson , who was a colleague of Yellen's at Berkeley. The group settled on her candidacy after an exhaustive search that at one point included nearly 50 names.

[ 34 ] In July 1994, during her confirmation hearing before the Senate Banking Committee , Yellen said that Fed policies should keep the economy growing as much as possible without accelerating inflation but avoid taking a clear position on the prospect of further increases in interest rates .

[ 37 ] The Senate panel approved her nomination without much Republican opposition, by a vote of 18 to 1; the only dissenting vote came from Senator Lauch Faircloth (R-NC), who said that her concerns should be limited to inflation.

[ 38 ] The nomination was confirmed in the full United States Senate by a vote of 94–6.

[ 39 ] On August 12, 1994, Yellen was appointed to a full 14-year term and assumed the seat vacated by Republican Wayne Angell .

[ 38 ] She was installed as the fourth female governor, joining Susan M. Phillips , which marks the first time that two women have sat on the Federal Reserve Board simultaneously.

[ 40 ] In July 1996, the Federal Reserve resisted pressure to raise interest rates as unemployment dropped. Yellen marshaled academic research to dissuade Chairman Alan Greenspan from committing the Fed to a zero inflation policy and demonstrate that the central bank should seek to moderate inflation rather than eliminate it. According to the study, a low inflation rate of around 2 percent provided a better foundation for reducing unemployment and increasing economic growth than the goal of zero.

[ 41 ] Upon her confirmation as chair of the Council of Economic Advisers, she resigned as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on February 17, 1997.

Council of Economic Advisers (1997–1999) [ edit ] Official photo as CEA chair, c.

1990s On December 20, 1996, Yellen joined the Clinton administration as chair of President Clinton's Council of Economic Advisers (CEA), replacing Joseph Stiglitz in office.

[ 42 ] She was reluctant to leave the Federal Reserve, but White House officials talked her into a job, passing over others with greater marquee value because, as Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin said, "We wanted someone who could bring a rigorous analytic approach to the issues and who could work well with others." [ 43 ] Yellen was unanimously confirmed by the Senate on February 13, 1997, [ 44 ] thereby becoming the second woman to serve as chief economic advisor to the president after Laura Tyson.

[ 45 ] [ 43 ] While serving within the Administration, she concurrently chaired the OECD Economic Policy Committee from 1997 to 1999.

[ 25 ] During her time with the Council of Economic Advisers, Yellen oversaw a June 1998 report, "Explaining Trends in the Gender Wage Gap", [ 46 ] which focused on the gender pay divide. Within this study, the Council analyzed data from 1969 to 1996 to determine the reasons why women earn substantially less than men. By observing trends attributable to issues such as occupation and industry, as well as familial status, it was determined that while the Equal Pay Act of 1963 was a step forward, there was no explanation for a 25-percent difference between average pay for women and men – an improvement from the 40-percent gap two decades earlier. It was concluded that this gap had no correlation with differences in productivity and, as such, was the result of discrimination within the workforce.

[ 18 ] In June 1999, Yellen announced that she was stepping down from the CEA for personal reasons and would return to teaching at UC Berkeley.

[ 47 ] It was reported that President Clinton asked her to take over from Alice Rivlin , the central bank's vice chairwoman – an offer she turned down.

[ 48 ] Return to the Federal Reserve (2004–2018) [ edit ] Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco [ edit ] On April 12, 2004, the Federal Reserve announced that Yellen would replace Robert T. Parry as president and chief executive officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco , taking office on June 14.

[ 49 ] She was the first woman to hold this position.

[ 18 ] While serving as Federal Reserve District president, she sat on the policy-setting Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and was a voting member once every three years on a rotating basis, with her first being in 2006.

[ 49 ] During her time at the San Francisco Fed, the largest of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks in terms of population and economic output, Yellen publicly downplayed concerns about the potential consequences of the boom in housing prices ; at FOMC meetings, on the contrary, she sounded the alarm on banks' heavy concentration in risky construction and home-development loans .

[ 50 ] On the other hand, she did not lead the San Francisco Fed to "move to check [the] increasingly indiscriminate lending" of Countrywide Financial , the United States' largest lender.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] On June 5, 2009, Yellen said that the Federal Reserve should consider raising interest rates earlier to prevent another housing bubble . She argued that higher short-term interest rates probably went against the expansion of a bubble in certain circumstances, like restraining the demand for housing and high-risk mortgages.

[ 53 ] In July 2009, Yellen was mentioned as a potential successor to Chairman Ben Bernanke when his term was set to expire before he was re-nominated for a second four-year term.

[ 54 ] She eventually emerged as the leading contender for vice chair of the Federal Reserve Board in March 2010, [ 55 ] and following her Senate confirmation, she resigned from the San Francisco Fed in October of that year.

[ 56 ] Vice Chair of the Federal Reserve [ edit ] Yellen takes the oath of office administered by Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke in the Eccles Building , October 4, 2010.

On April 28, 2010, President Barack Obama nominated Yellen to succeed Donald Kohn as vice chair of the Federal Reserve .

[ 57 ] In July 2010, the Senate Banking Committee voted 17–6 to confirm her, though the top Republican on the panel, Sen.

Richard Shelby of Alabama, voted no, saying "President Yellen presided over a regional housing bubble and failed to restrain the excesses." [ 58 ] Around the same time, on the heels of related testimony by Fed chairman Bernanke, FOMC voting member James B. Bullard of the St. Louis Fed stated that the U.S. economy was at risk of becoming "enmeshed in a Japanese-style deflationary outcome within the next several years." [ 59 ] That statement was interpreted as a possible shift within the FOMC balance between inflation hawks and doves. Yellen's pending confirmation, along with those of Peter Diamond and Sarah Bloom Raskin to fill vacancies, was seen as possibly furthering such a shift in the FOMC. All three nominations were seen as "on track to be confirmed by the Senate." [ 59 ] On September 29, 2010, Yellen, along with Raskin, [ 60 ] was confirmed by the Senate on a voice vote to be both a member of the board of governors [ 61 ] and vice chairman of the Federal Reserve System.

[ 62 ] On October 4, the pair were sworn in as Fed governors, while Yellen also took the oath of office as vice chair of the board for a four-year term.

[ 56 ] Simultaneously, she began a 14-year term as a member of the Federal Reserve Board, filling a vacant seat last held by Mark W. Olson .

[ 56 ] Yellen was just the second woman to hold the Federal Reserve's No.

2 post, after Alice Rivlin.

[ 63 ] In contrast to her predecessors, Yellen acted more independently within the institution in her role as vice chair.

[ 64 ] She has been urging Bernanke and the other FOMC members to follow her preferred route for monetary policy, arguing for more forceful actions to inject money into the economy to reduce unemployment.

[ 65 ] Yellen played a leading role in moving the Federal Reserve to announce its inflation target of two percent a year after her long campaign with Chairman Bernanke; she was an early supporter of inflation targeting , facing opposition from Chairman Greenspan during her first stint at the Fed in the 1990s.

[ 66 ] [ 64 ] Yellen was widely considered the front-runner to succeed Bernanke as the Federal Reserve's chair when his second term ceased.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] [ 68 ] Lawrence Summers , a former President Clinton's Treasury Secretary and former director of President Obama's National Economic Council , was the other leading contender in the highly publicized race; media outlets reported that the president was leaning toward selecting the latter candidate.

[ 69 ] However, throughout the race, Summers drew criticism from both sides of the aisle for his role in deregulating parts of the banking sector while he served in the Clinton administration. He sparked further controversy for remarks on women's aptitude in math and science, which he made in 2005 while serving as Harvard University's president.

[ 18 ] In July 2013, Yellen was pushed to be named the first chairwoman of the central bank in a letter that was circulated among the Senate Democrats and had been signed by almost a third of the 54 caucus senators, who primarily represent the liberal wing of the party.

[ 70 ] In addition, more than 500 professional economists from around 200 colleges and universities across the United States signed an open letter in support of her candidacy for Fed chair and sent it to the White House.

[ 71 ] After weeks of opposition to his potential nomination, Summers withdrew his name from consideration for the position in September.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] Chair of the Federal Reserve [ edit ] Official portrait as Federal Reserve chair, 2015 From left to right: Janet Yellen, Alan Greenspan , Ben Bernanke , and Paul Volcker , May 1, 2014 Yellen in conversation with IMF managing director Christine Lagarde , July 2, 2014 On October 9, 2013, Yellen was officially nominated to replace Bernanke as chair of the Federal Reserve , [ 74 ] [ 75 ] the first vice chair ever to be elevated to that post.

[ 76 ] While announcing his decision, President Obama called her "one of the nation's foremost economists and policymakers" and said that "America's workers and their families will have a champion in Janet Yellen." [ 77 ] During the nomination hearings held in November, Yellen defended the more than $3 trillion in stimulus funds that the central bank had been injecting into the U.S. economy.

[ 78 ] She also said that it is important for the Fed to try to detect asset bubbles and that if she saw one, she would work to address it.

[ 79 ] On December 20, 2013, the U.S. Senate voted 59–34 for cloture on Yellen's nomination.

[ 80 ] On January 6, 2014, she was confirmed as chair of the Federal Reserve by a vote of 56–26, [ 81 ] the narrowest margin ever for the position.

[ 82 ] Yellen was a trailblazer as the first woman to head the U.S. central bank, or any major central bank , and the first Democrat to do so since Paul Volcker assumed that position in 1979 via President Jimmy Carter .

[ 1 ] She was sworn into office on February 3, 2014, [ 83 ] and was previously elected as FOMC chair on January 30.

[ 84 ] According to a Fed representative, on Yellen's request, her title would be altered to "chair" rather than "chairman" or "chairwoman", as she prefers a gender-neutral manner.

[ 63 ] [ 18 ] Only one woman had ever led the central bank of a G8 country before Yellen – Russia's Elvira Nabiullina .

[ 85 ] In July 2014, at her first semi-annual congressional testimony on U S. monetary policy , Yellen said, "while real estate, equities, and corporate bond prices have risen appreciably and valuation metrics have increased they were generally in line with historical norms." She also acknowledged some concerns about the valuations of lower-rated corporate debt and affirmed that she and other Fed officials were monitoring trends but did not believe that a so-called " everything bubble " was forming.

[ 86 ] On December 16, 2015, the Federal Reserve under Yellen increased its key interest rate for the first time since 2006.

[ 87 ] That move was largely expected because extraordinarily low rates for an extremely long time may contribute to financial instability and pose a threat to the economy, and was considered a departure from the previous controversial Fed policy, commonly known as the " Greenspan put ".

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] During her tenure, the Fed gradually raised rates four additional times, leaving its key rate in a still-low range of 1.25 percent to 1.5 percent – well below historical standards.

[ 90 ] Following the 2016 presidential election , Yellen gave a strong defense of the Dodd–Frank Act in her Joint Economic Committee testimony, standing in opposition to incoming President Donald Trump 's plans to review the landmark legislation. She argued that it would be inappropriate to weaken or repeal the law designed to prevent a repeat of the 2008 financial crisis .

[ 91 ] Yellen provided further support for financial regulations enacted in the wake of the Great Recession in a speech to the Jackson Hole Economic Symposium on August 25, 2017. In her remarks about the aftermath of the crisis, she said, "The balance of research suggests that the core reforms we have put in place have substantially boosted resilience without unduly limiting credit availability or economic growth." Yellen warned that any adjustment to the regulatory framework should be modest and preserve the increase in resilience.

[ 92 ] In November 2017, as Yellen's tenure as chair of the Federal Reserve was coming to an end, Trump considered nominating her for another term, but on the advice of his Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin , he picked a Republican Fed governor, Jerome Powell , instead.

[ 93 ] Yellen made her resignation from the Federal Reserve Board at the conclusion of her chairmanship known after Trump's choice, despite still having her assignment as Fed governor until 2024.

[ 94 ] She served a single term and became just the second Federal Reserve chair eligible for reappointment not renominated by a successor presidential administration, the first being Arthur F. Burns almost 40 years prior.

[ 95 ] That unusual departure makes her the briefest-serving central bank chief since G. William Miller , who held that office for over a year, from 1978 to 1979.

[ 96 ] On February 2, 2018, Yellen enforced enormous sanctions on Wells Fargo , which was the third-largest U.S. bank at the time, with a consent order restricting the firm's expansion unless it resolved its internal issues.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] That move came in response to a string of "widespread consumer abuses and compliance breakdowns" at the company, particularly a fake account scandal , [ 99 ] and marked the first time the Fed has imposed a cap on the entire assets of a financial institution.

[ 98 ] Regarding labor markets, Yellen has been dubbed one of the Federal Reserve System's most successful chairpersons. During her term, the unemployment rate dropped from 6.7 percent to 4.1 percent, the lowest in 17 years.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] [ 90 ] For the first time since central bank creation, the economy added jobs throughout every month of any Fed chair's tenure.

[ 101 ] Yellen completed her time at the Fed with the lowest final unemployment rate of any Fed chair since William McChesney Martin in 1970.

[ 102 ] Under her leadership, the U.S. unemployment rate fell more than during any other chair's term in the post-World War II era , declining 2.6 percentage points.

[ 102 ] On the other hand, inflation remained below the Fed's annual two percent target, which led to the suggestion that the central bank could have done even more to bolster the economy without the risk of price increases.

[ 103 ] Yellen became the first person in U.S. central bank history to have served as a Federal Reserve chair (2014–2018), vice chair (2010–2014), district president (FRB of San Francisco, 2004–2010), Fed governor (1994–1997 and 2010–2018), and staff economist (1977–1978).

[ 104 ] After the Federal Reserve (2018–2020) [ edit ] Yellen delivers her farewell speech to Federal Reserve staff, February 1, 2018.

On February 2, 2018, the Brookings Institution announced that Yellen would join the think tank as a distinguished fellow in residence with the Economic Studies program, effective February 5, 2018.

[ 105 ] She's been affiliated with the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings.

[ 106 ] On July 31, 2018, the Hutchins Center announced Yellen, James H. Stock , and Louise Sheiner as co-chairs of the newly launched Productivity Measurement Initiative, aimed at improving the quality of economic statistics .

[ 107 ] In November 2020, Yellen left her position at Brookings after being selected as a nominee to serve as Treasury secretary.

[ 2 ] Within the think tank, she has been providing expertise and commentary on a range of economic issues, offering her perspective and analysis at Brookings panels, congressional testimony, lectures across the United States and abroad, and regularly serving as a commentator in the media.

[ 2 ] On June 27, 2017, Yellen stated that she did not expect another financial crisis "in our lifetime" because she thought banks were "much stronger" as a result of Federal Reserve oversight.

[ 108 ] In a December 10, 2018 conversation with Paul Krugman at the City University of New York , she warned of the possibility of another financial crisis by citing "gigantic holes in the system" after she departs from the Federal Reserve.

[ 109 ] On February 25, 2019, in an interview with Marketplace , when asked if she believed Trump has "a grasp of macroeconomic policy," Yellen replied, "No, I do not." [ 110 ] She expressed her doubts about the president's ability to articulate the Federal Reserve's explicit goals of "maximum employment and price stability" and emphasized his assertions that the Federal Reserve's goals include trade, which she explains are objectively false. She raised further concern over Trump's regard for the independence of the central bank  and voiced support for her successor, Jerome Powell.

[ 110 ] This interview marked a notable change in tone for Yellen, who traditionally handled her differences with the president in a neutral manner.

[ 111 ] On July 17, 2020, at the hearing of the House Select Oversight Subcommittee on the Coronavirus Crisis , which was set up by the House Committee on Oversight and Reform , former Federal Reserve chairs Bernanke and Yellen testified about the economic policy response to the negative impact of the coronavirus pandemic . They urged lawmakers to act aggressively with fiscal stimulus in three areas: extending the supplementary unemployment payments; providing additional financial assistance to hard-hit states and local governments; and investing in the medical response to the pandemic.

[ 112 ] She also expressed this commitment to stimulus in an op-ed for The New York Times with Jared Bernstein , a senior fellow at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities .

[ 113 ] In August 2020, it was reported that Yellen was among a handful of economists who briefed former vice president Joe Biden , the presumptive Democratic nominee for president, and his chosen running mate , Sen.

Kamala Harris , on economic issues.

[ 114 ] The meeting was one of the first times the Biden campaign announced its economic expert, whom few at the time predicted would take a presidential cabinet post.

[ 115 ] Paid corporate speaking [ edit ] Between 2018 and 2020, Yellen received $7.2 million in speaking fees for 50 speeches at various Wall Street , technology and consulting companies. This included $1 million for giving nine speeches to Citi and $800,000 from the hedge fund Citadel LLC , as well as other paid speeches with Wall Street companies Barclays , Goldman Sachs , UBS and Credit Suisse .

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] [ 118 ] [ 119 ] Paid speeches with technology companies included Google and Salesforce .

[ 116 ] With her return to government, she pledged to get official permission from the Office of Government Ethics (OGE) to participate in substantive issues involving such firms to avoid any conflict of interest.

[ 120 ] [ 119 ] Secretary of the Treasury (2021–2025) [ edit ] Nomination and confirmation [ edit ] President Joe Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris receive an economic briefing from Treasury Secretary Yellen in the Oval Office , January 29, 2021.

Following the 2020 presidential election , Yellen was routinely mentioned as a possible secretary of the treasury in the incoming Biden administration .

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] She edged out other top contenders to obtain the position, including Fed Board Gov.

Lael Brainard and Roger W. Ferguson Jr.

, a former central bank vice chairman.

[ 115 ] [ 123 ] On November 30, 2020, then-President-elect Biden announced he would nominate Yellen as Treasury Secretary in his cabinet .

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] In his remarks on the announcement, Biden lauded her as "one of the most important economic thinkers of our time" who "spent her career focused on employment and the dignity of work." [ 126 ] Despite being a highly respected figure across the political spectrum and expected to win confirmation easily, she was considered an unusual pick for the position because of her lack of experience in political maneuvering. Unlike her predecessors, she is viewed as more of an academic economist than a traditional politician used to horse-trading and dealmaking, qualities that could be critical to  achieving the goals of Biden's economic agenda in a deeply partisan Congress.

[ 127 ] [ 128 ] [ 129 ] All living former U.S. treasury secretaries, from George Shultz to Jack Lew , endorsed Yellen for the position in a bipartisan letter calling on the Senate to swiftly confirm her.

[ 130 ] The Senate Finance Committee unanimously approved Yellen's candidacy by a 26–0 vote on January 22, 2021.

[ 131 ] The full U.S. Senate confirmed her nomination with a vote of 84–15 (with one abstention , Marco Rubio , R-FL) [ 132 ] on January 25.

[ 133 ] With her oath of office administered by Vice President Harris the next day, [ 134 ] Yellen became the first female Secretary of the Treasury and the first person in American history to lead the three most powerful economic bodies in the federal government of the United States : the Treasury Department, the Federal Reserve, and the White House Council of Economic Advisers.

[ 3 ] [ 133 ] Only three other women within the G7 nations – France's Christine Lagarde , Canada's Chrystia Freeland and the United Kingdom's Rachel Reeves – have held positions analogous to Yellen's as Treasury Secretary.

[ 135 ] Yellen and Lynn Malerba signing currency during Yellen's time as Treasury Secretary also marked the first time two women signed U.S. currency.

[ 136 ] Tenure [ edit ] Proposed international tax reform [ edit ] Yellen meeting with German finance minister Olaf Scholz , July 2, 2021 A close-up of a United States five-dollar bill featuring Yellen's signature In April 2021, Yellen proposed a global minimum corporate tax rate that would prevent profit shifting by multinational companies for tax avoidance .

[ 137 ] In an accompanying written piece for The Wall Street Journal , she outlined the enormous benefits of the discussed tax system for the US economy as well as the global economy.

[ 138 ] On June 5, 2021, finance ministers from the Group of Seven (G7) agreed to reinstate a minimum worldwide corporate tax rate of at least 15% as part of a landmark deal to modernize the international tax system, while
France's Bruno Le Maire called it "a starting point" that could be increased in the future.

[ 139 ] A few days later, Treasury Secretary Yellen co-wrote an op-ed for The Washington Post with four of her international counterparts, describing the new agreement as "an historic opportunity to end the race to the bottom in corporate taxation, restoring government resources at a time when they are most needed." [ 140 ] The next month, financial leaders from the G20 countries came to an agreement on plans to put an end to global tax havens , force multinational corporations to pay an appropriate share of tax wherever they operate, and create a "more stable and fair international tax architecture." [ 141 ] In October 2021, more than 130 countries, accounting for more than 90% of global GDP , including several low-tax jurisdictions that had previously fought the pact, enforced through the OECD a landmark agreement to establish a global minimum tax rate of 15% for businesses worldwide. The projected gain from the deal, which was anticipated to take effect in 2023, would result in an increase of $150 billion in annual tax revenues. The treaty's implementation path remained uncertain because its ratification requires a two-thirds majority in the evenly divided U.S. Senate as well as passing domestic legislation in each of the signed countries.

[ 142 ] [ needs update ] Debt ceiling crisis [ edit ] On July 23, 2021, Yellen sent a letter to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and other congressional leaders in which she urged lawmakers to increase or suspend the nation's debt limit as soon as possible before it hit its statutory limit in August and the government would be unable to pay its bills. She warned Congress that failing to meet those financial obligations would cause "irreparable harm" to the U.S. economy and that the Treasury Department would take "extraordinary measures" to prevent the United States from suffering a government shutdown or even a debt default.

[ 143 ] On September 19, 2021, Yellen, in an op-ed for The Wall Street Journal , again called for an increase in the debt ceiling; otherwise, sometime in October, the Treasury expected to exhaust its cash reserves, which would trigger a financial crisis .

[ 144 ] After lawmakers adopted a short-term debt ceiling bill to raise the United States' borrowing limit through early December, she said that a longer-term measure should be provided to ensure certainty in government's solvency.

[ 145 ] In November, Yellen expressed her willingness to consider solutions to the debt crisis without GOP support if necessary, using a budget reconciliation as a viable alternative.

[ 146 ] She also supported the idea for Democrats to raise the debt limit high enough that it would not be reached until after the 2024 general elections while the party holds a majority in both houses of Congress, therefore preventing the issue from being weaponized for political reasons.

[ 147 ] In December 2021, President Biden signed a debt ceiling increase into law, preventing a U.S. default, a day after the Treasury's previously estimated deadline to address the issue. Congressional legislation designated to cover the government's financial commitments beyond the 2022 midterm elections was passed in a nearly party-line vote .

[ 148 ] In January 2023, after Republicans took control over the House, Yellen informed House Speaker Kevin McCarthy and new congressional leadership that the U.S. expected to hit the debt ceiling on January 19 and that the Treasury yet again would be forced to use "extraordinary measures" to prevent default, and it could last until June of that year. She repeated her call to "act in a timely manner to increase or suspend the debt limit." [ 149 ] Yellen rejected the GOP plan on government payments prioritization once "extraordinary measures" are exhausted, insisting that her department doesn't have the systems to do so and that proposal effectively means a default.

[ 150 ] Yellen with King Abdullah II of Jordan , July 20, 2021 On June 3, 2023, President Biden signed into law bipartisan congressional legislation that suspended the public debt limit throughout his first term in office, therefore ending the ongoing debt-ceiling crisis . It came as a compromise on fiscal spending between the White House and House Republicans two days before the United States was estimated to reach the debt ceiling and subsequently could no longer meet its own financial obligations.

[ 151 ] In September 2023, Yellen said she was not worried about the $33 trillion federal government debt .

[ 152 ] Sanctions against Russia and oil price cap [ edit ] In November 2021, Yellen and senior Treasury personnel were tasked with crafting a sanctions strategy that would maximize the costs inflicted on Russia's economy while limiting, if possible,
the expected negative impact on the United States and its allies if a potential aggression began.

[ 153 ] The Treasury Department worked closely across government agencies and with US allies abroad to impose unprecedented international sanctions in response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022.

[ 153 ] Yellen was a key proponent of a price cap on Russian oil , a plan designed to deprive the Kremlin of funding for Russia's war in Ukraine while reducing an inflation surge by preserving the global oil supply.

[ 154 ] On December 2, 2022,  following months of lobbying and negotiations by the United States, the emerging alliance of the G7 nations, the European Union, and Australia agreed to cap the price of Russian oil at $60 per barrel as an upper limit, with regular reviews to check that the ceiling stays at least 5 percent below average market prices.

[ 155 ] Digital Assets Regulation [ edit ] On April 7, 2022, at American University 's Kogod School of Business Center for Innovation, Yellen addressed for the first time the growing impact of digital assets on the American economy. Yellen outlined policy objectives and lessons that apply to the navigation of emerging technologies, which include "first, the U.S. financial system benefits from responsible innovation; second, it's often society's vulnerable who suffer most in an economic crisis when regulation is not moving at the same pace as innovation; third, regulation should focus on activities and risk, not technology; fourth, sovereign money is the core of a functioning financial system; and fifth, it'll take thoughtful public and private dialogue between various groups to move forward." [ 156 ] Yellen with South African Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana in November 2022 Yellen also announced possible plans for a government version of a stablecoin ; the administration is studying the possibility of issuing a central bank digital currency (CBDC) or digital dollar while taking into consideration the impact of a CBDC on monetary policy, national security, and international trade, as well as its utility for consumers. Solving such problems is an "engineering challenge that would require years of development, not months," she said.

[ 157 ] Friendshoring of supply chains [ edit ] In a speech delivered at the Atlantic Council on April 13, 2022, Yellen advised against the supply chain risks posed by reliance on commodities from countries that aligned with authoritarian regimes like Russia or China and favored friendshoring strategy, an approach that limits supply chain networks to allies and partner countries. She said that any moves from the other nations to undermine collective international effort to make Russia accountable for its aggression would draw the ire of the U.S. and its allies.

[ 158 ] Yellen also called for the modernization of international financial institutions so that they could meet the world's 21st-century challenges, invoking precedent of the Bretton Woods Conference , which was held during the Second World War to discuss post-war economic order .

[ 159 ] In December 2022, Yellen wrote an essay for Project Syndicate in which she singled out the key risks for the U.S. economy that may be mitigated with the implementation of friendshoring policies. Those risks include: "first, over-concentration of critical goods in any particular market may result in vulnerability in supply chains that hurt workers and customers; second, the need to protect from geopolitical and security risks emanating from hostile states; and third, the need to shift away from supply chains that relied on violations of core human rights , such as the use of forced labor in producing goods for import." [ 160 ] Comments on Roe v. Wade overturning [ edit ] On May 10, 2022, during a Senate Banking Committee hearing, Yellen made comments on the economic consequences of Roe v. Wade overturning after a leaked draft majority opinion in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization showed the Supreme Court was poised to overrule its previous decisions that legalized abortion in the United States . Sen.

Bob Menendez (D-NJ) asked what reversing the landmark ruling would mean economically for the United States; Yellen responded, "I believe that eliminating the right of women to make decisions about when and whether to have children would have very damaging effects on the economy and would set women back decades." She added that keeping women from accessing abortions "increases their odds of living in poverty or need for public assistance." Sen.

Tim Scott (R-SC) disagreed with her assertion and said, "I think finding a way to have a debate around abortion in a meeting for the economic stability of our country is harsh." She replied, "This is not harsh. This is the truth." [ 161 ] Following that heated exchange, Senator Scott penned an op-ed for The Washington Post in which he called Yellen's claim "simply false" and compared her arguments to those of Margaret Sanger in support of eugenics .

[ 162 ] A number of prominent conservative media outlets and public figures alike similarly interpreted her comments on women's reproductive rights , responding with sharp criticism.

[ 163 ] Internal Revenue Service reforms [ edit ] After the passage of the Inflation Reduction Act in August 2022, Yellen directed the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to use $80 billion in additional funding over a decade to clear backlogs, improve taxpayer services, update technology, and hire thousands of new employees.

[ 164 ] In June 2023, the Fiscal Responsibility Act , which was passed to reach a bipartisan agreement on debt ceiling, reallocated more than a quarter of the funding previously approved for IRS modernization to other budgetary areas. Despite that, Yellen assured that the agency still possesses the resources it needs in the near term to enhance service and ramp up enforcement. Furthermore, she said that the Treasury Department would continue to advocate for additional funds to make service improvements and help ensure that high-end taxpayers don't avoid paying their fair share.

[ 165 ] Visit to Ukraine [ edit ] Yellen with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy , February 27, 2023 Yellen laying flowers in memory of fallen Ukrainian soldiers at the Saint Michael's Square , February 27, 2023 On February 27, 2023, Yellen made a surprise visit to Kyiv, in which she reaffirmed ongoing U.S. economic support for Ukraine in its struggle against Russia's invasion, including nearly $50 billion in security, financial, and humanitarian aid the federal government has provided over the past year as Ukraine's largest bilateral donor. She met with Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy and the country's prime minister, Denys Shmyhal , to discuss the rollout of about $1.25 billion in budget relief, the first of a $10 billion package of civilian assistance for things like schools, hospitals, and emergency services , among others.

[ 166 ] Coinciding with her visit, Yellen wrote an op-ed for The New York Times in which she highlighted the importance of America's support and repeated President Biden's message that Washington will stand with the Ukrainian people for as long as it takes. She said, "We cannot allow Ukraine to lose the war for economic reasons when it has shown an ability to succeed on the battlefield." [ 167 ] Banking crisis [ edit ] On March 12, 2023, amidst the banking crisis , Yellen made an appearance on CBS ' Face the Nation and affirmed that financial regulators closely monitored the state of the banking system to make sure it remained safe and well-capitalized. Addressing the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank , which marked the second-largest bank failure in American history at the time, she said she had been working with bank regulators to "design appropriate policies" to tackle the issue, though  declining to provide further details. She stressed that the possibility of a bailout was off the table.

[ 168 ] Despite her statement, on the same day, Yellen approved actions enabling the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to complete its resolution of Silicon Valley Bank in a manner that fully protects all depositors by announcing a systemic risk exception, with similar provisions being made for Signature Bank , another failed lender.

[ 169 ] These extraordinary measures were taken to ensure confidence in the U.S. banking system and prevent spreading of a bank run .

[ 170 ] On March 21, Yellen delivered a speech to an American Bankers Association (ABA) summit in which she defended the forceful actions taken by regulators to avert a sweeping banking crisis and pledged resolute Biden administration support for lenders in need, regardless of their respective sizes. She said, "Our intervention was necessary to protect the broader U.S. banking system," and it was "not focused on aiding specific banks or classes of banks." Yellen went on to assure that "similar actions could be warranted if smaller institutions suffer deposit runs that pose the risk of contagion." [ 171 ] Nevertheless, Yellen stated in her testimony before the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Financial Services and General Government the following day that the FDIC was not considering providing "blanket insurance or guarantees of deposits." She said uninsured bank deposits beyond the law-established $250,000 limit could be protected only if a failed bank was deemed to pose a systemic risk to the financial system, and that determination would occur only on a case-by-case basis by the regulators.

[ 172 ] On April 21, Yellen announced a proposal by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) for a new procedure to designate nonbank financial companies as systemically important financial institutions , subjecting them to Federal Reserve supervision. It marked an effective reversal of previous guidance, which was issued in 2019 under the Trump administration and, according to Yellen, "created inappropriate hurdles as part of the designation process." She said such a designation process "could take six years to complete, which could prevent the council from acting to address an emerging risk to financial stability before it's too late." The revised guidance relied on a quantitative and qualitative analysis under which the council determined whether "material financial distress at the company or the company's activities could pose a threat to U.S. financial stability" and allowed for ample engagement between regulators and the company under review.

[ 173 ] On May 18, the Bank Policy Institute (BPI) convened a meeting of more than two dozen bank CEOs to discuss the current state of the economy. Citing sources familiar with the matter, CNN Business reported on Yellen's  remarks that more bank mergers may be necessary to overcome the sector's crisis.

[ 174 ] Economic approach to China [ edit ] Yellen with US President Joe Biden and Chinese President Xi Jinping at the Filoli Estate in Woodside, California , November 15, 2023 Yellen meets Premier Li Qiang.

In a speech delivered at Johns Hopkins University 's School of Advanced International Studies on April 20, 2023, Yellen laid out three principal objectives of the Biden administration's economic approach toward China. Those principles are: first, the paramount importance of securing American national security interests as well as protecting human rights; second, seeking healthy and fair economic competition with China based on international rules; and third, aiming to engage on major global challenges like easing the debt burden of the developing world and climate change .

[ 175 ] Though she emphasized that national security would always take priority if it collided with economics, her address ought to be interpreted as an olive branch to Beijing instead of the confrontation that has for a long time prevailed in relations between the two nations . Yellen's speech attempted to revive dialogue, at least on economic matters, as she made clear her desire to visit China as soon as possible to get the countries' previously pragmatic approach to each other back on track. However, its ultimate success is not at all obvious.

[ 176 ] Between July 6–9, Yellen visited China, the first trip to the country by a U.S. Treasury secretary in four years and her first since taking office. She began her visit by holding informal talks with the country's former vice premier Liu He , and People's Bank of China (PBC) governor Yi Gang about the state of their domestic economies, as well as the global outlook, in a bid to reopen communication lines and find areas of common economic ground between the two nations.

[ 177 ] Yellen then met with China's newly appointed economic team, including Premier Li Qiang , Vice Premier He Lifeng , finance minister Liu Kun , and Chinese Communist Party (CCP) central bank chief Pan Gongsheng . During those bilateral meetings, she reaffirmed that the US national security restrictions on Chinese investment were intended to be narrowly focused and not have broad effects on the country's economy .

[ 178 ] Yellen also expressed concerns about Chinese economic policies and went on to criticize the country's authorities for their treatment of foreign, particularly American, companies; she stated, "We seek healthy economic competition that is not winner-take-all but that, with a fair set of rules, can benefit both countries over time." [ 179 ] Yellen with Chinese Finance Minister Lan Fo'an in Beijing, 7 April 2024 Overall, Yellen's visit was part of a broader push by the Biden administration to rebuild bridges between the two countries and open more lines of high-level communication with America's main geopolitical rival, in particular with China's new economic leaders. In a press conference capping her four-day trip to Beijing, Yellen described it as a mission to revive engagement between the two largest economies and said she believes it has brought US-China ties closer to a "surer footing." [ 180 ] "We certainly have improved communication," Yellen said regarding China in an October interview with Sky News. The U.S. established a set of principles to govern Sino-American relations, Yellen said. These principles  are: 1. The U.S. will always protect its national security and call out human rights abuses, 2. The U.S. is not seeking to decouple economically from China, and 3. The U.S. and China need to cooperate on a variety of global challenges, including climate change and debt relief.

[ 181 ] Comments on Israel When asked about the potential economic implications of Israel's war on Gaza , Yellen told Sky News in an October 2023 interview, "I think it's too early to speculate on whether or not there will be significant consequences. I think, importantly, it depends on whether the hostilities extend beyond Israel and Gaza, and that's certainly an outcome we would like to avoid." [ 181 ] Yellen maintained that the U.S. can manage funding wars in both Israel and Ukraine , saying, "America can certainly afford to stand with Israel and to support Israel's military needs and we also can and must support Ukraine in its struggle against Russia." [ 181 ] She warned Iran that nothing is "off the table" for sanctions if Tehran is linked to the Hamas-led attack on Israel.

[ 182 ] Economic philosophy [ edit ] Yellen is widely considered to be a " dove " on monetary policy (i.e., more concerned with unemployment than with inflation) and, as such, generally favors lower rather than higher Federal Reserve interest rates.

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] [ 185 ] She was overall in favor of more stringent financial regulation to lessen systemic risks brought on by flaws in the financial system.

[ 186 ] Yellen was arguably the most liberal Federal Reserve leader since Marriner S. Eccles , who was appointed by President Franklin D. Roosevelt amidst the Great Depression in 1934.

[ 7 ] On fiscal policy , publications frequently refer to her as "sort of" a deficit hawk .

[ 185 ] [ 187 ] She expressed concern about the United States fiscal path prior to the COVID-19 recession , particularly about the national debt ; in 2018, she said, "If I had a magic wand, I would raise taxes and cut retirement spending." [ 185 ] The following year, she again suggested that she favored both raising revenue and making changes to the Medicare , Medicaid , and Social Security programs to control spending.

[ 185 ] In September 2021, at a House Financial Services Committee hearing, Yellen lent support to efforts for the complete removal of the debt ceiling, arguing that the borrowing cap is "very destructive" and poses an unnecessary threat to the American economy.

[ 188 ] In January 2019, Yellen was among the 45 original signers of the Economists' Statement on Carbon Dividends , which was eventually signed by over 3,500 prominent American economists promoting a carbon dividends framework for the U.S. policy on climate change .

[ 189 ] In October 2020, the Group of Thirty 's Steering Committee Working Group on Climate Change and Finance, which Yellen co-chaired with Mark Carney , prepared a report that developed a robust and inclusive strategy to amplify and mainstream the global transition to a net-zero emissions economy.

[ 190 ] The study calls upon governments, businesses, and financial institutions to assess climate risks and supports a phase-in of carbon pricing to accelerate a shift to carbon neutrality .

[ 191 ] Yellen is a Keynesian economist and has been described as a "Keynesian to her fingertips".

[ 192 ] In April 1999, Yellen discussed her views on the application of Keynesian economics to policymaking at the Yale economics department reunion. She stated that while most economists "appreciate the value of markets and incentives," Yalies "can recognize when they are not operating correctly and have higher concern for policies to remedy them." [ 193 ] During the 2008 financial crisis , she "warned against an over-hasty removal of stimulus," and "believes the state has a duty to tackle poverty and inequality." [ 194 ] When her appointment as treasury secretary was announced, Yellen was viewed by Wall Street as a "Treasury secretary who will push hard for expansionary policies aimed at boosting growth, profits and share prices," although the ability of Yellen to push through her preferred fiscal policies was seen as likely to be constrained by congressional gridlock .

[ 194 ] Honors and awards [ edit ] Yellen has received numerous honors in recognition of her career in academia and politics. These include: Academic [ edit ] Chancellor, visitor, governor, rector, and fellowships Location Date Organization Position New York 1986–1987 John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation Guggenheim Fellowship [ 195 ] Connecticut 2000–2006 Yale Corporation Alumni Fellow [ 196 ] California 2003–2004 Western Economic Association International President [ 197 ] Tennessee 2004–2005 American Economic Association Vice President [ 198 ] Served with Angus Deaton California 2013–present University of California, Berkeley Berkeley Fellow [ 199 ] Tennessee 2020–2021 American Economic Association President [ 200 ] Honorary degrees Location Date School Degree Gave Commencement Address Rhode Island May 25, 1998 Brown University Doctor of Laws (LL.D.) [ 201 ] Yes [ 202 ] New York May 27, 2000 Bard College Doctor of Humane Letters (DHL) [ 203 ] No New York May 21, 2014 New York University Doctor of Commercial Science (DCS) [ 204 ] Yes [ 205 ] England May 15, 2015 London School of Economics Doctor of Science (DSc) [ 206 ] No Connecticut May 15, 2015 Yale University Doctor of Social Science (DSSc) [ 207 ] No England November 19, 2015 University of Warwick Doctor of Laws (LL.D.) [ 208 ] No Maryland December 19, 2016 University of Baltimore Doctor of Laws (LL.D.) [ 209 ] Yes [ 210 ] Israel June 5, 2019 Tel Aviv University Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) [ 211 ] No Michigan December 15, 2019 University of Michigan Doctor of Laws (LL.D.) [ 212 ] No Pennsylvania May 17, 2021 University of Pennsylvania Doctor of Laws (LL.D.) [ 213 ] No Germany May 21, 2024 Frankfurt School of Finance & Management Doctor of Economics (Dr. rer. pol. h. c.) [ 214 ] No This list is incomplete ; you can help by adding missing items .

( May 2021 ) Memberships and fellowships [ edit ] Location Date Organization Position Massachusetts 1999–2010 National Bureau of Economic Research Research Associate (Monetary Economics) [ 215 ] Massachusetts 2001–present American Academy of Arts and Sciences Member [ 216 ] New York 2002–2010 Economists for Peace and Security Trustee [ 217 ] New York 2005–present Council on Foreign Relations Member [ 25 ] District of Columbia 2009–present Group of Thirty Senior Member [ 218 ] Tennessee 2012–present American Economic Association Distinguished Fellow [ 219 ] Connecticut 2014–present Econometric Society Fellow [ 220 ] District of Columbia 2010–present National Association for Business Economics NABE Fellow [ 221 ] England 2016–present British Academy Honorary Fellow [ 222 ] This list is incomplete ; you can help by adding missing items .

( February 2021 ) Awards [ edit ] Location Date Organisation Award Connecticut May 26, 1997 Yale Graduate School of Arts and Sciences Wilbur Cross Medal [ 223 ] District of Columbia October 11, 2010 National Association for Business Economics Adam Smith Award [ 224 ] New York January 22, 2015 Hobart and William Smith Colleges Elizabeth Blackwell Award [ 225 ] Massachusetts May 27, 2016 Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study Radcliffe Medal [ 226 ] Rhode Island May 5, 2017 Brown University The President's Medal [ 227 ] Illinois November 7, 2017 Institute of Government and Public Affairs The Paul H. Douglas Award for Ethics in Government [ 228 ] Awarded with Ben Bernanke California February 2, 2019 University of California, Santa Cruz The Foundation Medal [ 229 ] Connecticut March 20, 2019 Chief Executive Leadership Institute The Legend in Leadership Award [ 230 ] Massachusetts September 21, 2019 Brandeis International Business School Dean's Medal [ 231 ] Missouri October 10, 2019 Truman Library Institute Truman Medal for Economic Policy [ 232 ] District of Columbia March 30, 2023 National Association for Business Economics The Paul A. Volcker Lifetime Achievement Award for Economic Policy This list is incomplete ; you can help by adding missing items .

( February 2021 ) Other recognition [ edit ] In March 2018, Charles D. Ellis endowed The Janet L. Yellen Chair at the Yale School of Management , which was named after her. Professor Andrew Metrick has been invested as the inaugural Janet L. Yellen Professor of Finance and Management at the School.

[ 233 ] In December 2018, Federal Reserve Board presented an annual Janet L. Yellen Award for Excellence in Community Development to recognize the exemplary work of Federal Reserve System staff, intended to honor former chair Yellen's commitment to public service.

[ 234 ] Ariel Cisneros of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City has been named the first recipient of the newly created award.

[ 235 ] Yellen has been named one of the 100 most influential people in the world by Time magazine four times. This occurred in the years 2014, [ 236 ] 2015, [ 237 ] 2017, [ 238 ] and 2023.

[ 239 ] Additionally, she was named a runner-up for Time Person of the Year in 2022.

[ 240 ] Yellen has been ranked on multiple occasions in Forbes magazine's list of the world's 100 most powerful women . She was named the second-most powerful woman in the world in 2014.

[ 241 ] Forbes also ranked her several times on its list of the world's most powerful people . She was named the sixth-most powerful person in the world in 2014 and 2016.

[ 242 ] Personal life [ edit ] Yellen is married to George Akerlof , an economist who is a university professor at the McCourt School of Public Policy at Georgetown University and Koshland Professor of Economics Emeritus at the University of California, Berkeley , as well as a 2001 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences laureate.

[ 22 ] [ 243 ] The couple met in the fall of 1977, became engaged by that December, and married in June 1978, less than a year after meeting.

[ 244 ] [ 21 ] Their son, Robert Akerlof (born 1981), is a fellow economist. He received a bachelor's summa cum laude in economics and mathematics from Yale University and earned his Ph.D. in economics from Harvard University, where he was a Presidential Scholar. Robert is an associate professor of economics at the University of Warwick .

[ 245 ] Yellen and George Akerlof have often collaborated on research, including topics such as poverty, unemployment and a paper on the costs of out-of-wedlock childbearing. One of their most discussed papers at Berkeley, on why lower wages sometimes lead to lower employment, came from the personal experience of hiring a nanny for the first time.

[ 244 ] Yellen says Akerlof has been her biggest intellectual influence.

[ 244 ] Both frequently state that their lone disagreement is that she is a bit more supportive of free trade than he is.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Yellen has an estimated net worth of $20 million, accrued from stock holdings, speaking engagements, and various government and academic positions.

[ 246 ] Upon taking office as U.S. Treasury Secretary, she divested her shares including those in Pfizer , ConocoPhillips , and AT&T , among others.

[ 247 ] Yellen inherited from her mother a collection of postage stamps worth between $15,000 and $50,000.

[ 248 ] [ 117 ] She doesn't collect them on her own.

[ 249 ] In popular culture [ edit ] "Who's Yellen Now?" is a song by Dessa , a member of the indie hip-hop collective Doomtree and contributor to The Hamilton Mixtape .

Marketplace commissioned the song after then-President-elect Biden announced his intention to nominate Yellen as the nation's first female Treasury Secretary and joked that Lin-Manuel Miranda should write a Hamiltonesque musical about her.

[ 250 ] In addition, The Late Show with Stephen Colbert premiered a parody of Hamilton's opening song about Yellen.

[ 251 ] On NBC 's sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live (SNL), Yellen was parodied by SNL cast member Kate McKinnon in 2021.

[ 252 ] Selected works [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Akerlof, George A.; Yellen, Janet L., eds. (October 31, 1986).

Efficiency Wage Models of the Labor Market . Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511559594 .

ISBN 978-0-521-31284-4 .

Blinder, Alan S.; Yellen, Janet L. (2001).

The Fabulous Decade: Macroeconomic Lessons from the 1990s . New York: The Century Foundation Press.

ISBN 0-87078-467-6 .

OCLC 47018413 .

Articles [ edit ] Adams, William James; Yellen, Janet L. (August 1976). "Commodity Bundling and the Burden of Monopoly".

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

90 (3): 475– 498.

doi : 10.2307/1886045 .

JSTOR 1886045 .

Akerlof, George A.; Yellen, J. L. (January 1985). "A Near-Rational Model of the Business Cycle, with Wage and Price Inertia".

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

100 : 823– 838.

doi : 10.1093/qje/100.Supplement.823 .

ISSN 0033-5533 .

Akerlof, George A.; Yellen, Janet L. (May 1990). "The Fair Wage-Effort Hypothesis and Unemployment".

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

105 (2): 255– 283.

doi : 10.2307/2937787 .

JSTOR 2937787 .

See also [ edit ] List of female United States Cabinet members List of Jewish United States Cabinet members List of people who have held multiple United States Cabinet-level positions References [ edit ] ^ a b Solomon, Brian (January 6, 2014).

"She's Confirmed: Janet Yellen Is First Woman Federal Reserve Chair" .

Forbes .

ISSN 0015-6914 .

Archived from the original on December 25, 2019 . Retrieved January 7, 2014 .

^ a b c "Janet Yellen, Brookings scholar and former Federal Reserve Board Chair, picked to be U.S. Treasury Secretary" (Press release). Washington, D.C.: Brookings. November 30, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 15, 2021 . Retrieved December 1, 2020 .

^ a b "Janet L. Yellen Sworn In As 78th Secretary of the United States Department of the Treasury" (Press release). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Treasury. January 26, 2021.

Archived from the original on January 27, 2021 . Retrieved January 28, 2021 .

^ "Dr. Janet L. Yellen, Chair – Council of Economic Advisers" .

clintonwhitehouse2.archives.gov . August 3, 1999.

Archived from the original on April 7, 2021 . Retrieved January 21, 2001 .

^ Kornbluh, Jacob (January 18, 2021).

"Enough for a minyan: A Jewish Who's Who of Biden's Cabinet-to-Be" .

The Forward .

ISSN 1051-340X .

Archived from the original on April 15, 2022 . Retrieved January 19, 2021 .

^ "It's official: Bay Ridge's Janet Yellen confirmed as treasury secretary" .

Brooklyn Eagle . January 28, 2021.

Archived from the original on January 29, 2021 . Retrieved January 29, 2021 .

^ a b Lemann, Nicholas (July 21, 2014).

"The Hand on the Lever" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2014 . Retrieved July 22, 2014 .

^ a b c Kolhatkar, Sheelah; Philips, Matthew (September 20, 2013).

"Who Is Janet Yellen? A Look at the Front-Runner for the Next Fed Chairman" .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on April 13, 2016 . Retrieved September 21, 2013 .

^ Deutch, Gabby (May 16, 2022).

"Speaking at Warsaw Jewish museum, Yellen urges 'fierce resistance' to Putin" .

Jewish Insider .

Archived from the original on May 18, 2022 . Retrieved May 17, 2022 .

^ a b c Yee, Vivian (October 9, 2013).

"A Glimpse of Yellen's Career, Chronicled in Her High School Newspaper" .

cityroom.blogs.nytimes.com .

Archived from the original on June 25, 2021 . Retrieved October 10, 2013 .

^ Appelbaum, Binyamin (October 9, 2013).

"Yellen's Exclusive Interview, With Yellen" .

economix.blogs.nytimes.com .

Archived from the original on November 19, 2021 . Retrieved October 10, 2013 .

^ Grace, Stephanie (January–February 2014).

"Banker to the Nation" .

Brown Alumni Magazine .

Archived from the original on May 24, 2015 . Retrieved May 23, 2015 .

^ Reddy, Sudeep; Ballhaus, Rebecca (October 9, 2013).

"Janet Yellen's Short and Storied Newspaper Career" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 1042-9840 .

Archived from the original on November 13, 2022 . Retrieved October 10, 2013 .

^ Walker, Jack (January 25, 2021).

"Janet Yellen '67 confirmed to serve as first female Treasury Secretary" .

The Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on January 26, 2021 . Retrieved May 3, 2021 .

^ Sisgoreo, Daniel (October 10, 2013).

"Yellen picked as Fed's first female chair" .

Yale Alumni Magazine .

Archived from the original on March 24, 2015 . Retrieved May 22, 2014 .

^ Yellen, Janet.

"Employment, Output and Capital Accumulation in an Open Economy: A Disequilibrium Approach" .

ProQuest 288017476 .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2023 . Retrieved January 23, 2023 .

^ a b Miller, Rich (October 31, 2013).

"Yalies Yellen-Hamada Put Tobin Twist Theory to Work in QE" .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on November 17, 2015 . Retrieved November 1, 2013 .

^ a b c d e f g Mui, Yian (February 2, 2014).

"New Fed Chief Janet Yellen lets a long career of breaking barriers speak for itself" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on December 23, 2015 . Retrieved February 3, 2014 .

^ "Graduate School Alumna Janet Yellen Takes Charge of the Federal Reserve" .

gsas.yale.edu . February 3, 2014.

Archived from the original on August 2, 2015 . Retrieved February 4, 2014 .

^ Coronell Uribe, Raquel; Griffin, Kelsey J. (December 7, 2021).

"President-elect Joe Biden Nominates Harvard Affiliates to Top Executive Positions" .

The Crimson . Harvard University.

Archived from the original on October 26, 2021 . Retrieved December 8, 2020 .

^ a b c d Thompson, Marilyn W.

; Spicer, Jonathan (September 29, 2013).

"A Fed love story: Janet Yellen meets her match" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on November 25, 2020 . Retrieved September 30, 2013 .

^ a b c Akerlof, George (October 10, 2001).

"George A. Akerlof Biographical" .

nobelprize.org .

Archived from the original on November 24, 2020 . Retrieved October 11, 2001 .

^ a b "Senate confirms Yellen as first woman to lead Federal Reserve Bank" .

news.berkeley.edu . January 6, 2014.

Archived from the original on February 3, 2019 . Retrieved January 7, 2014 .

^ a b "Janet Yellen Resume" (PDF) .

haas.berkeley.edu . Archived from the original (PDF) on August 24, 2007 . Retrieved June 1, 2003 .

^ a b c d e "Nomination of Janet L. Yellen" (PDF) .

GovInfo . pp.

39– 41.

Archived (PDF) from the original on November 23, 2020 . Retrieved August 29, 2020 .

^ Gilmore, Janet (June 9, 1999).

"Janet Yellen, Clinton's chief economist, announces plans to return to teaching at UC Berkeley" (Press release). Berkeley, California: University of California, Berkeley.

Archived from the original on August 18, 2000 . Retrieved February 23, 2017 .

^ "Professor Janet Yellen Appointed President & CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco" (Press release). Berkeley, California: University of California, Berkeley. April 12, 2004.

Archived from the original on April 15, 2004 . Retrieved April 13, 2004 .

^ Friedman, Lisa (May 1, 2025).

"Janet Yellen joins Angeleno Group to boost climate investment" .

Axios . Retrieved May 5, 2025 .

^ a b Matthews, Dylan (October 13, 2013).

"Seventeen academic papers of Janet Yellen's that you need to read" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on September 19, 2019 . Retrieved October 14, 2013 .

^ McGrane, Victoria (October 9, 2013).

"A Look at Yellen's Research: Unemployment, Advertising and Out-of-Wedlock Births" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 1042-9840 .

Archived from the original on December 1, 2021 . Retrieved October 10, 2013 .

^ a b Rosenberg, Alex (October 9, 2013).

"Yellen's No. 1 theory: The badly paid don't work hard" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on May 26, 2021 . Retrieved October 10, 2013 .

^ Akerlof, George; Yellen, Janet (September 1, 1996).

"New mothers, not married: Technology shock, the demise of shotgun marriage, and the increase in out-of-wedlock births" .

brookings.edu .

Archived from the original on March 27, 2017 . Retrieved January 15, 2001 .

^ Akerlof, George; Yellen, Janet (August 1, 1996).

"An analysis of out-of-wedlock births in the United States" .

brookings.edu .

Archived from the original on November 14, 2016 . Retrieved January 15, 2001 .

^ a b Chandler, Clay (April 23, 1994).

"Blinder, Yellen Named by Clinton to Fed Board" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on December 21, 2021 . Retrieved January 15, 2001 .

^ Risen, James (April 23, 1994).

"Clinton Names 2 Economists to Fed Board" .

Los Angeles Times .

ISSN 2165-1736 .

Archived from the original on December 29, 2020 . Retrieved January 15, 2001 .

^ Clinton, Bill (April 22, 1994).

Statement on Nominations for the Federal Reserve Board (Speech). Nominations for the Federal Reserve Board. Washington, D.C.: The American Presidency Project.

Archived from the original on January 22, 2022 . Retrieved January 15, 2001 .

^ Bradsher, Keith (July 23, 1994).

"Fed Nominee Gives Views on Rates" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on March 1, 2021 . Retrieved January 15, 2001 .

^ a b Bradsher, Keith (August 12, 1994).

"Fed Nominee Is Confirmed By Senate" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on May 26, 2015 . Retrieved January 15, 2001 .

^ "Vote Summary – Question: On the Nomination (Janet L. Yellen)" . U.S. Senate Roll Call Votes 103rd Congress – 2nd Session. August 11, 1994.

Archived from the original on January 16, 2003.

^ Johnson, Simon (September 26, 2013).

"Economic Statecraft, Women and the Fed" .

economix.blogs.nytimes.com .

Archived from the original on December 23, 2021 . Retrieved September 27, 2013 .

^ Appelbaum, Binyamin (October 9, 2013).

"Yellen's Path From Liberal Theorist to Fed Voice for Jobs" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on May 26, 2021 . Retrieved October 10, 2013 .

^ "Yellen appointed to economic council" .

United Press International . December 20, 1996.

Archived from the original on December 20, 2021 . Retrieved January 15, 2001 .

^ a b Foust, Dean (March 3, 1997).

"Janet Yellen: An Economist Who Explains It All" .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on October 12, 2022 . Retrieved January 15, 2001 .

^ "PN84 – Janet L. Yellen – Executive Office of the President" . U.S. Senate 105th Congress – 1st Session. February 13, 1997.

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020.

^ Uchitelle, Louis (January 7, 1997).

"An Appointment That Draws No Fire" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on May 12, 2015 . Retrieved January 15, 2001 .

^ "Explaining Trends In The Gender Wage Gap" .

clintonwhitehouse2.archives.gov . June 10, 1998.

Archived from the original on September 26, 2020 . Retrieved January 15, 2001 .

^ Peterson, Jonathan (June 9, 1999).

"Yellen to Leave Economic Post, Return to UC Berkeley Faculty" .

Los Angeles Times .

ISSN 2165-1736 .

Archived from the original on December 23, 2020 . Retrieved January 15, 2001 .

^ Stevenson, Richard W. (June 9, 1999).

"Choice of a Successor to Yellen Is Called Near at White House" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on September 12, 2017 . Retrieved January 15, 2001 .

^ a b "Former Fed governor to head S.F. branch" .

NBC News . Reuters. April 12, 2004.

Archived from the original on December 9, 2022 . Retrieved April 13, 2004 .

^ "Insight: Yellen feared housing bust but did not raise public alarm" .

Reuters . October 30, 2013.

Archived from the original on January 14, 2017 . Retrieved October 31, 2013 .

^ Appelbaum, Binyamin (August 13, 2013).

"Divining the Regulatory Goals of Fed Rivals" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on October 22, 2019 . Retrieved August 14, 2013 .

^ Paletta, Damian (August 12, 2013).

"Fed's Yellen Says Stance on Banks Hardened" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 1042-9840 .

Archived from the original on November 29, 2021 . Retrieved August 13, 2013 .

^ Robb, Greg (June 5, 2009).

"Fed should pop next housing bubble, Yellen says" .

MarketWatch .

Archived from the original on June 7, 2009 . Retrieved June 6, 2009 .

^ Hilsenrath, Jon; Reddy, Sudeep; Wessel, David (July 9, 2009).

"White House Ponders Bernanke's Future" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 1042-9840 .

Archived from the original on March 22, 2016 . Retrieved July 10, 2009 .

^ Isidore, Chris (March 12, 2010).

"Yellen in line for Fed No. 2" .

CNN Business .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2021 . Retrieved March 12, 2010 .

^ a b c "Janet L. Yellen and Sarah Bloom Raskin formally sworn in as members of the Board of Governors" (Press release). Washington, D.C.: Federal Reserve. October 4, 2010.

Archived from the original on February 21, 2018 . Retrieved October 4, 2012 .

^ Reddy, Sudeep (April 29, 2010).

"Obama Nominates Yellen, Raskin, Diamond to Fed Board" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 1042-9840 .

Archived from the original on December 1, 2021 . Retrieved April 30, 2010 .

^ Lanman, Scott (July 28, 2010).

"Yellen, Diamond, Raskin Win Panel's Approval for Fed" .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on March 28, 2023 . Retrieved July 29, 2010 .

^ a b Chan, Sewell (July 29, 2010).

"Within the Fed, Worries of Deflation" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on September 20, 2019 . Retrieved July 30, 2010 .

^ Chan, Sewell (September 30, 2010).

"Two Are Confirmed for Fed's Board" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on September 30, 2010 . Retrieved October 1, 2010 .

^ "PN1728 – Janet L. Yellen – Federal Reserve System" . U.S. Senate 111th Congress – 1st Session. September 29, 2010.

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020.

^ "PN1729 – Janet L. Yellen – Federal Reserve System" . U.S. Senate 111th Congress – 1st Session. September 29, 2010.

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020.

^ a b Quester, Rachel (October 9, 2013).

"What To Call The Most Powerful Central Banker In The World" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on August 5, 2015 . Retrieved October 10, 2013 .

^ a b Felsenthal, Mark (August 5, 2012).

"Soft-spoken Yellen wields outsize influence as Fed's No. 2" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on February 22, 2021 . Retrieved August 6, 2012 .

^ Irwin, Neil; Mui, Ylan Q. (August 16, 2013).

"Janet Yellen called the housing bust and has been mostly right on jobs. Does she have what it takes to lead the Fed" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2020 . Retrieved August 17, 2013 .

^ a b Appelbaum, Binyamin (April 24, 2013).

"Possible Fed Successor Has Admirers and Foes" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on October 14, 2019 . Retrieved April 25, 2013 .

^ Hilsenrath, Jon; Izzo, Phil (July 18, 2013).

"Yellen Seen as Front-Runner for Top Fed Post" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 1042-9840 .

Archived from the original on May 16, 2015 . Retrieved July 19, 2013 .

^ Davidson, Paul (July 28, 2013).

"Economists: Yellen likely to succeed Bernanke" .

USA Today .

ISSN 0734-7456 .

Archived from the original on July 29, 2013 . Retrieved July 29, 2013 .

^ Irwin, Neil (August 30, 2013).

"How the Fed chair race became a public circus, and why it matters" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2021 . Retrieved August 31, 2013 .

^ Boles, Corey; Hook, Janet; Peterson, Kristina (July 25, 2013).

"Some Senate Democrats to Obama: Pick Yellen for Fed Chief" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 1042-9840 .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2021 . Retrieved July 26, 2013 .

^ Jacobsen, Joyce; Hartmann, Heidi (September 18, 2013).

"economists-letter-in-support-of-yellen" . Letter to Barack Obama. Institute for Women's Policy Research. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013 . Retrieved October 1, 2014 .

^ Goldfarb, Zachary A.; Mui, Ylan Q. (September 15, 2013).

"Larry Summers withdraws name from Fed consideration" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on September 16, 2013 . Retrieved September 16, 2013 .

^ Lowrey, Annie; Appelbaum, Binyamin (September 15, 2013).

"Summers Pulls Name From Consideration for Fed Chief" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on March 8, 2021 . Retrieved September 16, 2013 .

Facing growing opposition in Congress, Lawrence H. Summers, the former Treasury secretary and a top contender for Federal Reserve chairman, told President Obama that he didn't want to be considered for the job.

^ Calmes, Jackie (October 8, 2013).

"Obama to Pick Yellen as Leader of Fed, Officials Say" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on May 31, 2020 . Retrieved October 9, 2013 .

^ Mui, Ylan Q.; Goldfarb, Zachary A. (October 9, 2013).

"Obama nominates Janet Yellen to lead the Fed" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2021 . Retrieved October 10, 2013 .

^ Zumbrun, Joshua (June 27, 2013).

"Yellen Betting Defies 100-Year Jinx of Fed No. 2 Never Elevated" .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on February 28, 2017 . Retrieved June 28, 2013 .

^ Obama, Barack (October 9, 2013).

Remarks by the President in Nominating Dr. Janet Yellen as Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Speech). Nomination of Dr. Janet Yellen as Fed Chair. Washington, D.C.: The White House.

Archived from the original on January 26, 2017 . Retrieved May 2, 2014 .

^ Kurtz, Annalyn (November 14, 2013).

"Smooth sailing for Janet Yellen at Senate confirmation hearing" .

CNN Business .

Archived from the original on August 2, 2019 . Retrieved November 15, 2013 .

^ Kardashian, Kirk (November 20, 2013).

"Janet Yellen and the Fed's Boom-and-Bust Problem" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X .

Archived from the original on June 15, 2017 . Retrieved November 21, 2013 .

^ "Vote Summary – Question: On the Cloture Motion (Motion to Invoke Cloture on the Nomination of Janet L. Yellen to be Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System)" . U.S. Senate Roll Call Votes 113th Congress – 1st Session.

Archived from the original on December 24, 2013 . Retrieved December 20, 2013 .

^ "Vote Summary – Question: On the Nomination (Confirmation Janet L. Yellen, to be Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System)" . U.S. Senate Roll Call Votes 113th Congress – 2nd Session.

Archived from the original on January 9, 2014 . Retrieved January 6, 2014 .

^ Lowrey, Annie (January 6, 2014).

"Yellen Wins Backing of Senators to Lead Fed" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on January 8, 2014 . Retrieved January 7, 2014 .

^ Frizell, Sam (February 3, 2014).

"Janet Yellen Sworn In To Lead Federal Reserve" .

Time .

ISSN 0040-781X .

Archived from the original on April 15, 2021 . Retrieved February 4, 2014 .

^ "Federal Open Market Committee unanimously selects Janet L. Yellen to serve as its Chair, effective February 1, 2014" (Press release). Washington, D.C.: Federal Reserve Board. January 30, 2014.

Archived from the original on April 30, 2017 . Retrieved February 3, 2015 .

^ Matthews, Christopher (September 16, 2013).

"5 Things Everybody Should Know About Janet Yellen" .

Time .

ISSN 0040-781X .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2017 . Retrieved September 17, 2013 .

^ Irwin, Neil (July 15, 2014).

"Janet Yellen on the Everything Bubble" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on April 16, 2021 . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ Gillespie, Patrick (December 16, 2015).

"Finally! Fed raises interest rates" .

CNN Business .

Archived from the original on December 17, 2015 . Retrieved December 17, 2015 .

^ Nutting, Rex (August 28, 2015).

"Opinion: Why market correction makes a September rate hike more compelling" .

MarketWatch .

Archived from the original on November 24, 2020 . Retrieved August 29, 2015 .

^ Torres, Craig (January 15, 2015).

"Yellen Leaves Greenspan 'Put' Behind as She Charts Rate Increase" .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on February 4, 2015 . Retrieved January 16, 2015 .

^ a b Crutsinger, Martin (February 1, 2018).

"5 Things: What Yellen's Fed tenure will be remembered for" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on May 12, 2021 . Retrieved February 2, 2018 .

^ Crutsinger, Martin (November 17, 2016).

"The Latest: Yellen defends tougher bank regulation" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on November 28, 2021 . Retrieved November 18, 2016 .

^ "YELLEN: Any changes to the regulations that police Wall Street should be 'modest' " .

Business Insider . Reuters. August 25, 2017.

Archived from the original on October 11, 2017 . Retrieved August 26, 2017 .

^ Jacobs, Jennifer; Talev, Margaret; Olorunnipa, Toluse (November 2, 2017).

"Trump Considered Keeping Yellen at Fed, Until Mnuchin Spoke Up" .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on November 3, 2017 . Retrieved November 3, 2017 .

^ Appelbaum, Binyamin (November 20, 2017).

"Yellen Will Leave Federal Reserve Next Year" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on November 21, 2017 . Retrieved November 21, 2017 .

^ "Factbox: Past Federal Reserve chiefs and who appointed them" .

Reuters . February 22, 2021.

Archived from the original on February 23, 2021 . Retrieved February 23, 2021 .

^ Cox, Jeff (November 2, 2017).

"Trump picks Jerome Powell to succeed Yellen as Fed chair" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on November 24, 2021 . Retrieved November 3, 2017 .

^ Reed, Robert (February 6, 2018).

"Fed's Wells Fargo smackdown sends message to other bank giants' leaders: Shape up or else" .

Chicago Tribune .

ISSN 2165-171X .

Archived from the original on May 11, 2020 . Retrieved February 7, 2018 .

^ a b Borak, Donna; Wiener-Bronner, Danielle; Wattles, Jackie (February 3, 2018).

"The Fed drops the hammer on Wells Fargo" .

CNN Business .

Archived from the original on June 12, 2021 . Retrieved February 4, 2018 .

^ Flitter, Emily; Appelbaum, Binyamin; Cowley, Stacy (February 2, 2018).

"Federal Reserve Shackles Wells Fargo After Fraud Scandal" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on October 9, 2021 . Retrieved February 3, 2018 .

^ Lee, Don; Puzzanghera, Jim (January 25, 2018).

"Yellen's legacy as Fed chief: Full employment but unfinished business" .

Los Angeles Times .

ISSN 2165-1736 .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2018 . Retrieved January 26, 2018 .

^ a b Borak, Donna (February 3, 2018).

"Yellen's historic legacy: Wise caution and a successful recovery" .

CNN Business .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2018 . Retrieved February 4, 2018 .

^ a b Long, Heather (December 13, 2017).

"Janet L. Yellen, America's first female Fed chair, finishes to 'standing ovation' " .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on December 13, 2017 . Retrieved December 14, 2017 .

^ Casselman, Ben; Granville, Kevin (November 2, 2017).

"Yellen's Legacy: Economic Progress but a Sense of a Job Unfinished" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2017 . Retrieved November 3, 2017 .

^ Wynne, Mark (April 18, 2019).

"Global Perspectives: Janet Yellen on Becoming an Economist, Being Fed Chair and Views on Fed Independence" .

dallasfed.org .

Archived from the original on October 31, 2020 . Retrieved April 19, 2019 .

^ Appelbaum, Binyamin (February 2, 2018).

"Yellen, Departing Fed, Will Join Brookings" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on February 2, 2018 . Retrieved February 2, 2018 .

^ "Federal Reserve Chair Janet L. Yellen to join Economic Studies at Brookings" (Press release). Washington, D.C.: Brookings. February 2, 2018.

Archived from the original on February 2, 2018 . Retrieved February 3, 2018 .

^ "Janet Yellen, James Stock, Louise Sheiner to chair oversight panel for new Hutchins Center initiative to improve the quality of economic statistics" (Press release). Washington, D.C.: Brookings. July 31, 2018.

Archived from the original on August 11, 2020 . Retrieved August 1, 2018 .

^ Cox, Jeff (June 27, 2017).

"Yellen: Banks 'very much stronger'; another financial crisis not likely 'in our lifetime' " .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2019 . Retrieved June 28, 2017 .

^ Liesman, Steve (December 11, 2018).

"Yellen warns of another potential financial crisis: 'Gigantic holes in the system' " .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on November 27, 2021 . Retrieved December 12, 2018 .

^ a b Yellen, Janet (February 25, 2019).

"Former Fed Chair Janet Yellen: Far from retired, nowhere near done" .

Marketplace (Interview). Interviewed by Kai Ryssdal. Washington, D.C.: American Public Media.

Archived from the original on August 5, 2019 . Retrieved February 26, 2019 .

^ Cox, Jeff (February 25, 2019).

"Janet Yellen: Trump has 'lack of understanding' of Fed and economy" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on March 7, 2019 . Retrieved February 26, 2019 .

^ Lane, Sylvan (July 17, 2020).

"Yellen, Bernanke urge Congress to extend unemployment benefit boost" .

The Hill .

ISSN 1521-1568 .

Archived from the original on July 18, 2020 . Retrieved July 18, 2020 .

^ Yellen, Janet; Bernstein, Jared (August 24, 2020).

"The Senate's on Vacation While Americans Starve" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on August 25, 2020 . Retrieved August 25, 2020 .

^ Hunnicutt, Trevor (August 13, 2020).

"Former U.S. Fed Chair Yellen among those appearing at Biden economic briefing" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on August 17, 2020 . Retrieved August 14, 2020 .

^ a b Cassella, Megan; White, Ben (December 1, 2020).

"The quiet frontrunner: How Biden landed on Yellen for Treasury secretary" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on January 18, 2021 . Retrieved December 2, 2020 .

^ a b Thompson, Alex (January 1, 2021).

"Janet Yellen made millions in Wall Street, corporate speeches" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on January 8, 2021 . Retrieved September 18, 2024 .

^ a b Walsh, Joe (January 1, 2021).

"Yellen Earned $7.2 Million In Speaking Fees Over Last Two Years" .

Forbes .

ISSN 0015-6914 .

Archived from the original on January 1, 2021 . Retrieved January 2, 2021 .

^ Dorman, Sam (January 28, 2021).

"Yellen received $800G from hedge fund in Gamestop controversy; WH doesn't commit to recusal" .

Fox News .

Archived from the original on January 28, 2021 . Retrieved January 29, 2021 .

^ a b Makortoff, Kalyeena (January 1, 2021).

"Janet Yellen has made at least $7m from speaking fees, records show" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 1756-3224 .

Archived from the original on January 1, 2021 . Retrieved January 2, 2021 .

^ "Biden's Treasury nominee Yellen discloses paid speaking gigs for financial firms" .

Reuters . January 1, 2021.

Archived from the original on March 16, 2021 . Retrieved January 2, 2021 .

^ Cheung, Brian (November 16, 2020).

"Possible Biden picks for Treasury Secretary: a who's who" .

Yahoo! Finance .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ Carrazana, Chabeli (November 20, 2020).

"The Women Who Could Lead Biden's Economic Recovery" .

Ms .

ISSN 0047-8318 .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2022 . Retrieved November 21, 2020 .

^ Mohsin, Saleha; Epstein, Jennifer; Pager, Tyler (November 21, 2020).

"Brainard Slips as Treasury Contender With Biden Nearing Pick" .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on May 20, 2021 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ Guida, Victoria (November 23, 2020).

"Biden to tap former Fed chief Yellen as first woman to head Treasury" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on January 10, 2022 . Retrieved November 24, 2020 .

^ Lane, Sylvan (November 30, 2020).

"Biden names Janet Yellen as his Treasury nominee" .

The Hill .

ISSN 1521-1568 .

Archived from the original on April 16, 2021 . Retrieved December 1, 2020 .

^ Biden, Joe (December 1, 2020).

Remarks by President-elect Joe Biden in Wilmington, Delaware (Speech). Economic Policy Nominees & Appointees. Wilmington, Delaware: The American Presidency Project.

Archived from the original on April 18, 2021 . Retrieved December 2, 2020 .

^ Mohsin, Salena (October 7, 2021).

"Janet Yellen's Above-the-Fray Approach Is Put to a Political Test" .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on October 8, 2021 . Retrieved October 8, 2021 .

^ Hilsenrath, Jon; Timiraos, Nick (November 24, 2020).

"Politics Isn't Janet Yellen's Forte, but It's What She's In for Now" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 1042-9840 .

Archived from the original on November 25, 2020 . Retrieved November 25, 2020 .

^ Irwin, Neil (November 24, 2020).

"Janet Yellen Has Excelled at Big Jobs. This Will Be the Hardest One Yet" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on November 25, 2021 . Retrieved November 25, 2020 .

^ Fallert, Nicole (January 19, 2021).

"Janet Yellen Receives Support From All Eight Living Ex-Treasury Secretaries" .

Newsweek .

ISSN 0028-9604 .

Archived from the original on January 19, 2021 . Retrieved January 20, 2021 .

^ Lawder, David; Shalal, Andrea (January 22, 2021).

"Yellen nomination sails through Senate panel; final vote set for Monday" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on February 9, 2021 . Retrieved January 23, 2021 .

^ "Question: On the Nomination (Confirmation: Janet Louise Yellen, of California, to be Secretary of the Treasury )" . Roll Call Vote 117th Congress – 1st Session. January 25, 2021.

Archived from the original on January 26, 2021.

^ a b Tappe, Anneken; Egan, Matt (January 25, 2021).

"Janet Yellen is confirmed as the first female Treasury secretary in US history" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on January 26, 2021 . Retrieved January 26, 2021 .

^ Rappeport, Alan (January 26, 2021).

"Janet Yellen, the first woman to be Treasury secretary, is sworn in by the first woman to be vice president" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on October 19, 2021 . Retrieved January 27, 2021 .

^ Kerner, Andrew; Choi, Ha Eun; Bodea, Cristina (February 10, 2021).

"Janet Yellen will be the first female treasury secretary in U.S. Why are so few women in top economic posts?" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on February 10, 2021 . Retrieved February 11, 2021 .

^ "Yellen, Malerba become 1st female pair to sign US currency" .

AP News . December 8, 2022.

^ Rappeport, Alan (April 5, 2021).

"Yellen calls for a global minimum corporate tax rate" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on April 19, 2021 . Retrieved April 6, 2021 .

Treasury Secretary Janet L. Yellen made the case on Monday for a global minimum tax, kicking off the Biden administration's effort to help raise revenue in the United States and prevent companies from shifting profits overseas to evade taxes. Ms. Yellen, in a speech to the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, called for global coordination on an international tax rate that would apply to multinational corporations regardless of where they locate their headquarters. Such a global tax could help prevent the type of "race to the bottom" that has been underway, Ms. Yellen said, referring to countries trying to outdo one another by lowering tax rates to attract business.

^ Yellen, Janet (April 7, 2021).

"A Better Corporate Tax for America" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 1042-9840 .

Archived from the original on April 7, 2021 . Retrieved April 8, 2021 .

^ Milliken, David; Holton, Kate (June 5, 2021).

"Tech giants and tax havens targeted by historic G7 deal" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on June 7, 2021 . Retrieved June 6, 2021 .

^ Herrera Gutiérrez, Arturo; Mulyani Indrawati, Sri; Mboweni, Tito; Scholz, Olaf; Yellen, Janet (June 10, 2021).

"Opinion: Five finance ministers: Why we need a global corporate minimum tax" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on June 10, 2021 . Retrieved June 11, 2021 .

^ Rappeport, Alan (July 9, 2021).

"Finance Ministers Meet in Venice to Finalize Global Tax Agreement" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2021 . Retrieved July 10, 2021 .

^ Ziady, Hanna; Thompson, Mark (October 8, 2021).

"136 countries agree to minimum corporate tax rate after Ireland drops its opposition" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on November 22, 2021 . Retrieved October 9, 2021 .

^ Franck, Thomas (July 23, 2021).

"Yellen urges Congress to raise or suspend the debt limit by Aug. 2" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on November 14, 2021 . Retrieved July 24, 2021 .

^ Yellen, Janet (September 19, 2021).

"Congress, Raise the Debt Limit" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 1042-9840 .

Archived from the original on September 19, 2021 . Retrieved September 20, 2021 .

^ Robb, Greg (October 18, 2021).

"Yellen says debt-ceiling deal gives Treasury only 'temporary reprieve' through Dec. 3" .

MarketWatch .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2021 . Retrieved October 19, 2021 .

^ Stein, Jeff (November 1, 2021).

"Treasury Secretary Yellen expresses openness to defusing debt ceiling without GOP votes" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on November 1, 2021 . Retrieved November 2, 2021 .

^ Rappeport, Alan (November 12, 2022).

"Yellen Urges Congress to Raise Debt Limit Beyond 2024 Election" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on May 28, 2023 . Retrieved November 13, 2022 .

^ Fossum, Sam; Sullivan, Kate (December 16, 2021).

"Biden signs debt limit increase, averting potential economic disaster" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 16, 2021 . Retrieved December 17, 2021 .

^ Shabad, Rebecca (January 13, 2023).

"U.S. to hit debt limit next week, Yellen warns Congress" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on April 25, 2023 . Retrieved January 14, 2023 .

^ Nichols, Hans (January 20, 2023).

"Yellen rejects GOP gambit on debt ceiling" .

Axios .

Archived from the original on January 23, 2023 . Retrieved January 21, 2023 .

^ Gregorian, Dareh (June 3, 2023).

"Biden signs bipartisan debt ceiling bill to avert government default" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on June 4, 2023 . Retrieved June 4, 2023 .

^ Daniel, Will (September 18, 2023).

"Why Janet Yellen isn't worried about the $33 trillion national debt" .

Fortune .

^ a b Adeyemo, Wally (December 16, 2022).

"America's New Sanctions Strategy" .

Foreign Affairs .

ISSN 0015-7120 .

Archived from the original on December 16, 2022 . Retrieved December 17, 2022 .

^ Stein, Jeff (July 14, 2022).

"Janet Yellen's global campaign to defund Russia's war machine" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on July 14, 2022 . Retrieved July 15, 2022 .

^ Stevis-Gridneff, Matina; Tankersley, Jim; Rappeport, Alan (December 2, 2022).

"Ukraine's Allies Agree on Russian Oil Price Cap" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on February 25, 2023 . Retrieved December 3, 2022 .

^ Travers, Kevin (April 7, 2022).

"U.S. Treasury Secretary Yellen shares crypto 'lessons' at university address" .

Fintech Nexus .

Archived from the original on June 25, 2022 . Retrieved April 8, 2022 .

^ Duehren, Andrew (April 7, 2022).

"Crypto-Like Digital Dollar at Least Several Years Away, Yellen Says" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 1042-9840 .

Archived from the original on April 8, 2022 . Retrieved April 8, 2022 .

^ Condon, Christopher; Martin, Eric (April 13, 2022).

"Yellen Talks Tough on China, Warning of Fallout Over Russia Ties" .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on May 8, 2022 . Retrieved April 14, 2022 .

^ Fouriezos, Nick (April 13, 2022).

"Janet Yellen's message to the world: There can be no 'sitting on the fence' on Russia" .

Atlantic Council .

Archived from the original on March 22, 2023 . Retrieved April 14, 2022 .

^ Yellen, Janet L. (December 12, 2022).

"Resilient Trade" .

Project Syndicate .

Archived from the original on December 19, 2022 . Retrieved December 13, 2022 .

^ Shabad, Rebecca (May 10, 2022).

"Treasury Secretary Yellen says reversing Roe v. Wade would have 'damaging effects on the economy' " .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on May 19, 2022 . Retrieved May 11, 2022 .

^ Scott, Tim (May 17, 2022).

"Opinion: Tim Scott: Abortion is not the way to help single Black mothers" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on May 17, 2022 . Retrieved May 18, 2022 .

^ McCann Ramirez, Nikki (May 13, 2022).

"Anti-abortion pundits were furious after Janet Yellen pointed out that reproductive freedom is essential to economic freedom" .

Media Matters for America .

Archived from the original on December 3, 2022 . Retrieved May 14, 2022 .

^ Rappeport, Alan (August 17, 2022).

"Yellen Directs I.R.S. to Embark on $80 Billion Overhaul Plan" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on November 1, 2022 . Retrieved August 17, 2022 .

^ Condon, Christopher (June 8, 2023).

"Yellen Says Debt Deal's $21 Billion IRS Clawback Won't Affect 'Near-Term' Plans" .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on June 8, 2023 . Retrieved June 9, 2023 .

^ Hayda, Julian; Harbage, Claire (February 27, 2023).

"Janet Yellen visits Ukraine and pledges even more U.S. economic aid" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on March 1, 2023 . Retrieved February 28, 2023 .

^ Yellen, Janet (February 27, 2023).

"Janet L. Yellen in Kyiv: Economic Aid to Ukraine Is Vital" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on February 27, 2023 . Retrieved February 28, 2023 .

^ Quinn, Melissa (March 12, 2023).

"Yellen rules out bailout for Silicon Valley Bank: "We're not going to do that again" " .

CBS News .

Archived from the original on March 16, 2023 . Retrieved March 13, 2023 .

^ "Joint Statement by the Department of the Treasury, Federal Reserve, and FDIC" (Press release). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Treasury. March 12, 2023.

Archived from the original on March 12, 2023 . Retrieved March 13, 2023 .

^ Sweet, Ken; Rugaber, Christopher; Megerian, Chris; Bussewitz, Cathy (March 12, 2023).

"US government moves to stop potential banking crisis" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on May 7, 2023 . Retrieved March 13, 2023 .

^ Rappeport, Alan (March 21, 2023).

"U.S. Is Ready to Protect Smaller Banks if Necessary, Yellen Says" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on March 22, 2023 . Retrieved March 22, 2023 .

^ "U.S. isn't considering 'blanket insurance' for bank deposits, Yellen says" .

NBC News . Reuters. March 22, 2023.

Archived from the original on March 22, 2023 . Retrieved March 23, 2023 .

^ Lawder, David (April 21, 2023).

"U.S. financial regulators to tighten rules on non-banks, systemic risks" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on April 26, 2023 . Retrieved April 22, 2023 .

^ Egan, Matt (May 19, 2023).

"Janet Yellen told bank CEOs more mergers may be necessary, sources say" .

CNN Business .

Archived from the original on May 23, 2023 . Retrieved May 20, 2023 .

^ Swanson, Ana (April 20, 2023).

"Yellen Calls for 'Constructive' China Relationship" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on April 22, 2023 . Retrieved April 21, 2023 .

^ Luce, Edward (April 20, 2023).

"Janet Yellen offers an olive branch to China" .

Financial Times .

ISSN 0307-1766 .

Archived from the original on April 20, 2023 . Retrieved April 21, 2023 .

^ Dendrinou, Viktoria (July 6, 2023).

"Yellen Meets Old Guard of Chinese Economy on Trip to Mend Ties" .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on July 7, 2023 . Retrieved July 7, 2023 .

^ Rappeport, Alan; Bradsher, Keith (July 9, 2023).

"China and the U.S., Still Adversaries, Are Talking. That's a Start" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on September 1, 2023 . Retrieved July 9, 2023 .

^ Rappeport, Alan; Bradsher, Keith (July 7, 2023).

"Yellen, in Beijing, Criticizes China's Treatment of U.S. Companies" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on July 9, 2023 . Retrieved July 8, 2023 .

^ Dendrinou, Viktoria (July 9, 2023).

"Yellen Says US-China Ties on 'Surer Footing' After Critical Trip" .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2023 . Retrieved July 9, 2023 .

^ a b c Sillars, James (October 16, 2023).

"Janet Yellen: America can 'certainly' afford to support Israel and Ukraine, US Treasury secretary says" .

Sky News .

^ "Janet Yellen warns Iran that nothing is 'off the table' for sanctions" .

Financial Times . October 11, 2023.

^ Cassidy, John (October 8, 2013).

"A Janet Yellen Question: Just How Dovish Is She?" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on April 13, 2016 . Retrieved October 9, 2013 .

^ Appelbaum, Binyamin (April 25, 2013).

"Hawks and Doves at the Fed" .

economix.blogs.nytimes.com .

Archived from the original on March 14, 2023 . Retrieved April 26, 2013 .

^ a b c d Appelbaum, Binyamin; Swanson, Ana; Tankersley, Jim; Smialek, Jeanna (November 24, 2020).

"Yellen Would Assume Vast Policy Portfolio as Treasury Secretary" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 1553-8095 .

Archived from the original on November 26, 2022 . Retrieved November 25, 2020 .

^ Yellen, Janet L. (January 3, 2019).

"Seven questions for Janet Yellen on financial stability" .

brookings.edu . Brookings Institution.

Archived from the original on February 3, 2019 . Retrieved January 4, 2019 .

^ Jones, Claire (January 7, 2021).

"What Yellen's career tells us her views on fiscal policy" .

Financial Times .

ISSN 0307-1766 .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved January 8, 2021 .

^ Cox, Jeff (September 30, 2021).

"Yellen lends support for effort to remove the debt ceiling altogether" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on October 30, 2021 . Retrieved October 1, 2021 .

^ "Economists' Statement on Carbon Dividends" .

The Wall Street Journal . January 16, 2019.

ISSN 1042-9840 .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2020 . Retrieved January 17, 2019 .

^ G30 Working Group on Climate Change and Finance (October 8, 2020).

Mainstreaming the Transition to a Net-Zero Economy (PDF) (Report). Group of Thirty. p. 80.

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 31, 2022 . Retrieved October 9, 2020 .

{{ cite report }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Green, Matthew (October 8, 2020).

"U.S. could adopt carbon tax under a Biden presidency, ex-Fed Chair Yellen says" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on December 6, 2022 . Retrieved October 9, 2020 .

^ Cassidy, John (April 3, 2013).

"Janet Yellen: A Keynesian Woman at the Fed" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X .

Archived from the original on October 14, 2014 . Retrieved April 4, 2013 .

^ Yellen, Janet (April 16, 1999).

Yale Economics in Washington (Speech). Yale Economics Reunion. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale Department of Economics.

Archived from the original on November 24, 2014 . Retrieved January 15, 2001 .

^ a b Elliott, Larry; Inman, Phillip (December 5, 2020).

"Jobs slump and Covid lead litany of post-Trump crises facing Janet Yellen" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 1756-3224 .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2020 . Retrieved December 6, 2020 .

^ "Janet Louise Yellen" .

Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation . May 12, 1986.

Archived from the original on April 13, 2019 . Retrieved May 24, 2008 .

^ "Janet Yellen joins Yale Corporation as the newest alumni fellow" .

archives.news.yale.edu . June 23, 2000.

Archived from the original on November 23, 2020 . Retrieved January 15, 2001 .

Katz, Daniel (June 1, 2006).

"Warner to serve on Yale Corporation" .

yaledailynews.com .

Archived from the original on March 2, 2021 . Retrieved November 30, 2022 .

^ "92nd Annual Conference Program" (PDF) . Western Economics Association. p. 4.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 11, 2020 . Retrieved October 23, 2020 .

^ "Past Vice-Presidents" . American Economic Association.

Archived from the original on October 15, 2020 . Retrieved October 23, 2011 .

^ Counts, Laura (March 13, 2013).

"Profs. Williamson, Yellen Named Berkeley Fellows" .

newsroom.haas.berkeley.edu .

Archived from the original on January 10, 2021 . Retrieved March 14, 2013 .

^ "Past Presidents" . American Economic Association.

Archived from the original on January 21, 2021 . Retrieved January 20, 2021 .

^ "Honorary Degrees: 1900s" . The Brown University.

Archived from the original on October 29, 2020 . Retrieved May 25, 2014 .

^ "Brown will present eight honorary degrees at Commencement May 25" (Press release). Providence, Rhode Island: The Brown University News Bureau. May 11, 1998.

Archived from the original on May 9, 2001 . Retrieved May 20, 2014 .

^ "Largest Graduating Class in Bard's History to Receive Degrees at the College's One Hundred Fortieth Commencement on Saturday, May 27, 2000" (Press release). Annandale-on-Hudson, New York: Bard College. May 27, 2000.

Archived from the original on September 5, 2006 . Retrieved October 5, 2016 .

^ "New York University Holds 182nd Commencement In Yankee Stadium" (Press release). New York: New York University. May 21, 2014.

Archived from the original on November 15, 2020 . Retrieved May 20, 2016 .

^ Yellen, Janet (May 21, 2014).

Speech by Chair Janet L. Yellen at New York University's commencement (Speech). University of Baltimore 2016 Midyear Commencement. New York, New York: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Archived from the original on May 27, 2014 . Retrieved May 22, 2014 .

^ "LSE Honorary Graduates" (PDF) . the London School of Economics and Political Science.

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 19, 2021 . Retrieved May 15, 2016 .

"LSE Global Forum in New York City" .

aflse.org . May 15, 2015.

Archived from the original on April 18, 2018 . Retrieved May 16, 2015 .

^ "Yale awards nine honorary degrees at Commencement 2015" .

news.yale.edu . May 15, 2015.

Archived from the original on July 4, 2017 . Retrieved May 16, 2015 .

^ "Graduation Ceremony – November 2015" .

warwick.ac.uk . November 19, 2015.

Archived from the original on April 24, 2016 . Retrieved November 20, 2015 .

^ "Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen to Receive Honorary Degree, Deliver Keynote at UB Commencement, Dec. 19" (Press release). Baltimore, Maryland: University of Baltimore. December 15, 2016.

Archived from the original on December 25, 2020 . Retrieved October 19, 2016 .

^ Yellen, Janet (December 19, 2016).

Commencement remarks by Chair Yellen (Speech). University of Baltimore 2016 Midyear Commencement. Baltimore, Maryland: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Archived from the original on December 19, 2016 . Retrieved December 20, 2016 .

^ "Honorary Doctor of Philosophy" .

tau.ac.il . June 5, 2019.

Archived from the original on June 29, 2020 . Retrieved June 6, 2019 .

"BOG 2019: Honorary Degrees Awarded" .

tau.ac.il . June 5, 2019.

Archived from the original on January 26, 2021 . Retrieved June 6, 2019 .

^ "Honorary Degrees Awarded, 1852-Present (By Year)" (PDF) .

president.umich.edu . December 15, 2019.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 8, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2019 .

Zaniewski, Ann; Iseler, James (November 1, 2019).

"Five recommended for Winter Commencement honorary degrees" .

record.umich.edu . University of Michigan.

Archived from the original on February 2, 2021 . Retrieved November 2, 2019 .

^ "Chronological Listing of Honorary Degree Recipients" (PDF) .

secretary.upenn.edu . July 1, 2021.

Archived (PDF) from the original on December 23, 2021 . Retrieved July 2, 2021 .

"Penn's 2021 Commencement Speaker and Honorary Degree Recipients" .

almanac.upenn.edu . University of Pennsylvania. March 16, 2021.

Archived from the original on March 16, 2021 . Retrieved March 17, 2021 .

^ "Janet Yellen receives honorary doctorate from Frankfurt School of Finance & Management" .

frankfurt-school.de . May 21, 2024. Archived from the original on May 22, 2024 . Retrieved May 22, 2024 .

^ "Janet Yellen" . National Bureau of Economic Research. Archived from the original on September 10, 2009 . Retrieved October 29, 2020 .

^ "Members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 1780–2019 – XYZ" (PDF) . American Academy of Arts and Sciences.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 18, 2019 . Retrieved October 25, 2020 .

^ "Trustees" . Economists for Peace and Security. Archived from the original on May 27, 2006 . Retrieved October 25, 2020 .

^ "Senior Member Biography – Janet Yellen" .

group30.org . October 2020.

Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved October 25, 2020 .

^ "Janet Yellen, Distinguished Fellow 2012" . American Economic Association.

Archived from the original on April 4, 2019 . Retrieved December 14, 2020 .

^ "2014 Election of Fellows" . The Econometric Society.

Archived from the original on October 27, 2020 . Retrieved November 13, 2020 .

^ "NABE Fellows" . National Association for Business Economics.

Archived from the original on October 31, 2020 . Retrieved November 24, 2020 .

^ "British Academy announces new President and elects 66 new Fellows" (Press release). London, United Kingdom: The British Academy. July 15, 2016.

Archived from the original on August 14, 2020 . Retrieved July 17, 2016 .

^ "List of Past Wilbur Cross Recipients" .

gsas.yale.edu . May 26, 1997.

Archived from the original on November 28, 2020 . Retrieved January 15, 2001 .

"Wilbur L. Cross Medals" .

archives.news.yale.edu . Yale University. June 2–23, 1997.

Archived from the original on June 10, 2021 . Retrieved January 15, 2001 .

^ "Adam Smith Award" .

nabe.com . December 13, 2020.

Archived from the original on June 10, 2021 . Retrieved December 14, 2020 .

^ "Blackwell Recipients – Dr. Janet L. Yellen" .

hws.edu . January 22, 2015.

Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved January 23, 2015 .

^ Bolotnikova, Marina N. (May 27, 2016).

"Janet Yellen Talks Policy and Inequality at Radcliffe Day Celebration" .

harvardmagazine.com .

Archived from the original on May 28, 2016 . Retrieved May 28, 2016 .

^ "Yellen traces the struggles, progress of women in the U.S. economy" .

brown.edu . May 5, 2017.

Archived from the original on November 24, 2020 . Retrieved May 6, 2017 .

^ "Federal Reserve Board chairs Ben Bernanke and Janet Yellen receive the Paul H. Douglas Award for Ethics in Government" .

igpa.uillinois.edu . November 8, 2017.

Archived from the original on May 12, 2018 . Retrieved November 9, 2017 .

^ McNulty, Jennifer (February 5, 2019).

"Former Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen receives Foundation Medal" .

news.ucsc.edu .

Archived from the original on February 9, 2019 . Retrieved September 25, 2020 .

^ "Chief Executive Leadership Institute Honors Janet Yellen" .

som.yale.edu . March 19, 2019.

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved March 20, 2019 .

^ Moser, Douglas (September 26, 2019).

"Janet Yellen awarded Dean's Medal" .

brandeis.edu .

Archived from the original on November 30, 2020 . Retrieved September 27, 2020 .

^ "Truman Medal for Economic Policy to be awarded to Janet Yellen" (Press release). Independence, Missouri: Truman Library Institute. October 7, 2019.

Archived from the original on December 19, 2020 . Retrieved October 13, 2020 .

^ "Prof. Andrew Metrick, Expert on Financial Crises, Named First Janet L. Yellen Professor" .

som.yale.edu . March 29, 2018.

Archived from the original on August 12, 2020 . Retrieved March 30, 2018 .

^ "Federal Reserve Board announces plans to present Janet L. Yellen Award for Excellence in Community Development" (Press release). Washington, D.C.: Federal Reserve Board. November 30, 2018.

Archived from the original on December 1, 2018 . Retrieved December 1, 2018 .

^ "Ariel Cisneros awarded inaugural Janet L. Yellen Award for Community Development" (PDF) (Press release). Kansas City, Missouri: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. December 6, 2018.

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 29, 2021 . Retrieved December 7, 2018 .

^ Lagarde, Christine (April 23, 2014).

"Janet Yellen" .

Time .

ISSN 0040-781X .

Archived from the original on October 21, 2021 . Retrieved April 24, 2014 .

^ Admati, Anat (April 16, 2015).

"Janet Yellen" .

Time .

ISSN 0040-781X .

Archived from the original on October 20, 2021 . Retrieved April 17, 2015 .

^ Stiglitz, Joseph (April 20, 2017).

"Janet Yellen" .

Time .

ISSN 0040-781X .

Archived from the original on December 17, 2020 . Retrieved April 21, 2017 .

^ Summers, Larry (April 13, 2023).

"Janet Yellen" .

Time .

ISSN 0040-781X .

Archived from the original on April 13, 2023 . Retrieved April 14, 2023 .

^ Portée, Alex (December 5, 2022).

"Who will be Time's 2022 Person of the Year? See the contenders" .

Today .

Archived from the original on January 31, 2023 . Retrieved December 6, 2022 .

^ "Forbes Announces 10th Anniversary Of The World's 100 Most Powerful Women List" .

Forbes (Press release). Jersey City, New Jersey. May 28, 2014.

Archived from the original on November 25, 2020 . Retrieved May 29, 2014 .

^ "2014 Ranking Of The World's Most Powerful People" .

Forbes (Press release). Jersey City, New Jersey. 5 November 2014.

Archived from the original on 8 November 2014 . Retrieved 5 November 2014 .

Ewalt, David M. (14 December 2016).

"The World's Most Powerful People 2016" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on 14 December 2016 . Retrieved 15 December 2016 .

^ Reddy, Sudeep (September 23, 2014).

"George Akerlof (aka Mr. Janet Yellen) Heads to Georgetown – Real Time Economics – WSJ" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 1042-9840 .

Archived from the original on October 2, 2014 . Retrieved September 24, 2014 .

^ a b c Foroohar, Rana (January 9, 2014).

"Janet Yellen: The Sixteen Trillion Dollar Woman" .

Time .

ISSN 0040-781X .

Archived from the original on November 14, 2021 . Retrieved January 10, 2014 .

"Firms are not always willing to cut wages, even if there are people lined up outside the gates to work. So why don't they?" asks Yellen. The couple's conclusion: some employers set pay higher to demonstrate that they value employees in a way that motivates them to do good work, even when markets are ready to undercut those wages. As any parent paying more than market rates for a nanny knows, child care is a labor market in which the conventional wisdom doesn't always hold.

^ "Robert Akerlof Resume" (PDF) .

robertakerlof.com .

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 13, 2021 . Retrieved April 11, 2024 .

^ Allcot, Dawn (January 21, 2021).

"How Rich Are Biden's Cabinet Picks? Check Out the Finances of These Notable Nominees" .

Yahoo! Finance .

Archived from the original on January 22, 2021 . Retrieved January 22, 2021 .

^ Alexander, Dan (June 15, 2021).

"Here's How Much Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen Is Worth" .

Forbes .

ISSN 0015-6914 .

Archived from the original on June 24, 2021 . Retrieved June 16, 2021 .

^ Udland, Myles (August 29, 2014).

"Janet Yellen Owns A Very Expensive Collection Of Stamps" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on September 1, 2014 . Retrieved August 30, 2014 .

^ Duehren, Andrew (September 15, 2022).

"Janet Yellen Likes Rocks. Foreign Diplomats Keep Giving Her Stamps" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 1042-9840 .

Archived from the original on September 15, 2022 . Retrieved September 16, 2022 .

^ "Biden: Yellen needs a 'Hamilton' musical. Dessa: Here you go" .

Marketplace . January 21, 2021.

Archived from the original on January 22, 2021 . Retrieved January 22, 2021 .

^ Meyer, Dan (December 3, 2020).

"WATCH: Janet Yellen Gets the Hamilton Treatment" .

Playbill .

ISSN 0551-0678 .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2022 . Retrieved December 4, 2020 .

^ Goodwin, Jazmin (March 29, 2021).

"Still not sure what NFTs are? 'SNL' explains with Eminem parody" .

CNN Business .

Archived from the original on March 30, 2021 . Retrieved March 30, 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Janet Yellen .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Janet Yellen .

Official [ edit ] Biography Archived February 15, 2021, at the Wayback Machine at the United States Department of the Treasury Biography at the Federal Reserve Clinton White House biography (archived) Expert profile at the Brookings Institution Faculty profile at the Haas School of Business Faculty profile at University of California, Berkeley Other [ edit ] Appearances on C-SPAN Profile and papers at Research Papers in Economics Janet Yellen collected news and commentary at The Guardian Offices Government offices Preceded by Wayne Angell Member of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors 1994–1997 Succeeded by Edward Gramlich Preceded by Mark W. Olson Member of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors 2010–2018 Succeeded by Lisa D. Cook Preceded by Donald Kohn Vice Chair of the Federal Reserve 2010–2014 Succeeded by Stanley Fischer Preceded by Ben Bernanke Chair of the Federal Reserve 2014–2018 Succeeded by Jerome Powell Political offices Preceded by Joseph Stiglitz Chair of the Council of Economic Advisers 1997–1999 Succeeded by Martin Neil Baily Preceded by Steven Mnuchin United States Secretary of the Treasury 2021–2025 Succeeded by Scott Bessent Other offices Preceded by Robert T. Parry President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 2004–2010 Succeeded by John Williams Academic offices Preceded by Ben Bernanke President of the American Economic Association 2020–2021 Succeeded by David Card U.S. order of precedence (ceremonial) Preceded by Lloyd Austin as Former US Cabinet Member Order of precedence of the United States as Former US Cabinet Member Succeeded by Alejandro Mayorkas as Former US Cabinet Member Links to related articles v t e United States secretaries of the treasury Hamilton Wolcott Dexter Gallatin Campbell Dallas Crawford Rush Ingham McLane Duane Taney Woodbury Ewing Forward Spencer Bibb Walker Meredith Corwin Guthrie Cobb Thomas Dix Chase Fessenden McCulloch Boutwell Richardson Bristow Morrill Sherman Windom Folger Gresham McCulloch Manning Fairchild Windom Foster Carlisle Gage Shaw Cortelyou MacVeagh McAdoo Glass Houston Mellon Mills Woodin Morgenthau Vinson Snyder Humphrey Anderson Dillon Fowler Barr Kennedy Connally Shultz Simon Blumenthal Miller Regan Baker Brady Bentsen Rubin Summers O'Neill Snow Paulson Geithner Lew Mnuchin Yellen Bessent v t e Chairs of the Council of Economic Advisers Nourse Keyserling Burns Saulnier Heller Ackley Okun McCracken Stein Greenspan Schultze Weidenbaum Feldstein Sprinkel Boskin Tyson Stiglitz Yellen Baily Hubbard Mankiw Rosen Bernanke Lazear Romer Goolsbee Krueger Furman Hassett Philipson * Goodspeed * Rouse Bernstein Miran * indicates acting officeholders v t e Cabinet of President Joe Biden (2021–2025) Cabinet Vice President Kamala Harris ( 2021–2025 ) Secretary of State Antony Blinken (2021–2025) Secretary of the Treasury Janet Yellen (2021–2025) Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin (2021–2025) Attorney General Merrick Garland (2021–2025) Secretary of the Interior Deb Haaland (2021–2025) Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack (2021–2025) Secretary of Commerce Gina Raimondo (2021–2025) Secretary of Labor Marty Walsh (2021–2023) Julie Su (acting) (2023–2025) Secretary of Health and Human Services Xavier Becerra (2021–2025) Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Marcia Fudge (2021–2024) Adrianne Todman (acting) (2024–2025) Secretary of Transportation Pete Buttigieg (2021–2025) Secretary of Energy Jennifer Granholm (2021–2025) Secretary of Education Miguel Cardona (2021–2025) Secretary of Veterans Affairs Denis McDonough (2021–2025) Secretary of Homeland Security Alejandro Mayorkas (2021–2025) Cabinet-level Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency Michael S. Regan (2021–2024) Jane Nishida (acting) (2025) Director of the Office of Management and Budget Shalanda Young (2021–2025) Director of National Intelligence Avril Haines (2021–2025) Director of the Central Intelligence Agency William J. Burns (2023–2025) Trade Representative Katherine Tai (2021–2025) Ambassador to the United Nations Linda Thomas-Greenfield (2021–2025) Chair of the Council of Economic Advisers Cecilia Rouse (2021–2023) Jared Bernstein (2023–2025) Administrator of the Small Business Administration Isabel Guzman (2021–2025) Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy Eric Lander (2021–2022) Arati Prabhakar (2022–2025) White House Chief of Staff Ron Klain (2021–2023) Jeff Zients (2023–2025) See also: Political appointments by Joe Biden v t e Cabinet of President Bill Clinton (1993–2001) Cabinet Vice President Al Gore ( 1993–2001 ) Secretary of State Warren Christopher (1993–1997) Madeleine Albright (1997–2001) Secretary of the Treasury Lloyd Bentsen (1993–1994) Robert Rubin (1995–1999) Lawrence Summers (1999–2001) Secretary of Defense Les Aspin (1993–1994) William J. Perry (1994–1997) William Cohen (1997–2001) Attorney General Janet Reno (1993–2001) Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt (1993–2001) Secretary of Agriculture Mike Espy (1993–1994) Dan Glickman (1995–2001) Secretary of Commerce Ron Brown (1993–1996) Mickey Kantor (1996–1997) William M. Daley (1997–2000) Norman Mineta (2000–2001) Secretary of Labor Robert Reich (1993–1997) Alexis Herman (1997–2001) Secretary of Health and Human Services Donna Shalala (1993–2001) Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Henry Cisneros (1993–1997) Andrew Cuomo (1997–2001) Secretary of Transportation Federico Peña (1993–1997) Rodney E. Slater (1997–2001) Secretary of Energy Hazel R. O'Leary (1993–1997) Federico Peña (1997–1998) Bill Richardson (1998–2001) Secretary of Education Richard Riley (1993–2001) Secretary of Veterans Affairs Jesse Brown (1993–1997) Togo D. West Jr.

(1998–2000) Cabinet-level Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency Carol Browner (1993–2001) Director of the Office of Management and Budget Leon Panetta (1993–1994) Alice Rivlin (1994–1996) Franklin Raines (1996–1998) Jack Lew (1998–2001) Director of Central Intelligence John M. Deutch (1995–1996) George Tenet (1996–2001) Trade Representative Mickey Kantor (1993–1996) Charlene Barshefsky (1996–2001) Ambassador to the United Nations Madeleine Albright (1993–1997) Bill Richardson (1997–1998) Richard Holbrooke (1999–2001) Chair of the Council of Economic Advisers Laura Tyson (1993–1995) Joseph Stiglitz (1995–1997) Janet Yellen (1997–1999) Martin Neil Baily (1999–2001) Administrator of the Small Business Administration Philip Lader (1994–1997) Aida Álvarez (1997–2001) Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency James Lee Witt (1993–2001)* Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy Lee P. Brown (1993–1996) Barry McCaffrey (1996–2001) White House Chief of Staff Mack McLarty (1993–1994) Leon Panetta (1994–1997) Erskine Bowles (1997–1998) John Podesta (1998–2001) * took office in 1993, raised to cabinet-rank in 1996 v t e Federal Reserve System Chair Vice Chair Governors Federal Reserve Banks Federal Open Market Committee Banknotes Federal Reserve Note Federal Reserve Bank Note Reports Beige Book Federal Reserve Statistical Release Monetary Policy Report to the Congress Federal funds Discount window Bank rate Federal funds Federal funds rate Overnight rate Primary dealer History ( Antecedents ) Aldrich–Vreeland Act (1908) National Monetary Commission (1909–1912) Federal Reserve Act (1913) Pittman Act (1918) Edge Act (1919) Phelan Act (1920) Regulation D (c. 1930) Emergency Banking Act (1933) Regulation Q (1933) Glass–Steagall Act (1933) Gold Reserve Act (1934) Banking Act of 1935 Bretton Woods system (1944–1971) Employment Act of 1946 U.S. Treasury Department Accord (1951) Bank Holding Company Act (1956) FOMC actions (1961–present) Truth in Lending Act (1968) Nixon shock (1971) Smithsonian Agreement (1971) Equal Credit Opportunity Act (1974) Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (1975) Community Reinvestment Act (1977) Federal Reserve Reform Act (1977) Electronic Fund Transfer Act (1978) Humphrey–Hawkins Full Employment Act (1978) International Banking Act (1978) DIDMC Act (1980) Federal Reserve v. Investment Co. Institute (1981) Northeast Bancorp v. Federal Reserve (1985) Greenspan put (1987) Expedited Funds Availability Act (1987) FIRRE Act (1989) FDIC Improvement Act (1991) Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act (1999) Subprime mortgage crisis responses (2007–2010) Emergency Economic Stabilization Act (2008) Unfair or Deceptive Acts or Practices (2008) Commercial Paper Funding Facility (2008–2010) Primary Dealer Credit Facility (2008–2010) Bloomberg v. Federal Reserve (2009) 2009 Supervisory Capital Assessment Program Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (2009–2010) Public–Private Investment Program for Legacy Assets (2009–) Dodd–Frank Act (2010; Durbin amendment ) Commercial Paper Funding Facility (2020–2021) Bank Term Funding Program (2023–2024) Corner Post v. Federal Reserve (2024) Chairs Charles S. Hamlin (1914–1916) William P. G. Harding (1916–1922) Daniel R. Crissinger (1923–1927) Roy A. Young (1927–1930) Eugene Meyer (1930–1933) Eugene R. Black (1933–1934) Marriner S. Eccles (1934–1948) Thomas B. McCabe (1948–1951) William M. Martin (1951–1970) Arthur F. Burns (1970–1978) G. William Miller (1978–1979) Paul Volcker (1979–1987) Alan Greenspan (1987–2006) Ben Bernanke (2006–2014) Janet Yellen (2014–2018) Jerome Powell (2018–present) Current governors Jerome Powell ( Chair ) Philip Jefferson ( Vice Chair ) Michelle Bowman ( Vice Chair for Supervision ) Christopher Waller Lisa D. Cook Michael Barr 1 seat vacant Current presidents (by district) Susan Collins ( Boston ) John Williams ( New York ) Anna Paulson ( Philadelphia ) Beth M. Hammack ( Cleveland ) Thomas Barkin ( Richmond ) Raphael Bostic ( Atlanta ) Austan Goolsbee ( Chicago ) Alberto Musalem ( St. Louis ) Neel Kashkari ( Minneapolis ) Jeff Schmid ( Kansas City ) Lorie Logan ( Dallas ) Mary C. Daly ( San Francisco ) Related Central bank Criticism of the Federal Reserve Fed model Fedspeak Fed put Jackson Hole Economic Symposium Lender of last resort Monetary policy of the United States History Personal consumption expenditures price index Sahm rule v t e Presidents of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Archibald C. Kains (1914–1917) James K. Lynch (1917–1919) John U. Calkins (1919–1936) William A. Day (1936–1945) Ira Clerk (1946) C. E. Earhart (1946–1956) Hermann N. Mangels (1956–1961) Eliot J. Swan (1961–1972) John J. Balles (1972–1986) Robert T. Parry (1986–2004) Janet Yellen (2004–2010) John C. Williams (2011–2018) Mary C. Daly (2018–present) v t e Presidents of the American Economic Association 1886–1900 Francis Amasa Walker (1886) Charles Franklin Dunbar (1893) John Bates Clark (1894) Henry Carter Adams (1896) Arthur Twining Hadley (1898) Richard T. Ely (1900) 1901–1925 Edwin R. A. Seligman (1902) F. W. Taussig (1904) Jeremiah Jenks (1906) Simon Patten (1908) Davis Rich Dewey (1909) Edmund J. James (1910) Henry Walcott Farnam (1911) Frank Fetter (1912) David Kinley (1913) John H. Gray (1914) Walter Francis Willcox (1915) Thomas Nixon Carver (1916) John R. Commons (1917) Irving Fisher (1918) Henry B. Gardner (1919) Herbert J. Davenport (1920) Jacob H. Hollander (1921) Henry R. Seager (1922) Carl C. Plehn (1923) Wesley C. Mitchell (1924) Allyn A. Young (1925) 1926–1950 Edwin W. Kemmerer (1926) Thomas S. Adams (1927) Fred M. Taylor (1928) Edwin F. Gay (1929) Matthew B. Hammond (1930) Ernest L. Bogart (1931) George E. Barnett (1932) William Z. Ripley (1933) Harry A. Millis (1934) John M. Clark (1935) Alvin S. Johnson (1936) Oliver M. W. Sprague (1937) Alvin Hansen (1938) Jacob Viner (1939) Frederick C. Mills (1940) Sumner Slichter (1941) Edwin G. Nourse (1942) Albert B. Wolfe (1943) Joseph S. Davis (1944) I. Leo Sharfman (1945) Emanuel A. Goldenweiser (1946) Paul Douglas (1947) Joseph Schumpeter (1948) Howard S. Ellis (1949) Frank Knight (1950) 1951–1975 John H. Williams (1951) Harold A. Innis (1952) Calvin B. Hoover (1953) Simon Kuznets (1954) John D. Black (1955) Edwin E. Witte (1956) Morris A. Copeland (1957) George W. Stocking (1958) Arthur F. Burns (1959) Theodore W. Schultz (1960) Paul A. Samuelson (1961) Edward S. Mason (1962) Gottfried Haberler (1963) George J. Stigler (1964) Joseph J. Spengler (1965) Fritz Machlup (1966) Milton Friedman (1967) Kenneth E. Boulding (1968) William J. Fellner (1969) Wassily Leontief (1970) James Tobin (1971) John Kenneth Galbraith (1972) Kenneth J. Arrow (1973) Walter W. Heller (1974) R. Aaron Gordon (1975) 1976–2000 Franco Modigliani (1976) Lawrence R. Klein (1977) Jacob Marschak (1978) Tjalling C. Koopmans (1978) Robert M. Solow (1979) Moses Abramovitz (1980) William J. Baumol (1981) Gardner Ackley (1982) W. Arthur Lewis (1983) Charles L. Schultze (1984) Charles P. Kindleberger (1985) Alice M. Rivlin (1986) Gary S. Becker (1987) Robert Eisner (1988) Joseph A. Pechman (1989) Gérard Debreu (1990) Thomas C. Schelling (1991) William Vickrey (1992) Zvi Griliches (1993) Amartya Sen (1994) Victor R. Fuchs (1995) Anne O. Krueger (1996) Arnold C. Harberger (1997) Robert W. Fogel (1998) D. Gale Johnson (1999) Dale W. Jorgenson (2000) 2001–present Sherwin Rosen (2001) Robert Lucas Jr.

(2002) Peter Diamond (2003) Martin Feldstein (2004) Daniel McFadden (2005) George Akerlof (2006) Thomas J. Sargent (2007) Avinash Dixit (2008) Angus Deaton (2009) Robert Hall (2010) Orley Ashenfelter (2011) Christopher A. Sims (2012) Claudia Goldin (2013) William Nordhaus (2014) Richard Thaler (2015) Robert J. Shiller (2016) Alvin E. Roth (2017) Olivier Blanchard (2018) Ben Bernanke (2019) Janet Yellen (2020) David Card (2021) Christina Romer (2022) Susan Athey (2023) Janet Currie (2024) Lawrence F. Katz (2025) v t e Keynesians Founder John Maynard Keynes Neo-Keynesians Gardner Ackley William Baumol James Duesenberry Robert Eisner Trygve Haavelmo Alvin Hansen Roy Harrod Walter Heller John Hicks Lawrence Klein James Meade Lloyd Metzler Franco Modigliani Robert Mundell Arthur Melvin Okun Don Patinkin Bill Phillips William Poole Paul Samuelson Robert Solow James Tobin Post-Keynesians Victoria Chick Paul Davidson Evsey Domar James K. Galbraith John Kenneth Galbraith Wynne Godley Myron J. Gordon Geoff Harcourt Michael Hudson Richard Kahn Nicholas Kaldor Michał Kalecki Steve Keen Jan Kregel Marc Lavoie Abba P. Lerner Hyman Minsky Bill Mitchell Basil Moore Steven Pressman Joan Robinson G. L. S. Shackle Pavlina R. Tcherneva Anthony Thirlwall William Vickrey Sidney Weintraub L. Randall Wray New Keynesians George Akerlof Ben Bernanke Olivier Blanchard Alan Blinder Guillermo Calvo Richard Clarida Brad DeLong Huw Dixon Stanley Fischer Jordi Galí Mark Gertler Robert J. Gordon Stephany Griffith-Jones Nobuhiro Kiyotaki Paul Krugman Greg Mankiw Marc Melitz Maurice Obstfeld Edmund Phelps Ricardo Reis Kenneth Rogoff David Romer Julio Rotemberg Robert Shiller Andrei Shleifer Joseph Stiglitz Lawrence Summers John B. Taylor Michael Woodford Janet Yellen Related Keynesian economics Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Korea Poland Israel Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Janet_Yellen&oldid=1303605326 " Categories : 1946 births Living people 20th-century American economists 20th-century American politicians 20th-century American women civil servants 21st-century American economists 21st-century American politicians 21st-century American women civil servants Academics of the London School of Economics American expatriate academics in the United Kingdom American labor economists American macroeconomists American people of Polish-Jewish descent American women economists Biden administration cabinet members Biden administration personnel Brookings Institution people California Democrats Chairs of the Federal Reserve American women bankers Chairs of the United States Council of Economic Advisers Clinton administration cabinet members Clinton administration personnel Distinguished fellows of the American Economic Association Economists from California Economists from New York (state) Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco presidents Federal Reserve economists Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Fellows of the Econometric Society Female finance ministers First Trump administration personnel Fort Hamilton High School alumni Group of Thirty Haas School of Business faculty Harvard University faculty Honorary Fellows of the British Academy Jewish American economists Jewish members of the Cabinet of the United States Jewish American women in politics Jews from New York (state) Massachusetts Institute of Technology fellows Monetary economists National Bureau of Economic Research New Keynesian economists New York (state) Democrats Obama administration personnel Pembroke College in Brown University alumni People from Bay Ridge, Brooklyn Presidents of the American Economic Association United States secretaries of the treasury University of California, Berkeley faculty Vice chairs of the Federal Reserve Women members of the Cabinet of the United States Yale Graduate School of Arts and Sciences alumni Yale University fellows Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from January 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from February 2021 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox economist as a module Articles with hAudio microformats Wikipedia articles in need of updating from October 2024 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Incomplete lists from May 2021 Incomplete lists from February 2021 Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links People appearing on C-SPAN Guardian topic template using Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 00:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Janet Yellen 64 languages Add topic

