Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Linear time-variant systems 3 Examples of time-variant systems 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Time-variant system 3 languages فارسی Polski 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's general notability guideline .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "Time-variant system" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Time-variant system" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A time-variant system is a system whose output response depends on moment of observation as well as moment of input signal application.

[ 1 ] In other words, a time delay or time advance of input not only shifts the output signal in time but also changes other parameters and behavior. Time variant systems respond differently to the same input at different times. The opposite is true for time invariant systems (TIV).

Overview [ edit ] There are many well developed techniques for dealing with the response of linear time invariant systems, such as Laplace and Fourier transforms . However, these techniques are not strictly valid for time-varying systems.  A system undergoing slow time variation in comparison to its time constants can usually be considered to be time invariant: they are close to time invariant on a small scale.  An example of this is the aging and wear of electronic components, which happens on a scale of years, and thus does not result in any behaviour qualitatively different from that observed in a time invariant system: day-to-day, they are effectively time invariant, though year to year, the parameters may change.  Other linear time variant systems may behave more like nonlinear systems, if the system changes quickly – significantly differing between measurements.

The following things can be said about a time-variant system: It has explicit dependence on time.

It does not have an impulse response in the normal sense. The system can be characterized by an impulse response except the impulse response must be known at each and every time instant.

It is not stationary in the sense of constancy of the signal's distributional frequency. This means that the parameters which govern the signal's process exhibit variation with the passage of time. See Stationarity (statistics) for in-depth theoretics regarding this property.

Linear time-variant systems [ edit ] Linear-time variant (LTV) systems are the ones whose parameters vary with time according to previously specified laws. Mathematically, there is a well defined dependence of the system over time and over the input parameters that change over time.

y ( t ) = f ( x ( t ) , t ) {\displaystyle y(t)=f(x(t),t)} In order to solve time-variant systems, the algebraic methods consider initial conditions of the system i.e. whether the system is zero-input or non-zero input system.

Examples of time-variant systems [ edit ] The following time varying systems cannot be modelled by assuming that they are time invariant: The Earth's thermodynamic response to incoming Solar irradiance varies with time due to changes in the Earth's albedo and the presence of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Discrete wavelet transform , often used in modern signal processing, is time variant because it makes use of the decimation operation [ dubious – discuss ] .

See also [ edit ] Control system Control theory System analysis Time-invariant system References [ edit ] ^ Cherniakov, Mikhail (2003).

An Introduction to Parametric Digital Filters and Oscillators . Wiley. pp.

47– 49.

ISBN 978-0470851043 .

^ Sung, Taehong; Yoon, Sang; Kim, Kyung (2015-07-13).

"A Mathematical Model of Hourly Solar Radiation in Varying Weather Conditions for a Dynamic Simulation of the Solar Organic Rankine Cycle" .

Energies .

8 (7): 7058– 7069.

doi : 10.3390/en8077058 .

ISSN 1996-1073 .

^ Alzahrani, Ahmad; Shamsi, Pourya; Dagli, Cihan; Ferdowsi, Mehdi (2017).

"Solar Irradiance Forecasting Using Deep Neural Networks" .

Procedia Computer Science .

114 : 304– 313.

doi : 10.1016/j.procs.2017.09.045 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Time-variant_system&oldid=1298736429 " Category : Control theory Hidden categories: Articles with topics of unclear notability from July 2021 All articles with topics of unclear notability Articles needing additional references from March 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from July 2021 This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 10:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Time-variant system 3 languages Add topic

