Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Technical characteristics 2 Scientific instruments 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Galileo National Telescope 12 languages Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Italiano Lëtzebuergesch Nederlands Português Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 28°45′14″N 17°53′17″W ﻿ / ﻿ 28.754°N 17.88814°W ﻿ / 28.754; -17.88814 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Telescope in the Roque de los Muchachos Observatory, Canary Islands Galileo National Telescope The dome of the Telescopio Nazionale Galileo near time of sunset Alternative names TNG Location(s) La Palma , Atlantic Ocean , international waters Coordinates 28°45′14″N 17°53′17″W ﻿ / ﻿ 28.754°N 17.88814°W ﻿ / 28.754; -17.88814 Altitude 2,370 m (7,780 ft) Built October 1993–June 1996 Telescope style Ritchey–Chrétien telescope Diameter 3.58 m (11 ft 9 in) Secondary diameter 0.875 m (2 ft 10.4 in) Collecting area 12 m 2 (130 sq ft) Focal length 38.5 m (126 ft 4 in) Mounting altazimuth mount Website www .tng .iac .es Location of Galileo National Telescope Related media on Commons [ edit on Wikidata ] The Galileo National Telescope , ( Italian : Telescopio Nazionale Galileo ; TNG ; code : Z19 ) is a 3.58-meter Italian telescope , located at the Roque de los Muchachos Observatory on the island of La Palma in the Canary Islands , Spain. The TNG is operated by the "Fundación Galileo Galilei, Fundación Canaria", a non-profit institution, on behalf of the Italian National Institute of Astrophysics (INAF). The telescope saw first light in 1998 and is named after the Italian Renaissance astronomer Galileo Galilei .

Observations at the TNG can be proposed through the Italian Time Allocation Committee (TAC) which assigns, based on the scientific merit of the proposals, 75% of the available time. The rest of the time is at disposal of the Spanish and international astronomical communities. The TNG is open to new proposals two times a year, typically in March–April and September–October.

Technical characteristics [ edit ] The TNG is an altazimuthal reflecting telescope with a Ritchey-Chretien optical configuration and a flat tertiary mirror feeding two opposite Nasmyth foci. It has a design derived from the New Technology Telescope (NTT), an ESO 4-meters class telescope located in La Silla (Chile). Therefore, the optical quality of the telescope is ensured by an active optics system performing real-time corrections of the optical components and compensating, in particular, for the deformations of the primary mirror, which is too thin to be completely rigid.

The interface between the telescope fork and the instruments at both Nasmyth foci is provided by two rotator/adapters. Their main function is to compensate for the field rotation by a mechanical counter rotation. The best quality of the TNG is that all the available instruments are permanently mounted at the telescope. This guarantees flexibility during an observing session, since it is possible to change instrument during the night with a loss of time limited to a few minutes.

The science based on observational data from the TNG is varied. Proposed observing programs go from the study of the planets and minor bodies of the Solar System up to researches of cosmological interest (e.g.

large-scale structure of the Universe and systems of galaxies ).

Scientific instruments [ edit ] The TNG is equipped with five instruments: HARPS-N ("High Accuracy Radial velocity Planet Searcher"), echelle spectrograph dedicated to the discovery of extrasolar planets ; DOLoRes ("Device Optimized for the Low Resolution"), CCD camera and low-resolution spectrograph for observations in the visible band ; NICS ("Near Infrared Camera and Spectrometer"), camera and spectrograph for observations in the near- infrared ; GIANO , high-resolution echelle spectrograph for observations in the near- infrared ; SiFAP2 , extremely fast optical photometer.

Decommissioned instruments: SARG ("Spettrografo ad Alta Risoluzione del Galileo"), high-resolution spectrograph for observations in the visible band; OIG ("Optical Imager Galileo"), CCD camera dedicated to optical images at high resolution; Speckle camera , dedicated to observations in the visible band at the diffraction limit of the telescope; AdOpt@TNG , adaptive optics system working in the near-infrared.

See also [ edit ] Reflecting telescope List of largest optical reflecting telescopes References [ edit ] External links [ edit ] Official website TNG News Page (TNG News) Scientific publications based on data taken at the TNG Roque de los Muchachos Observatory Haran, Brady .

"Telescopio Nazionale Galileo (TNG)" .

Deep Sky Videos .

v t e Galileo Galilei Scientific career Observational astronomy Galileo affair Galileo's escapement Galilean invariance Galilean moons Galilean transformation Leaning Tower of Pisa experiment Phases of Venus Celatone Thermoscope Works De motu antiquiora (1589–1592) Sidereus Nuncius (1610) Letters on Sunspots (1613) Letter to Benedetto Castelli (1613) " Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina " (1615) " Discourse on the Tides " (1616) Discourse on Comets (1619) The Assayer (1623) Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems (1632) Two New Sciences (1638) Family Vincenzo Galilei (father) Michelagnolo Galilei (brother) Vincenzo Gamba (son) Maria Celeste (daughter) Marina Gamba (mistress) Related " And yet it moves " Villa Il Gioiello Galileo's paradox Galileo's ship Sector Museo Galileo Galileo's telescopes Galileo's objective lens Tribune of Galileo Galileo thermometer Galileo project spacecraft Galileo Galilei Airport Galileo National Telescope Astronomers Monument In popular culture Life of Galileo (1943 play) Lamp At Midnight (1947 play) Galileo (1968 film) Galileo (1975 film) Starry Messenger (1996 book) Galileo's Daughter: A Historical Memoir of Science, Faith, and Love (1999 book) Galileo Galilei (2002 opera) Galileo's Dream (2009 novel) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Galileo_National_Telescope&oldid=1258597905 " Categories : Reflecting telescopes Astronomical observatories in La Palma Galileo Galilei Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using Wikidata location map with locally defined parameters Articles with infoboxes completely from Wikidata Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 20 November 2024, at 16:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Galileo National Telescope 12 languages Add topic

