Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Timeline 1.1.1 Progressive Party to Unionist Party 1.1.2 South African Party 1.1.3 United Party 1.1.4 Liberal Party of South Africa 1.1.5 Progressive Party to Democratic Alliance 1.2 Mahlabatini Declaration 2 Prominent individuals Toggle Prominent individuals subsection 2.1 Politics 2.2 Academia 2.3 Media and literature 2.4 Religion 3 Liberal organisations 4 References 5 See also Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in South Africa 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on the Politics of South Africa Constitution Founding provisions Bill of Rights Chapter nine institutions Executive President Cyril Ramaphosa Deputy President Paul Mashatile Cabinet Departments Shadow Cabinet Legislature National Council of Provinces Chairperson Refilwe Mtsweni-Tsipane National Assembly Speaker Thoko Didiza Leader of the Opposition John Hlophe Judiciary Chief Justice Mandisa Maya Deputy Chief Justice Mbuyiseli Madlanga (acting) Courts Constitutional Court Supreme Court of Appeal President: Mahube Molemela High Court Magistrate's courts Electoral Court Elections General 1910 1915 1920 1921 1924 1929 1933 1938 1943 1948 1953 1958 1961 1966 1970 1974 1977 1981 1984 1987 1989 1994 1999 2004 2009 2014 2019 2024 Municipal 2000 2006 2011 2016 2021 Referendums 1960 1983 1992 Political parties Administrative divisions Provinces Districts Metropolitan municipality District municipality Municipalities ( list ) Foreign relations Department of International Relations and Cooperation Minister : Ronald Lamola Diplomatic missions of / in South Africa Nationality law Passport Visa requirements Visa policy Related topics Political assassinations Repression Protests Human rights National budget National debt Social welfare Taxation Provincial politics Politics of the Eastern Cape Politics of the Free State Politics of Gauteng Politics of KwaZulu-Natal Politics of Limpopo Politics of Mpumalanga Politics of the Northern Cape Politics of North West Politics of the Western Cape South Africa portal Other countries v t e Liberalism in South Africa has encompassed various traditions and parties.

Various South Africans have contributed prominently to liberalism in the country. Cape liberalism played a key role in the politics of the Cape Colony , which enjoyed the non-racial Cape Qualified Franchise .

[ 1 ] From the foundation of the Union of South Africa , liberal ideas played a key role in ensuring certain political freedoms – including of speech and political participation – for the white population , whose own multiculturalism (particularly Afrikaner - British parity) it had guaranteed. Another key facet of liberalism in South Africa was advocacy for the reform or total abolition of apartheid . In the democratic era, liberalism lives on through the country's constitution , which features a far-reaching bill of rights, some separation of powers and checks and balances. It continues to be championed by some political parties, while the country's economic policy has features of liberalism despite being a mixed economy.

The moderate South African Party and its successor, the United Party , formed government several times between the formation of the Union and the election of the National Party in 1948. In 1959, members of the United Party formed the Progressive Party , a precursor to the present-day Democratic Alliance . Separately, in 1953, the anti-Apartheid and multi-racial Liberal Party of South Africa was formed, before disbanding in 1968.

Following the 2024 general elections, the liberal Democratic Alliance (DA) entered into a coalition with the African National Congress (ANC) and various other parties, breaking the ANC's dominance of national government since the end of apartheid.

History [ edit ] Timeline [ edit ] Progressive Party to Unionist Party [ edit ] 1890: The Progressive Party was formed.

1910: PP merged with the Constitutional Party from the Orange River Colony and the Progressives from the South African Republic to form the Unionist Party .

1920: The Unionist Party merged into the ⇒ South African Party.

South African Party [ edit ] 1911: The South African Party was formed of various pre-Union parties. Led by the moderate Louis Botha , it formed the first government of a united South Africa. The party's support base included English-speaking white South Africans who developed a pattern of supporting the most moderate Afrikaner politicians to avoid domination. The party's own 'liberal' wing was led by Jan Hofmeyr .

[ 2 ] 1934: SAP merged into the United Party.

United Party [ edit ] 1934: The United Party was formed in response to the Great Depression , combining Jan Smuts ' South African Party and most of Barry Hertzog 's National Party .

[ 2 ] 1939: Hertzog left the party and a split formed following South Africa's entry into the Second World War .

[ 3 ] The party increasingly resembled the former South African Party.

[ 2 ] 1948: The United Party, led by Jan Smuts, lost in the 1948 election to the Reunited National Party . The United Party based its platform on the recommendations of the Fagan Commission , which determined total segregation to be impossible, and advocated a relaxation of restrictions on black African migration into urban areas.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The Reunited National Party, conversely, had campaigned on total racial separation.

[ 4 ] 1960: Moderate National Party members formed the National Union .

1962: NU merged into the UP.

1973: Democratic Party broke away from the National Party.

1977: DP and UP formed the New Republic Party .

1987: NRP dissolved, many of their members went to the Independent Party .

1988: IP and NRP merged into the Democratic Party.

Liberal Party of South Africa [ edit ] 1953: The Liberal Party of South Africa was formed by Alan Paton .

1968: The SALP decided to disband rather than obey legislation outlawing multiracial political parties. The decision was also influenced by the fact that the leadership of the SALP had been decimated by banning orders and other restrictive measures, and by the fact that many stalwarts had been forced into exile.

Progressive Party to Democratic Alliance [ edit ] 1959: Liberal members of the United Party seceded and formed the liberal Progressive Party . The parliamentary party is led by Helen Suzman .

1975: The party merged with the Reform Party led by Harry Schwarz , a faction of the United Party, and became the Progressive Reform Party .

1977: After the dissolution of the United Party, former members merged into the PRP, which is renamed the Progressive Federal Party .

1987: National Party MP Wynand Malan quit the governing party to protest PW Botha 's policies. South African Ambassador to the UK Denis Worrall quit his post in order to return to South Africa and fight apartheid. The two formed and led the liberal Independent Party .

1988: The PFP merged with the newly founded National Democratic Movement and the Independent Party into the Democratic Party .

2000: The DP merged with the conservative New National Party into an alliance, the Democratic Alliance.

2001: The NNP left the alliance and the DP continues as the present-day Democratic Alliance .

2024: The Democratic Alliance joins a Government of National Unity , forming a coalition with the African National Congress and other parties.

Mahlabatini Declaration [ edit ] Main article: Mahlabatini Declaration of Faith On 4 January 1974, Transvaal United Party leader Harry Schwarz met with Mangosuthu Buthelezi and signed a five-point plan for racial peace in South Africa, which came to be known as the Mahlabatini Declaration of Faith . Its purpose was to provide a blueprint for the government of South Africa by consent and racial peace in a multi-racial society, stressing opportunity for all, consultation, the federal concept, and a bill of rights . It also affirmed that political change must take place though non-violent means, at a time when neither the National Party nor the African National Congress were looking to peaceful solutions or dialogue. The declaration enshrined the principles of peaceful transition of power and equality for all, the first of such agreements by acknowledged black and white political leaders in South Africa and was heralded by many as a breakthrough in race relations in South Africa. Liberal figures and others such as Alan Paton praised the declaration. The declaration drew much media interest both inside and outside South Africa. Schwarz, leader of the liberal 'Young Turks' in the UP, would be expelled with other liberals from the party the following year.

Prominent individuals [ edit ] Politics [ edit ] South African Party: Louis Botha , Jan Smuts , Jan Hofmeyr . Botha and Smuts were the first and second prime ministers of South Africa respectively United Party: Harry Schwarz , Jan Smuts Liberal Party of South Africa: Alan Paton Progressive Party: Jan Steytler , Colin Eglin , Bernard Friedman , Helen Suzman Reform Party: Harry Schwarz Progressive Reform and Progressive Federal Party: Colin Eglin , Frederik van Zyl Slabbert , Harry Schwarz , Zach de Beer Independent Party: Denis Worrall , Wynand Malan Democratic Party: Denis Worrall , Harry Schwarz Wynand Malan , Zach de Beer , Tony Leon , Sipho Moganedi (first black Democratic Party Youth national president, 1995 to 1998) Democratic Alliance: Tony Leon , Helen Zille , Mmusi Maimane , John Steenhuisen Academia [ edit ] Donald Barkly Molteno (1908–1972) Edgar Brookes (1897–1979) Media and literature [ edit ] Author Alan Paton (1903–1988) Laurence Gandar [ 6 ] (1915–1998), editor of the liberal daily the Rand Daily Mail in Johannesburg from 1957 to 1969 Barry Streek [ 7 ] (1948–2006), political journalist.

Religion [ edit ] South African Council of Churches (SACC): Beyers Naudé Liberal organisations [ edit ] Helen Suzman Foundation South African Institute of Race Relations Black Sash Free Market Foundation References [ edit ] ^ Van Staden, Martin (25 October 2019).

"Cape Liberal Tradition (1820s-1959)" .

Liberal South Africa . Retrieved 2 March 2025 .

^ a b c Mills, Wallace.

"South African Political Parties" .

smu-facweb.smu.ca . Retrieved 26 February 2022 .

^ "United Party, South Africa" .

Oxford Reference . Retrieved 26 February 2022 .

^ a b "South Africa - The 1948 Election" .

countrystudies.us . Retrieved 26 February 2022 .

^ Evans, Ivan (1997).

Bureaucracy and Race: Native Administration in South Africa .

University of California Press . pp.

58– 59.

ISBN 9780520206519 .

^ The Independent (UK) ^ Mail & Guardian Archived 1 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine See also [ edit ] History of South Africa Politics of South Africa List of political parties in South Africa v t e Liberalism in South Africa Apartheid-era political parties and groups Liberal Party of South Africa Progressive Party Democratic Party Progressive Federal Party Reform Party Progressive Reform Party Independent Party Black Sash Post-Apartheid political parties and groups Democratic Alliance South African Institute of Race Relations Helen Suzman Foundation People before and during the apartheid era Alan Paton Colin Eglin Harry Schwarz Helen Suzman Zach de Beer Denis Worrall Wynand Malan Frederik van Zyl Slabbert Donald Barkly Molteno Jan Steytler Margaret Ballinger Post-apartheid people Tony Leon Helen Zille Gwen Ngwenya John Steenhuisen v t e Liberalism in Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) v t e Politics of South Africa By province Eastern Cape Free State Gauteng KwaZulu-Natal Limpopo Mpumalanga North West Northern Cape Western Cape Flag of South Africa Political movements Ideologies African nationalism Afrikaner nationalism Anarchism Anti-war Black consciousness Environmentalism Federalism Feminism Liberalism Pan-Africanism Non-racialism Trotskyism Political parties see South Africa political parties Other political organisations AfriForum Afrikanerbond Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging (AWB) Congress of Traditional Leaders of South Africa (CONTRALESA) Congress of South African Students (COSAS) Earthlife Africa Keep Left Khanya College Koeberg Alert Lesbian and Gay Equality Project (LGEP) People Against Gangsterism and Drugs (PAGAD) South African Liberal Students' Association (SALSA) South African Students Congress (SASCO) South African Wine Initiative Zabalaza Anarchist Communist Front (ZACF) Trade unions and Social movements see South Africa trade unions Equal Education Mandela Park Backyarders People Against Suffering, Oppression and Poverty (PASSOP) Poor People's Alliance Abahlali baseMjondolo Landless Peoples Movement Western Cape Anti-Eviction Campaign Reclaim the City Social Justice Coalition Treatment Action Campaign Unemployed Peoples' Movement Law see South African law Political culture African Renaissance Alternative media Azania Corruption (Don't) touch me on my studio Freedom Charter Proudly South African Rainbow nation Renaming Tenderpreneurs Toyi-toyi Ubuntu UnFreedom Day White monopoly capital Ungovernability Xenophobia Anti-Chinese sentiment Anti-Indian sentiment Slogans " Amandla Ngawethu!

" " No Land! No House! No Vote!

" "Dubul' ibhunu" (Shoot the Boer) " One Settler, One Bullet " "Each One, Teach One" Books and periodicals African Communist Amandla ANC Today Biko I Write What I Like Long Walk to Freedom Molotov Cocktail No Land! No House! No Vote!

Other Corrective rape Crime Cape Independence Elections e-tolling Farm attacks Gupta family HIV/AIDS Labour brokering Land occupations Legacies of apartheid Lindela Phala Phala robbery Political assassinations Political repression Protests Sexual violence Shack fires Terrorism Third Force Category v t e Political history of South Africa Defunct polities Kingdom of Mapungubwe ( c.

1075 – c.

1220 ) Dutch Cape Colony (1652–1806) Mthethwa Paramountcy ( c.

1780 –1817) Ndwandwe Kingdom ( c.

1780 –1819) Cape Colony (1795–1910) Zulu Kingdom (1816–1897) Natalia Republic (1839–1843) Natal Colony (1843–1910) Orange Free State (1854–1902) South African Republic (1856–1902) Griqualand East (1861–1879) Griqualand West (1870–1873) Goshen (1882–1883) Stellaland (1882–1885) Nieuwe Republiek (1884–1888) Upingtonia (1885–1887) Klein Vrystaat (1886–1891) Orange River Colony (1902–1910) Transvaal Colony (1902–1910) Union of South Africa (1910–1961) Transkei (1976–1994) Bophuthatswana (1977–1994) Venda (1979–1994) Ciskei (1981–1994) Events Pre-colonial Bantu migrations Battle of Salt River 1652–1815 Dutch settlement French Huguenot settlement Khoikhoi–Dutch Wars Xhosa Wars Battle of Muizenberg Battle of Blaauwberg Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814 1815–1910 Mfecane 1820 Settlers Great Trek Boer Republics Transvaal Civil War Mineral Revolution Witwatersrand Gold Rush South African Wars South Africa Act 1909 ( National Convention ) 1910–1948 South West Africa campaign Maritz rebellion Rand Rebellion Great Depression 1946 African Mine Workers' Union strike Bantustans Apartheid 1948 general election Apartheid legislation Pass laws Internal resistance Coloured-vote constitutional crisis Defiance Campaign Congress of the People Freedom Charter Women's March 1956 1957 Alexandra bus boycott Sharpeville massacre 1960 republic referendum International isolation UN Resolution 1761 UNSC Resolution 591 Academic boycott Disinvestment Constructive engagement Tar Baby Option Sporting boycott Olympics Rugby union Rivonia Trial Durban Moment Border War Israeli alliance Israel–South Africa Agreement Mafeje affair Soweto Uprising Weapons of mass destruction Project Coast Church Street bombing 1983 constitutional referendum Vaal uprising Langa massacre Rubicon speech Operation Vula Dakar Conference Transkei coup d'état Ciskei coup d'état Venda coup d'état Third Force CODESA Storming of the Kempton Park World Trade Centre Bisho massacre 1992 apartheid referendum Saint James Church massacre Bophuthatswana crisis Shell House massacre Sauer Commission Post- apartheid 1994 general election Government of National Unity Reconstruction and Development Programme Truth and Reconciliation Commission Arms Deal Floor crossing Soweto bombings African Renaissance Travelgate Xenophobia Attack on Kennedy Road Blikkiesdorp Marikana massacre 2012 Western Cape farm workers' strike Nkandlagate Racism 2014 platinum strike #RhodesMustFall protests #FeesMustFall student protests Tshwane riots 2019 service delivery protests 2019 Johannesburg riots COVID-19 pandemic 2020 Phala Phala Robbery 2021 unrest Lady R incident Political culture African nationalism Afrikaner Calvinism Afrikaner nationalism Anarchism Azania Baasskap Boerehaat Black Consciousness Movement Cape Independence Day of the Vow Greater South Africa Honorary whites Rooi gevaar Slavery Swart gevaar Uitlander Volkstaat Defunct organisations Civic and political organisations Afrikaner Bond Afrikaner Broederbond Afrikaner Party AITUP APO AVF BPC Black Sash Boerestaat Party CDA CNIP CTEG COD Congress Alliance COSG CP DLF Dominion Party DP (1973–1977) DP (1989–2000) DPP DSM ECC FA FD Genootskap van Regte Afrikaners GNP Het Volk HNP (Herenigde) HNP (Herstigte) IDASA ID IP ISL Jeugkrag Johannesburg Reform Committee Labour Party (1910–1958) Labour Party (1969–1994) Liberal Party (1953–1968) NA NCP Natal Indian Congress NLP NNP NP NPP NRP NUSAS Occupy Orangia Unie Oranjewerkers Orde Boerevolk PAVN PFP Progressive Party (Cape Colony) Progressive Party PRP Radio Freedom Reform Party SABP SADECO SAIC SASO SAYCO SAYRCO South African Party (Cape Colony) South African Party (1911–1934) South African Party (1977–1980) TNIP Torch Commando UFP United Party Unionist Party National Party of Venda Volksparty Workers Party WOSA Trade unions and social movements APF BCM BLATU CNETU CTSWU FCWU FNETU FOSATU ICU IWW MUSA NEUM NURHS PAWE SAAPAWU SACTU SAIF SARHU SATUC Die Spoorbund UDF Umkosi Wezintaba Paramilitary and terrorist organisations APLA ARM AWB BBB Boeremag Greyshirts MK Ossewabrandwag Orde van die Dood PAGAD SANF Histories of political parties African National Congress Democratic Alliance Pan Africanist Congress of Azania Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalism_in_South_Africa&oldid=1278423209 " Categories : Liberalism in South Africa Political movements in South Africa Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2019 Use British English from January 2019 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 2 March 2025, at 11:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in South Africa 1 language Add topic

