Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Properties of the category of sets 2 Foundations for the category of sets 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Category of sets 13 languages Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Category whose objects are sets and whose morphisms are functions In the mathematical field of category theory , the category of sets , denoted by Set , is the category whose objects are sets .  The arrows or morphisms between sets A and B are the functions from A to B , and the composition of morphisms is the composition of functions .

Many other categories (such as the category of groups , with group homomorphisms as arrows) add structure to the objects of the category of sets or restrict the arrows to functions of a particular kind (or both).

Properties of the category of sets [ edit ] The axioms of a category are satisfied by Set because composition of functions is associative , and because every set X has an identity function id X : X → X which serves as identity element for function composition.

The epimorphisms in Set are the surjective maps, the monomorphisms are the injective maps, and the isomorphisms are the bijective maps.

The empty set serves as the initial object in Set with empty functions as morphisms.  Every singleton is a terminal object , with the functions mapping all elements of the source sets to the single target element as morphisms. There are thus no zero objects in Set .

The category Set is complete and co-complete . The product in this category is given by the cartesian product of sets. The coproduct is given by the disjoint union : given sets A i where i ranges over some index set I , we construct the coproduct as the union of A i ×{ i } (the cartesian product with i serves to ensure that all the components stay disjoint).

Set is the prototype of a concrete category ; other categories are concrete if they are "built on" Set in some well-defined way.

Every two-element set serves as a subobject classifier in Set . The power object of a set A is given by its power set , and the exponential object of the sets A and B is given by the set of all functions from A to B .

Set is thus a topos (and in particular cartesian closed and exact in the sense of Barr ).

Set is not abelian , additive nor preadditive .

Every non-empty set is an injective object in Set . Every set is a projective object in Set (assuming the axiom of choice ).

The finitely presentable objects in Set are the finite sets. Since every set is a direct limit of its finite subsets, the category Set is a locally finitely presentable category .

If C is an arbitrary category, the contravariant functors from C to Set are often an important object of study. If A is an object of C , then the functor from C to Set that sends X to Hom C ( X , A ) (the set of morphisms in C from X to A ) is an example of such a functor. If C is a small category (i.e. the collection of its objects forms a set), then the contravariant functors from C to Set , together with natural transformations as morphisms, form a new category, a functor category known as the category of presheaves on C .

Foundations for the category of sets [ edit ] In Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory the collection of all sets is not a set; this follows from the axiom of foundation . One refers to collections that are not sets as proper classes . One cannot handle proper classes as one handles sets; in particular, one cannot write that those proper classes belong to a collection (either a set or a proper class). This is a problem because it means that the category of sets cannot be formalized straightforwardly in this setting. Categories like Set whose collection of objects forms a proper class are known as large categories , to distinguish them from the small categories whose objects form a set.

One way to resolve the problem is to work in a system that gives formal status to proper classes, such as NBG set theory . In this setting, categories formed from sets are said to be small and those (like Set ) that are formed from proper classes are said to be large .

Another solution is to assume the existence of Grothendieck universes . Roughly speaking, a Grothendieck universe is a set which is itself a model of ZF(C) (for instance if a set belongs to a universe, its elements and its powerset will belong to the universe).  The existence of Grothendieck universes (other than the empty set and the set V ω ω {\displaystyle V_{\omega }} of all hereditarily finite sets ) is not implied by the usual ZF axioms; it is an additional, independent axiom, roughly equivalent to the existence of strongly inaccessible cardinals . Assuming this extra axiom, one can limit the objects of Set to the elements of a particular universe. (There is no "set of all sets" within the model, but one can still reason about the class U of all inner sets, i.e., elements of U .) In one variation of this scheme, the class of sets is the union of the entire tower of Grothendieck universes. (This is necessarily a proper class , but each Grothendieck universe is a set because it is an element of some larger Grothendieck universe.) However, one does not work directly with the "category of all sets". Instead, theorems are expressed in terms of the category Set U whose objects are the elements of a sufficiently large Grothendieck universe U , and are then shown not to depend on the particular choice of U . As a foundation for category theory , this approach is well matched to a system like Tarski–Grothendieck set theory in which one cannot reason directly about proper classes; its principal disadvantage is that a theorem can be true of all Set U but not of Set .

Various other solutions, and variations on the above, have been proposed.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The same issues arise with other concrete categories, such as the category of groups or the category of topological spaces .

See also [ edit ] Category of topological spaces Set theory Small set (category theory) Category of measurable spaces Elementary Theory of the Category of Sets Notes [ edit ] ^ Mac Lane 1969 ^ Feferman 1969 ^ Blass 1984 References [ edit ] Blass, A. (1984).

"The interaction between category theory and set theory" (PDF) .

Mathematical Applications of Category Theory . Contemporary Mathematics. Vol. 30. American Mathematical Society. pp.

5– 29.

doi : 10.1090/conm/030/749767 .

ISBN 978-0-8218-5032-9 .

Feferman, S. (1969).

"Set-theoretical foundations of category theory" .

Mac Lane 1969 . Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Vol. 106. pp.

201– 247.

doi : 10.1007/BFb0059148 .

ISBN 978-3-540-04625-7 .

Lawvere, F.W.

An elementary theory of the category of sets (long version) with commentary Mac Lane, S. (2006) [1969]. "One universe as a foundation for category theory". In Mac Lane, S. (ed.).

Reports of the Midwest Category Seminar III . Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Vol. 106. Springer. pp.

192– 200.

doi : 10.1007/BFb0059147 .

ISBN 978-3-540-36150-3 .

Mac Lane, Saunders (September 1998).

Categories for the Working Mathematician .

Graduate Texts in Mathematics . Vol. 5. Springer.

ISBN 0-387-98403-8 .

Pareigis, Bodo (1970), Categories and functors , Pure and applied mathematics, vol. 39, Academic Press , ISBN 978-0-12-545150-5 External links [ edit ] A231344    Number of morphisms in full subcategories of Set spanned by {{}, {1}, {1, 2}, ..., {1, 2, ..., n}} at OEIS .

v t e Major topics in Foundations of Mathematics Mathematical logic Peano axioms Mathematical induction Formal system Axiomatic system Hilbert system Natural deduction Mathematical proof Model theory Mathematical constructivism Modal logic List of mathematical logic topics Set theory Set Naive set theory Axiomatic set theory Zermelo set theory Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory Constructive set theory Descriptive set theory Determinacy Russell's paradox List of set theory topics Type theory Axiom of reducibility Simple type theory Dependent type theory Intuitionistic type theory Homotopy type theory Univalent foundations Girard's paradox Category theory Category Topos theory Category of sets Higher category theory ∞-groupoid ∞-topos theory Mathematical structuralism Glossary of category theory List of category theory topics Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Category_of_sets&oldid=1290460331 " Categories : Foundations of mathematics Categories in category theory Basic concepts in set theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 May 2025, at 23:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Category of sets 13 languages Add topic

