Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition Toggle Definition subsection 1.1 Characteristics 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 20th-century French philosophy 2.2 Recent Anglo-American developments 3 Contrast with analytic philosophy 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Notes 5.2 Citations 5.3 Sources Toggle the table of contents Continental philosophy 47 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Latina Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Русский Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical traditions from mainland Europe "Continental Philosophy" redirects here. For the 2005 book by William R. Schroeder, see Continental Philosophy: A Critical Approach .

Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e Continental philosophy is a group of philosophies first prominent in 20th-century continental Europe that derive from a broadly Kantian tradition of re-focusing Western philosophy on the individual and society.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Continental philosophy includes German idealism , phenomenology , existentialism (and its antecedents, such as the thought of Kierkegaard and Nietzsche ), hermeneutics , structuralism , post-structuralism , deconstruction , French feminism , psychoanalytic theory , and the critical theory of the Frankfurt School as well as some Freudian , Hegelian , and Western Marxist views.

[ 3 ] There is no academic consensus on the definition of continental philosophy. Prior to the twentieth century, the term "continental" was used broadly to refer to philosophy from continental Europe.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] A slightly narrower use of the term originated among English-speaking philosophers since the second half of the 20th century, who use it as a convenient catch-all term to refer to a range of thinkers and traditions outside the movement known as analytic philosophy .

[ 6 ] The term continental philosophy may mark merely a family resemblance across disparate philosophical views; a similar argument has been made for analytic philosophy.

[ 7 ] Definition [ edit ] The term continental philosophy , in the above sense, was first widely used by English-speaking philosophers to describe university courses in the 1970s, emerging as a collective name for the philosophies then widespread in France and Germany, such as phenomenology, existentialism, structuralism, and post-structuralism.

[ 8 ] However, the term (and its approximate sense) can be found at least as early as 1840, in John Stuart Mill 's 1840 essay on Coleridge , where Mill contrasts the Kantian -influenced thought of "Continental philosophy" and "Continental philosophers" with the English empiricism of Bentham and the 18th century generally.

[ 9 ] This notion gained prominence in the early 20th century as figures such as Bertrand Russell and G. E. Moore advanced a vision of philosophy closely allied with natural science, progressing through logical analysis. This tradition, which has come to be known broadly as analytic philosophy , became dominant in Britain and the United States from roughly 1930 onward. Russell and Moore made a dismissal of Hegelianism and its philosophical relatives a distinctive part of their new movement.

[ 10 ] Commenting on the history of the distinction in 1945, Russell distinguished "two schools of philosophy, which may be broadly distinguished as the Continental and the British respectively", a division he saw as operative "from the time of Locke"; Russell proposes the following broad points of distinction between Continental and British types of philosophy: [ 11 ] [ clarification needed ] in method , deductive system -building vs. piecemeal induction ; in metaphysics , rationalist theology vs. metaphysical agnosticism; in ethics , non-naturalist deontology vs. naturalist hedonism ; and in politics , authoritarianism vs.

liberalism .

Since the 1970s, however, many philosophers in the United States and Britain have taken an interest in continental philosophers since Kant, and the philosophical traditions in many European countries have similarly incorporated many aspects of the "analytic" movement. Self-described analytic philosophy flourishes in France, including philosophers such as Jules Vuillemin , Vincent Descombes , Gilles Gaston Granger , François Recanati , and Pascal Engel . Likewise, self-described "continental philosophers" can be found in philosophy departments in the United Kingdom, North America, and Australia.

[ 12 ] "Continental philosophy" is thus defined in terms of a family of philosophical traditions and influences rather than a geographic distinction. The issue of geographical specificity has been raised again more recently in post-colonial and decolonial approaches to "continental philosophy", which critically examine the ways that European imperial and colonial projects have influenced academic knowledge production. For this reason, Nelson Maldonado-Torres has advocated for " post-continental philosophy " as an outgrowth of continental philosophy.

[ 13 ] Characteristics [ edit ] The term continental philosophy , like analytic philosophy , lacks a clear definition and may mark merely a family resemblance across disparate philosophical views.

Simon Glendinning has suggested that the term was originally more pejorative than descriptive, functioning as a label for types of western philosophy rejected or disliked by analytic philosophers.

[ 14 ] Nonetheless, Michael E. Rosen has ventured to identify common themes that typically characterize continental philosophy.

[ 15 ] The themes derive from a broadly Kantian thesis that knowledge , experience , and reality are bound and shaped by conditions best understood through philosophical reflection rather than exclusively empirical inquiry .

[ 2 ] Continental philosophers generally reject the view that the natural sciences are the only or most accurate way of understanding natural phenomena . This contrasts with many analytic philosophers who consider their inquiries as continuous with, or subordinate to, those of the natural sciences. Continental philosophers often argue that science depends upon a "pre-theoretical substrate of experience" (a version of Kantian conditions of possible experience or the phenomenological " lifeworld ") and that scientific methods are inadequate to fully understand such conditions of intelligibility.

[ 16 ] Continental philosophy usually considers these conditions of possible experience as variable: determined at least partly by factors such as context, space and time, language, culture, or history. Thus continental philosophy tends toward historicism (or historicity ). Where analytic philosophy tends to treat philosophy in terms of discrete problems, capable of being analyzed apart from their historical origins (much as scientists consider the history of science inessential to scientific inquiry), continental philosophy typically suggests that "philosophical argument cannot be divorced from the textual and contextual conditions of its historical emergence." [ 17 ] Continental philosophy typically holds that human agency can change these conditions of possible experience: "if human experience is a contingent creation, then it can be recreated in other ways." [ 18 ] Thus continental philosophers tend to take a strong interest in the unity of theory and practice, and often see their philosophical inquiries as closely related to personal, moral, or political transformation. This tendency is very clear in the Marxist tradition (" philosophers have only interpreted the world, in various ways; the point, however, is to change it "), but is also central in existentialism and post-structuralism .

A final characteristic trait of continental philosophy is an emphasis on metaphilosophy . In the wake of the development and success of the natural sciences, continental philosophers have often sought to redefine the method and nature of philosophy.

[ 19 ] In some cases (such as German idealism or phenomenology), this manifests as a renovation of the traditional view that philosophy is the first, foundational, a priori science. In other cases (such as hermeneutics, critical theory, or structuralism), it is held that philosophy investigates a domain that is irreducibly cultural or practical. And some continental philosophers (such as Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, or later Heidegger ) doubt whether any conception of philosophy can coherently achieve its stated goals.

History [ edit ] The history of continental philosophy (taken in the narrower sense of " late modern / contemporary continental philosophy") is usually thought to begin with German idealism . Led by figures like Fichte , Schelling , and later Hegel , German idealism developed out of the work of Immanuel Kant in the 1780s and 1790s and was closely linked with romanticism and the revolutionary politics of the Enlightenment . Besides the central figures listed above, important contributors to German idealism also included Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi , Gottlob Ernst Schulze , Karl Leonhard Reinhold , and Friedrich Schleiermacher .

Henri Bergson As the institutional roots of "continental philosophy" in many cases directly descend from those of phenomenology, [ i ] Edmund Husserl has always been a canonical figure in continental philosophy. Nonetheless, Husserl is also a respected subject of study in the analytic tradition.

[ 20 ] Husserl's notion of a noema , the non-psychological content of thought, his correspondence with Gottlob Frege , and his investigations into the nature of logic continue to generate interest among analytic philosophers.

J. G. Merquior argued that a distinction between analytic and continental philosophies can be first clearly identified with Henri Bergson (1859–1941), whose wariness of science and elevation of intuition paved the way for existentialism .

[ 21 ] Merquior wrote: "the most prestigious philosophizing in France took a very dissimilar path [from the Anglo-Germanic analytic schools]. One might say it all began with Henri Bergson." [ 21 ] Martin Heidegger An illustration of some important differences between analytic and continental styles of philosophy can be found in Rudolf Carnap 's "Elimination of Metaphysics through Logical Analysis of Language" (1932; "Überwindung der Metaphysik durch Logische Analyse der Sprache"), a paper some observers [ who?

] have described as particularly polemical . Carnap's paper argues that Heidegger's lecture "What Is Metaphysics?" violates logical syntax to create nonsensical pseudo-statements.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Moreover, Carnap claimed that many German metaphysicians of the era were similar to Heidegger in writing statements that were syntactically meaningless.

With the rise of Nazism , many of Germany's philosophers, especially those of Jewish descent or leftist or liberal political sympathies (such as many in the Vienna Circle and the Frankfurt School ), fled to the English-speaking world. Those philosophers who remained—if they remained in academia at all—had to reconcile themselves to Nazi control of the universities. Others, such as Martin Heidegger , among the most prominent German philosophers to stay in Germany, aligned themselves with Nazism when it came to power.

20th-century French philosophy [ edit ] See also: 20th-century French philosophy This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Both before and after World War II there was a growth of interest in German philosophy in France . A new interest in communism translated into an interest in Marx and Hegel, who became for the first time studied extensively in the politically conservative French university system of the Third Republic . At the same time the phenomenological philosophy of Husserl and Heidegger became increasingly influential, perhaps owing to its resonances with French philosophies which placed great stock in the first-person perspective (an idea found in divergent forms such as Cartesianism , spiritualism , and Bergsonism ). Most important in this popularization of phenomenology was the author and philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre , who called his philosophy existentialism .

Another major strain of continental thought is structuralism / post-structuralism . Influenced by the structural linguistics of Ferdinand de Saussure , French anthropologists such as Claude Lévi-Strauss began to apply the structural paradigm to the humanities. In the 1960s and '70s, post-structuralists developed various critiques of structuralism. Post-structuralist thinkers include Jacques Derrida and Gilles Deleuze . After this wave, most of the late 20th century, the tradition has been carried into the 21st century by Quentin Meillassoux , Tristan Garcia , Francois Laruelle , and others.

Recent Anglo-American developments [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( August 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) From the early 20th century until the 1960s, continental philosophers were only intermittently discussed in British and American universities, despite an influx of continental philosophers, particularly German Jewish students of Nietzsche and Heidegger, to the United States on account of the persecution of the Jews and later World War II ; Hannah Arendt , Herbert Marcuse , Leo Strauss , Theodor W. Adorno , and Walter Kaufmann are probably the most notable of this wave, arriving in the late 1930s and early 1940s.

Contrast with analytic philosophy [ edit ] Continental philosophy is often contrasted with Anglo-American analytic philosophy .

[ 24 ] There is widespread influence and debate between the analytic and continental traditions; some philosophers see the differences between the two traditions as being based on institutions, relationships, and ideology rather than anything of significant philosophical substance.

[ 25 ] [ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Index of continental philosophy articles Transcontinental philosophy References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ E.g., the largest academic organization devoted to furthering the study of continental philosophy is the Society for Phenomenology and Existential Philosophy.

Citations [ edit ] ^ Critchley 2001 , p. 32.

^ a b Continental philosophers usually identify such conditions with the transcendental subject or self: Solomon 1988 , p. 6, "It is with Kant that philosophical claims about the self attain new and remarkable proportions. The self becomes not just the focus of attention but the entire subject-matter of philosophy. The self is not just another entity in the world, but in an important sense it creates the world, and the reflecting self does not just know itself, but in knowing itself knows all selves, and the structure of any and every possible self." ^ The above list includes only those movements common to both lists compiled by Critchley 2001 , p. 13 and Glendinning 2006 , pp. 58–65 ^ Leiter 2007 , p. 2: "As a first approximation, we might say that philosophy in Continental Europe in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries is best understood as a connected weave of traditions, some of which overlap, but no one of which dominates all the others." ^ Critchley, Simon (1998). "Introduction: what is continental philosophy?". In Critchley, Simon; Schroder, William (eds.).

A Companion to Continental Philosophy . Blackwell Companions to Philosophy. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing Ltd. p. 4.

^ Critchley 2001 , p. 32: "As such, Continental philosophy is an invention, or, more accurately, a projection of the Anglo-American academy onto a Continental Europe.." ^ a b Glock, H.J. (2008).

What is Analytic Philosophy?

. Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-87267-6 . Retrieved 2023-08-28 .

^ Critchley 2001 , p. 38.

^ Mill, John Stuart (1950).

On Bentham and Coleridge . Harper Torchbooks. New York: Harper & Row. pp. 104, 133, 155.

^ Russell, Bertrand (1959).

My Philosophical Development . London: Allen & Unwin. p.

62 .

Hegelians had all kinds of arguments to prove this or that was not 'real'. Number, space, time, matter, were all professedly convicted of being self-contradictory. Nothing was real, so we were assured, except the Absolute, which could think only of itself since there was nothing else for it to think of and which thought eternally the sort of things that idealist philosophers thought in their books.

^ Russell, Bertrand. 1945.

A History of Western Philosophy . Simon & Schuster. pages 643, 641. Ibid., pages 643–47.

^ See, e.g., Brogan, Walter, and James Risser, eds. 2000.

American Continental Philosophy: A Reader . Indiana University Press.

^ Laurie, Timothy; Stark, Hannah; Walker, Briohny (2019).

"Critical Approaches to Continental Philosophy: Intellectual Community, Disciplinary Identity, and the Politics of Inclusion" .

Parrhesia: A Journal of Critical Philosophy .

30 : 1– 17.

^ Glendinning 2006 , p. 12.

^ Rosen, Michael E.

, "Continental Philosophy from Hegel", in Philosophy 2: Further through the Subject , ed.

A. C. Grayling (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), 665.

^ Critchley 2001 , p. 115.

^ Critchley 2001 , p. 57.

^ Critchley 2001 , p. 64.

^ Leiter 2007 , p. 4: "While forms of philosophical naturalism have been dominant in Anglophone philosophy, the vast majority of authors within the Continental traditions insist on the distinctiveness of philosophical methods and their priority to those of the natural sciences." ^ Kenny, Anthony, ed.

The Oxford Illustrated History of Western Philosophy .

ISBN 0-19-285440-2 .

^ a b Merquior, J. G.

1987.

Foucault , Fontana Modern Masters series. University of California Press.

ISBN 0-520-06062-8 .

^ Gregory, Wanda T. 2001. " Heidegger, Carnap and Quine at the Crossroads of Language ." Current Studies in Phenomenology and Hermeneutics 1(Winter). Archived from the original 2006-08-21.

^ Stone, Abraham D. 2005. " Heidegger and Carnap on the Overcoming of Metaphysics ." Chapter 8 in Martin Heidegger , edited by S. Mulhall .

doi : 10.4324/9781315249636 .

^ H.-J. Glock, What Is Analytic Philosophy?

(Cambridge University Press, 2008), p. 86 ^ Rinofner-Kreidl, S.; Wiltsche, H.A. (2016).

Analytic and Continental Philosophy: Methods and Perspectives. Proceedings of the 37th International Wittgenstein Symposium . Publications of the Austrian Ludwig Wittgenstein Society – New Series. De Gruyter.

ISBN 978-3-11-044887-0 . Retrieved 2023-08-28 .

Sources [ edit ] Babich, Babette (2003).

"On the Analytic-Continental Divide in Philosophy: Nietzsche's Lying Truth, Heidegger's Speaking Language, and Philosophy." In: C. G. Prado, ed., A House Divided: Comparing Analytic and Continental Philosophy . Amherst, New York: Prometheus/Humanity Books. pp.

63– 103.

Critchley, Simon (2001).

Continental Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-285359-2 .

Cutrofello, Andrew (2005).

Continental Philosophy: A Contemporary Introduction . Routledge Contemporary Introductions to Philosophy. New York; Abingdon: Routledge Taylor & Francis Group.

Glendinning, Simon (2006).

The idea of continental philosophy: a philosophical chronicle . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press Ltd.

Leiter, Brian; Rosen, Michael, eds. (2007).

The Oxford Handbook of Continental Philosophy . Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.

Schrift, Alan D. (2010).

The History of Continental Philosophy. 8 Volumes . Chicago; Illinois: University of Chicago Press Press.

Solomon, Robert C.

(1988).

Continental philosophy since 1750: the rise and fall of the self . Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.

Kenny, Anthony (2007).

A New History of Western Philosophy, Volume IV: Philosophy in the Modern World . New York: Oxford University Press.

v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐79fd654b9f‐8rhph
Cached time: 20250818134916
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.685 seconds
Real time usage: 0.852 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2672/1000000
Revision size: 22919/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 214361/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2280/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 107544/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.392/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9122590/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  637.597      1 -total
 24.05%  153.370      2 Template:Reflist
 22.41%  142.907     13 Template:Cite_book
 15.92%  101.488      1 Template:Philosophy_sidebar
 11.21%   71.504      1 Template:Short_description
 10.47%   66.736      9 Template:Navbox
  7.47%   47.628      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
  7.02%   44.785      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  6.10%   38.891      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.79%   36.927      1 Template:Clarify Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:309641:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818134916 and revision id 1306570429. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Continental_philosophy&oldid=1306570429 " Categories : Continental philosophy 20th century in philosophy 21st century in philosophy Contemporary philosophy Critical theory Intellectual history Philosophical schools and traditions Post-structuralism Postmodernism Western culture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2023 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2011 Articles needing additional references from August 2020 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 13:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Continental philosophy 47 languages Add topic

