Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 1.1 Niger River valley 1.2 Saharan zone 1.3 Sahelian zone 1.4 Sudan–Guinea zone 2 Protected areas 3 Flora 4 Fauna Toggle Fauna subsection 4.1 Mammals 4.2 Birds 4.3 Reptiles and amphibians 4.4 Fish 4.5 Invertebrates 5 Threats 6 Conservation 7 Gallery 8 References Toggle the table of contents Wildlife of Mali 1 language فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Biodiversity of Mali ) The wildlife of Mali , composed of its flora and fauna , is widely varying from the Saharan desert zone (covering about 33% of the country) to the Sahelian east–west zone, to Mali, a landlocked francophone country in North Africa ; large swathes of Mali remain unpopulated but has three sub-equal vegetation zones; the country has Sahara Desert in the north, the Niger River Basin at its center and the Senegal River on the south.

[ 1 ] The vegetation zones are the Saharan, the Sahel, and the Sudan–Guinea Savanna. Mali has many protected areas which include two national parks, one biosphere reserve, six faunal reserves, two partial faunal reserves, two sanctuaries (one is a UNESCO designated World Heritage Site ), one chimp sanctuary, six game reserves, [ 2 ] and three Ramsar Sites .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Protected area in Mali, under legal acts and regulations (Law No. 86-43/AN-RM for trade and conservation of parks and reserves and Law No. 86-42/AN-RM for forest code), cover about 5,760.035 square kilometres (2,223.962 sq mi), which is 4.7% area of the country. Adding the buffer zone and the peripheral zone of the Biosphere of Baoul, it becomes 6.2% of the total area of the country.

[ 2 ] [ 5 ] The rich biodiversity of the country is reflected in its more than 1,700 plant species and about 1,000 animal species.

[ 1 ] Geography [ edit ] Further information: Geography of Mali October, 1996: the dark green vegetation is lush when water from the summer rains passes through the region, causing floods. It provides a strong visual contrast with the surrounding desert countryside. By April 1997, the wetlands dry up, and the inland delta attains a uniform tan colour. The white box outlines the area covered by view.

[ 6 ] Niger River valley [ edit ] The Niger River valley, which dominates the topography of Mali, drained by the Niger River and its tributaries. Along its course, the central southern region is the narrowest and is known as the Inner Delta or the Inundation Zone of the Niger, formed of 38,000 square kilometres (15,000 sq mi) of flood-plains, along a river length of 570 kilometres (350 mi); these form its wetlands of great ornithological interest.

[ 3 ] Saharan zone [ edit ] Habitat wise, the Saharan zone occupies a third of the country, and is made up of Sahara Desert and the Sahel (which is a zone of transition between the two). There is hardly any vegetation as the habitat comprises "unvegetated regs, hamadas, dunes and wadis " and also a few oases .

[ 3 ] On the south-eastern part of this zone is the Adrar des Iforhas Massif rising to a height of 900 metres (3,000 ft), which is part of the Ahaggar Massif in southern Algeria . Average precipitation in the zone is reported to be less than 200 millimetres (7.9 in).

[ 3 ] Sahelian zone [ edit ] The Sahelian zone, widest in an east–west direction, has the Dogon plateau (777 metres (2,549 ft)) elevation) and the Hombori mountains (1,155 metres (3,789 ft), highest location in Mali) with the Inundation Zone of the Niger River located to its west. Average annual rainfall varies from about 600 millimetres (24 in) in the south to under 200 millimetres (7.9 in) in the north; the vegetation also changes accordingly from acacia -wooded grassland and deciduous bushland to thin coverage of annual grasslands (of Cenchrus biflorus ).

[ 3 ] Sunset over the Bani River in Mali .

Sudan–Guinea zone [ edit ] The Sudan–Guinea zone is part of south-western region of Mali. The Senegal River and the Bafing and Baoulé Rivers rise here, and the basin is known for the lowest-lying land in the country of 20,000 square kilometres (7,700 sq mi) area which is below the 100 metres (330 ft) contour.

[ 3 ] The zone also includes the Manding plateau (near Bamako , the capital of Mali) which is part of Fouta Djallon Mountains (700 metres (2,300 ft) elevation) of Guinea . This forms the upper region of the catchment area that lies between the Senegal and Niger River systems. Geological formation reported is of sandstone . Vegetation in this zone is mainly of Isoberlinia sp.

[ 3 ] Protected areas [ edit ] There is very little wildlife and a few national parks in Mali. The reserve and largest national park is the Boucle du Baoulé National Park (7,710 square kilometres (2,980 sq mi)).

[ 7 ] located to the northeast of Bamako . There is hardly any wildlife left in this park due to intense poaching of elephants, giraffes, buffalo, chimpanzees and lions. Monkeys are the only animals seen now.

The Reserve de Ansongo Menaka is in the southeast, near the border with Niger. The Reserve de Douentza is the most interesting in terms of wildlife.

Bafing National Park (5,000 square kilometres (1,900 sq mi)).

[ 7 ] is in the south west bordering with Guinea which is a dry area between Mopti and Gao ; it is home for desert elephants which move with change of seasons.

The other notable parks are the Wongo National Park and the Kouroufing National Park .

[ 8 ] The Bafing Biosphere Reserve covers an area of 5,215 square kilometres (2,014 sq mi) and the Bafing Chimpanzee Sanctuary is exclusive to conserve chimpanzees .

[ 5 ] Flora [ edit ] The dominant vegetation in the inland delta of the Niger consists of hygrophilous grassland species of Eragrostis atrovirens , Panicum anabaptistum , Panicum fluviicola , Vetiveria nigritana , Echinochloa stagnina , wild rice Oryza barthii , Andropogon gayanus , Cynodon dactylon and Hyparrhenia dissolute .

The many tree species reported are in patches. Dominant species of grasses in the transition zone between the higher levels of flood plains and its flooded zones are Acacia nilotica with Mimosa and Ziziphus spp. and Guiera senegalensis , Borassus and Hyphaene .

[ 3 ] Cram cram grasses are scattered in Mali.

[ 9 ] Fauna [ edit ] Mammals [ edit ] Main article: List of mammals in Mali Left: African wild dogs ( Lycaon pictus ); right: cattle crossing the Niger River near Segou , Mali .

There are 146 species of mammals in Mali of which 2 are critically endangered (CR), 3 are endangered (EN), 10 are vulnerable (VU), and 3 are near-threatened (NT).

[ citation needed ] The threatened species are the following.

Addax nasomaculatus (addax) (CR) Gazella dama (dama gazelle) (CR) Pan troglodytes (common chimpanzee) (EN) Gazella leptoceros (rhim gazelle)  (EN) Lycaon pictus (African wild dog) (EN) Ammotragus lervia (Barbary sheep) (VU) Acinonyx jubatus (cheetah) (VU) Loxodonta africana (African bush elephant) (VU) Trichechus senegalensis (African manatee) (VU) Profelis aurata (African golden cat) (VU) Panthera leo (lion) (VU) Gazella dorcas (dorcas gazelle) (VU) Hippopotamus amphibius (hippopotamus)  (VU) Gazella rufifrons (red-fronted gazelle)  (VU) Hipposideros jonesi (Jones's roundleaf bat) (NT) Felis margarita (sand cat) (NT) Crocuta crocuta (spotted hyena) (NT) Chimpanzees are found in the southernmost forests and monkeys are found in the Parc national de la Boucle du Baoule. Elephants in the Gourma region, known as the Sahelian herds of 360 to 630 numbers, migrate over 870 kilometres (540 mi) (round trip) during the dry season between Burkina Faso and Mali to lake areas and return to Mali during the rainy season. Mali lions are found only around the Faleme River in the far west of cerde of Kenieba .

Papio papio (Guinea baboon) and Massoutiera mzabi (Mzab gundi) are also reported.

[ 10 ] The African manatee (also known as the sea cow and  West African manatee) is found all along the Niger River was hunted for meat in the past but its meat is now not marketed, which may be due its decreasing numbers or due to the legal protection given for its conservation.

[ 11 ] Birds [ edit ] Main article: List of birds of Mali Left: cut-throat finch ; right: violet turaco Seventeen Important Bird Areas (IBAs) have been designated in Mali, encompassing an area of 28,692 square kilometres (11,078 sq mi) (about 2.3% of the surface area of the country). Ten include wetlands, nine are in the Inner Delta of the Niger river (key bird area), four (under the A3 criterion) include the Sudan–Guinea ecoregion of the Savanna biome, four are in the Sahel biome, and two in the Sahara–Sindian biome.

[ 3 ] The Kulicoro firefinch, also known as the Mali firefinch ( Lagonostica virata ), is the only endemic bird of Mali, found in rocky and grassy areas near Mopti and Bamako .

[ 12 ] In these IBAs, 622 bird species have been recorded; there have been 335 resident species noted, with 202 of these breeding in Mali. Additionally, 137 species of the noted 243 migratory species are of Palearctic origin. There are 12 species which are of global conservation concern, with seven being vagrants (Palearctic migrants). These are Marmaronetta angustirostris (VU), Aythya nyroca (VU), Circus macrourus (NT), Falco naumanni (VU), Neotis nuba (Nubian bustard) (NT), Gallinago media (NT), Glareola nordmanni (NT), Acrocephalus paludicola (VU), Lagonosticta virata (NT), Prinia fluviatilis (DD), Ceratogymna elata (NT).

The Inner Delta is also rich in waterfowl and heron species, particularly the cosmopolitan Bubulcus ibis (LC) and Casmerodius albus (LC), as well as the world’s largest heron, Ardea goliath (Goliath heron, LC). The Goliath heron, which has small populations in South Asia as well, can stand upwards of 152 cm/5 ft tall, with a 230 cm/7 ft wingspan.

[ 3 ] Poicephalus senegalus (Senegal parrot, LC), Serinus mozambicus (yellow-fronted canary, LC) and Haliaeetus vocifer (African fish eagle, LC) are some of the other, more common, avian species reported in Mali.

[ 10 ] Reptiles and amphibians [ edit ] A few reptile species reported are Cerastes cerastes (desert horned viper) and Geochelone sulcata (African spurred tortoise).

[ 12 ] Other species of snakes or cobra are: Bitis arietans (puff adder), Cerastes cerastes (horned viper), Dispholidus typus (boomslang), Echis jogeri (Joger's carpet viper), Echis leucogaster (white-bellied carpet viper), Echis ocellatus (West African carpet viper), Naja katiensis (West African brown spitting cobra), Naja melanoleuca (forest cobra), Naja nigricollis (black-necked spitting cobra), and Naja senegalensis (Senegalese cobra).

[ 13 ] Mali Uromastyx .

The Mali Uromastyx , Uromastyx maliensis , is a widely known species of lizard in Mali.

[ 14 ] Skink genera in Mali include Chalcides and Trachylepis .

[ 15 ] Other lizard species known in the Dogon Country of Mali are Agama sankaranica , Uromastyx geyri , Sphenops delislei , Trachylepis perrotetii , Trachylepis quinquetaeniata , Chalcides ocellatus , Chamaeleo africanus , Ptyodactylus ragazzii , Tarentola ephippiata , Tarentola annularis , Tropiocolotes tripolitanus , Latastia longicaudata , Varanus griseus , and Varanus niloticus . Turtles include Pelomedusa subrufa , and crocodiles include the Nile crocodile and Mecistops cataphractus (African slender-snouted crocodile).

[ 16 ] The Dogon are also familiar with the colubrid species Psammophis sibilans , Psammophis elegans , and Bamanophis dorri , and the cobra species Naja nigricollis ( black spitting cobra ) and Naja haje ( Egyptian cobra ).

[ 15 ] Other snake species of the Dogon Country in Mali include Atractaspis watsoni , Eryx muelleri , Python regius , Python sebae , Telescopus obtusus , and Cerastes vipera .

[ 16 ] Most fatal snakebites in Mali are due to encounters with Bitis spp. (particularly Bitis arietans ) and Echis spp. (particularly Echis leucogaster and others). Untreated bites from Bitis species can result in hemorrhage (bleeding) within 5 hours, and Echis bites can cause hemorrhage in 1-2 days.

[ 15 ] Among the amphibians, Tomopterna milletihorsini (Mali screeching frog) and Bufo chudeaui (Bata marsh toad) are notable in Mali.

[ 17 ] In Dogon country , amphibian species that are well known by the local Dogon people include the edible bullfrog Hoplobatrachus occipitalis , Amnirana galamensis ( Galam white-lipped frog ), Phrynobatrachus accraensis , Hyperolius nitidulus (or Hyperolius viridiflavus ), Amietophrynus xeros , Amietophrynus regularis , and Sclerophrys pentoni .

[ 15 ] Amietophrynus channingi and Hildebrandtia ornata are also reported from Dogon Country .

[ 16 ] Fish [ edit ] There are approximately 200 fish species in Mali.

[ 9 ] Fishing is a common practice in the Niger and other rivers in Mali, and the most popular variety of fish is capitaine .

Many species of fish are found in the Niger River and its tributaries. Along the northern bend of the river in the eastern half of Mali, reported fish species include Alestes baremoze , Alestes dentex sethente , Brycinus macrolepidotus , Brycinus nurse , Hydrocynus forskahlii , Micralestes elongatus , Marcusenius senegalensis , Bagrus bajad , Synodontis schall , Schilbe intermedius , Clarias anguillaris / Clarias gariepinus , Malapterurus electricus , Mastacembelus nigromarginatus , Lates , Oreochromis niloticus , Citharinus latus , Labeo senegalensis , Mormyrus rume , Protopterus annectens , Tetraodon lineatus , Brycinus leuciscus , Sarotherodon galilaeus , Polypterus senegalus , Hydrocynus brevis , Heterotis niloticus , Hyperopisus bebe , Gymnarchus niloticus , Hepsetus odoe , Distichodus brevipinnis , Citharidium ansorgei , Citharinops distichodoides , Citharinus citharus , Labeo coubie , Bagrus docmac , Clarotes laticeps , Chrysichthys auratus , Chrysichthys nigrodigitatus , Auchenoglanis biscutatus , Auchenoglanis occidentalis , Schilbe mystus , Heterobranchus bidorsalis , Synodontis batensoda , Synodontis membranacea , Synodontis resupinata , Synodontis clarias , Synodontis budgetti , Synodontis vermiculata , Synodontis sorex , Synodontis gobroni , Synodontis filamentosa , Synodontis melanoptera , Synodontis nigrita , Arius gigas , Hemichromis , and Tilapia zillii .

[ 18 ] Many villages along the Niger River export fish and fish products to neighbouring regions. For example, in Mopti Region , fishing villages near Konna regularly export fish to market towns in the dry inland Dogon country , such as Douentza . In Douentza , fish species that are commonly found in the market are catfish (especially Clarias and Bagrus spp.), carp ( Sarotherodon and Oreochromis spp.), capitaine ( Lates spp.), dogfish ( Hydrocynus spp.), Mormyrus , Marcusenius , and Labeo fish species. Although most Dogon villages do not have direct local access to fresh fish, some villages are located near pools at the bottoms of escarpments that harbour fish species belonging to genera such as Clarias , Marcusenius , and Brycinus .

[ 18 ] Invertebrates [ edit ] See also: Dogon country § Insects Termites are a unique feature of Mali found in many uncleared locations. Their habitat is notably along with specific trees and plants, and alates or flying ants are the species housed in the ant hills. A documentary on these termite hills has been made under the title "Termites: Castles  of Clay", which is about the "Soul of the White ant ".

[ 12 ] Other insects reported are Dracunculus medinensis (Guinea worm) and Necator americanus (hookworm).

[ 10 ] Scorpions are noted; the female Anopheles mosquito carries malaria .

[ 9 ] Threats [ edit ] Further information: Environmental issues in Mali The threats to the wildlife of Mali are on account of deforestation (in 1997, the economic damage amounted to an estimated 5.35 per cent of GDP , [ 1 ] ) intensive hunting pressure, proliferation of livestock farming, extension of agricultural land and also due to desertification ( Sahara desert extending, erosion and drought due to climate change ). In the past, droughts in the 1970s and 1980s (last great drought was in 1984) have also contributed to the decline of wildlife resources of the country.

[ 2 ] [ 7 ] Increased anthropogenic and livestock pressures, due to people moving to the southern part of the country and settling on river banks, has also compounded the threats. Particular mention of effect on the fauna in the wild is of antelope species which are threatened. Other significant contributors to biodiversity degradation relate to pollution, mining, crop cultivation and also indiscriminate traditional slash and burn farming. Another aspect in the past was of concentrating protection measures only in the southwestern savannah region.

[ 2 ] [ 7 ] Conservation [ edit ] The conservation of the protected areas is the responsibility of the National Parks Department of Mali. However, conservation and preservation of forest lands (including gazetted forest) rests with the Forest Service and both these agencies fall under the purview of the Department of Water and Forests of the Ministry of Natural Resources and Livestock. In the past, the traditional practice of protecting the forests and its flora and fauna rested with the Village elders. However, with Islam making inroads into the country, traditional rules have been relegated to a backseat and has resulted in over exploitation of the forest resources, which has been further aggravated by increased anthropological pressures.

[ 3 ] A major conservation effort has been launched with funding provided by the Global Environmental Facility (under the aegis of the UNDP ) to be completed by 2014 with the objective of substantially increasing the area under protection estate and reinforce the management instruments to achieve effective protection area, particularly the southwest region in respect of endangered mammal species of Derby eland and the western chimpanzee .

[ 19 ] Gallery [ edit ] Taguelmoust, near d'Oubankort in l'Adrar des Ifoghas References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Republic of Mali" (PDF) . UNEP Organization . Retrieved 17 April 2013 .

^ a b c d "Application for Funding" . UNDP . Retrieved 17 April 2013 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k "Mali" (pdf) . BirdLife International organization . Retrieved 28 March 2013 .

^ "Haddoud" (pdf) . FAO organization . Retrieved 28 March 2013 .

^ a b Julian Oliver Caldecott; Lera Miles (2005).

World Atlas of Great Apes And Their Conservation . University of California Press. pp.

375 –.

ISBN 978-0-520-24633-1 . Retrieved 28 March 2013 .

^ "Figure 4.8" . NASA, Govt. of US. Archived from the original on 7 November 2002 . Retrieved 17 April 2013 .

^ a b c d R. East (1999).

African Antelope Database 1998 . IUCN. pp. 18, 42–.

ISBN 978-2-8317-0477-7 . Retrieved 17 April 2013 .

^ Ettagale Blauer; Jason Lauré (2008).

Mali . Marshall Cavendish. pp.

66 .

ISBN 978-0-7614-2568-7 . Retrieved 28 March 2013 .

^ a b c Dipiazza, Francesca Davis (2007).

Mali in Pictures . Twenty-First Century Books. pp.

14 –16.

ISBN 978-0-8225-6591-8 . Retrieved 19 April 2013 .

^ a b c "Taxon Information" .

Mali . The Animal Diversity Web (online) . Retrieved 16 April 2013 .

^ "Trichechus senegalensis (VU)" . International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, Red List Organization . Retrieved 18 April 2013 .

^ a b c Ross Velton (2009).

Mali: The Bradt Safari Guide . Bradt Travel Guides. pp.

8– 12.

ISBN 978-1-84162-218-7 . Retrieved 17 April 2013 .

^ "Snake Antivenoms" . WHO Organization. Archived from the original on May 6, 2010 . Retrieved 17 April 2013 .

^ "Mali Uromastyx" . Reptilechannel.com . Retrieved 17 April 2013 .

^ a b c d Heath, Jeffrey .

"Guide to herpetofauna (snakes, lizards, and amphibians) of Dogon country and northern Mali" .

^ a b c Christfried Naumann & Tom Güldemann & Steven Moran & Guillaume Segerer & Anne-Maria Fehn & Robert Forkel (eds.) 2020.

Tsammalex: A lexical database on plants and animals . Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.

^ "Mali: Checklist of Endemic Amphibian Species" . Living National Treasures.com . Retrieved 17 April 2013 .

^ a b Heath, Jeffrey .

"Guide to fish of Dogon country and northern Mali" .

^ "Full sized Project : The  GEF Trust Fund" (pdf) . GEF Organization . Retrieved 17 April 2013 .

v t e Mali articles History Ghana Empire Mali Empire History of the Mali Empire Songhai Empire Segou Empire Kénédougou Kingdom Kaarta Massina Empire Toucouleur Empire Wassoulou Empire French Sudan Mali Federation 2012 Tuareg rebellion 2012 coup Mali War Ebola disease event 2020 protests 2020 coup 2021 coup Geography Borders Cercles Cities Communes Environmental issues Mountains National parks Regions Rivers Wildlife Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Human rights LGBT rights Law enforcement Military National Assembly Political parties President Prime Minister Vice President Economy Foreign aid Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Child marriage Demographics Ethnic groups Education Health Human trafficking Languages Prostitution Religion Slavery Women Culture Cuisine Films Flag Literature Media Music Polygamy Public holidays Outline Index Category Portal v t e Wildlife of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Western Sahara v t e Biodiversity worldwide Biodiversity hotspot Biodiversity loss Global biodiversity Ecology Bioresilience Dark diversity Ecological effects of biodiversity Elevational diversity gradient Genetic diversity Insect biodiversity Soil biodiversity Species–area relationship Species richness Measurement All-taxa biodiversity inventory Alpha diversity Beta diversity Diversity index Environmental DNA Gamma diversity Range condition scoring Species diversity Phylogenetic diversity Zeta diversity Conservation Biodiversity action plan Convention on Biological Diversity 2010 Biodiversity Target Key Biodiversity Areas Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework Economics Agricultural biodiversity Biodiversity in agriculture Biodiversity banking Biodiversity credit Crop diversity Biodiversity and drugs Food biodiversity Biodiversity offsetting Health Biodiversity hypothesis of health By region Africa Algeria Angola Botswana Benin Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Libya Madagascar Mali Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nigeria Rodrigues Rwanda Seychelles Somalia South Africa Cape Town Marine South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Tunisia Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Borneo Cambodia China Georgia India Assam Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Laos Malaysia Myanmar Nepal Pakistan Palestine Papua New Guinea Philippines Qatar Russia South Korea Sri Lanka Syria Thailand Turkey Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Italy Latvia Lithuania Kosovo Montenegro Norway Poland Portugal Republic of Ireland Romania Russia Serbia Slovenia Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Wales North America Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Jamaica Martinique Mexico Nicaragua Trinidad and Tobago Turks and Caicos Islands United States Oceania Australia New Caledonia New Zealand Papua New Guinea South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Antarctica Antarctica List of biodiversity databases Global 200 Megadiverse countries Millennium Ecosystem Assessment NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐km7j7
Cached time: 20250818001031
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.607 seconds
Real time usage: 0.769 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3359/1000000
Revision size: 25452/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 134019/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7406/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 29/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 101154/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.326/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8439787/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  592.127      1 -total
 31.60%  187.096      1 Template:Reflist
 27.16%  160.800      1 Template:Mali_topics
 26.78%  158.588      1 Template:Country_topics
 21.73%  128.658     13 Template:Cite_web
 10.89%   64.503      1 Template:Short_description
  6.38%   37.752      1 Template:Citation_needed
  6.35%   37.618      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.20%   36.714     17 Template:Convert
  5.58%   33.044      5 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12535065:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818001031 and revision id 1298637182. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wildlife_of_Mali&oldid=1298637182 " Categories : Biota of Mali Wildlife by country Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2018 This page was last edited on 3 July 2025, at 18:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wildlife of Mali 1 language Add topic

