Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Lifetime 2 Ideas Toggle Ideas subsection 2.1 Observations and theories 2.2 The concept of paramanu (atom) 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Kaṇāda 46 languages العربية Asturianu বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Galego Հայերեն हिन्दी বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ മലയാളം मराठी مصرى नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Русский संस्कृतम् سنڌي Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Vedic sage and founder of Vaisheshika school of Hindu philosophy Not to be confused with Canada .

Kaṇāda Born Unclear, 6th – 2nd century BCE Relatives Kashypa, Sulakshada (parents) Philosophical work Region Indian philosophy School Vaisheshika Main interests Metaphysics Ethics Physics Notable ideas Atomism Part of a series on Hindu philosophy Orthodox Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Heterodox Charvaka Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Ajñana Sub-schools Smartist Advaita Vaishnavite Bhedabheda Vishishtadvaita Dvaita Shuddhadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Svabhavika Bhedabheda Mahanubhava Ekasarana Dharma Akshar Purushottam Darshan Shaivite Shaiva Siddhanta Pratyabhijna Panchartika Pramanavada Shakti Vishishtadvaita Shiva Bhedabeda Shiva Advaita Neo-Vedanta Integral yoga Teachers ( Acharyas ) Nyaya Akṣapāda Gotama Jayanta Bhatta Raghunatha Siromani Mīmāṃsā Jaimini Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Prabhākara Advaita (Mayavada) Gaudapada Vāchaspati Misra Adi Shankara Vishishtadvaita Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Dvaita (Tattvavada) Madhvacharya Jayatirtha Vyasatirtha Shuddhadvaita Vallabha Achintya Bheda Abheda Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Svabhavika Bhedabheda Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Purushottam Keshav Kashmiri Harivyas devacharya Mahanubhava Chakradhara Ekasarana Dharma Sankardev Akshar Purushottam Darshan Swaminarayan Tantra Shakta Abhinavagupta Nigamananda Paramahansa Ramprasad Sen Bamakhepa Kamalakanta Bhattacharya Anandamayi Ma Neo-Vedanta Vivekananda Aurobindo Radhakrishnan Others Samkhya Kapila Yoga Patanjali Vaisheshika Kaṇāda , Prashastapada Secular Valluvar Major texts Śruti Smṛti Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Upanishads Principal Upanishads Minor Upanishads Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama (Hinduism) Vachanamrut Shastras and Sutras Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Puranas Dharmaśāstra Arthashastra Kama Sutra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Shiva Samhita Secular ethics Kural Hinduism Other Indian philosophies v t e Kaṇāda ( Sanskrit : कणाद , IAST : Kaṇāda ), also known as Ulūka, Kashyapa, Kaṇabhaksha, Kaṇabhuj [ 1 ] [ 2 ] was an ancient Indian natural scientist and philosopher who founded the Vaisheshika school of Indian philosophy that also represents the earliest Indian physics .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Estimated to have lived sometime between 6th century to 2nd century BCE, little is known about his life.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 4 ] His traditional name "Kaṇāda" means "atom eater", [ 8 ] and he is known for developing the foundations of an atomistic approach to physics and philosophy in the Sanskrit text Vaiśeṣika Sūtra .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] His text is also known as Kaṇāda Sutras , or " Aphorisms of Kaṇāda".

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The school founded by Kaṇāda explains the creation and existence of the universe by proposing an atomistic theory, applying logic and realism, and is one of the earliest known systematic realist ontology in human history.

[ 13 ] Kaṇāda suggested that everything can be subdivided, but this subdivision cannot go on forever, and there must be smallest entities ( paramanu ) that cannot be divided, that are eternal, that aggregate in different ways to yield complex substances and bodies with unique identity, a process that involves heat, and this is the basis for all material existence.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] He used these ideas with the concept of Atman (soul, Self) to develop a non-theistic means to moksha .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] If viewed from the prism of physics, his ideas imply a clear role for the observer as independent of the system being studied. Kaṇāda's ideas were influential on other schools of Hinduism, and over its history became closely associated with the Nyaya school of Hindu philosophy.

[ 13 ] Kaṇāda's system speaks of six properties ( padārthas ) that are nameable and knowable. He claims that these are sufficient to describe everything in the universe, including observers. These six categories are dravya (substance), guna (quality), karma (action/ motion), samanya (generality/ commonness), visesa (particular), and samavaya (inherence). There are nine classes of substances (dravya), some of which are atomic, some non-atomic, and others that are all-pervasive.

The ideas of Kaṇāda span a wide range of fields, and they influenced not only philosophy, but possibly scholars in other fields such as Charaka who wrote a medical text named Charaka Samhita .

[ 18 ] Lifetime [ edit ] The century in which Kaṇāda lived is unclear and has been a subject of a long debate.

[ 13 ] In his review of 1961, Riepe states Kaṇāda lived sometime before 300 CE, but convincing evidence to firmly put him in a certain century remains elusive.

[ 19 ] The Vaisheshika Sutras mention competing schools of Indian philosophy such as Samkhya and Mimamsa, [ 20 ] but make no mention of Buddhism, which has led scholars in more recent publications to posit estimates of 6th century BCE.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 14 ] The Vaisheshika Sutras manuscript has survived into the modern era in multiple versions and the discovery of newer manuscripts in different parts of India by Thakur in 1957 and Jambuvijayaji in 1961, followed by critical edition studies, suggest that the text attributed to Kaṇāda was systematized and finalized sometime between 200 BCE and the start of the common era, with the possibility that its key doctrines may be much older.

[ 20 ] [ 4 ] [ 21 ] Multiple Hindu texts dated to the 1st and 2nd century CE, such as the Mahavibhas and Jnanaprasthana from the Kushan Empire , quote and comment on Kaṇāda's doctrines.

[ 22 ] His ideas are also mentioned in Buddhist texts attributed to Aśvaghoṣa of the same period.

[ 22 ] In Jainism literature, he is referred as Sad-uluka , which means "the Uluka who propounded the doctrine of six categories".

[ 20 ] His Vaisheshika philosophy similarly appears with alternate names, such as "Aulukya philosophy" derived from the nickname Uluka (literally owl, or grain eater in the night).

[ 20 ] [ note 1 ] Kaṇāda was influential in Indian philosophies appearing in various texts by dictators, philosophers, and more, such as Kashyapa, Uluka, Kananda, Kanabhuk among others.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Ideas [ edit ] Physics is central to Kaṇāda's assertion that all that is knowable is based on motion. His ascribing centrality to physics in the understanding of the universe also follows from his invariance principles. For example, he says that the atom must be spherical since it should be the same in all dimensions.

[ 23 ] He asserts that all substances are composed of four types of atoms, two of which have mass and two are massless.

Kaṇāda presents his work within a larger moral framework by defining Dharma as that which brings about material progress and highest good.

[ 18 ] [ 24 ] He follows this Sutra with another that asserts that the Vedas have gained respect because they teach such Dharma, and something is not Dharma simply because it is in the Vedas.

[ 18 ] Kanada makes empirical observations such as the rising upwards of fire, magnetic movement, rain and thunder, the growth of grass, and offers naturalistic explanations to them in his text Vaisheshika Sutra .

[ 25 ] Kaṇāda and early Vaisheshika scholars focused on the evolution of the universe by law.

[ 26 ] However, this was not unusual for his times since several major early versions of Hindu philosophies such as Samkhya, Nyaya, Mimamsa along with sub-schools of Yoga and Vedanta, as well as non-Vedic schools such as Jainism and Buddhism, were similarly non-theistic.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Kaṇāda was among the sages of India who believed in man's potential to understand existence and reach moksha on his own, without God, a notion of ancient Indians summarized by Nietzsche as the belief that "with piety and knowledge of the Veda, nothing is impossible".

[ 26 ] The text states: [ 29 ] There are nine constituents of realities: four classes of atoms (earth, water, light and air), space ( akasha ), time ( kāla ), direction (disha), infinity of souls ( Atman ), mind ( manas ).

[ 30 ] Every object of creation is made of atoms (paramāṇu) which in turn connect with each other to form molecules (aṇu). Atoms are eternal, and their combinations constitute the empirical material world.

Individual souls are eternal and pervade material bodies for a time.

There are six categories ( padārtha ) of experience—substance, quality, activity, generality, particularity, and inherence.

Several traits of substances ( dravya ) are given as colour, taste, smell, touch, number, size, the separate, coupling and uncoupling, priority and posterity, comprehension, pleasure and pain, attraction and revulsion, and wishes.

[ 31 ] Thus the idea of the subdivision is carried further to analytical categories as well, which explains its affinity with Nyaya .

Observations and theories [ edit ] In the fifth chapter of Vaisheshika Sutra, Kaṇāda mentions various empirical observations and natural phenomena such as the falling of objects to the ground, rising of fire and heat upwards, the growth of grass upwards, the nature of rainfall and thunderstorms, the flow of liquids, the movement towards a magnet among many others, asks why these things happen, then attempts to integrate his observations with his theories on atoms, molecules, and their interaction. He classifies observed events into two: those caused by volition, and those caused by subject-object conjunctions.

[ 25 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] His idea of the observer, that is the subject, being different from objective reality is completely consistent with Vedanta , which speaks of the difference between "Apara" and "Para" knowledge, where "Apara" represents normal associational knowledge whereas "Para" represents deeper subjective knowledge.

The concept of paramanu (atom) [ edit ] See also: Mahābhūta , Dravya , and Akāraṇavat Vaisheshika Darshana Dharma is that through which there is the accomplishment of rising to the unsurpassed good. Because it is an exposition of that, it has the authority of Veda . – Vaisheshika Sutras 1.1-2 (...) That there is only one individual (soul) is known from the absence of particularity when it comes to the emergence of an understanding of happiness and suffering, (whereas) a multiplicity of individuals is inferred from their perseverance in dharma, and from the strength of their teaching. – Vaisheshika Sutras 3.16-18 The true being is eternal, having no cause. Its indicator is its effect. The presence of the effect arises from the presence of its cause. – Vaisheshika Sutras 4.1-3 —Kaṇāda, Translated by John Wells [ 34 ] [ 35 ] Kaṇāda proposes that paramanu ( atom ) is an indestructible particle of matter. The atom is indivisible because it is a state at which no measurement can be attributed. He used invariance arguments to determine properties of the atoms. He also stated that anu can have two states—absolute rest and a state of motion.

[ 36 ] Kaṇāda postulated four different kinds of atoms: two with mass, and two without.

[ 12 ] Each substance is supposed to consist of all four kinds of atoms.

Kaṇāda's conception of the atom was likely independent from the similar concept among the ancient Greeks, because of the differences between the theories.

[ 37 ] For example, Kaṇāda suggested that atoms as building blocks differ both qualitatively and quantitatively, while Greeks suggested that atoms differed only quantitatively but not qualitatively.

[ 37 ] See also [ edit ] Timeline of atomic and subatomic physics List of Indian inventions and discoveries Leucippus Vedanta Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Notes [ edit ] ^ A legend in the Hindu tradition states that ascetic scholar Kanada would spend all day in his studies and in meditation, eat only once every night like an owl.

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Sharma 2000 , p. 175.

^ a b Riepe 1961 , p. 228 with footnote 12.

^ a b Bart Labuschagne & Timo Slootweg 2012 , p. 60, Quote: "Kanada, a Hindu sage who lived either around the 6th or 2nd century BCE, and who founded the philosophical school of Vaisheshika..

^ a b c d Jeaneane D. Fowler 2002 , pp. 98–99.

^ Oliver Leaman (1999), Key Concepts in Eastern Philosophy.

Routledge, ISBN 978-0415173629 , page 269 ^ J Ganeri (2012), The Self: Naturalism, Consciousness, and the First-Person Stance, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0199652365 ^ "Approximate Chronology of Indian Philosophers" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 21 February 2022 .

^ a b Jeaneane D. Fowler 2002 , p. 99.

^ Riepe 1961 , pp. 227–229.

^ "The Vaisesika sutras of Kanada. Translated by Nandalal Sinha" Full Text at archive.org ^ Riepe 1961 , p. 229.

^ a b Kak, S. 'Matter and Mind: The Vaisheshika Sutra of Kanada' (2016), Mount Meru Publishing, Mississauga, Ontario, ISBN 978-1-988207-13-1 .

^ a b c Jeaneane D. Fowler 2002 , p. 98.

^ a b H. Margenau 2012 , p. xxx-xxxi.

^ Jeaneane D. Fowler 2002 , pp. 100–102.

^ James G. Lochtefeld (2002).

The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism: N-Z . The Rosen Publishing Group. pp.

729 –731.

ISBN 978-0-8239-3180-4 .

^ Sharma 2000 , p. 177-186.

^ a b c Bimal Krishna Matilal 1977 , pp. 55–56.

^ Riepe 1961 , pp. 228–229.

^ a b c d Bimal Krishna Matilal 1977 , p. 54.

^ Wilhelm Halbfass (1992).

On Being and What There Is: Classical Vaisesika and the History of Indian Ontology . State University of New York Press. pp.

79– 80.

ISBN 978-0-7914-1178-0 .

^ a b Bimal Krishna Matilal 1977 , p. 55.

^ Kak, S. Kaṇāda, Great Physicist and Sage of Antiquity ^ Purusottama Bilimoria; Joseph Prabhu; Renuka M. Sharma (2007).

Indian Ethics: Classical traditions and contemporary challenges . Ashgate. p. 76.

ISBN 978-0-7546-3301-3 .

, Quote: "Kanada's Vaisesikasutra: dharma is that from which prosperity and the highest good come about." ^ a b Bimal Krishna Matilal 1977 , p. 57.

^ a b Herman Siemens; Vasti Roodt (2008).

Nietzsche, Power and Politics: Rethinking Nietzsche's Legacy for Political Thought . Walter de Gruyter. pp.

578– 579.

ISBN 978-3-11-021733-9 .

^ Surendranath Dasgupta (1992).

A History of Indian Philosophy . Motilal Banarsidass. pp.

281– 285.

ISBN 978-81-208-0412-8 .

^ Roy W. Perrett (2013).

Philosophy of Religion: Indian Philosophy . Routledge. pp.

xiii– xiv.

ISBN 978-1-135-70329-5 .

^ The Vaisheshika sutras of Kanada , 2nd Edition, Translator: Nandalal Sinha (1923); Editor: BD Basu; Note: this is the translation of non-critical edition of the manuscript ^ O'Flaherty, p. 3.

^ Vitsaxis, Vassilis. Thought and Faith: Comparative Philosophical and Religious Concepts in Ancient Greece, India, and Christianity. Somerset Hall Pr 2009-10-01 (October 2009). P. 299.

ISBN 1935244035 .

^ The Vaisesika Sutras of Kanada , pp. 152-166, Translated by Nandalal Sinha (note this translation is of the old disputed manuscript, not critical edition) ^ John Wells (2009), The Vaisheshika Darshana , Darshana Press, Chapter 5 verses (main and appendix), critical edition ^ John Wells (2009), The Vaisheshika Darshana , Darshana Press ^ For Sanskrit and an alternate translation: Debasish Chakravarty (2003), Vaisesika Sutra of Kanada, DK Printworld, ISBN 978-8124602294 ^ Roopa Narayan.

"Space, Time and Anu in Vaisheshika" (PDF) . Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, USA . Retrieved 29 May 2013 .

^ a b Edward Craig (1998).

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Index . Routledge. pp.

198– 199.

ISBN 978-0-415-18715-2 .

Sources [ edit ] Jeaneane D. Fowler (2002).

Perspectives of Reality: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Hinduism . Sussex Academic Press.

ISBN 978-1-898723-93-6 .

H. Margenau (2012).

Physics and Philosophy: Selected Essays . Springer Science.

ISBN 978-94-009-9845-2 .

Bimal Krishna Matilal (1977).

Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika . Otto Harrassowitz Verlag.

ISBN 978-3-447-01807-4 .

Subhash Kak (2016).

Matter and Mind: The Vaiśeṣika Sūtra of Kaṇāda . Mount Meru Publishing.

ISBN 9781988207148 .

Riepe, Dale Maurice (1961).

Naturalistic Tradition in Indian Thought . Motilal Banarsidass (Reprint 1996).

ISBN 978-81-208-1293-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Bart Labuschagne; Timo Slootweg (2012).

Hegel's Philosophy of the Historical Religions . BRILL Academic.

ISBN 978-90-04-22618-0 .

Sharma, Chandradhar (2000).

A Critical Survey of Indian Philosophy . Motilal Banarsidass.

ISBN 978-81-208-0365-7 .

External links [ edit ] Early Atomism - Resonance magazine, Oct 2010 Scientists of India by Dilip M. Salwi - Children's Book Trust - ISBN 81-7011-318-0 , 2007 v t e Rishis Saptarshi 1st (Svayambhuva) Manvantara Marichi Atri Angiras Pulaha Kratu Pulastya Vasishtha 2nd (Svarocisha) Manvantara Urja Stambha Prana Dattoli Rishabha Nischara Arvarivat 3rd (Uttama) Manvantara Kaukundihi Kurundi Dalaya Sankha Pravahita Mita Sammita 4th (Tapasa) Manvantara Jyotirdhama Prithu Kavya Chaitra Agni Vanaka Pivara 5th (Raivata) Manvantara Hirannyaroma Vedasri Urddhabahu Vedabahu Sudhaman Parjanya Mahamuni 6th (Cakshusha) Manvantara Sumedhas Virajas Havishmat Uttama Madhu Abhinaman Sahishnnu 7th (Vaivasvata) Manvantara Kashyapa Atri Vasishtha Vishvamitra Gautama Jamadagni Bharadvaja Other Four Kumaras Agastya Agnivesha Aruni Ashtavakra Astika Atharvan Atreya Aupamanyava Aurva Avatsara Bhrigu Bhringi Brahmarshi Chyavana Dattatreya Dadhichi Devala Dirghatamas Durvasa Garga Gritsamada Jahnu Jaimini ( Mimansa ) Kambhoja Kambu Swayambhuva Kanada ( Vaisheshika ) Kanva Kapila ( Samkhya ) Kindama Kutsa Lomasha Mandavya Markandeya Matsyendra Mrikanda Nachiketa Narada Parashara Rajarshi Raikva Renukacharya Rishyasringa Sakayanya Sandipani Sankriti Satyakama Jabala Shukra Shuka Upamanyu Vaisampayana Valmiki Vartantu Vibhandaka Vyasa ( Vedas , Vedanta ) Yajnavalkya Other Hindu sages v t e Indian philosophy Topics Atheism Atomism Idealism Logic Monotheism Vedic philosophy Kama Artha Moksha Ancient Āstika Hindu : Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Shaiva Raseśvara Pashupata Shaivism Pāṇiniya Nāstika Ājīvika Ajñana Charvaka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist philosophy and Early Buddhist schools Śūnyatā Madhyamaka Yogachara Sautrāntika Svatantrika Medieval Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Sikh Philosophy Shaiva Pratyabhijna Pashupata Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Modern Integral yoga Gandhism Radical Humanism Progressive utilization theory Texts Abhinavabharati Arthashastra Bhagavad Gita Bhagavata Purana Brahma Sutra Buddhist texts Dharmashastra Hindu texts Jain Agamas Kamasutra Mimamsa Sutras All 108 texts Principal Nyāya Sūtras Nyayakusumanjali Panchadasi Samkhyapravachana Sutra Sangam texts Sarvadarsanasangraha Shiva Sutras Tarka-Sangraha Tattvacintāmaṇi Tirukkuṟaḷ Upanishads Minor Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Vedangas Vedas Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Yoga Vasistha More...

Philosophers Adi Shankara Abhinavagupta Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Maṇḍana Miśra Valluvar Avatsara Vāchaspati Misra Uddalaka Aruni Gautama Buddha Yājñavalkya Gārgī Vāchaknavī Buddhaghosa Patañjali Kanada Kapila Brihadratha Ikshvaku Jaimini Vyasa Chanakya Dharmakirti Akshapada Gotama Nagarjuna Padmasambhāva Vasubandhu Gaudapada Ramana Maharshi Vivekananda Dayananda Saraswati Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Raikva Sadananda Sakayanya Satyakama Jabala Madhvacharya Mahavira Guru Nanak More...

Concepts Abhava Abhasavada Abheda Adarsana Adrishta Advaita Aham Ahimsa Aishvarya Akrodha Aksara Anatta Ananta Anavastha Anupalabdhi Apauruṣheyā Artha Asiddhatva Asatkalpa Ātman Avyakta Bhrama Brahman Bhuman Bhumika Catuṣkoṭi Chaitanya Chidabhasa Cittabhumi Dāna Devatas Dharma Dhi Dravya Dhrti Ekagrata Guṇa Hitā Idam Ikshana Ishvaratva Jivatva Kama Karma Kasaya Kshetrajna Lakshana Matsya Nyaya Mithyatva Mokṣa Nididhyasana Nirvāṇa Nishkama Karma Niyama Padārtha Paramatman Paramananda Parameshashakti Parinama-vada Pradhana Prajna Prakṛti Pratibimbavada Pratītyasamutpāda Puruṣa Rājamaṇḍala Ṛta Sakshi Samadhi Saṃsāra Satya Satkaryavada Shabda Brahman Sphoṭa Sthiti Śūnyatā Sutram Svātantrya Iccha-mrityu Syādvāda Taijasa Tajjalan Tanmatra Tyāga Uparati Upekkhā Utsaha Vivartavada Viraj Yamas Yoga More...

Authority control databases International VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Israel People DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kaṇāda&oldid=1303183792 " Categories : Ancient Indian philosophers Atomists Ancient physicists Metaphysicians Rishis Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from May 2015 Use dmy dates from May 2015 Articles with hCards Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Pages using multiple image with manual scaled images CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 14:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kaṇāda 46 languages Add topic

