Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early anti-Masonic documents 2 Political anti-Masonry Toggle Political anti-Masonry subsection 2.1 United States 2.2 Asia 2.3 Europe 2.3.1 Finland 2.3.2 Soviet Union 2.3.3 Fascist Italy 2.3.4 Hungary 2.3.5 Nazi Germany and occupied Europe 2.3.6 Francoist Spain 2.3.7 United Kingdom 3 Religious anti-Masonry Toggle Religious anti-Masonry subsection 3.1 Muslim anti-Masonry 3.2 Christian anti-Masonry 4 Conspiracy theories 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle External links subsection 8.1 Critical of Freemasonry 8.2 Supportive of Freemasonry Toggle the table of contents Anti-Masonry 16 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Español فارسی Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Македонски Nederlands Norsk bokmål Português Română Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Opposition to Freemasonry "Anti-Masonic" redirects here. For the 19th century political party, see Anti-Masonic Party .

Part of a series on Freemasonry Overview Grand Lodge Masonic lodge Masonic lodge officers Grand Master Prince Hall Freemasonry Regular Masonic jurisdiction Anglo-American Freemasonry Continental Freemasonry History History of Freemasonry Liberté chérie Masonic manuscripts Masonic bodies Masonic Masonic bodies York Rite Order of Mark Master Masons Holy Royal Arch Royal Arch Masonry Cryptic Masonry Knights Templar Red Cross of Constantine Scottish Rite Knight Kadosh French Rite Societas Rosicruciana Order of Royal and Select Masters Grand College of Rites Swedish Rite Order of Saint Thomas of Acon Royal Order of Scotland Order of Knight Masons Research Lodge Corks Side degrees The Shrine Royal Order of Jesters Tall Cedars of Lebanon The Grotto Masonic groups for women Women and Freemasonry Order of the Amaranth Order of the Eastern Star Prince Hall Order of the Eastern Star Co-Freemasonry Masonic youth organizations DeMolay A.J.E.F.

Job's Daughters International Order of the Rainbow for Girls Views on Masonry Anti-Masonry Anti-Masonic Party Grand Anti-Masonic Exhibition Masonic conspiracy theories Christian attitudes towards Freemasonry Papal ban of Freemasonry Taxil hoax People and places Masonic Temple James Anderson Prince Hall William Preston Thomas Smith Webb Albert Mackey Albert Pike John the Evangelist John the Baptist William Schaw Elizabeth Aldworth List of Freemasons Lodge Mother Kilwinning Freemasons' Hall, London Mark Masons' Hall, London House of the Temple Solomon's Temple Detroit Masonic Temple List of Masonic buildings Related Masonic ritual and symbolism Great Architect of the Universe Square and Compasses Pigpen cipher Eye of Providence Hiram Abiff Chamber of Reflection List of Masonic Abbreviations Sprig of Acacia Masonic Landmarks Pike's Morals and Dogma Propaganda Due Dermott's Ahiman Rezon Volume of Sacred Law By country Barbados Belgium Canada China Croatia Cuba Denmark France Finland Germany Iceland India Indonesia Israel Italy Japan Lebanon Luxembourg Malaysia Malta Mexico North Macedonia Philippines Portugal Romania Russia Scotland South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Thailand Turkey Ukraine Venezuela United States v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Anti-Masonry (alternatively called anti-Freemasonry ) is "avowed opposition to Freemasonry ", [ 1 ] which has led to multiple forms of religious discrimination , violent persecution , and suppression in some countries as well as in various organized religions (primarily Abrahamic religions ).

[ 2 ] That said, there is no homogeneous anti-Masonic movement. Anti-Masonry consists of radically differing criticisms from frequently incompatible political institutions and organized religions that oppose each other , and are hostile to Freemasonry in some form.

[ 2 ] Early anti-Masonic documents [ edit ] The earliest known [ 3 ] anti-Masonic document was a leaflet which was printed in 1698 by a Presbyterian minister who was named Winter. It reads: [ 4 ] [ 5 ] TO ALL GODLY PEOPLE, In the Citie of London.

Having thought it needful to warn you of the Mischiefs and Evils practiced in the Sight of God by those called Freed Masons, I say take Care lest their Ceremonies and secret Swearings take hold of you; and be wary that none cause you to err from Godliness. For this devilish Sect of Men are Meeters in secret which swear against all without ther Following. They are the Anti Christ which was to come leading Men from Fear of God. For how should Men meet in secret Places and with secret Signs taking Care that none observed them to do the Work of GOD; are not these the Ways of Evil-doers?

Knowing how that God observeth privilly them that sit in Darkness they shall be smitten and the Secrets of their Hearts layed bare. Mingle not among this corrupt People lest you be found so at the World's Conflagration.

Political anti-Masonry [ edit ] Freemasonry has been alleged to hold its members back from fully committing themselves to their nation.

[ 6 ] Critics claim that, compared to Operative Masonry 's clear denunciations of treachery, [ 7 ] Speculative Masonry (Freemasonry after 1723) was far more ambiguous.

[ 8 ] The old Catholic Encyclopedia alleges that Masonic disapproval of treachery is not on moral grounds but on the grounds of inconvenience to other Masons.

[ 9 ] It also argues [ 10 ] [ 11 ] that the adage "Loyalty to freedom overrides all other considerations" [ 12 ] justifies treason, and quotes Albert Mackey , who said "... if treason or rebellion were masonic crimes, almost every mason in the United Colonies (America), in 1776, would have been subject to expulsion and every Lodge to a forfeiture of its warrant by the Grand Lodges of England and Scotland, under whose jurisdiction they were at the time".

[ 6 ] Freemasonry charges its members that: "In the state you are to be a quiet and peaceful subject, true to your government and just to your country; You are not to countenence disloyalty or rebellion, but patiently submit to legal authority and conform with cheerfulness to the government of the country in which you live." [ 13 ] Freemasonry was persecuted in all the communist countries.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Freemasonry in Cuba continued to exist following the Cuban Revolution , and according to Cuban folklore , Fidel Castro is said to have "developed a soft spot for the Masons when they gave him refuge in a Masonic Lodge" in the 1950s. When in power, Castro was also said to have "kept them on a tight leash" as they were considered a subversive element in Cuban society and allegedly providing safe haven for dissidents.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Fascists treated Freemasonry as a potential source of opposition. Masonic writers state that the language used by the totalitarian regimes is similar to that used by other modern critics of Freemasonry.

[ 18 ] United States [ edit ] Main articles: William Morgan (anti-Mason) and Anti-Masonic Party In 1826, William Morgan disappeared from the small town of Batavia, New York . He was alleged to be kidnapped by Freemasons [ 19 ] and murdered after threatening to expose Freemasonry's "secrets" by publishing its rituals.

[ 20 ] Morgan's disappearance sparked a series of protests and suspicion against Freemasonry, which eventually spread to the political realm. Under the leadership of anti-Masonic Thurlow Weed , an Anti-Jacksonist movement became (since Jackson was a Mason) the Anti-Masonic Party . This political Party ran presidential candidates in 1828 and 1832, but by 1835 the party had disbanded everywhere except Pennsylvania .

William A. Palmer of Vermont and Joseph Ritner of Pennsylvania were both elected governor of their respective states on anti-Masonic platforms.

[ 21 ] John Quincy Adams , President of the United States during the Morgan Affair , objected to the oath of secrecy, particularly with regard to the keeping of undefined secrets and to the penalties for breaking the oath. He declared, "Masonry ought forever to be abolished. It is wrong – essentially wrong – a seed of evil which can never produce any good," [ 22 ] although he extended "the most liberal of tolerance" to Masons who joined the fraternity before the murder of William Morgan, saying that they were taken by surprise and that they took the Oaths "without reflecting upon what they imported, or sheltering their consciences under the great names which had gone before them." [ 23 ] Though few states passed laws directed at Freemasonry by name, laws regulating and restricting it were passed and many cases dealing with Freemasonry were seen in the courts.

[ 24 ] Antimasonic legislation was passed in Vermont in 1833, including a provision by which the giving and willing taking of an unnecessary oath was made a crime. (Pub. Stat., sec. 5917), [ 25 ] and the state of New York enacted a Benevolent Orders Law to regulate such organizations.

[ 24 ] Asia [ edit ] In 1938, a Japanese representative to the Welt-Dienst / World-Service congress hosted by Ulrich Fleischhauer stated, on behalf of Japan , that " Judeo-Masonry is forcing the Chinese to turn China into a spearhead for an attack on Japan, and thereby forcing Japan to defend itself against this threat. Japan is at war not with China but with Freemasonry ( Tiandihui ), represented by General Chiang Kai-shek , the successor of his master, the Freemason Sun Yat-sen ." [ 14 ] Europe [ edit ] According to Simon Sarlin, and Dan Rouyer, intense denunciation of Freemasonry because of its supposed grip on society and government, became standard doctrine within counter-revolutionary thought and action in the 19th century.  A major event was The International Anti-Masonic Congress that took place in Trento, Italy in 1896. It was sponsored by Pope Leo XIII and the Austro-Hungarian Emperor Francis-Joseph , a Catholic. The Congress assembled 1,500 delegates and 300 journalists, as well as prominent Catholic bishops. Thousands of telegrams testified to support from the right worldwide.  It created a permanent body, the "Universal Anti-Masonic Union." The goal was to create a powerful centre for all anti-Masonic groups, strengthening their resolve and capabilities to battle the Freemasons nation by nation.  In practice the Union was too conspicuously Papal, and poorly organized. It proved ineffective in its grandiose expectations but its creation was a measure of bitter anger and frustration among the Catholic enemies of Freemasonry.

[ 26 ] Finland [ edit ] The far-right groups exercised considerable political power in Finland in the 1930s and 40s, pressuring the government to expel Freemasons from the armed forces.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Patriotic Citizens of Viitasaari wanted to purge Jews and Freemasons from the country and spread anti-Masonic booklets in the prints of tens of thousands.

[ 29 ] Patriotic People's Movement MP Paavo Susitaival was a prominent opponent of freemasonry and claimed freemasons were responsible for ritual murders.

[ 30 ] Soviet Union [ edit ] The Soviet Union definitively outlawed Freemasonry in 1922. At one of the Second International meetings, Grigory Zinoviev demanded to purge it of masons.

[ 31 ] Freemasonry did not exist in the other Marxist–Leninist states . Post-war revivals of Freemasonry in Czechoslovakia and Hungary were suppressed in 1950.

[ 32 ] Fascist Italy [ edit ] Benito Mussolini decreed in 1924 that every member of his Fascist Party who was a Mason must abandon either one or the other organization, and in 1925, he dissolved Freemasonry in Italy, claiming that it was a political organization. One of the most prominent Fascists, General Luigi Capello , who had also been Deputy Grand Master of the Grande Oriente, Italy's leading Grand Lodge , gave up his membership in the Fascist Party rather than in Masonry. He later took part in a failed attempt to murder Mussolini and was sentenced to 30 years in jail, though he was released after 9 years of prison.

[ 33 ] Hungary [ edit ] In 1919, Béla Kun [ 34 ] proclaimed the dictatorship of the proletariat in Hungary and Masonic lodges were closed. After the fall of the dictatorship of the proletariat, leaders of the counter-revolution such as Miklós Horthy blamed the Hungarian freemasons for their First World War defeat and for the revolution. Masonry was outlawed by a decree in 1920. This marked the start of raids by army officers on Masonic lodges [ 35 ] along with theft, and sometimes destruction, of Masonic libraries, records, archives, paraphernalia, and works of art. Several Masonic buildings were seized and used for anti-Masonic exhibitions. The masonic documents were archived, preserved and may still be used for research.

In post-war Hungary, lodges were re-established, but after five years, [ 35 ] the government described them as "meeting places of the enemies of the people's democratic republic, of capitalistic elements, and of the adherents of Western imperialism". They were banned again in 1950.

[ 14 ] Nazi Germany and occupied Europe [ edit ] See also: The Holocaust and Liberté chérie Propaganda poster of the Grand Anti-Masonic Exhibition in Belgrade during the Nazi German occupation of Serbia The red triangle , the symbol used to mark Freemasons Freemasons were consistently considered an ideological foe of Nazism in their world perception ( Weltauffassung ). The Nazis claimed that high-degree Masons were willing members of the Jewish conspiracy and that Freemasonry was one of the causes of Germany's defeat in World War I .

[ 36 ] In Mein Kampf , Adolf Hitler wrote that "Freemasonry has succumbed to the Jews and has become an excellent instrument to fight for their aims and to use their strings to pull the upper strata of society into their designs". He continued, "The general pacifistic paralysis of the national instinct of self-preservation begun by Freemasonry" is then transmitted to the masses of society by the press.

[ 37 ] [ not specific enough to verify ] In 1933 Hermann Göring , the Reichstag President and one of the key figures in the process of Gleichschaltung (" synchronization "), stated "in National Socialist Germany, there is no place for Freemasonry".

[ 38 ] The Enabling Act ( Ermächtigungsgesetz in German ) was passed by Germany's parliament (the Reichstag) on March 23, 1933. Using the Act, on January 8, 1934, the German Ministry of the Interior ordered the disbandment of Freemasonry, and confiscation of the property of all Lodges; stating that those who had been members of Lodges when Hitler came to power, in January 1933, were prohibited from holding office in the Nazi party or its paramilitary arms, and were ineligible for appointment in public service.

[ 39 ] Consistently considered an ideological foe of Nazism in their world perception ( Weltauffassung ), special sections of the Security Service ( SD ) and later the Reich Security Main Office ( RSHA ) were established to deal with Freemasonry.

[ 40 ] Masonic concentration camp inmates were graded as political prisoners, and wore an inverted (point down) red triangle .

On August 8, 1935, as Führer and Chancellor , Adolf Hitler announced in the Nazi Party newspaper, Völkischer Beobachter , the final dissolution of all Masonic Lodges in Germany. The article accused a conspiracy of the Fraternity and World Jewry of seeking to create a World Republic .

[ 41 ] In 1937 Joseph Goebbels inaugurated an "Anti-Masonic Exposition" to display objects seized by the state.

[ 38 ] The Ministry of Defence forbade officers from becoming Freemasons, with officers who remained as Masons being sidelined.

[ 14 ] During the war, Freemasonry was banned by edict in all countries that were either allied with the Nazis or under Nazi control, including Norway and France . Anti-Masonic exhibitions were held in many occupied countries.

Field-Marshal Friedrich Paulus was denounced as a "High-grade Freemason" when he surrendered to the Soviet Union in 1943.

[ 42 ] In 1943, the Propaganda Abteilung, a delegation of Nazi Germany's propaganda ministry within occupied France , commissioned the propaganda film Forces occultes . The film virulently denounces Freemasonry, parliamentarianism and Jews as part of Vichy's drive against them and seeks to prove a Jewish-Masonic plot. The Freemasons were accused of conspiring with Jews and Anglo-American nations to encourage France into a war with Germany.

The preserved records of the RSHA —i.e., Reichssicherheitshauptamt or the Office of the High Command of Security Service, which pursued the racial objectives of the SS through the Race and Resettlement Office—document the persecution of Freemasons.

[ 40 ] The number of Freemasons from Nazi occupied countries who were killed is not accurately known, but it is estimated that between 80,000 and 200,000 Freemasons were murdered under the Nazi regime.

[ 43 ] The Government of the United Kingdom established Holocaust Memorial Day [ 44 ] to recognise all groups who were targets of the Nazi regime, and counter Holocaust denial . Freemasons are listed as being among those who were targeted.

Francoist Spain [ edit ] It is claimed that the dictator Miguel Primo de Rivera ordered the abolition of Freemasonry in Spain.

[ 45 ] In September 1928, one of the two Grand Lodges in Spain was closed and approximately two-hundred masons, most notably the Grand Master of the Grand Orient, were imprisoned for allegedly plotting against the government.

[ 46 ] Following the military coup of 1936 , many Freemasons trapped in areas under Nationalist control were arrested and summarily killed in the White Terror , along with members of left wing parties and trade unionists. It was reported that Masons were tortured, garroted , shot, and murdered by organized death squads in every town in Spain. At this time one of the most rabid opponents of Freemasonry, Father Juan Tusquets Terrats , began to work for the Nationalists with the task of exposing masons. One of his close associates was Franco's personal chaplain, and over the next two years, these two men assembled a huge index of 80,000 suspected masons, even though there were little more than 5,000 masons in Spain. The lodge building in Cordoba was burnt, the Masonic Temple of Santa Cruz de Tenerife in the Canary Islands was confiscated and transformed into the headquarters of the Falange, and another was shelled by artillery. In Salamanca thirty members of one lodge were shot, including a priest. Similar atrocities occurred across the country: fifteen masons were shot in Logroño , seventeen in Ceuta , thirty-three in Algeciras , and thirty in Valladolid , among them the Civil Governor. Few towns escaped the carnage as Freemasons in Lugo , Zamora, Cádiz and Granada were brutally rounded up and shot, and in Seville , the entire membership of several lodges were butchered. The slightest suspicion of being a mason was often enough to earn a place in a firing squad, and the blood-letting was so fierce that, reportedly, some masons were even hurled into working engines of steam trains. By 16 December 1937, according to the annual masonic assembly held in Madrid, all masons that had not escaped from the areas under nationalist control had been murdered.

[ 46 ] After the victory of dictator General Francisco Franco , Freemasonry was officially outlawed in Spain on 2 March 1940. Being a mason was automatically punishable by a minimum jail term of 12 years.

[ 47 ] Masons of the 18º and above were deemed guilty of "Aggravated Circumstances", and usually faced the death penalty.

[ 48 ] According to Francoists, the Republican Regime which Franco overthrew had a strong Masonic presence.

[ citation needed ] In reality Spanish Masons were present in all sectors of politics and the armed forces.

[ 49 ] At least four of the Generals who supported Franco's rebellion were Masons, although many lodges contained fervent but generally conservative Republicans. Freemasonry was formally outlawed in the Law for the Repression of Freemasonry and Communism.

[ 50 ] After Franco's decree outlawing masonry, Franco's supporters were given two months to resign from any lodge they might be a member. Many masons chose to go into exile instead, including prominent monarchists who had whole-heartedly supported the Nationalist rebellion in 1936. The common components in Spanish Masonry seems to have been upper or middle class conservative liberalism and strong anti-clericism.

[ 51 ] The Law for the Repression of Freemasonry and Communism was not abrogated until 1963.

[ 50 ] References to a "Judeo-Masonic plot" are a standard component of Francoist speeches and propaganda and reveal the intense and paranoid obsession of the dictator with masonry. Franco produced at least 49 pseudonymous anti-masonic magazine articles and an anti-masonic book during his lifetime. According to Franco: [ 48 ] The whole secret of the campaigns unleashed against Spain can be explained in two words: masonry and communism... we have to extirpate these two evils from our land.

United Kingdom [ edit ] It was the Unlawful Societies Act 1799 that saw the first statute "for the more effectual suppression of societies established for seditious and treasonable purposes"; once enacted it affected all societies whose members were required to take an oath not authorised by law, shall be deemed "unlawful combinations." It was as a result of the intervention of the Grand Master of the Antients, The 4th Duke of Atholl , and the Acting Grand Master of the Moderns, the Earl of Moira that a special exempting clause was inserted into this legislation in favour of societies "held under the Denomination of Lodges of Freemasons" provided that they had been "usually held before the Act" and their names, places and times of meeting and the names of the members were annually registered with the local clerk to the justices of the peace. This continued on until this act was repealed by a section of the Criminal Justice Act 1967 which meant that the annual returns of all the Lodges to the authorities ceased.

[ 52 ] In the United Kingdom, anti-Masonic sentiment grew following the publication of Martin Short's 1989 book, Inside the Brotherhood (Further Secrets of the Freemasons) .

[ 53 ] The allegations made by Short led several members of the British Government, since 1997, to propose laws requiring Freemasons who join the police or judiciary [ 54 ] to declare their membership publicly to the government amid accusations of Freemasons performing acts of mutual advancement and favour-swapping. This movement was initially led by Jack Straw , Home Secretary from 1997 until 2001.

[ 54 ] In 1999, the Welsh Assembly became the only body in the United Kingdom to place a legal requirement on membership declaration for Freemasons.

[ 55 ] Currently, existing members of the police and judiciary in England are asked to voluntarily admit to being Freemasons.

[ 56 ] However, all first time successful judiciary candidates had to "declare their freemasonry status" before appointment until 2009, when – following a successful challenge in the European Court by Italian Freemasons – Jack Straw accepted that the policy was "disproportionate" and revoked it.

[ 56 ] Conversely, new members of the police are not required to declare their status.

[ 56 ] In 2004, Rhodri Morgan , the First Minister of the Welsh Assembly , said that he blocked Gerard Elias' appointment to counsel general because of links to hunting and Freemasonry, [ 57 ] although it was claimed by non-Labour politicians that the real reason was in order to have a Labour supporter, Malcolm Bishop, in the role.

[ 58 ] Religious anti-Masonry [ edit ] Muslim anti-Masonry [ edit ] Further information: Antisemitism in Islam , Antisemitism in the Arab world , Conspiracy theories in the Arab world , Conspiracy theories in Turkey , War on Islam controversy , and 1988 Hamas charter Ottoman noble Ahmad Nami dressed in full Masonic attire in 1925 Islamic criticism and opposition to Freemasonry has existed since the introduction of the latter in the Muslim world in the 18th century.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] After the condemnation of Freemasonry by Pope Clement XII in 1738, Sultan Mahmud I followed suit outlawing the organization and since that time Freemasonry was equated with atheism in the Ottoman Empire and the broader Islamic world.

[ 61 ] The Islamic anti-Masonic opposition in the Muslim world has been reinforced by the anti-clerical and atheistic slant of the Grand Orient of France .

[ 61 ] By the middle of the 19th century, Freemasonry and its semi-secret organizational structures were able to establish lodges predominantly among those populations living in the Ottoman Empire and its provinces [ 59 ] ( Egypt , Lebanon , Syria , Cyprus , and Macedonia ).

[ 59 ] This began about 15 years after the declaration of 1839 Reform Edicts and Freemasonry became successful in the Ottoman Empire under the reigns of sultans Abdulmejid (1839–1861), Abdulaziz (1861–1876) and Abdul Hamid II (1876–1909).

[ 59 ] During the 19th century, numerous prominent Muslim scholars, thinkers, and politicians, such as 'Abd al-Qadir al-Jaza'iri (1808–1883), Jamal al-Din Afghani (1839–1897), and Riza Tevfik (1869–1949) were active in Freemasonry.

[ 62 ] Other notable scholars, intellectuals, and politicians who became Freemasons included Sa'd Zaghlul , Ya'qib Sannu' , Adib Ishaq , Tawfiq Pasha , and the influential Islamic jurist and theologian Muhammad 'Abduh .

[ 63 ] Many contemporary Islamic anti-Masonic arguments are closely tied to both antisemitism and anti-Zionism , though other reasons for the Muslim anti-Masonry have been formulated, such as linking Freemasonry to conspiracy theories and Islamic eschatology , in particular to the eschatological figure of the Dajjal (the Islamic Antichrist).

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] During the early 20th century, the Syrian - Egyptian Islamic theologian Mūhammād Rashīd Ridâ (1865–1935) played the crucial role in leading the opposition to Freemasonry across the Muslim world.

[ 66 ] Through his popular pan-Islamic journal Al-Manār , Rida spread anti-Semitic and anti-Masonic ideas which would directly influence the Muslim Brotherhood and subsequent radical Islamic and Islamist movements, such as Hamas (see Hamas Charter ).

[ 64 ] [ 67 ] The Egyptian newspaper Al-Manār , belonging to Muhammad Rashid Rida , played a critical role in spreading these conspiracy theories . Rida was the leading pan-Islamic activist of that age, a significant intellectual influence on Hassan al-Banna , the founder of the Muslim Brotherhood . In his articles, Rida maintained that the Jews stood behind the Young Turk revolution in the Ottoman Empire in 1908 and had also orchestrated the French Revolution of 1789 and the 1905 rebellion in Russia . Rida also believed that the Jews were planning to take over Al-Aqsa Mosque and expel the Muslim and Christian inhabitants of the Holy Land . Rida’s mix of European conspiratorial thought and political Islam left a lasting mark.

[ 67 ] Influenced by Rida, the Muslim Brotherhood holds to anti-Semitic conspiracy theories in which freemasonry is seen as a form of Jewish subversion.

[ 67 ] In article 28 of its Charter, Hamas states that Freemasonry, Rotary , and other similar groups "work in the interest of Zionism and according to its instructions...." [ 68 ] On July 15, 1978, the Islamic Jurisdictional College—one of the most influential entities that interpret Sharia , or Islamic law—issued an opinion that deemed Freemasonry to be "dangerous" and "clandestine".

[ 61 ] Many countries with a significant Muslim population do not allow Masonic establishments within their jurisdictions. After World War II , while under the British Mandate , Iraq used to have several Masonic lodges. This all changed with the 14 July Revolution in 1958, however, with the abolition of the Hashemite monarchy and Iraq's declaration as a republic . The licenses permitting lodges to meet were rescinded, and later, laws were introduced banning any further meetings. This position was later reinforced under Saddam Hussein . In 1980, the Iraqi legal and penal code was changed, making it a felony to "promote or acclaim Zionist principles, including freemasonry, or who associate [themselves] with Zionist organizations." [ 69 ] Also, Freemasonry was banned in Egypt in 1964 by the order of President Nasser and in 1965 the Ba'athist government of Syria banned all lodges.

[ 70 ] However, a few countries such as Turkey and Morocco have allowed establishment of Grand Lodges [ 71 ] while in countries such as Malaysia [ 72 ] and Lebanon , [ 73 ] there are District Grand Lodges operating under a warrant from an established Grand Lodge. In addition, according to some sources, King Hussein of Jordan was a Freemason himself.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] Christian anti-Masonry [ edit ] Part of a series on Integralism Principles Anti-communism Anti-liberalism Anti-Masonry Anti-Zionism Catholic social teaching Common good Confessionalism Consistent life ethic Corporatism Counter-revolution Decentralization ( Fueros ) Medievalism ( Medieval Church-State Estamentalism Manorialism Feudal duties Medieval Communalism ) Organicism Doctrine of the two swords Distributism ( Cooperativism Guildism ) By the Grace of God ( Deposing power ) Ecclesiastical court " Error has no rights " Familialism Gelasian Diarchy Integral Education Integral nationalism Integral state Monarchism ( Accidentalism ) Natural law Panhispanism Patriotism Political traditionalism Res publica Christiana Sun and Moon allegory Social Kingship Solidarity Traditionalist Catholicism Ultramontanism Variants Brazilian Neo- Catholic French Lusitano Spanish Thinkers Ambrose Aquinas Augustine Balmes Barbey d'Aurevilly Billot Blanc de Bonald Chesterton Castellani de Chateaubriand Corrêa de Oliveira Cuesta Delassus Donoso Cortés Eyzaguirre Ezcurra Feser Fita Fontcuberta Gago Gaume Gelasius I Genta Gómez Gómez Davila González Groulx Hahn Koneczny Madiran Maeztu Maurras Meinvielle Menéndez y Pelayo Ousset Pemán Pie Pius IX Pius X le Play Raposo Reale Salgado Salvany dos Santos Sardinha Solana Taparelli Urquiza Valdivieso Vázquez de Mella Vermeule Veuillot Politicians Abascal Ahimeir Barroso Charlemagne Clavarana Constantine I Estévanez Fernández García Gomar Gómez Lamamié (José) Lamamié (Juan) Larraín Louis IX Maurras Moreno Nocedal Olazábal du Pin Pujo Quiroga Rocamora Sánchez Santamaria dos Santos Senante Theodosius I de Villèle Works Catholic Bible The City of God De regno, ad regem Cypri Treatise on Law El liberalismo es pecado Papal documents ( Famuli vestrae pietatis Mirari Vos Quanta Cura Immortale Dei Rerum novarum Pascendi Dominici Gregis ) El Siglo Futuro Mes idées politiques O que é o Integralismo Organizations Action Française Acción Española Brazilian Patrianovist Imperial Action Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Integralist Front Catalan Patriotic Movement Catholic and Royal Army Cristeros Integrist Party Milícia Catalana Palmarian Catholic Church Los TECOS El Yunque Popular Representation Party Sanfedisti Spanish Catholic Movement Viva Maria Related Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Traditionalism Legitimism Federales Carlism Christ the King Deus vult Miguelism Neocatólicos Sodalitium Pianum Clerico-nationalism Clerical fascism ( Estado Novo Falangism Francoism Tacuara ) Nacionalismo Person Dignity Theory Orthodox Peronism Third Position Common good constitutionalism Gremialismo High Tory Politics portal v t e Main articles: Antisemitism in Christianity , Christian attitudes towards Freemasonry , Opposition to Freemasonry within Christianity , and Judeo-Masonic conspiracy theory One of the first highly vocal Christian critics of freemasonry was Charles Finney . In his book The Character, Claims, and Practical Workings of Freemasonry , Finney not only ridiculed the masons, he also explained why he viewed leaving the society as an essential act three years after he entered seminary.

A number of Protestant and Eastern Orthodox denominations discourage their congregants from joining Masonic lodges, but this practice differs in intensity according to the beliefs of the denomination. Some denominations simply express mild concern about Freemasonry because they do not believe that it is compatible with the teachings of Christianity while, at the other extreme, other denominations openly accuse the fraternity of worshipping Satan , by quoting the writings of Leo Taxil and Abel Clarin de la Rive .

[ 76 ] Since 1738, the Roman Catholic Church has prohibited its members from joining Masonic organizations, citing political as well as religious reasons. Until 1983, the penalty for Catholics who joined the fraternity was excommunication .

[ 77 ] Since that time, the punishment has been an interdict , barring the offender from receiving Holy Communion . Even though the canonical penalty was changed in 1983, the prohibition on membership has not been changed.

[ 78 ] Conspiracy theories [ edit ] Main article: Masonic conspiracy theories There have long been conspiracy theories concerning Freemasonry in which the organization is either bent on world domination or it is already covertly in control of world politics.

[ 79 ] The earliest document which accused Freemasonry of being involved in a conspiracy was Enthüllungen des Systems der Weltbürger-Politik ("Disclosure of the System of Cosmopolitan Politics"), published in 1786.

[ 80 ] The book claimed that Freemasons and Jesuits were plotting to foment a world revolution.

[ 81 ] During the 19th Century, this theory was repeated by many Christian counter-revolutionaries, [ 82 ] [ 83 ] who accused Freemasons of being behind every attack on the existing social system.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] See also [ edit ] Abel Clarin de la Rive Anti-Catholicism Anti-clericalism Anti-Protestantism Humanum genus 1884 Papal Encyclical against Masonry Judeo-Masonic conspiracy theory Mormonism and Freemasonry New World Order (conspiracy theory) Propaganda Due – The P2 pseudo-Masonic Lodge Scandal Secret society Taxil hoax References [ edit ] ^ Oxford English Dictionary (1979 ed.), p. 369.

^ a b Ferrer Benimeli, José A. (2014).

"Freemasonry and Religion" . In Bogdan, Henrik; Snoek, Jan A. M. (eds.).

Handbook of Freemasonry . Brill Handbooks on Contemporary Religion. Vol. 8.

Leiden and Boston : Brill Publishers . pp.

139– 144.

doi : 10.1163/9789004273122_010 .

ISBN 978-9004273122 .

ISSN 1874-6691 .

LCCN 2014009769 .

S2CID 159127723 .

^ Morris, S. Brent; The Complete Idiot's Guide to Freemasonry , Alpha books, 2006, p. 203 ^ As quoted by Morris, S. Brent; The Complete Idiot's Guide to Freemasonry , Alpha Books, 2006, p. 204 ^ Additional information on this pamphlet is available in Ars Quatuor Coronatorum 55 (1942) ^ a b "Another characteristic of Masonic law is that "treason" and "rebellion" against civil authorities are only declared political crimes, which affect the good standing of a Brother no more than heresy, and furnish no ground for a Masonic trial." Masonry (Freemasonry) from the Catholic Encyclopedia , partially quoting Mackey, Jurisprudence , 509.

^ "2nd – You shall be true liegemen to the King of England without any treason or falsehood, and if you know of any that you amend it privily, if you may, or else warn the King and his Council of it by declaring it to his officers." ^ II. Of the CIVIL MAGISTRATES supreme and subordinate "A Mason is a peaceable Subject to the Civil Powers, wherever he resides or works, and is never to be concern'd in Plots and Conspiracies against the Peace and Welfare of the Nation, nor to behave himself undutifully to inferior Magistrates; for as Masonry hath been always injured by War, Bloodshed, and Confusion, so ancient Kings and Princes have been much dispos'd to encourage the Craftsmen, because of their Peaceableness and Loyalty, whereby they practically answer'd the Cavils of their Adversaries, and promoted the Honour of the Fraternity, who ever flourish'd in Times of Peace. So that if a Brother should be a Rebel against the State he is not to be countenanc'd in his Rebellion, however he may be pitied as an unhappy Man; and, if convicted of no other Crime though the loyal Brotherhood must and ought to disown his Rebellion, and give no Umbrage or Ground of political Jealousy to the Government for the time being; they cannot expel him from the Lodge, and his Relation to it remains indefeasible." ^ Reváuger, Cécile. Black Freemasonry: from Prince Hall to the Giants of Jazz. 2019, Inner Traditions International, The Limited.

^ "The brotherhood ought to disown the rebellion, but only in order to preserve the fraternity from annoyance by the civil authorities." from the article Masonry (Freemasonry) in the Catholic Encyclopedia ^ "Such language would equally suit every anarchistic movement." Masonry (Freemasonry) in the Catholic Encyclopedia ^ "If we were to assert that under no circumstances had a Mason been found willing to take arms against a bad government, we should only be declaring that, in trying moments, when duty, in the masonic sense, to state means antagonism to the Government, they had failed in the highest and most sacred duty of a citizen. Rebellion in some cases is a sacred duty, and none, but a bigot or a fool, will say, that our countrymen were in the wrong, when they took arms against King James II. Loyalty to freedom in a case of this kind overrides all other considerations, and when to rebel means to be free or to perish, it would be idle to urge that a man must remember obligations which were never intended to rob him of his status of a human being and a citizen." "Freemason's Chronicle" 1875, I, 81, quoted as footnote [89] in Masonry (Freemasonry) in the Catholic Encyclopedia ^ Webb, Thomas Smith; Freemason's Monitor Or Illustrations of Freemasonry – Charge at initiation into the first degree, p. 43 (originally published 1818... republished by Kessinger Publishing, 1995 ISBN 978-1564595539 ) ^ a b c d Bessel, Paul M. (November 1994).

"Bigotry and the Murder of Freemasonry" . Retrieved 2011-10-19 .

^ Whalen, W.J., "Freemasonry" The New Catholic Encyclopedia (1967) Archived 2013-01-30 at the Wayback Machine article hosted at trosch.org . Retrieved 2011-10-19.

^ Cuba's muzzled mavericks find haven among Masons Archived 2006-12-31 at the Wayback Machine , by Gary Marx, published April 14, 2005 ^ Stein, Jeff (7 April 2014).

"Bay of Piglets: How the Freemasons Got Caught in a Plot to Topple the Castros" .

Newsweek . Retrieved 7 April 2015 .

^ Paul M. Bessel (1994).

"Bigotry and the Murder of Freemasonry" .

These people who attack Masonry with exaggerated language, and without accepting reasonable explanations of what Freemasonry really is, would probably say that their use of language about Masonry that is strikingly similar to that which was used by the Nazis and other vicious attackers of Freemasonry in the past does not mean that they are following in the footsteps of the Nazis.

^ Ridley, Jasper; The Freemasons: A History of the World's Most Powerful Secret Society , pp. 180–181 (Arcade Publishing 1999).

^ Finney, Charles Grandison; The Character, Claims, and Practical Workings of Freemasonry .

^ William Preston Vaughn, The Anti-Masonic Party in the United States, 1826–1843 (University Press of Kentucky. 1983).

^ Adams, John Quincy Letters on the Masonic Institution , pp. 68–71, 1847
Press of T.R. Marvin ^ Adams, John Quincy (1 April 1833).

"Autograph Letter Signed as Congressman, to Stephen Bates. Washington, D.C." Seth Kaller, Inc . Retrieved 2022-05-21 .

^ a b Mackey, Albert Gallatin; Haywood, Harry LeRoy (2003-03-01).

Encyclopedia of Freemasonry 1909 . Kessinger Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-7661-4721-8 .

^ Vermont Catholic Encyclopedia, 1911, Accessed June 26, 2008 ^ Simon Sarlin and Dan Rouyer, "The Anti-Masonic Congress of Trento (1896): International Mobilization and the Circulation of Practices against Freemasonry." Contemporanea: Rivista di Storia dell'800 e del '900 (July-Sep 2021, 24#3, pp. 517-536.

^ Iltalehti Teema Historia: Lapuan liike, Alma Media, 2015, p. 34-35.

^ L. J. Niinistö ; "Paavo Susitaival 1896–1993. Aktivismi elämänasenteena", 1998.

^ Anttikoski, Riitta: Kun talonpojat marssivat. Helsingin Sanomat, 6.7.1980, s. 17.

HS Aikakone (vain tilaajille) ^ Kirja-arvosteluja. L. J. Niinistö: Paavo Susitaival 1896–1993. Aktivismi elämänasenteena Genos ^ "Кац Александр Семенович. Протоколы Сионских Мудрецов и Всемирный Жидомасонский Заговор" .

samlib.ru . Retrieved 23 March 2018 .

^ Whalen, W.J.

"Freemasonry" Archived 2013-01-30 at the Wayback Machine The New Catholic Encyclopedia (1967), hosted at David Trosch 's website. Retrieved 2011-10-09.

^ 'The Truth Is Stranger Than Fiction', Alphonse Cerza, published by the Masonic Service Association, September 1967 ^ King, Edward L.

" "Famous" Anti-Masons" .

www.masonicinfo.com . Retrieved 14 August 2017 .

^ a b L. Nagy Zsuzsa: Szabadkőművesség a XX. században, Budapest, 1977, Kossuth Könyvkiadó; L. Nagy Zsuzsa: Szabadkőművesség, Budapest, 1988, Akadémiai kiadó ^ Art DeHoyos and S. Brent Morris (2004).

Freemasonry in Context: History, Ritual, Controversy . Lexington Books. pp.

100– 101.

ISBN 978-0739107812 .

^ Adolf Hitler , Mein Kampf , pp. 315, 320.

^ a b The American Mercury Newspaper, 1941 Archived 2012-08-13 at the Wayback Machine accessed 21 May 2006 ^ The Enabling Act Accessed February 23, 2006.

^ a b " Documented evidence from the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum pertaining to the persecution of the Freemasons Archived 2012-12-10 at the Wayback Machine " accessed 21 May 2006 ^ Bro. E Howe, Freemasonry in Germany , Quatuor Coronati Lodge, No 2076 (UGLE), 1984 Yearbook.

^ Denslow, Freemasonry in the Eastern Hemisphere, at page 111, citing a letter from Otto Arnemann in 1947, cited as Note 22 in Bigotry and the Murder of Freemasonry by Paul M. Bessel ^ Hodapp, Christopher (2013).

Freemasonry for Dummies (2nd ed.). Wiley Publishing Inc.

ISBN 978-1118412084 .

^ "Holocaust Memorial Day Trust" . Archived from the original on November 12, 2007.

^ "In 1925, Spain's first dictator of this generation, General Primo de Rivera, ordered the abolition of Freemasonry in his country." The Anhilation of Freemasonry by Sven G. Lunden by The American Mercury Newspaper, 1941. Hosted by the Grand Lodge of Antient Free and Accepted Masons of Scotland ^ a b Scanlan, Matthew.

"Freemasonry and the Spanish Civil War: Part I, the Path to War" . Archived from the original on 28 August 2010 . Retrieved 19 August 2009 .

^ "Freemasonry banned in Spain by General Franco" .

www.freemasons-freemasonry.com . Retrieved 14 August 2017 .

^ a b " "Freemasonry and the Spanish Civil War: Part II", by Matthew Scanlan retrieved 19 August 2009" . Archived from the original on 11 July 2011 . Retrieved 14 August 2017 .

^ Bowen, Wayne H. (2006).

Spain during World War II . University of Missouri press. p.

249 .

ISBN 978-0826216588 .

spain during wwII.

^ a b Ruiz, Julius, Franco's justice: repression in Madrid after the Spanish Civil War , p. 25 Oxford Univ. Press ^ Hugh Thomas, The Spanish Civil War, Penguin, 1965 pp. 47–48 ^ Pietre Stones The Unlawful Societies Act of 1799, Dr Andrew Prescott, retrieved 13th July 2012 ^ "Martin Short – HarperCollins" . Archived from the original on 2013-12-15 . Retrieved 2013-12-15 .

^ a b "New judges must declare masonic membership" , BBC, March 5, 1998, retrieved February 26, 2006 ^ "Freemason policy review due" , BBC, December 8, 2001, retrieved February 26, 2006 ^ a b c "House of Commons Hansard Written Answers for 21 July 2005 (pt 69)" Archived 15 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine , UK House of Commons, July 21, 2005, retrieved October 2, 2007 ^ "Morgan criticised over job blocking" , BBC, March 22, 2004, retrieved February 26, 2006 ^ "Mr Morgan wanted another QC, Malcolm Bishop, who has stood as a Labour candidate and is a close associate of former Lord Chancellor Derry Irvine." Morgan 'blocked' QC appointment ^ a b c d Dumont, Paul (July 2005). D'haen, Theo (ed.). "Freemasonry in Turkey: A By-product of Western Penetration".

European Review .

13 (3).

Cambridge and New York : Cambridge University Press : 481– 493.

doi : 10.1017/S106279870500058X .

ISSN 1474-0575 .

S2CID 145551813 .

^ Landau, Jacob M. (July 1996). Brunner, Rainer (ed.). "Muslim Opposition to Freemasonry".

Die Welt des Islams .

36 (2).

Leiden and Boston : Brill Publishers : 186– 203.

doi : 10.1163/1570060962597481 .

eISSN 1570-0607 .

ISSN 0043-2539 .

JSTOR 3693461 .

^ a b c Layiktez, Cecil " Freemasonry in the Islamic World ", Pietre-Stones Review of Freemasonry, 1996 ^ De Poli, Barbara (2019). "6: Sufi and Freemasons in the Ottoman empire".

Freemansonry and the Orient: Esotericisms between the East and the West . Edizioni Ca' Foscari-Digital publishing. pp.

75– 86.

ISBN 978-8869693397 .

Summary 6.1 ʿAbd Al-Qādir Al-Jazāʾirī. – 6.2 Jamāl Al-Dīn Al-Afghānī. – 6.3 Rizā Tevfīk.

^ Kudsi-Zadeh, A. Albert (January–March 1972). "Afghānī and Freemasonry in Egypt".

Journal of the American Oriental Society .

92 (1).

American Oriental Society : 25– 35.

doi : 10.2307/599645 .

ISSN 0003-0279 .

JSTOR 599645 .

LCCN 12032032 .

OCLC 47785421 .

It traces Afghani's connections with Freemasonry and concludes that he attempted to use the brotherhood as a ready-made agency for political mobilization and agitation against the Khedive Isma'il and the increasing European intervention in the affairs of Egypt. Many of  his followers, such as Muhammad 'Abduh, Sa'd Zaghlul, Ya'qib Sannu' and Adib Ishaq, joined, as did some notables, army officers, and Isma'il's son, Tawfiq Pasha.

^ a b Litvak, Meir (2021). "Islamic Radical Movements and Antisemitism: Between Old and New". In Lange, Armin; Mayerhofer, Kerstin; Porat, Dina; Schiffman, Lawrence H. (eds.).

An End to Antisemitism! – Volume 5: Confronting Antisemitism in Modern Media, the Legal and Political Worlds .

Berlin and Boston : De Gruyter . pp.

133– 148.

doi : 10.1515/9783110671964-009 .

ISBN 978-3110671964 .

^ Prescott, Andrew.

The Study of Freemasonry as a New Academic Discipline (PDF) . pp.

13– 14. Archived from the original (pdf) on 2007-03-17 . Retrieved 2006-05-21 .

^ Rickenbacher, Daniel (6 December 2019).

"The 'War Against Islam': How a Conspiracy Theory Drove and Shaped the Islamist Movement" .

Archived from the original on 18 August 2021.

^ a b c Rickenbacher, Daniel (6 December 2019).

"The 'War Against Islam': How a Conspiracy Theory Drove and Shaped the Islamist Movement" .

www.eeradicalization.com . European Eye on Radicalization.

Archived from the original on 18 August 2021 . Retrieved 23 March 2023 .

^ Hamas Covenant of 1988 . Wikisource. Accessed 2 October 2007.

^ "Saddam to be formally charged" , The Washington Times , July 1, 2004. Retrieved 2011-10-09.

^ "استيقاظ الماسونية السورية" .

تلفزيون سوريا . September 9, 2019.

^ Leyiktez, Celil.

"Freemasonry in the Islamic World" . Accessed 2 October 2007.

^ DGLME.org – The District Grand Lodge of the Middle East Archived 2008-12-06 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Districts Online | Grand Lodge F. & A. M. State of New York" . Archived from the original on July 5, 2008.

^ "Famous Freemasons | The Lodge of Unity, Warwick" . Retrieved 8 June 2023 .

^ "Extract from World of Freemasonry" (PDF) .

linfordresearch.info . Retrieved 8 June 2023 .

^ "Is It True What They Say About Freemasonry?" Authors: de Hoyos, Arturo and Morris, S. Brent, 1988, 2nd edition, pp. 27–36, Leo Taxil: The Hoax of Luciferian Masonry ISBN 1590771532 ^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Excommunication" .

www.newadvent.org . Retrieved 23 March 2018 .

^ Joseph Cardinal Ratzinger, Prefect.

Declaration on Masonic Associations Sacred Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, 26 November 1983. Accessed 2011-10-09. "Therefore the Church's negative judgment in regard to Masonic association[s] remains unchanged since their principles have always been considered irreconcilable with the doctrine of the Church and therefore membership in them remains forbidden. The faithful who enroll in Masonic associations are in a state of grave sin and may not receive Holy Communion. It is not within the competence of local ecclesiastical authorities to give a judgment on the nature of Masonic associations which would imply a derogation from what has been decided above..." ^ Pawns in the Game, (4th Edition, April, 1962), William Guy Carr ^ "Bereits um 1786, kurz zuvor waren die Illuminaten in Bayern verboten worden, kursierte das erste Pamphlet über die Freimaurer, das von einem anonymen Autor als "Enthüllungen des Systems der Weltbürger-Politik" veröffentlicht wurde." Transl. "As early as 1786, shortly before the banning of the Illuminati in Bavaria, the first pamphlet about Freemasonry arrived, the anonymously authored "Enthüllungen des Systems der Weltbürger – Politik"." Freimaurer im Wandel der Zeit – von der Gründung bis heute Archived 2008-09-25 at the Wayback Machine , from the Neue Freimaurer Archived 2008-09-25 at the Wayback Machine website.

^ prof. Dr. Pfahl-Traughber: Der antisemitisch-antifreimaurerische Verschwörungsmythos ^ a b Matthias Pöhlmann: Verschwiegene Männer , Protestant Centre for Religious and Ideological Issues of the Evangelical Church in Germany ^ a b Dr. Johannes Rogalla von Biberstein, historian and librarian of the University of Bielefeld: Die These von der Verschwörung 1776–1945. Philosophen, Freimaurer, Juden, Liberale und Sozialisten gegen die Sozialordnung , Flensburg 1992 Further reading [ edit ] Sarlin, Simon, and Dan Rouyer. "The Anti-Masonic Congress of Trento (1896): International Mobilization and the Circulation of Practices against Freemasonry." Contemporanea: Rivista di Storia dell'800 e del '900 (Jul-Sep 2021), 24#3, pp. 517–536.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Anti-Masonry .

Critical of Freemasonry [ edit ] www.conspiracyarchive.org – Freemasonry: Midwife to an Occult Empire by Terry Melanson www.masoncode.com – The Jewels of Freemasonry www.ephesians 5-11.org – How can you lead Masons away from the Masonic Lodge?

Workers' Movement: Marxism against Freemasonry Supportive of Freemasonry [ edit ] srmason-sj.org – Is It True What They Say About Freemasonry?

by Art DeHoyos masonicinfo.com – Masonic rebuttal to Anti-Masonic claims www.freemasonry.bcy.ca – Anti-masonry Frequently Asked Questions www/freemasons-freemasonry.com – Anti-Masonry in the contemporary world Academic examinations of Anti-Masonry Academic Conference on Anti-masonry The New Anti-Masonic Movement in America, University California, Davis v t e Freemasonry Fraternal organisations with origins in the United Kingdom in the 18th century, sorted by bodies , lodges , locations and rites General Abbreviations Chamber of Reflection History Grand Lodge ( List ) Landmarks Manuscripts Music Masonic myths Rites Ritual and Symbolism Lodge Research lodge Square and Compasses Freemasons' Hall , London, headquarters (1775/1933-) of the United Grand Lodge of England (1722-) Anglo-American Freemasonry Eurasia British Isles United Grand Lodge of England Grand Lodge of Scotland Grand Lodge of Ireland Swedish Rite Swedish Order of Freemasons Danish Order of Freemasons Icelandic Order of Freemasons Norwegian Order of Freemasons Grand Lodge of Spain Grand Landlodge of the Freemasons of Germany Armenia Belgium Cyprus Czech Republic Finland France India Germany Italy Regular Grand Lodge Grand Orient Luxembourg North Macedonia Malta Netherlands Philippines Portugal Romania Russia Switzerland Turkey Australia and New Zealand United Grand Lodge of New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory Grand Lodge of New Zealand Americas United States Alabama California Connecticut Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Missouri Nebraska New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Pennsylvania Tennessee Texas Virginia West Virginia Wisconsin African-American Prince Hall Freemasonry Order of the Eastern Star Ancient Egyptian Arabic Order Imperial Court Canada Manitoba Newfoundland and Labrador Ontario Latin America Brazil Chile Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic Mexico Venezuela Continental Freemasonry and Co-Freemasonry , including CLIPSAS Eurasia Le Droit Humain (several countries) Belgium Grand Orient Female Grand Lodge Grand Lodge Denmark Spain Catalonia France Grand Orient Mixed Grand Lodge Greece Ibérico Italy Grand Orient of Italy Grand Lodge Female Grand Lodge Malta Poland Portugal Romania Turkey Americas Universal Co-Masonry Venezuela United States Canada Mexico Appendant Orders Non-Denominational Allied Masonic Degrees Grand College of Rites Holy Royal Arch (Anglo-European) Royal Arch Masonry (American) Order of Athelstan Order of the Eastern Star Order of Knight Masons Order of Mark Master Masons Order of the Scarlet Cord Order of the Secret Monitor Order of Royal and Select Masters (Anglo-European) Cryptic Masonry (American) Royal Ark Mariners Shriners Christian Only Holy Royal Arch Knight Templar Priests Knights of the York Cross of Honour Knights Templar Masonic Order of the Bath Order of Saint Thomas of Acon Red Cross of Constantine Reformed and Rectified Rite Royal Order of Scotland S.R.I.A.

Royal Order of Eri Societas Rosicruciana Sovereign Order of Knights Preceptor York Rite Sovereign College Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite USA Northern Jurisdiction Southern Jurisdiction Supreme Council of Louisiana People List of Freemasons A–D E–Z monarchs US presidents Freemasonry and women Places Masonic Buildings Libraries Anti-Masonry Anti-Masonry Conspiracy theories Judeo-Masonic conspiracy theory Morgan Affair Category v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases International FAST National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Masonry&oldid=1303682436 " Category : Anti-Masonry Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from December 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2010 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 12:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Masonry 16 languages Add topic

