Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In fiction 2 Real-world usage 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Evil corporation 5 languages 한국어 日本語 Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Corporation that ignores social responsibility This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Logo and slogan of the fictional evil Weyland-Yutani corporation from the Alien franchise An evil corporation ignores social responsibility , morality , ethics , and sometimes laws in order to make profit for its shareholders.

[ 1 ] In fiction [ edit ] The notion is "deeply embedded in the landscape of contemporary culture—populating films, novels, videogames, and more." The science fiction genre served as the initial background to portray corporations in this dystopian light.

[ 1 ] Evil corporations can be seen to represent the danger of combining capitalism with larger hubris .

[ 2 ] Some notable uses of the trope include the Tyrell and Wallace corporations in Blade Runner , Arasaka Corporation in Cyberpunk , Weyland-Yutani in Alien , Vault-Tec in Fallout , InGen in Jurassic Park , Resources Development Administration (RDA) in Avatar , Umbrella Corporation in Resident Evil , E-Corp in Mr. Robot and Lumon Industries in Severance .

Real-world usage [ edit ] Some real-world corporations have been accused of being evil. To guard against such accusations, Google used the official motto " Don't be evil " until the formation of Alphabet Inc.

Rob Enderle argued that this motto was never truly followed, and critics of Google have accused the company of "evil" acts such as secret data collection , violating customers' privacy, and political bias.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] The motto was eventually moved to the very end of its code of conduct .

[ 4 ] The New Yorker wrote that "many food activists consider Monsanto (which later merged with Bayer ) to be the definitively evil corporation".

[ 5 ] The Debate over Corporate Social Responsibility wrote, "For many consumers, Walmart serves as the evil corporation prototype, but record numbers shop at the stores for low prices." [ 6 ] In Japan, a committee of journalists and rights activists issues an annual "corporate raspberry award" known as Most Evil Corporation of the Year Award (also called the Black Company Award) to a company "with a culture of overwork, discrimination and harassment" .

[ 7 ] After the shooting of Brian Thompson in December 2024, many Americans used social media to express their outrage against health insurance companies and the American healthcare system overall, often using terms associated with the trope to describe these corporations.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-capitalism Anti-consumerism Anti-corporate activism Big Pharma conspiracy theory Business ethics Corporate crime Corporate warfare Criticism of capitalism Criticisms of corporations Cyberpunk Human rights § Corporations Karen Silkwood List of corporate collapses and scandals Megacorporation Military–industrial complex Multinational corporation Organized crime Prison–industrial complex Psychopathy in the workplace Shareholder primacy State crime State-corporate crime The Corporation (2003 film) References [ edit ] ^ a b c Allan, Angela (April 25, 2016).

"How the 'Evil Corporation' Became a Pop-Culture Trope" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved January 11, 2017 .

^ McHenry, Jackson (August 26, 2015).

" Mr. Robot ' s Chilling Message: Every Corp Is E Corp" .

GQ . Retrieved January 11, 2017 .

^ Thompson, Cadie (2014-08-19).

"Does 'Don't be evil' still apply to Google?" .

CNBC . Retrieved 2023-05-07 .

^ Conger, Kate (18 May 2018).

"Google Removes 'Don't be Evil' Clause from Its Code of Conduct" .

Gizmodo .

^ Specter, Michael (November 4, 2013).

"Why the climate corporation sold itself to Monsanto" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved January 23, 2017 .

^ Kendall, Brenden E.; Gill, Rebecca; Cheney, George (2007). "Consumer Activism and Corporate Social Responsibility: How Strong a Connection?". In May, Steven K.; Cheney, George (eds.).

The Debate over Corporate Social Responsibility . Oxford University Press. p. 258.

ISBN 978-0-19-517883-8 .

^ Kikuchi, Daisuke (December 23, 2016).

"Ad giant Dentsu declared Most Evil Corporation of the Year" .

The Japan Times . Retrieved January 27, 2017 .

^ Yancey-Bragg, Ken Alltucker, Jeanine Santucci and N'dea.

"Health insurance CEO shooting unleashes Internet vitriol aimed at industry" .

USA TODAY . Retrieved 2024-12-16 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Trethan, Phaedra.

"UnitedHealth CEO: 'We understand people's frustrations' with health care system" .

USA TODAY . Retrieved 2024-12-16 .

^ "Anger After UnitedHealthcare CEO's Killing Rattles Health Insurance Workers" . 2024-12-12.

Archived from the original on 2024-12-13 . Retrieved 2024-12-16 .

^ Fields, Ashleigh (2024-12-13).

"UnitedHealth CEO acknowledges frustrations with health care system" .

The Hill . Retrieved 2024-12-16 .

Further reading [ edit ] Decker, Mark T. (2016). "Ridley Scott Takes On Apparently Evil Corporations in Alien , Blade Runner , and Prometheus ".

Industrial Society and the Science Fiction Blockbuster: Social Critique in Films of Lucas, Scott and Cameron . McFarland. pp.

74– 110.

ISBN 978-0-7864-9911-3 .

Sloane, S.B. (2002).

Organizations in the Movies: The Legend of the Dysfunctional System . University Press of America.

ISBN 978-0-7618-2434-3 .

External links [ edit ] Sample list of evil corporations in film at MTV Sample list of evil corporations in science fiction Archived 2017-02-05 at the Wayback Machine at PC World Sample list of evil corporations in science fiction books at Barnes & Noble v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Evil_corporation&oldid=1304912204 " Categories : Science fiction themes Cyberpunk themes Fictional companies Anti-corporate activism Tropes Fiction about organizations Dystopian fiction Corruption Corporate conduct Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from July 2025 All articles that may contain original research Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 23:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Evil corporation 5 languages Add topic

