Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Propositions Toggle Propositions subsection 1.1 Proposition one 1.2 Proposition two 1.3 Proposition three 1.3.1 Approximation to square roots 2 References 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Measurement of a Circle 15 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית 日本語 Română Slovenščina Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Treatise by Archimedes A page from Archimedes' Measurement of a Circle Measurement of a Circle or Dimension of the Circle ( Greek : Κύκλου μέτρησις , Kuklou metrēsis ) [ 1 ] is a treatise that consists of three propositions, probably made by Archimedes , ca. 250 BCE.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The treatise is only a fraction of what was a longer work.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Propositions [ edit ] Proposition one [ edit ] The circle and the triangle are equal in area.

Proposition one states:
The area of any circle is equal to a right-angled triangle in which one of the sides about the right angle is equal to the radius, and the other to the circumference of the circle.
Any circle with a circumference c and a radius r is equal in area with a right triangle with the two legs being c and r . This proposition is proved by the method of exhaustion .

[ 6 ] Proposition two [ edit ] Proposition two states: The area of a circle is to the square on its diameter as 11 to 14.

This proposition could not have been placed by Archimedes, for it relies on the outcome of the third proposition.

[ 6 ] Proposition three [ edit ] Proposition three states: The ratio of the circumference of any circle to its diameter is greater than 3 10 71 {\displaystyle 3{\tfrac {10}{71}}} but less than 3 1 7 {\displaystyle 3{\tfrac {1}{7}}} .

This approximates what we now call the mathematical constant π . He found these bounds on the value of π by inscribing and circumscribing a circle with two similar 96-sided regular polygons .

[ 7 ] Approximation to square roots [ edit ] This proposition also contains accurate approximations to the square root of 3 (one larger and one smaller) and other larger non-perfect square roots ; however, Archimedes gives no explanation as to how he found these numbers.

[ 5 ] He gives the upper and lower bounds to √ 3 as ⁠ 1351 / 780 ⁠ > √ 3 > ⁠ 265 / 153 ⁠ .

[ 6 ] However, these bounds are familiar from the study of Pell's equation and the convergents of an associated simple continued fraction , leading to much speculation as to how much of this number theory might have been accessible to Archimedes. Discussion of this approach goes back at least to Thomas Fantet de Lagny , FRS (compare Chronology of computation of π ) in 1723, but was treated more explicitly by Hieronymus Georg Zeuthen . In the early 1880s, Friedrich Otto Hultsch (1833–1906) and Karl Heinrich Hunrath (b. 1847) noted how the bounds could be found quickly by means of simple binomial bounds on square roots close to a perfect square modelled on Elements II.4, 7; this method is favoured by Thomas Little Heath . Although only one route to the bounds is mentioned, in fact there are two others, making the bounds almost inescapable however the method is worked. But the bounds can also be produced by an iterative geometrical construction suggested by Archimedes' Stomachion in the setting of the regular dodecagon. In this case, the task is to give rational approximations to the tangent of π/12.

References [ edit ] ^ Knorr, Wilbur R.

(1986-12-01). "Archimedes' dimension of the circle: A view of the genesis of the extant text".

Archive for History of Exact Sciences .

35 (4): 281– 324.

doi : 10.1007/BF00357303 .

ISSN 0003-9519 .

S2CID 119807724 .

^ Lit, L.W.C. (Eric) van (13 November 2012).

"Naṣīr al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī's Version of The Measurement of the Circle of Archimedes from his Revision of the Middle Books" .

Tarikh-e Elm .

The measurement of the circle was written by Archimedes (ca. 250 B.C.E.) ^ Knorr, Wilbur R.

(1986).

The Ancient Tradition of Geometric Problems .

Courier Corporation .

p. 153 .

ISBN 9780486675329 .

Most accounts of Archimedes' works assign this writing to a time relatively late in his career.  But this view is the consequence of a plain misunderstanding.

^ Heath, Thomas Little (1921), A History of Greek Mathematics , Boston: Adamant Media Corporation, ISBN 978-0-543-96877-7 , retrieved 2008-06-30 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b "Archimedes" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . 2008 . Retrieved 2008-06-30 .

^ a b c Heath, Thomas Little (1897), The Works of Archimedes , Cambridge University: Cambridge University Press., pp.

lxxvii , 50 , retrieved 2008-06-30 ^ Heath, Thomas Little (1931), A Manual of Greek Mathematics , Mineola, N.Y.: Dover Publications , p. 146, ISBN 978-0-486-43231-1 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) External links [ edit ] Measurement of a Circle , English translation by Thomas Heath v t e Archimedes Written works Measurement of a Circle The Sand Reckoner On the Equilibrium of Planes Quadrature of the Parabola On the Sphere and Cylinder On Spirals On Conoids and Spheroids On Floating Bodies Ostomachion The Method of Mechanical Theorems Book of Lemmas (apocryphal) Discoveries and inventions Archimedean solid Archimedes's cattle problem Archimedes' principle Archimedes's screw Claw of Archimedes Miscellaneous Archimedes' heat ray Archimedes Palimpsest List of things named after Archimedes Pseudo-Archimedes Related people Euclid Eudoxus of Cnidus Apollonius of Perga Hero of Alexandria Eutocius of Ascalon Category v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Measurement_of_a_Circle&oldid=1303256086 " Categories : Works by Archimedes Euclidean geometry Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 23:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Measurement of a Circle 15 languages Add topic

