Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Construction 2 Usage 3 Famous mural instruments 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Mural instrument 7 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Lëtzebuergesch Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of angle measuring device Tycho Brahe 's mural quadrant Mural quadrant constructed as a frame mounted on a wall.  This instrument was made by John Bird in 1773 and is in the Museum of the History of Science, Oxford .

A mural instrument is an angle measuring instrument mounted on or built into a wall. For astronomical purposes, these walls were oriented so they lie precisely on the meridian . A mural instrument that measured angles from 0 to 90 degrees was called a mural quadrant . They were utilized as astronomical devices in ancient Egypt and ancient Greece .

Edmond Halley , due to the lack of an assistant and only one vertical wire in his transit , confined himself to the use of a mural quadrant built by George Graham after its erection in 1725 at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich .

Bradley 's first observation with that quadrant was made on 15 June 1742.

[ 1 ] The mural quadrant has been called the "quintessential instrument" of 18th century (i.e. 1700s) observatories.

[ 2 ] It rose to prominence in the field of positional astronomy at this time.

[ 2 ] Construction [ edit ] A Bird Mural Quadrant was for many years the main instrument of the Mannheim Observatory in Germany, shown here installed.

Many older mural quadrants have been constructed by marking directly on the wall surfaces. More recent instruments were made with a frame that was constructed with precision and mounted permanently on the wall.

The arc is marked with divisions, almost always in degrees and fractions of a degree.  In the oldest instruments, an indicator is placed at the centre of the arc .  An observer can move a device with a second indicator along the arc until the line of sight from the movable device's indicator through the indicator at the centre of the arc aligns with the astronomical object .  The angle is then read, yielding the elevation or altitude of the object.  In smaller instruments, an alidade could be used.  More modern mural instruments would use a telescope with a reticle eyepiece to observe the object.

Many mural quadrants were constructed, giving the observer the ability to measure a 90° range of elevation .  There were also mural sextants that read 60°.

Mural quadrants of the 17th century were noted for their expense, with Flamsteed's 1689 quadrant costing £120 (equivalent to £27,488 in 2023), and Edmund Halley's 1725 quadrant which cost over £200 (equivalent to £37,619 in 2023).

[ 2 ] The large fixed quadrants were more expensive than a typical portable quadrant, with a Bird 2-foot quadrant costing 70 guineas or £73.50 (equivalent to £13,825 in 2023).

[ 2 ] Usage [ edit ] In order to measure the position of, for example, a star, the observer needs a sidereal clock in addition to the mural instrument.  With the clock measuring time, a star of interest is observed with the instrument until it crosses an indicator showing that it is transiting the meridian.  At this instant, the time on the clock is recorded as well as the angular elevation of the star.  This yields the position in the coordinates of the instrument.  If the instrument's arc is not marked relative to the celestial equator, then the elevation is corrected for the difference, resulting in the star's declination .  If the sidereal clock is precisely synchronized with the stars, the time yields the right ascension directly.

[ 3 ] Famous mural instruments [ edit ] Ulugh Beg 's mural sextant, constructed in Samarkand , Uzbekistan, during the 15th century A mural sextant was constructed in Ray, Iran , by Abu-Mahmud al-Khujandi in 994.

[ 4 ] Ulugh Beg constructed the "Fakhri Sextant" in Samarkand that had a radius of 40 meters.

[ 5 ] Seen in the image on the right, the arc was finely constructed with a staircase on either side to provide access for the assistants who performed the measurements.

Tycho Brahe 's mural quadrant in Uraniborg at Hven (now Ven in Sweden).

The mural quadrant at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich , in east London.

Ptolemy 's mural quadrant at Alexandria .  This instrument is also referred to as a plinth .

[ 6 ] The obsolete constellation Quadrans Muralis represents a mural quadrant.

The mural quadrant at the Mannheim Observatory in Germany.

[ 7 ] This is another of John Bird 's instruments.

See also [ edit ] List of astronomical instruments References [ edit ] ^ Robert Grant , History of Physical Astronomy from The Earliest Ages to the Nineteenth Century (1852) pp. 483-484.

^ a b c d Turner, A. J. (2002).

"2002JHA....33..373T Page 373" .

Journal for the History of Astronomy .

33 (113): 373.

Bibcode : 2002JHA....33..373T .

doi : 10.1177/002182860203300403 . Retrieved 2019-11-14 .

^ Sidereal Time ^ O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Abu Mahmud Hamid ibn al-Khidr Al-Khujandi" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews ^ Ulugh Beg, Dictionary of Scientific Biography .

^ Hoyle, Fred, Astronomy, A history of man's investigation of the universe , Crescent Books, Inc.,  London 1962, p 37.

^ Mannheimer Observatory quadrant External links [ edit ] Media related to Mural instrument at Wikimedia Commons v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy Portals : Astronomy Stars Outer space Solar System Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mural_instrument&oldid=1297054352 " Categories : Ancient Greek astronomy Ancient Egyptian science Ancient Egyptian technology Astronomical instruments Historical scientific instruments Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world Technology in the medieval Islamic world Angle measuring instruments Egyptian inventions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 22:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mural instrument 7 languages Add topic

