Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The Cornell Chimes 2 McGraw Tower 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Cornell Chimes Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°26′51″N 76°29′06″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.44757°N 76.48505°W ﻿ / 42.44757; -76.48505 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chime on the campus of Cornell University McGraw Tower John McGraw Hall, foreground with McGraw Tower in the background.

A late 19th or early 20th century view of the clocktower The Cornell Chimes is a 21-bell chime in McGraw Tower on the central campus of Cornell University , in Ithaca , New York , United States .

The chime originally had nine bells, donated by Jennie McGraw .

[ 1 ] They first rang at the University's opening ceremonies on October 7, 1868, and have since marked the hours and been used for chiming concerts.

The tower, long called "the Library Tower", was renamed in 1961.

[ 2 ] Whether the new name was intended to honor Jennie McGraw or her father, trustee John McGraw , was not specified at the time.

[ 3 ] The Cornell Chimes [ edit ] The bells are played by a group of "chimesmasters." About ten chimesmasters play three concerts daily during the school year and a reduced schedule during the summer and semester breaks, making it one of the largest and most frequently played chimes in the world.   The chimes are sometimes mistakenly called a " carillon " which is incorrect as a true carillon has at least 23 bells, and a different playing console.

Many styles of music are played on the bells, including classical and modern pieces by a range of composers, including Beethoven , The Beatles , Franz Schubert , and Scott Joplin . Commonly played pieces include Edward Elgar 's Pomp and Circumstance Marches and the theme from The Muppet Show , as well as a multitude of original compositions. The chimes' music library contains over two-thousand specially arranged pieces and original compositions—both solos and duets .

Every morning concert, since 1869, has begun with the "Cornell Changes" (affectionately known as the "Jennie McGraw Rag"). The chimesmasters' goal is to play its 549 notes as quickly as 
possible.  The Cornell "Alma Mater" is played at the midday concert, and the "Cornell Evening Song" at the end of the evening concert.

Each spring semester potential chimesmasters, "compets", undergo a rigorous ten-week competition to become a chimesmaster. The only requirement to compete is an ability to read music and the energy to climb the 161 steps to operate the playing clavier (there is no mechanical assistance). The first stage of competition requires that compets learn the three traditional Cornell pieces (the "Jenny McGraw Rag," the "Alma Mater," and the "Cornell Evening Song"). Compets play a practice instrument, where the levers strike tuned bars with hammers (like a xylophone ), allowing them to learn the instrument without the whole campus listening. To advance to the next round of competition, compets must demonstrate their mastery of the three songs, in addition to sight reading a piece. This audition is played on the main chimes console, but compets only press the dampers halfway, and therefore the chimes remain silent. Those who pass the silent audition move on to coached concerts, and then, finally, judged concerts, where compets take on the full responsibilities of a chimesmaster.

The Cornell Chimes welcome visitors to all concerts.

McGraw Tower [ edit ] In 1873, the chimes were moved from a ground-level playing stand to McGraw Hall. In 1891, they were moved to their permanent home atop McGraw Tower , designed by Cornell alumnus William Henry Miller . The 173-foot (53 m) tower is Cornell's most prominent landmark and is adjacent to Uris Library.  The tower is also home to an office, museum, practice room, and a restored 1875 Seth Thomas clock with a 14-foot pendulum . Visitors can still see the clockworks and pendulum , but the clock was linked to the Global Positioning System in 1999.

See also [ edit ] Altgeld Chimes Far Above Cayuga's Waters References [ edit ] ^ Parsons, Kermit C. (1963-12-01). "The Quad on the Hill: An Account of the First Buildings at Cornell".

Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians .

22 (4): 199– 216.

doi : 10.2307/988191 .

JSTOR 988191 .

^ Uris Library celebrated by Martin B. Stiles, 'Cornell Chronicle', October 26, 1989 ^ "Ezra's Oracle" .

Cornell Daily Sun . October 19, 2013.

Archived March 30, 2014, at the Wayback Machine External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to McGraw Tower (Cornell University) .

Cornell Chimes Website The story of the pumpkin entry on McGraw Tower [ usurped ] Video of chimes being played - Part 1 Video of chimes being played - Part 2 Video of chimes being played - Part 3 v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category 42°26′51″N 76°29′06″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.44757°N 76.48505°W ﻿ / 42.44757; -76.48505 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cornell_Chimes&oldid=1263615250 " Categories : Cornell University Bells (percussion) Clock towers in New York (state) Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is locally defined Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 December 2024, at 17:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cornell Chimes Add languages Add topic

