Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Potential impacts 2 Individual preparedness 3 Home retrofitting 4 Organized preparation 5 Test facilities 6 Hurricane simulator 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Tropical cyclone preparedness 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Planning and actions to deal with a tropical cyclone strike This article is about activities prior to a tropical cyclone. For activities after a tropical cyclone, see tropical cyclone response .

Hurricane preparedness insignia from the U.S. Health and Human Services Department Part of a series on Tropical cyclones Outline Media coverage Structure Central dense overcast Development Eye Effects By region Warnings and watches Storm surge Preparedness Response Climatology and tracking Basins Climate change effects RSMCs Scales Observation Forecasting Rainfall forecasting Rainfall climatology Track forecasting Naming History List of historical names Lists of retired names: Atlantic , Pacific hurricane , Pacific typhoon , Philippine , Australian , South Pacific Tropical cyclones portal v t e Cyclone mitigation encompasses the actions and planning taken before a tropical cyclone strikes to mitigate damage and injury from the storm.   Knowledge of tropical cyclone impacts on an area help plan for future possibilities.  Preparedness may involve preparations made by individuals as well as centralized efforts by governments or other organizations.  Tracking storms during the tropical cyclone season helps individuals know current threats.  Regional Specialized Meteorological Centers and Tropical Cyclone Warning Centers provide current information and forecasts to help individuals make the best decision possible.

Potential impacts [ edit ] The aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in Gulfport, Mississippi .

Main article: Effects of tropical cyclones Tropical cyclones out at sea cause large waves, heavy rain , flood and high winds, disrupting international shipping and, at times, causing shipwrecks.

[ 1 ] On land, strong winds can damage or destroy vehicles, buildings, bridges, and other outside objects, turning loose debris into deadly flying projectiles. The storm surge , or the increase in sea level due to the cyclone, is typically the worst effect from landfalling tropical cyclones, historically resulting in 90% of tropical cyclone deaths.

[ 2 ] The broad rotation of a landfalling tropical cyclone, and vertical wind shear at its periphery, spawns tornadoes . Tornadoes can also be spawned as a result of eyewall mesovortices , which persist until landfall.

[ 3 ] Over the past two centuries, tropical cyclones have been responsible for the deaths of about 1.9 million people worldwide. Large areas of standing water caused by flooding lead to infection, as well as contributing to mosquito-borne illnesses. Crowded evacuees in shelters increase the risk of disease propagation.

[ 2 ] Tropical cyclones significantly interrupt infrastructure, leading to power outages, bridge destruction, and the hampering of reconstruction efforts.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] On average, the Gulf and east coasts of the United States suffer approximately US$5 billion (1995 US $) in cyclone damage every year. The majority (83%) of tropical cyclone damage is caused by severe hurricanes, category 3 or greater. However, category 3 or greater hurricanes only account for about one-fifth of cyclones that make landfall every year.

[ 5 ] Although cyclones take an enormous toll in lives and personal property, they may be important factors in the precipitation regimes of places they impact, as they may bring much-needed precipitation to otherwise dry regions.

[ 6 ] Tropical cyclones also help maintain the global heat balance by moving warm, moist tropical air to the middle latitudes and polar regions, [ 7 ] and by regulating the thermohaline circulation through upwelling .

[ 8 ] The storm surge and winds of hurricanes may be destructive to human-made structures, but they also stir up the waters of coastal estuaries , which are typically important fish breeding locales. Tropical cyclone destruction spurs redevelopment, greatly increasing local property values.

[ 9 ] When hurricanes surge upon shore from the ocean, salt is introduced to many freshwater areas and raises the salinity levels too high for some habitats to withstand. Some are able to cope with the salt and recycle it back into the ocean, but others can not release the extra surface water quickly enough or do not have a large enough freshwater source to replace it. Because of this, some species of plants and vegetation die due to the excess salt.

[ 10 ] In addition, hurricanes can carry toxins and acids onto shore when they make landfall. The flood water can pick up the toxins from different spills and contaminate the land that it passes over.  The toxins are very harmful to the people and animals in the area, as well as the environment around them. The flooding water can also spark many dangerous oil spills.

[ 11 ] Recent windstorm activity, in the United States in particular [ citation needed ] , has focused interest in measures that can be used to lower the likelihood of damage to structures. Billions of dollars of damages have resulted from such strong winds and the manner in which structures have been built in the affected areas in the United States .  Some building codes address mitigation measures. For example, the Florida Building Code, [ 12 ] specifies the type of nail used to secure roof sheathing.

[ 13 ] The specification was determined by scientific research conducted by Florida International University 's International Hurricane Research Center.

[ 14 ] Individual preparedness [ edit ] Chart with concurrent information for Hurricane Arlene and Tropical Storm Bret logged and plotted An example of a chart for Matthew showing its five-day forecast track All but the most expensive bottles of water were sold out at this Publix supermarket before Hurricane Irma ; in the week preceding the storm, water sold out soon after shipments arrived See also: Emergency preparedness and Tropical cyclone tracking chart This section contains instructions or advice .

Wikipedia is not a guidebook; please help rewrite the content to make it more encyclopedic or move it to Wikiversity , Wikibooks , or Wikivoyage .

( June 2024 ) An important decision in individual preparedness is determining if and when to evacuate an area that will be affected by a tropical cyclone.

[ 15 ] Tropical cyclone tracking charts allow people to track ongoing systems to form their own opinions regarding where the storms are going and whether or not they need to prepare for the system being tracked, including possible evacuation.  This continues to be encouraged by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and National Hurricane Center.

[ 16 ] Some agencies provide track storms in their immediate vicinity, [ 17 ] while others cover entire ocean basins.  One can choose to track one storm per map, use the map until the table is filled, or use one map per season.  Some tracking charts have important contact information in case of an emergency or to locate nearby hurricane shelters.

[ 18 ] Tracking charts allow tropical cyclones to be better understood by the end user.

[ 19 ] If evacuation is not possible or necessary, other preparedness actions include storing supplies, securing a home against extreme winds and rain, and making plans with others prior to the storm's landfall.

Hurricane preparedness kits usually include drinkable water, sealed pre-prepared meals MRE , first-aid kits, prescription medications in sealed containers, waterproof battery-powered or hand-crank-powered flashlights and radios, a whistle or other sound-signaling device, a multi-tool with a knife, identification and medical cards, any necessary medical records, waterproof bags or portable waterproof containers, and other supplies helpful to a survival situation. If your pets will be with you make sure you include canned or dry food for them as well (any dry food included should be rotated every 2 months).

[ 20 ] You should also include veterinarian records and proof of vaccinations for all of your pets.

[ 21 ] Preparedness also may include having discussed evacuation plans and routes, and informing others of those plans before a disaster occurs.

Evacuation to hurricane shelters is an option of last resort.

[ citation needed ] Shelter space is first-come, first-served and only intended preserve human life. Buildings designated as shelters in Florida are required to only have been constructed to meet minimum code requirements applicable at the time of design.

[ citation needed ] Some shelters are expected to protect occupants from wind and water but are not expected to provide food, water, sanitation, or bedding.

[ 22 ] Based on preparedness of the people in a region, the preparedness level was greatly affected by the salary, race, age, etc. Many people are not prepared for the worst-case scenario, but they should be. Being prepared for a huge disaster is what will ultimately save your life if worse comes to worst.

[ 23 ] Hospitals are needed to be prepared in advance for huge natural disasters. Nurses are in high demand when people are in trouble. They need to be prepared for ready for any situation that enters the hospital. After hurricanes such as Katrina and Rita , nurses are needed to be fully capable of any possible scenario.

[ 24 ] Home retrofitting [ edit ] An important decision a homeowner should make is to locate the building outside of range from the coast that is exposed to storm surge . Regardless of protection from the effects of wind, a building can be flooded or destroyed by storm surge waters.

To mitigate the effects of high winds and associated debris impact, the home can be examined out by an experienced hurricane mitigation professional. Many hurricane protection companies offer free consultations as part of their marketing strategy. The State of Florida has taken steps to help its homeowners in the area of hurricane preparedness through its My Safe Florida Home grant program.

[ 25 ] Qualified homeowners receive a free in-home assessment of their home's hurricane readiness. The state matches funds spent by the homeowner, up to a $5,000 limit.

[ citation needed ] When making these types of home improvements, there are two major areas of focus: the roof and the openings.

Homes may be retrofitted to withstand the extreme conditions of a tropical cyclone. Common modifications include reinforcing gabled roofs , applying additional adhesives to roof shingles , installing hurricane straps and clips to ensure the roof stays in place despite high winds.

[ 26 ] Hurricane resistant shutters , as well as impact resistant glass may help keep windows closed from driving rain, despite flying debris. Contrary to a common misconception , taping windows with masking or duct tape does not impact whether they will break.

[ 27 ] External patio and pool screen enclosures are especially vulnerable during a hurricane. A homeowner who anticipates sustained winds greater than 100 mph may use a razor knife taped to a telescopic pole to cut down the screens from the enclosure's skeleton structure.

[ 28 ] This will prevent the screens from acting as a sail and pulling down the entire enclosure structure.

Reinforcing garage doors and entry doors is also common practice for hurricane preparing a home.

[ 29 ] Garage doors may be protected by fabric screens, made of a strong woven fabric, to keep out projectiles and to reinforce the door.

The goal of these mitigation measures and products is to decrease the likelihood of severe damage to a home. There is no guarantee that these measures will safeguard any home against any kind of storm and the projectiles that may come with a storm , but a well-protected home is far more likely to come through a hurricane in better shape than a home that has little or no protection.

Organized preparation [ edit ] Evacuation route sign on Tulane Avenue in New Orleans shows lines from long standing floodwaters after Hurricane Katrina This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( September 2009 ) Hurricane mitigation uses policies to make buildings and other infrastructure more resistant to the effects of tropical cyclones. In addition to facilities themselves being at risk, the internal contents of the structures can be damaged as result of exposure to water if the building envelope is breached, usually as a result of the strong winds associated with hurricanes and tropical storms . Although the negative pressure caused by high velocity wind flowing over a building roof can cause the roof to fail with the building envelope intact, [ 30 ] broken windows allow the air pressure to rise inside a building, creating an even greater pressure difference, and increasing the likelihood of roof failure. This pressure increase results after an opening, that is, a window or door, is breached after being struck and broken by wind blown debris.

See also Nationwide Wireless Priority Service on wireless telephone networks.

Government Emergency Telecommunications Service on the public switched telephone network, land line telephone service.

Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport | Hurricane Preparedness Manual, year 2014 [ 31 ] Test facilities [ edit ] There is no single test standard or facility capable of qualifying the protection of an entire building . The Cyclone Testing Station [ 32 ] in Australia can test building systems (e.g., roofs, exterior cladding), and indirectly test entire small buildings with structural loading to simulate wind pressures. In the United States , the test facilities at the FM Global Research Campus includes both direct wind testing of roof components to speeds up to 160 mph (260 km/h), [ 33 ] and roof uplift simulation using suction tables per industry standards.

[ 34 ] Hurricane simulator [ edit ] University of Florida 's team led by Forrest Masters developed "the world's most powerful portable hurricane simulator, a giant machine capable of reproducing winds in excess of 120 mph (190 km/h) and recreating rain." [ 35 ] It consists of eight large fans driven by four diesel engines, with a 5,000-gallon (19,000 litre) water tank to keep the engines cooled. The university is currently designing water-resistant windows, wind-proof tiles and altogether stronger structures.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] This machine was used in the MythBusters 2009 season to test the myth that it's better to leave the windows open during a hurricane than closed (the myth was declared Busted).

See also [ edit ] Tropical cyclones portal Automated Tropical Cyclone Forecasting System – Software used to predict and forecast tropical cyclogenesis and to track tropical cyclones Emergency preparedness – Dealing with all humanitarian aspects of emergencies Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Hurricane shutter – Temporary building reinforcement Hurricane-proof building – Method for building to survive against strong winds Insurance – Equitable transfer of the risk of a loss, from one entity to another, in exchange for payment NOAA Weather Radio – Weather radio network in the United States Standby generator – Type of generator Storm – Disturbed state of an astronomical body's atmosphere Tropical cyclone – Rapidly rotating storm system Wind – Natural movement of air or other gases relative to a planet's surface References [ edit ] ^ Roth, David & Cobb, Hugh (2001).

"Eighteenth Century Virginia Hurricanes" . NOAA . Retrieved 24 February 2007 .

^ a b c Shultz, J. M.; Russell, J.; Espinel, Z. (2005).

"Epidemiology of Tropical Cyclones: The Dynamics of Disaster, Disease, and Development" .

Epidemiologic Reviews .

27 : 21– 35.

doi : 10.1093/epirev/mxi011 .

PMID 15958424 .

^ Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory, Hurricane Research Division.

"Frequently Asked Questions: Are TC tornadoes weaker than midlatitude tornadoes?" .

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . Archived from the original on September 14, 2009 . Retrieved July 25, 2006 .

^ Staff Writer (30 August 2005).

"Hurricane Katrina Situation Report #11" (PDF) . Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability (OE) United States Department of Energy . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 November 2006 . Retrieved 24 February 2007 .

^ Burroughs, William James (2007).

Climate change : a multidisciplinary approach (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-87015-3 .

^ National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration .

2005 Tropical Eastern North Pacific Hurricane Outlook.

. Retrieved May 2, 2006.

^ National Weather Service (19 October 2005).

"Tropical Cyclone Introduction" .

JetStream — An Online School for Weather .

National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration . Retrieved 7 September 2010 .

^ Emanuel, Kerry (July 2001).

"Contribution of tropical cyclones to meridional heat transport by the oceans" .

Journal of Geophysical Research .

106 (D14): 14771– 14781.

Bibcode : 2001JGR...10614771E .

doi : 10.1029/2000JD900641 .

^ Christopherson, Robert W. (1992).

Geosystems: An Introduction to Physical Geography .

New York : Macmillan Publishing Company. pp.

222– 224.

ISBN 0-02-322443-6 .

^ Doyle, Thomas (2005).

"Wind damage and Salinity Effects of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita on Coastal Baldcypress Forests of Louisiana" (PDF) . Retrieved 13 February 2014 .

^ Cappielo, Dina (2005).

"Spills from hurricanes stain coast With gallery - Houston Chronicle" .

Houston Chronicle . Retrieved 12 February 2014 .

^ "Florida Building Code Online" . Floridabuilding.org . Retrieved 19 July 2009 .

^ "Hurricane Loss Reduction for Residences and Mobile Homes in Florida" . Florida International University . Retrieved 4 September 2013 .

^ "International Hurricane Research Center" . Ihrc.fiu.edu . Retrieved 19 July 2009 .

^ "National Hurricane Center - "Be Prepared" " . Retrieved 9 November 2023 .

^ National Ocean Service (7 September 2016).

"Follow That Hurricane!" (PDF) .

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . Retrieved 2 June 2017 .

^ Vanuatu Meteorology & Geo-Hazards Department (2017).

"Vanuatu Cyclone Tracking Map" . Retrieved 4 June 2017 .

^ East Baton Rouge Parish Office of Emergency Management (2000).

"East Baton Rouge Parish Hurricane Response Map" (PDF) . Louisiana Section of the United States Geological Survey . Retrieved 4 June 2017 .

^ Means, Tiffany (18 May 2016).

"How to Use a Hurricane Tracking Chart" . Thought Co . Retrieved 3 June 2017 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 August 2016 . Retrieved 4 August 2016 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "How To Keep Your Pets Safe During a Hurricane [Infographic]" .

Bounce Energy Blog . Retrieved 4 August 2016 .

^ "National Response Framework" (PDF) .

floridadisaster.org . January 2008 . Retrieved 9 November 2023 .

^ Baker, Earl J. (2011). "Household preparedness for the Aftermath of Hurricanes in Florida".

Applied Geography .

31 (1): 46– 52.

Bibcode : 2011AppGe..31...46B .

doi : 10.1016/j.apgeog.2010.05.002 .

^ Donohue, Rebecca (September 2007). "What Important Changes Have Been Made in Your Practice's Emergency Preparedness Plan Since Hurricane Katrina?".

ONS Connect : 13.

^ "(program expired on June 30, 2009)" . My Safe Florida Home. 22 July 2002 . Retrieved 25 October 2018 .

^ "Secure Your Home" . Archived from the original on 9 June 2010 . Retrieved 7 September 2009 .

^ Mikkelson, Barbara (30 August 2005).

"Should You Open Windows During a Hurricane?" .

Snopes . Retrieved 19 June 2024 .

^ "Screen enclosure repair from Hurricane Matthew" .

Pool Enclosures West Palm Beach | Screen Enclosures West Palm Beach | Palm Beach Patio Screens . Retrieved 1 December 2016 .

^ "IBHS Provides Top 5 Recommendations to Reduce Property Damage from Hurricanes - IBHS" .

IBHS . 20 May 2015 . Retrieved 4 August 2016 .

^ "Understanding Wind Uplift Ratings" . Roofingcontractor.com . Retrieved 25 October 2018 .

^ "Hurricane Manual, year 2014, Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport, Broward County. 124 pages" . Broward.org. 2014 . Retrieved 3 January 2023 .

^ "Cyclone Testing Station" . Archived from the original on 19 August 2006 . Retrieved 17 April 2006 .

Cyclone Testing Station ^ "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on 30 October 2007 . Retrieved 22 November 2007 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) |FM Global Research Campus Natural Hazards Laboratory ^ American National Standard for Evaluating the Simulated Wind Uplift Resistance of Roof Assemblies Using Static Positive and/or Negative Differential Pressures fmglobal.com [ dead link ] ^ "Huge wind machine to simulate category three hurricanes" . 2007 . Retrieved 4 August 2016 .

^ Gallacher, Andy (7 June 2008).

"news.bbc.co.uk, Florida's hurricane simulator" . BBC News . Retrieved 19 July 2009 .

^ "freshnews.in/scientists, Scientists develop world's most powerful portable hurricane simulator Home" . Freshnews.in. 11 June 2008 . Retrieved 19 July 2009 .

External links [ edit ] Ready.gov Hurricane preparedness Section Article from NOAA about Hurricane preparedness The Essentials of Hurricane Preparedness Hurricane Shutters and Storm Shutters for Protection International Hurricane Research Center Social & Economic Costs of Hurricane & Tropical Storms from "NOAA Socioeconomics" website initiative Hurricane Season 2021: How to Be Prepared Miami Dade County 2018 OFFICIAL HURRICANE READINESS GUIDE v t e Disasters Overview Lists by death toll by cost Australia Bangladesh Canada China Croatia Czech Republic Estonia Fiji Finland France Great Britain and Ireland Greece Haiti India Indonesia Japan Malta New Zealand Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Singapore South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand United States Vietnam Disasters v t e Natural disasters – list by death toll Geological Mass wasting Landslide Avalanche Mudflow Debris flow Earthquake ( List ) Seismic hazard Seismic risk Soil liquefaction Volcano eruption Pyroclastic flow Lahar Volcanic ash Natural erosion Sinkhole Hydrological Flood ( List ) Coastal flood Flash flood Storm surge Other Tsunami Megatsunami Limnic eruption Meteorological Temperature Blizzard Cold wave Ice storm Heat wave Drought Megadrought Cyclonic storms Bomb cyclone Thunderstorm ( Hail ) Tornado ( Tornado outbreak ) Tropical cyclone Other Derecho Wildfire Firestorm ARkStorm Astronomical Potentially hazardous object Impact event Meteor shower Geomagnetic storm Solar flare Supernova Hypernova Accidents Health Biosecurity Diseases of affluence Disease of despair Diseases of poverty Epidemic list Famine List Famine scales Opioid epidemic Pandemic Industrial Bridge Dam Infrastructure Levee breach Mast and tower Mining Oil spills Structural failures and collapses Nuclear ( by death toll ) Civilian nuclear Civilian radiation Military nuclear Transport Air Maritime Rail Shipwreck Spaceflight Man-made Crowd collapses and crushes Economic crises Environmental disasters Sacrifice zone Military Nightclub fires Riots Societal collapse Terrorist incidents Wars Preparation Disaster risk reduction Earthquake preparedness Hurricane preparedness Safety Survival kit Anticipatory action Countermeasures Crisis management Disaster area Earthquake warning system Emergency Alert System Emergency management Emergency population warning Evacuations Humanitarian aid Hurricane response Media Disaster film ( List of disaster films ) Organizations Civil defense ( List of civil defense organisations ) Disaster Accountability Project International Association of Emergency Managers International Disaster and Risk Conference International Disaster Emergency Service WikiProject NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vn5zx
Cached time: 20250816192421
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.747 seconds
Real time usage: 0.877 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4915/1000000
Revision size: 26132/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 179106/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4333/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 146145/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.506/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23022849/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  771.987      1 -total
 32.05%  247.413      1 Template:Reflist
 20.31%  156.779     25 Template:Cite_web
 19.58%  151.124     10 Template:Annotated_link
 10.72%   82.777      1 Template:Tropicalcyclone
 10.33%   79.748      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.18%   70.866      7 Template:Navbox
  6.53%   50.393      4 Template:Citation_needed
  6.52%   50.307      1 Template:Short_description
  6.35%   48.993      1 Template:Disasters Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2840108:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816192421 and revision id 1272005461. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tropical_cyclone_preparedness&oldid=1272005461 " Categories : Disaster preparedness Tropical cyclones Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010 Articles needing cleanup from June 2024 All pages needing cleanup Articles containing how-to sections Articles with unsourced statements from September 2009 Articles to be expanded from September 2009 All articles to be expanded Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 26 January 2025, at 18:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tropical cyclone preparedness 1 language Add topic

