Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Hus's death 1.2 Hussite Wars (1419–1434) 1.3 Council of Basel and Compacta of Prague 1.4 Hussite Bohemia, Luther and the Reformation (1434–1618) 1.5 Bohemian Revolt and harsh persecution under the Habsburgs (1618–1918) 1.6 Post-Habsburg era and modern times (1918–present) 2 Factions Toggle Factions subsection 2.1 Moderates 2.2 Radicals 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Hussites 54 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gàidhlig 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Czech pre-Protestant Christian movement Part of a series on Protestantism Outline Concepts Anti-Protestantism Bible Criticism Culture Demographics Ecclesiology Liturgy Relations with Catholics Theologies Five Solas History Proto-Protestantism Bohemian Reformation Reformation Magisterial Radical Counter Martin Luther Ninety-five Theses Augsburg Confession Huldrych Zwingli John Calvin Arminianism Crypto-Protestantism Nonconformists Dissenters Puritans John Wesley Pietism Great Awakenings in America Revival meetings Branches Proto-Protestants Hussites Waldensians Lutherans Reformed Continental Presbyterians Congregational Anglicans Continuing Anabaptists Amish Hutterites Mennonites Quakers Baptists Black church Methodists Radical Pietism Shakers Stone-Campbell Plymouth Brethren Adventist Irvings Holiness Keswickians Eastern Protestant Pentecostals United and uniting churches Nondenominational Movements Augsburg Catholics Charismatics Confessionalism Confessing Movement Convergence Church Growth Ecumenism Emerging church Evangelicalism Fundamentalism High church Liberalism Mainlines Neo-charismatics Neo-orthodoxy New Calvinism Paleo-orthodoxy Progressivism Spiritual Christianity Christianity portal v t e Battle between Hussites (left) and Catholic crusaders in the 15th century The Lands of the Bohemian Crown during the Hussite Wars. The movement began during the Renaissance in Prague and quickly spread south and then through the rest of the Kingdom of Bohemia . Eventually, it expanded into the remaining domains of the Bohemian Crown as well.

The Hussites ( Czech : Husité or Kališníci , "Chalice People"; Latin : Hussitae ) were a Czech proto-Protestant Christian movement influenced by both the Byzantine Rite and John Wycliffe that followed the teachings of reformer Jan Hus ( fl.

1401–1415), a part of the Bohemian Reformation .

The Czech lands had originally been Christianized by Byzantine Greek missionaries Saints Cyril and Methodius , who introduced the Byzantine Rite in the Old Church Slavonic liturgical language and the Byzantine tradition of Communion in both kinds administered by the holy spoon . Over the centuries that followed, however, the Roman Rite in Ecclesiastical Latin , which is less easily understood than Slavonic by native speakers of Old Czech , was imposed upon the Czech people despite considerable public resistance, by German-speaking bishops, beginning with Wiching , from the Holy Roman Empire . (See also Sázava Monastery ).

[ 1 ] As a cultural memory of both communion in both kinds and the Divine Liturgy in a language closer to the vernacular is believed to have survived well into the Renaissance , the ideas of Jan Hus and others like him swiftly gained a wide public following. After the trial and execution of Hus at the Council of Constance , [ 2 ] a series of crusades, civil wars, victories and compromises between various factions with different theological agendas broke out. At the end of the Hussite Wars (1420–1434), the now Catholic -supported Utraquist side came out victorious from protracted conflict against Jan Žižka and the Taborites , who embraced the more radical theological teachings of John Wycliffe and the Lollards , and became the dominant Hussite group in Bohemia.

Catholics and Utraquists were given legal equality in Bohemia after the religious peace of Kutná Hora in 1485.

Bohemia and Moravia , or what is now the territory of the Czech Republic , remained majority Hussite for two centuries.

Roman Catholicism was only reimposed by the Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand II following the 1620 Battle of White Mountain and during the Thirty Years' War .

The Hussite tradition continues in the Moravian Church , Unity of the Brethren and, since the dissolution of Austria-Hungary , by the re-founded Czechoslovak Hussite Church .

[ 3 ] The revived legacy of Saints Cyril and Methodius also continues in both the Orthodox Church in the Czech Lands and the Apostolic Exarchate of the Greek Catholic Church in the Czech Republic .

History [ edit ] The Hussite movement began in the Kingdom of Bohemia and quickly spread throughout the remaining Lands of the Bohemian Crown , including Moravia and Silesia . It also made inroads into the northern parts of the Kingdom of Hungary (now Slovakia ), but was rejected and gained infamy for the plundering behaviour of the Hussite soldiers.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] There were also very small temporary communities in Poland-Lithuania and Transylvania which moved to Bohemia after being confronted with religious intolerance. It was a regional movement that failed to expand farther. Hussites emerged as a majority Utraquist movement with a significant Taborite faction, and smaller regional ones that included Adamites , Orebites and Orphans .

Major Hussite theologians included Petr Chelčický and Jerome of Prague . A number of Czech national heroes were Hussite, including Jan Žižka , who led a fierce resistance to five consecutive crusades proclaimed on Hussite Bohemia by the Papacy . Hussites were one of the most important forerunners of the Protestant Reformation . This predominantly religious movement was propelled by social issues and strengthened Czech national awareness.

Hus's death [ edit ] Main articles: Jan Hus and Bohemian Reformation Execution of Jan Hus (1415) that sparked outrage in the Kingdom of Bohemia The Council of Constance lured Jan Hus in with a letter of indemnity, then tried him for heresy and put him to death at the stake on 6 July 1415.

[ 2 ] The arrest of Hus in 1414 caused considerable resentment in Czech lands . The authorities of both countries appealed urgently and repeatedly to King Sigismund to release Jan Hus.

When news of his death at the Council of Constance arrived, disturbances broke out, directed primarily against the clergy and especially against the monks. Even the Archbishop narrowly escaped from the effects of this popular anger. The treatment of Hus was felt to be a disgrace inflicted upon the whole country and his death was seen as a criminal act. King Wenceslaus IV.

, prompted by his grudge against Sigismund, at first gave free vent to his indignation at the course of events in Constance . His wife openly favoured the friends of Hus. Avowed Hussites stood at the head of the government.

A league was formed by certain lords, [ who?

] who pledged themselves to protect the free preaching of the Gospel upon all their possessions and estates and to obey the power of the Bishops only where their orders accorded with the injunctions of the Bible . The university would arbitrate any disputed points. The entire Hussite nobility joined the league. Other than verbal protest of the council's treatment of Hus, there was little evidence of any actions taken by the nobility until 1417. At that point several of the lesser nobility and some barons, signatories of the 1415 protest letter, removed Catholic priests from their parishes, replacing them with priests willing to give communion in both wine and bread. The chalice of wine became the central identifying symbol of the Hussite movement.

[ 8 ] If the king had joined, its resolutions would have received the sanction of the law; but he refused, and approached the newly formed Roman Catholic League of lords, whose members pledged themselves to support the king, the Catholic Church , and the council. The prospect of a civil war began to emerge.

Prior to becoming pope, Martin V , then known as Cardinal Otto of Colonna had attacked Hus with relentless severity. He energetically resumed the battle against Hus's teaching after the enactments of the Council of Constance . He wished to eradicate completely the doctrine of Hus, for which purpose the co-operation of King Wenceslaus had to be obtained.

[ citation needed ] In 1418, Sigismund succeeded in winning his brother over to the standpoint of the council by pointing out the inevitability of a religious war if the heretics in Bohemia found further protection.

[ citation needed ] Hussite statesmen and army leaders had to leave the country and Roman Catholic priests were reinstated. These measures caused a general commotion which hastened the death of King Wenceslaus by a paralytic stroke in 1419.

[ citation needed ] His heir was Sigismund.

Hussite Wars (1419–1434) [ edit ] Main article: Hussite Wars The Battle of Kratzau between Hussites and Catholic forces led by Hans von Polenz The Hussite Wagenburg Recreation of Hussite pavise from an original in the Museum of Prague The news of the death of King Wenceslaus in 1419 produced a great commotion among the people of Prague. A revolution swept over the country: churches and monasteries were destroyed, and church property was seized by the Hussite nobility. It was then, and remained till much later, in question whether Bohemia was a hereditary or an elective monarchy, especially as the line through which Sigismund claimed the throne had accepted that the Kingdom of Bohemia was an elective monarchy elected by the nobles, and thus the regent of the kingdom ( Čeněk of Wartenberg ) also explicitly stated that Sigismund had not been elected as reason for Sigismund's claim to not be accepted. Sigismund could get possession of "his" kingdom only by force of arms. Pope Martin V called upon Catholics of the West to take up arms against the Hussites, declaring a crusade, and twelve years of warfare followed.

The Hussites initially campaigned defensively, but after 1427 they assumed the offensive. Apart from their religious aims, they fought for the national interests of the Czechs. The moderate and radical parties were united, and they not only repelled the attacks of the army of crusaders but crossed the borders into neighboring countries. On March 23, 1430, Joan of Arc dictated a letter [ 9 ] that threatened to lead a crusading army against the Hussites unless they returned to the Catholic faith, but her capture by English and Burgundian troops two months later would keep her from carrying out this threat.

Council of Basel and Compacta of Prague [ edit ] Main articles: Council of Basel and Basel Compacts Eventually, the opponents of the Hussites found themselves forced to consider an amicable settlement. The Hussites were sent an invitation to attend the ecumenical Council of Basel on October 15, 1431.

[ 10 ] The discussions began on 10 January 1432, focusing chiefly on the four articles of Prague . No agreement emerged. After repeated negotiations between the Basel Council and Bohemia, a Bohemian–Moravian state assembly in Prague accepted the " Compactata " of Prague on 30 November 1433. The agreement granted communion in both kinds to all who desired it, but with the understanding that Christ was entirely present in each kind, though on the condition that the rest of the Hussite reforms would no longer be emphasised.

[ 10 ] Free preaching was granted conditionally: the Church hierarchy had to approve and place priests, and the power of the bishop must be considered. The article which prohibited the secular power of the clergy was almost reversed.

The Taborites refused to conform. The Calixtines united with the Roman Catholics and destroyed the Taborites at the Battle of Lipany on 30 May 1434.

[ 11 ] From that time, the Taborites lost their importance, though the Hussite movement would continue in Poland for another five years, until the Royalist forces of Poland defeated the Polish Hussites at the Battle of Grotniki . The state assembly of Jihlava in 1436 confirmed the "Compactata" and gave them the sanction of law. This accomplished the reconciliation of Bohemia with Rome and the Western Church, and at last Sigismund obtained possession of the Bohemian crown.

[ 11 ] His reactionary measures caused a ferment in the whole country, but he died in 1437. The state assembly in Prague rejected Wyclif's doctrine of the Lord's Supper, which was obnoxious to the Utraquists , as heresy in 1444. Most of the Taborites now went over to the party of the Utraquists; the rest joined the "Brothers of the Law of Christ" ( Latin : "Unitas Fratrum" ) (see history of the Moravian Church ).

Hussite Bohemia, Luther and the Reformation (1434–1618) [ edit ] See also: Martin Luther and Reformation Painting celebrating the Catholic victory at the Battle of White Mountain (1620). In the coming years, Bohemia and Moravia were converted from Hussitism to Roman Catholicism by the Habsburgs .

In 1462, Pope Pius II declared the "Compacta" null and void, prohibited communion in both kinds, and acknowledged King George of Podebrady as king on condition that he would promise an unconditional harmony with the Roman Church. This he refused, leading to the Bohemian–Hungarian War (1468–1478) . His successor, King Vladislaus II , favored the Roman Catholics and proceeded against some zealous clergymen of the Calixtines. The troubles of the Utraquists increased from year to year. In 1485, at the Diet of Kutná Hora , an agreement was made between the Roman Catholics and Utraquists that lasted for thirty-one years. It was only later, at the Diet of 1512, that the equal rights of both religions were permanently established. The appearance of Martin Luther was hailed by the Utraquist clergy, and Luther himself was astonished to find so many points of agreement between the doctrines of Hus and his own. But not all Utraquists approved of the German Reformation ; a schism arose among them, and many returned to the Roman doctrine, while other elements had organised the " Unitas Fratrum " already in 1457.

Bohemian Revolt and harsh persecution under the Habsburgs (1618–1918) [ edit ] Main articles: Bohemian Revolt , Battle of the White Mountain , Thirty Years' War , Counter-Reformation , Anti-Protestantism , and History of the Moravian Church Under Emperor Maximilian II , the Bohemian state assembly established the Confessio Bohemica , upon which Lutherans , Reformed, and Bohemian Brethren agreed. From that time forward Hussitism began to die out. After the Battle of White Mountain on 8 November 1620 the Roman Catholic Faith was re-established with vigour, which fundamentally changed the religious conditions of the Czech lands .

Leaders and members of Unitas Fratrum were forced to choose to either leave the many and varied southeastern principalities of what was the Holy Roman Empire (mainly Austria , Hungary , Bohemia , Moravia and parts of Germany and its many states), or to practice their beliefs secretly. As a result, members were forced underground and dispersed across northwestern Europe. The largest remaining communities of the Brethren were located in Lissa ( Leszno ) in Poland, which had historically strong ties with the Czechs, and in small, isolated groups in Moravia. Some, among them Jan Amos Comenius , fled to western Europe, mainly the Low Countries . A settlement of Hussites in Herrnhut , Saxony, now Germany, in 1722 caused the emergence of the Moravian Church .

Post-Habsburg era and modern times (1918–present) [ edit ] The modern Hussite flag Main articles: Moravian Church , Czechoslovak Hussite Church , and Unity of the Brethren (Texas) In 1918, as a result of World War I , the Czech lands regained independence from Austria-Hungary controlled by the Habsburg monarchy as Czechoslovakia (due to Masaryk and Czechoslovak legions with Hussite tradition, in the name of the troops).

[ 12 ] Today, the Hussite tradition is represented in the Moravian Church , Unity of the Brethren , and Czechoslovak Hussite Church .

[ 3 ] [ 13 ] Factions [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( November 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) See also: Utraquism , Taborites , and Moravian Church § Jan Hus and the Bohemian Reformation Luther and Hus serving communion under both kinds together , an imaginary woodcut from 16th century Saxony demonstrating the affinity of Lutherans and Moderate Hussites Jan Žižka leading troops of Radical Hussites Hussite theologians dispute in the presence of King Władysław II Jagiełło of Poland Hussitism organised itself during the years 1415–1419. Hussites were not a unitary movement, but a diverse one with multiple factions that held different views and opposed each other in the Hussite Wars . From the beginning, there formed two parties, with a smaller number of people withdrawing from both parties around the pacifist Petr Chelčický , whose teachings would form the foundation of the Unitas Fratrum . Hussites can be divided into: Moderate Hussites Prague Hussites Bohemian Hussite nobility Hussites of Žatec and Louny Other Utraquists / Calixtines Radical Hussites Taborites Orebites Adamites Orphans Other Radical Hussites Moderates [ edit ] The more conservative Hussites (the moderate party, or Utraquists ), who followed Hus more closely, sought to conduct reform while leaving the whole hierarchical and liturgical order of the Church untouched.

[ 14 ] Their programme is contained in the Four Articles of Prague , which were written by Jacob of Mies and agreed upon in July 1420, promulgated in the Latin , Czech , and German languages. They can be summarised as follows: [ 15 ] Free preaching of the Word of God throughout the Kingdom of Bohemia and the Margravate of Moravia.

Celebration of the communion under both kinds (bread and wine to priests and laity alike) The removal of secular power from the clergy.

Secular punishment for mortal sins among clergy and laity alike.

The views of the moderate Hussites were widely represented at the university and among the citizens of Prague; they were therefore called the Prague Party, but also Calixtines (Latin calix chalice) or Utraquists (Latin utraque both), because they emphasized the second article of Prague, and the chalice became their emblem.

Radicals [ edit ] The more radical parties, the Taborites , Orebites and Orphans , identified itself more boldly with the doctrines of John Wycliffe , sharing his passionate hatred of the monastic clergy,   and his desire to return the Church to its supposed condition during the time of the apostles. This required the removal of the existing hierarchy and the secularisation of ecclesiastical possessions. Above all they clung to Wycliffe's doctrine of the Lord's Supper , denying transubstantiation , [ 16 ] and this is the principal point by which they are distinguished from the moderate party, the Utraquists .

The radicals preached the "sufficientia legis Christi" —the divine law (i.e. the Bible ) is the sole rule and canon for human society, not only in the church, but also in political and civil matters. They rejected therefore, as early as 1416, everything that they believed had no basis in the Bible, such as the veneration of saints and images, fasts , superfluous holidays, the oath, intercession for the dead, auricular Confession , indulgences , the sacraments of Confirmation and the Anointing of the Sick , and chose their own priests.

The radicals had their gathering-places all around the country. Their first armed assault fell on the small town of Ústí, on the river Lužnice, south of Prague (today's Sezimovo Ústí ). However, as the place did not prove to be defensible, they settled in the remains of an older town upon a hill not far away and founded a new town, which they named Tábor (a play on words, as "Tábor" not only meant "camp" or "encampment" in Czech , [ 17 ] but is also the traditional name of the mountain on which Jesus was expected to return; see Mark 13 ); hence they were called Táborité ( Taborites ). They comprised the essential force of the radical Hussites.

Their aim was to destroy the enemies of the law of God, and to defend his kingdom (which had been expected to come in a short time) by the sword. Their end-of-world visions did not come true. In order to preserve their settlement and spread their ideology, they waged bloody wars; in the beginning they observed a strict regime, inflicting the severest punishment equally for murder, as for less severe faults as adultery, perjury, and usury , and also tried to apply rigid Biblical standards to the social order of the time. The Taborites usually had the support of the Orebites (later called Orphans), an eastern Bohemian sect of Hussitism based in Hradec Králové .

See also [ edit ] Christianity portal History portal Czech Republic portal Arnoldists Hussite Bible Lollards Pavel Kravař Restorationism Taborites Jistebnice hymn book Waldensians War wagon References [ edit ] ^ Dvornik, F. (1964).

"The Significance of the Missions of Cyril and Methodius" .

Slavic Review .

23 (2): 195– 211.

doi : 10.2307/2492930 .

JSTOR 2492930 .

S2CID 163378481 .

^ a b Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (Oxford University Press 2005 ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3 ), article "Constance, Council of" ^ a b Nĕmec, Ludvík "The Czechoslovak heresy and schism: the emergence of a national Czechoslovak church," American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, 1975, ISBN 0-87169-651-7 ^ Spiesz et al.

2006, p. 52.

^ Bartl 2002, p. 45.

^ Kirschbaum 2005, p. 48.

^ Spiesz et al.

2006, p. 53.

^ John Klassen, "The Nobility and the Making of the Hussite Revolution" ( East European Quarterly /Columbia University Press, 1978) ^ "Joan of Arc's Letter to the Hussites (March 23, 1430)" .

archive.joan-of-arc.org .

^ a b Fudge, Thomas A. (1998).

The magnificent ride : the first reformation in Hussite Bohemia . Internet Archive. Aldershot, Hants ; Brookfield, Vt. : Ashgate.

ISBN 978-1-85928-372-1 .

^ a b Malcolm Lambert (1992).

Medieval heresy . Internet Archive. B. Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0-631-17431-8 .

^ PRECLÍK, Vratislav. Masaryk a legie (Masaryk and legions), váz. kniha, 219 str., vydalo nakladatelství Paris Karviná, Žižkova 2379 (734 01 Karviná) ve spolupráci s Masarykovým demokratickým hnutím (Masaryk Democratic Movement), 2019, ISBN 978-80-87173-47-3 , pp. 17–25, 33–45, 70–76, 159–184, 187–199 ^ Sheldon, Addison Erwin; Sellers, James Lee; Olson, James C. (1993).

Nebraska History, Volume 74 . Nebraska State Historical Society. p. 151.

^ "Utraquism’s faithfulness to the Prague Use of the Roman rite …(was) an intentional symbol of Utraquism’s self-understanding as a continuing part of the Western Catholic Church." Holeton, David R.; Vlhová-Wörner, Hana; Bílková, Milena (2007).

"The Trope Gregorius presul meritis in Bohemian Tradition: Its Origins, Development, Liturgical Function and Illustration" (PDF) .

Bohemian Reformation and Religious Practice .

6 : 215– 246 . Retrieved 18 November 2023 .

^ "The Four Articles of Prague" .

John Hus: Apostle of Truth .

^ Cook, William R. (1973).

"John Wyclif and Hussite Theology 1415–1436" .

Church History .

42 (3): 335– 349.

doi : 10.2307/3164390 .

ISSN 0009-6407 .

JSTOR 3164390 .

^ Profous, Antonín (1957).

Místní jména v Čechách: Jejich vznik, původní význam a změny; part 4, S–Ž . Prague, Czechoslovakia: Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences.

Bibliography [ edit ] Michael Van Dussen and Pavel Soukup (eds.). 2020.

A Companion to the Hussites . Brill.

Kaminsky, H.

(1967) A History of the Hussite Revolution University of California Press: Los Angeles.

Fudge, Thomas A. (1998) The Magnificent Ride: The First Reformation in Hussite Bohemia , Ashgate.

Fudge, Thomas A. (2002) The Crusade against Heretics in Bohemia , Ashgate.

Ondřej, Brodu, "Traktát mistra Ondřeje z Brodu o původu husitů" ( Latin : "Visiones Ioannis, archiepiscopi Pragensis, et earundem explicaciones, alias Tractatus de origine Hussitarum" ), Muzem husitského revolučního hnutí, Tábor, 1980, OCLC 28333729 in (in Latin) with introduction in (in Czech) Mathies, Christiane, "Kurfürstenbund und Königtum in der Zeit der Hussitenkriege: die kurfürstliche Reichspolitik gegen Sigmund im Kraftzentrum Mittelrhein," Selbstverlag der Gesellschaft für Mittelrheinische Kirchengeschichte, Mainz, 1978, OCLC 05410832 in (in German) Bezold, Friedrich von, "König Sigmund und die Reichskriege gegen die Husiten," G. Olms, Hildesheim, 1978, ISBN 3-487-05967-3 in (in German) Denis, Ernest , "Huss et la Guerre des Hussites," AMS Press, New York, 1978, ISBN 0-404-16126-X in (in French) Klassen, John (1998) "Hus, the Hussites, and Bohemia" in New Cambridge Medieval History Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.

Macek, Josef, "Jean Huss et les Traditions Hussites: XVe–XIXe siècles," Plon, Paris, 1973, OCLC 905875 in (in French) External links [ edit ] " Hussites ".

A Dictionary of All Religions and Religious Denominations (4th ed.). 1784.

" Hussites ".

New International Encyclopedia . 1905.

Wilhelm, J. (1913). " Hussites ".

Catholic Encyclopedia .

Hussite Museum, Tabor v t e Proto-Protestantism 400–1100 AD People Jovinian Claudius of Turin Gottschalk of Orbais Ratramnus Berengar of Tours Sects and groups Pataria Berengarians 1100–1400 AD People Tanchelm Peter of Bruys Henry of Lausanne Arnold of Brescia Peter Waldo Milíč of Kroměříž John Wycliffe Matthias of Janov Marsilius of Padua Sects and groups Arnoldists Waldensians Lollardy Strigolniki Friends of God Petrobrusians 1400–1500 AD People Jan Hus Jan Žižka Mikuláš of Pelhřimov Petr Chelčický Johannes von Goch Johann Ruchrat von Wesel Wessel Gansfort Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples Lorenzo Valla Girolamo Savonarola Luke of Prague Sects and groups Bohemian Reformation Hussites Taborites Utraquism Czech Brethren Piagnoni Events Oldcastle Revolt Hussite Wars Compacts of Basel Peace of Kutná Hora Mérindol massacre Savoyard–Waldensian wars Piedmontese Easter Literature Wycliffe Bible Hussite Bible Jistebnice hymn book Ecclesiae Regimen Twelve Conclusions of the Lollards Triumph of the Cross (Girolamo Savonarola) Other Comparison of Catharism and Protestantism Italics indicate their inclusion to be controversial or disputed.

v t e Beliefs condemned as heretical by the Catholic Church ( list ) Antiquity Adoptionism Apollinarism Arianism Anomoeanism Semi-Arianism Antidicomarianites Audianism Docetism Donatism Circumcellions Collyridianism Dualism Ebionites Euchites Gnosticism Manichaeism Paulicianism Priscillianism Naassenes Ophites Sethianism Valentinianism Iconoclasm Luciferianism Macedonianism Marcionism Melchisedechians Modalism Monarchianism Athinganoi Modalistic Monophysitism Monothelitism Montanism Nestorianism Novatianism Patripassianism Pelagianism Semipelagianism Pneumatomachians Psilanthropism Sabellianism Subordinationism Valentinianism Middle Ages Arnoldism Bogomilism Bosnian Church Catharism Conciliarism Dulcinians Fraticelli Free Spirits Henricians Humiliati Hussites Impanation Josephines Lollardy Migetians Pasagians Spanish Adoptionism Taborites Waldensians Early modernity Antinomianism Consubstantiation Febronianism Gallicanism Jansenism Josephinism Pantheism Protestantism Anabaptism Arminianism Calvinism Lutheranism Quietism Modernity Americanism Community of the Lady of All Nations Feeneyism Indifferentism Jehovah's Witnesses Modernism Mormonism Narco-saints Maximón Santa Muerte Positive Christianity Reincarnationism Catholic Church portal v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Poland Israel Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐s25js
Cached time: 20250814215332
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.897 seconds
Real time usage: 1.090 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3355/1000000
Revision size: 27787/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 148698/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3644/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 29/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 108171/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.570/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17586097/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  879.606      1 -total
 17.78%  156.385      1 Template:Reflist
 14.94%  131.371      2 Template:Langx
 12.77%  112.323      1 Template:Protestantism
 12.38%  108.923      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.27%   99.158      3 Template:Cite_journal
  8.09%   71.200      1 Template:Short_description
  7.79%   68.534      4 Template:Fix
  5.96%   52.444      1 Template:Authority_control
  5.25%   46.196      3 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:14291:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215332 and revision id 1294404076. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hussites&oldid=1294404076 " Categories : Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the DARRD with an wstitle parameter Hussites Protestantism in the Czech Republic Jan Hus Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2011 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2011 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles needing additional references from November 2017 All articles needing additional references Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles with Latin-language sources (la) Articles with Czech-language sources (cs) Articles with German-language sources (de) Articles with French-language sources (fr) Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the DARRD Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles containing Tagalog-language text This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 14:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hussites 54 languages Add topic

