Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Research Support 3 Partner Organizations 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Atkinson Center for a Sustainable Future Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cornell Atkinson Center for Sustainability The Atkinson Center in Rice Hall on the campus of Cornell University Company type Research Organization Predecessor Cornell Atkinson Center for Sustainability Founded 2010 Headquarters 200 Rice Hall, Cornell University , Ithaca, New York , 14850 Key people David Lodge, The Francis J. DiSalvo Director Parent Cornell University Website atkinson .cornell .edu The Cornell Atkinson Center for Sustainability is the hub of collaborative sustainability research at Cornell University , forging vital connections among researchers, students, staff, and external partners. The center’s funding and programming accelerate groundbreaking research within and across all of Cornell’s colleges and schools. In turn, the center is the university’s home to bold ideas and powerful new models that ensure people and the planet not only survive, but thrive.

History [ edit ] Cornell Atkinson Center for Sustainability grew out of the Cornell Center for a Sustainable Future (CCSF), which was established in 2007 as a pilot program with support from alumnus David R. Atkinson '60 and his wife Patricia [ 1 ] following a multiyear, cross-campus discussion about energy and sustainability. In 2010, the Atkinsons endowed the center with an $80 million gift, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] making it the largest gift ever received from an individual at Cornell University at that time.

[ 4 ] Recognizing that sustainability solutions cannot be limited to one field of inquiry and that discovery in one area may affect other parts of the whole, the center is home to 514 Faculty Fellows representing 12 Cornell University colleges and 90 departments.

By providing startup funding for cross-college collaborations, time-sensitive research, and external partnerships, the center supports pioneering discovery with real-world impact in food systems, energy transitions, climate, behavior, the built environment, and the linkages between human and environmental health.

Atkinson Hall under construction in June 2023 Construction on a new building to house the Center was announced in 2021. The 90,000 square foot, four-story building on Tower Road is expected to be completed in 2024.

[ 5 ] Research Support [ edit ] The Atkinson Center supports Cornell University researchers through multiple funds and fellowships: Academic Venture Fund —The Academic Venture Fund (AVF) seeds original, multidisciplinary research that is not likely to find funding elsewhere because the projects are novel, risky, need early data to establish traction, or involve new teams working together.

Innovation for Impact Fund —The Innovation for Impact Fund (IIF) connects our nonprofit, government, and industry partners with the research capacity of Cornell to jointly develop and test evidence-based solutions. Current collaborators include CARE, The Nature Conservancy, Environmental Defense Fund, Avangrid, and the Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute.

Rapid Response Fund —The Rapid Response Fund (RRF) facilitates urgent or time-sensitive sustainability research, workshops, and other activities. With unusually flexible guidelines, the RRF is a source of funding for smaller projects that foster a broad range of sustainability initiatives.

Faculty Fellowship for Social Sciences, Humanities, and Arts —The Social Sciences, Humanities, and Arts (SSHA) Faculty Fellows Fund adds a unique and invaluable perspective by reshaping imaginations, behaviors, and minds. This work complements and extends the center’s sustainability advances in the life, physical, environmental, and agricultural sciences.

Partner Organizations [ edit ] Partner organizations include but are not limited to: CARE —This collaboration connects Atkinson Center research teams with CARE staff on the ground in communities around the world, speeding delivery of science-based solutions. Cornell scientists also provide background research to inform CARE positions on policy issues related to international food assistance and relief aid.

Environmental Defense Fund (EDF) —The center's work with Environmental Defense Fund includes joint research activities and an undergraduate internship program. The research program leverages Cornell research expertise with EDF's leadership in the policy arena. The internship program places Cornell students in EDF offices around the world to work on complex projects.

Oxfam America —This collaboration of the Atkinson Center, Clark University , and Oxfam America looks to identify common threads in evaluating rural resilience around the world.

The Nature Conservancy (TNC) —In partnership with the Atkinson Center and five other leading universities, The Nature Conservancy established a NatureNet Science Fellows program to create a reservoir of next-generation interdisciplinary science talent. The fellowships are awarded annually to six outstanding early-career scientists working at the interface of conservation, business, and technology.

Smithsonian Institution —This comprehensive collaboration between the Atkinson Center and the world’s largest museum and research complex responds to urgent needs in wildlife and natural habitat conservation . Together, experts from the center and the Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute are training the next generation of conservation scientists, providing practical advice to governments and the private sector in biodiversity hot spots, and sharing evidence with a wide audience that wildlife and natural habitat conservation improves all lives.

See also [ edit ] Sustainable development Climate change Sustainability Cornell University References [ edit ] ^ "Graduate Pays Back Cornell With $80 Million Gift" .

Dealbook . 28 October 2010 . Retrieved 14 July 2011 .

^ "Historic gift creates Atkinson Center to bolster sustainability research, education, action" .

Cornell Chronicle .

Archived from the original on 5 July 2011 . Retrieved 13 July 2011 .

^ "Record Gift to Cornell to Fund Research" .

Wall Street Journal . 28 October 2010 . Retrieved 4 August 2011 .

^ Dobbin, Ben (28 October 2010).

"Cornell Gets $80M Gift For Sustainability Work" .

Huffington Post . Retrieved 4 August 2011 .

^ Fleischman, Tom (8 March 2021).

"Atkinsons' $30M gift to name multidisciplinary building" .

Cornell Chronicle . Cornell University. Archived from the original on 1 February 2023 . Retrieved 30 June 2023 .

External links [ edit ] The Atkinson Center for a Sustainable Future Congressional Briefing on Carbon Sequestration and Biochar [ permanent dead link ] NYTimes 10th Annual Year in Ideas e360 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Atkinson_Center_for_a_Sustainable_Future&oldid=1243149210 " Category : Cornell University Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2016 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 30 August 2024, at 20:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Atkinson Center for a Sustainable Future Add languages Add topic

