Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Features 2 Range 3 Visual search 4 Examples 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Knowledge management software 5 languages Deutsch فارسی Polski Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subset of enterprise content management This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Knowledge management software" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Knowledge management software ( KM software ) is a subset of content management software, which consists of software that specializes in the way information is collected, stored and/or accessed. The concept of knowledge management is based on the practices of an individual , a business , or a corporation to identify, create, represent and redistribute information in support of organizational goals. Software that enables an information practice or range of practices at any part of the processes of information management can be deemed to be called information management software. A subset of information management software that emphasizes an approach to build knowledge out of information that is managed or contained is often called knowledge management software.

KM software in most cases provides a means for individuals, small groups or mid-sized businesses to innovate, build new knowledge in the group, and/or improve customer experience.

Knowledge management systems (software) include a range of about 1,500 or more different approaches to collect and contain information to then build knowledge that can be searched through specialised search tools. These include concept building tools and/or visual search tools that present information in a connected manner not originally conceptualised by those collecting or maintaining the information database.

One of the main categories of knowledge management software is groupware , which can be used for knowledge sharing and capture. Groupware is a combination of synchronous, asynchronous and community focused tools. Groupware can be used to exchange knowledge and expertise even when the team members are situated around the world.

[ 1 ] Features [ edit ] Features of KM software usually include: Aggregation of content from both internal and external sources Classification of content using taxonomies Search Expertise location Workflows for creating knowledge Verification of knowledge Views/ dashboards As business today is becoming increasingly international, the ability to access information in different languages is now a requirement for some organizations. Reported success factors of a KM system include the capability to integrate well with existing internal systems [ 2 ] and the scalability of the system to grow within the organization.

[ 3 ] Range [ edit ] KM software ranges from small software packages for an individual to use to highly specialized enterprise software suitable for use by hundreds of employees. Often KM software provides a key resource for employees working in customer service or telephone support industries, or sectors of large corporations.

Knowledge management software, in general, enables the combination of unstructured information sources, such as individual word processed documents and/or PDF documents, email , graphic illustrations , unstructured notes , website links , invoices , and other information bearing collections, such as a simple thought, through to a combination of millions of interactions from a website, and through that combination enables the seeker to obtain knowledge that otherwise would not have been discovered. As Internet access speeds increased, many on-demand (or software as a service ) products have evolved and are now the leading suppliers of KM software.

Visual search [ edit ] One of the departures from the almost standard keyword search approach are those group of companies developing visual search techniques . Some common visual search approaches include: Tree traversal – A folder is opened and inside the display of that folder are further sub-folders. The folders are searched in a specific order, exactly once, in a systematic manner. This tree traversal approach relies on the naming of folders to provide a rich enough indication as to what is contained in the next folder or level of folders.

Taxonomy navigation – A taxonomy (or topic map ) is the classification of things or concepts, as well as the principles underlying such classification. In KM software, taxonomies are often used as a way of visually structuring the available information by tagging it with relevant topics and visually represent them as folders and sub-folders inside the taxonomy. Users can then navigate the taxonomy and select the topic, or combination of topics ( faceted search ), to perform the search on.

Tag cloud search – Once text data has been tagged with certain topics it can be visually represented as a Tag Cloud, where the importance of each tag is represented as a font size and/or color. This way you can identify and pick the most prominent topics.

Matrix / heat map search – The classification of information into topics facilitates visualization and analysis of the information flow. A combined topic search can be presented as values in a Matrix, and a Heat Map is a graphical representation of that data, presented in colors.

Examples [ edit ] Notable knowledge management tools include: Bloomfire – Knowledge sharing software with AI Collective Knowledge – An open source, portable and command line framework for knowledge management Confluence – Wiki-based knowledge management software that is part of Atlassian's suite eGain – Knowledge management and AI software Elium – Knowledge management software Joplin – Open source knowledge management software Obsidian - knowledge management software Trillium - Open source knowledge management software Logseq – Open source knowledge management software Notion (productivity software) – Proprietary knowledge management software Microsoft OneNote – Proprietary knowledge management software OpenKM – Open source knowledge management software Document360 - AI powered knowledge management software See also [ edit ] Enterprise content management Customer knowledge Knowledge base Knowledge extraction References [ edit ] ^ de Carvalho, Rodrigo Baroni, and Marta Araújo Tavares Ferreira. "Knowledge Management Software." Encyclopedia of Knowledge Management, edited by David G. Schwartz, Idea Group Reference, 2006, pp. 410-418. Gale Virtual Reference Library, http://link.galegroup.com/apps/doc/CX3467300066/GVRL ^ Lehner, Franz; Nicolas Haas (2010). "Knowledge Management Success Factors".

Electronic Journal of Knowledge Management .

8 (1): 81.

^ L Feliciano, Joe (1 January 2007).

"The success criteria for implementing knowledge management systems in an organization" .

Etd Collection for Pace University . ETD Collection for Pace University Paper: 1– 142 . Retrieved 20 August 2013 .

External links [ edit ] v t e Knowledge management General topics Intellectual capital Knowledge economy Knowledge intensive services Knowledge intensive business services Knowledge organization (management) Knowledge-intensive company Knowledge sharing Electronic systems Knowledge management software Business intelligence Enterprise content management Wiki software Related Knowledge Tacit knowledge Collective intelligence Personal knowledge management Design rationale People Knowledge worker Chief knowledge officer Virtual team Communities of innovation Community of practice Community of interest Journals Journal of Knowledge Management Knowledge Management Research & Practice Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Knowledge_management_software&oldid=1296164055 " Categories : Knowledge management Technical communication Management systems Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2021 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 18 June 2025, at 07:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Knowledge management software 5 languages Add topic

