Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Music 2 Dance 3 Literature 4 Bwaka ni buto celebrations 5 Bubuti system 6 Material culture 7 Social problems 8 Dueling 9 Kiribati traditional martial arts 10 See also 11 References Toggle the table of contents Culture of Kiribati 3 languages Español Français Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Bubuti system ) Contemporary Kiribati culture is centered on the family, the church and the sea.

Music [ edit ] Main article: Music of Kiribati Kiribati folk music is generally based around chanting or other forms of vocalizing, accompanied by body percussion .  Public performances in modern Kiribati are generally performed by a seated chorus, accompanied by a guitar. However, during formal performances of the standing dance ( Te Kaimatoa ) or the hip dance ( Te Buki ) a wooden box is used as a percussion instrument. This box is constructed so as to give a hollow and reverberating tone when struck simultaneously by a chorus of men sitting around it.  Traditional songs are often love-themed, but there are also competitive, religious, children's, patriotic, war and wedding songs.

[ 1 ] There are also stick dances (which accompany legends and semi-historical stories.

[ 2 ] These stick dances or 'tirere' (pronounced seerere) are only performed during major festivals.

Dance [ edit ] Main article: Dance of Kiribati The uniqueness of Kiribati when compared with other forms of Pacific Island dance is its emphasis on the outstretched arms of the dancer and the sudden birdlike movement of the head. The Frigate bird ( Fregata minor ) on the Kiribati flag refers to this bird-like style of Kiribati dancing.  Most dances are in the standing or sitting position with movement limited and staggered. Smiling whilst dancing as seen in the modern Hawaiian Hula is generally considered vulgar within the context of Kiribati dancing. This is due to its origin of not being solely as a form of entertainment but as a form of storytelling and a display of the skill, beauty and endurance of the dancer.

[ citation needed ] Literature [ edit ] There have been few published I-Kiribati literary writers.

Teresia Teaiwa stands out as one of the most notable.

[ 3 ] Bwaka ni buto celebrations [ edit ] There is a celebration after a baby is born in Kiribati culture called ‘bwaka ni buto’. It is when the umbilical cord is cut.

[ 4 ] There are special items created by women such as a 'te inaai', a woven mat, garlands for the parents 'te itera' and a bracelet for the baby. The ceremony involves dancing and feasting.

[ 4 ] Bubuti system [ edit ] The bubuti system occurs when one is in need of some item and may borrow it from a friend, relative or neighbour. Culturally speaking, it is shameful to refuse such a request but situation and context does have a bearing on the outcome.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Material culture [ edit ] In 1963 Gerd Koch , a German anthropologist, carried out research in the islands of Kiribati to record traditional practices, [ 8 ] and in 1965 he published the Material Culture of the Gilbert Islands.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] His field work produced 70 films of traditional practices and material culture.

[ 11 ] The Ethnological Museum of Berlin also holds photos and an extensive collection of audio tapes (including music-ethnological material) made by Koch.

[ 8 ] Social problems [ edit ] Drinking alcohol is part of the culture and consumption of toddy, a locally made fermented coconut juice, is widespread.

[ 12 ] Alcoholism is a common problem, especially on the main island of Tarawa. Domestic violence is also common.

[ 13 ] Dueling [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Kiribati has a history of contrived and ritualized duels .  The armor was made of thickly woven sennit , a kind of coconut fiber.  The duelists wore helmets made of blowfish remains.  The helmets were resilient and, due to the structure of blowfish, covered with many points, which had the ability of damaging weapons.  The weapons resembled broadswords with a serrated edge created with many shark teeth.  The duels were performed mostly for the purpose of settling disputes and maintaining honor.  The practicality of the duels is debatable.  Due to the difficulty of moving in this armor, falling over and becoming unable to get back up was common enough that duel assistants were required.

Kiribati traditional martial arts [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( July 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Early 20th century Micronesian armour from Kiribati.

Kiribati has been known for its traditional martial arts which were kept within the secrets of several families for generations. The Kiribati arts of fighting as opposed to Asian martial arts are not often mentioned or even advertised to be known by the general public. Though, there may be some noticeable parallels in principle to that of Asian martial arts, they are merely really different. For instance, generally, there is no kicking as in Karate kicks or Kung Fu kicks, and speed is more important than power. A list of some of these traditional martial arts is as follows: Nabakai, Nakara, Ruabou, Tabiang, Taborara, Tebania, Temata-aua, Te Rawarawanimon, and Terotauea.

The essence of Kiribati traditional martial arts is the magical power of the spirits of the ancestral warriors. All these martial arts skills share one thing in common. That is, they came from an ancestral spirit.

"Nabakai" is a martial art from the island of Abaiang originated from the person named Nabakai. Nabakai was a member of the crab clan called "Tabukaokao". The three ancestral female spirits of this clan "Nei Tenaotarai", "Nei Temwanai" and "Nei Tereiatabuki" which usually believed to manifest themselves with a female crab came to him and taught him the fighting art.

"Te Rawarawanimon" was believed to be originated from three women namely Mwangataba, Nei Wanre and Nei Karaoia who played different roles in the performance of magical rite related with the martial art, including their brother Teroa. The grave yard for Teroa is on the land named Terawarawanimon in the bush side and remains of the three sisters which are in the form of stone, cramp shell and made hole in the ground are in the village side of the same named land,Terawarawanimon. "Nabakai" and "Te Rawarawanimon" show similar resemblance of techniques except that "Nabakai" usually works with one hand and basically uses only one stance while "Te Rawarawanimon" works with two hands and has more than a dozen different stances. "Te Rawarawanimon" is a martial art from the island of North Tarawa.

"Tabiang" is a martial art from the island of Abemama. It is called "Tabiang" because it belongs to every member of the village called Tabiang on Abemama island. It uses speed and accuracy to take over an opponent. The common formula used in this form of martial art is "you give me one punch I give you four punches". It was originated from an ancestral spirit called "Terengerenge" commonly known in other versions of oral traditions as "Teraka". He became manifested by a person called "Karotu-te-buai" from Abemama island and this was the birth of "Tabiang". According to oral traditions, this ancestral spirit traveled to Asia and was a source of origin for what is now known as "karate", a reverse written form of the name "Teraka". Oral traditions state that "Kaitu" and Uakeia" conquered the whole of the southern Gilbert islands and of the northern Gilberts. Mwea, the warrior from Nikunau, he conquered Abemama prior the arrival of Kaitu and Uakeia and that is why Kaitu and Uakeia were not very serious about Abemama. They came to confirm the ownership of Mwea, whom his siblings started the kingdom of Abemama , and claimed more prior leaving the island. This explains why the king there owns a lot of land. In fact, the name Tabiang originates from Beru such as Taboiaki and Aotukia in Nonouti. "Nakara" and "Ruabou" were originated from the island of Niutao in the Ellice Islands(now called Tuvalu). Oral traditions stated that "Nakara" and "Ruabou" were adopted from the styles of "Lupe" in Niutao who derived his martial arts from his ancestral spirit, through Tikitiki who gain came from Beru.

The basics of "Nakara" and "Ruabou" work mainly on wrestling techniques. "Ruabou" applies more of wrestling and hand combat combination while "Nakara" mainly develops focus on wrestling techniques as a common saying in Kiribati states "when fighting a "Nakara" expert, never come in close contact with him."  The two forms of martial arts are practiced throughout the southern Gilbert islands but originally began on the islands of Tamana and Arorae.

In 1963 Gerd Koch filmed self-defence techniques of kaunrabata (wrestling), rawebiti (defence of attacks with stabbing weapons) and rawekoro (armed attacks) on Nonouti and also filmed kaunrabata (wrestling defence), oro (defence of unarmed attacks) and rawekai (defence of armed attacks) on Onotoa .

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Religion in Kiribati References [ edit ] ^ "Traditional Kiribati Music" .

Jane's Oceania Page . Retrieved September 29, 2005 .

^ "Music from Kiribati" .

Encarta . Archived from the original on 2009-08-29 . Retrieved September 29, 2005 .

^ "Country profile: Kiribati" , The Guardian , April 22, 2009 ^ a b Humphry, Louisa.

"Rekerekeu ma Abau: Connecting to My Land" .

Pantograph Punch . Retrieved 2022-02-26 .

^ pacificislandtravel.com Archived 2013-09-27 at the Wayback Machine ^ Rao, Doraswamy, 2005. “Culture and entrepreneurship: an exploratory essay”, Fijian Studies: A Journal of Contemporary Fiji, 3(1): S. 57-86.

^ Ron Duncan, Cultural and Social Norms and Economic Development in Remote Aboriginal Communities: Lessons from the Pacific, S. 4f ^ a b "Short Portrait: Gerd Koch" . Interviews with German anthropologists: The History of Federal German Anthropology post 1945. 20 December 2012 . Retrieved 5 February 2014 .

^ Koch, Gerd (1986).

Materielle Kultur der Gilbert-Inseln . Berlin: Museum fur Volkerkunde; the English translation by Guy Slatter, was published as The Material Culture of Kiribati, University of the South Pacific in Suva.

ISBN 9789820200081 .

^ Koch, Gerd (1988). "The Kiribati project: The culture of the Gilbert Islands".

Visual Anthropology .

1 (3): 275– 279.

doi : 10.1080/08949468.1988.9966481 .

^ a b "70 Silent Films by Gerd Koch from the Gilbert Islands" . Göttingen University.

^ Venezia Kingi and Michael Roguski, “Pacific Prevention of Domestic Violence Programme: Update of Baseline In-Country Report” Archived 2015-01-14 at the Wayback Machine , January 2011.

^ Nuzhat Shahzadi, "The Story of Maria of Temwaiku Village, Kiribati" , Unicef Pacific, 11/10/2013 v t e Culture of Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna v t e Culture of indigenous Oceania List of resources about traditional arts and culture of Oceania Art Ahu Australia Austronesia Cook Islands kapa (Hawaiʻi) Lei magimagi moai New Zealand Māori nguzu nguzu Oceania Papua New Guinea reimiro tā moko tabua taʻovala tapa ["masi" (Fiji), "ngatu" (Tonga), "siapo" (Sāmoa), " ʻuha" (Rotuma)] tattoo tēfui tivaevae Broad culture areca nut "yaqona" (Fiji), or "sakau" (Pohnpei) Kava culture Lapita Māori Polynesia Sāmoa 'ava ceremony Wood carving Geo-specific, general Australia Australian Aboriginal astronomy ) Austronesia Caroline Islands , - Pwo Chatham Islands Cook Islands Easter Island Fiji Lau Islands traditions and ceremonies Guam Lomilomi massage Kiribati French Polynesia's Marquesas Islands Federated States of Micronesia Nauru New Caledonia New Zealand Māori Niue Norfolk Island Palau Papua New Guinea Pitcairn Islands Sāmoa Solomon Islands Tonga Torres Strait Islands Tuvalu Vanuatu Wallis and Futuna Polynesian Navigation Micronesian Navigation Marshall Islands Stick charts of Yap navigation Weriyeng navigation school Canoes Aboriginal dugout Alingano Maisu Bangka Drua Dugout (boat) Hōkūleʻa Kaep Karakoa Māori migration Outrigger Paopao (Tuvalu) Paraw Polynesian sailing Proa Vinta Waka list Walap Dance ʻAparima cibi fara fire dancing firewalking haka hivinau hula kailao kapa haka Kiribati meke 'ote'a pa'o'a poi Rotuma siva Tahiti tāmūrē tautoga Tonga Tuvalu 'upa'upa Festivals Australia Garma Festival Hawaiʻi Aloha Festivals Merrie Monarch Festival World Invitational Hula Festival Fiji New Zealand Pasifika Festival Te Matatini Pacific Community Festival of Pacific Arts Papua New Guinea Languages by area v t e Languages of Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna by category Languages of Oceania Literature v t e Literature of Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna Music Austral Islands (French Polynesia) Australia Austronesia Cook Islands Easter Island Fiji Guam Kiribati Lali Melanesia Micronesia Federated States of Micronesia Nauru New Caledonia New Zealand Māori Niue Northern Mariana Islands Palau Papua New Guinea Polynesia Sāmoa Slit drum Solomon Islands Tahiti Tokelau Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Wallis and Futuna Mythology Australian Aboriginal Fijian Mangarevan Maohi Māori Melanesian Menehune Micronesian Oceanian legendary creatures Polynesian Rapa Nui Samoan Tuvaluan Vanuatuan Research Asian American and Pacific Islander Policy Research Consortium Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies People Indigenous Australian Austronesian Sama-Bajau Chamorro Chatham Islander (Moriori or Rekohu) Fijian (iTaukei) Hawaiian Ilocano Igorot Ivatans Lumad Māori Marshallese Melanesian Micronesian Negrito Norfolk Islander Papuan Polynesian Indigenous Polynesian (Mā’ohi) Rapa Nui Rotuman Samoan (Tagata Māo‘i) Tagalog Tahitian Taiwanese aborigines Tokelauan Tongan Torres Strait Islander Visayans Yami Religion v t e Religion in Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna For other topics including Oceanian cinema , indigenous currency , dress , folklore and cuisine , see Category:Culture of Oceania .

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐b6tf2
Cached time: 20250812014731
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.351 seconds
Real time usage: 0.437 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2213/1000000
Revision size: 12088/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 134043/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2534/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 56499/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.201/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5973770/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  340.700      1 -total
 32.41%  110.420      6 Template:Navbox
 32.31%  110.082      1 Template:Reflist
 23.84%   81.206      4 Template:Oceania_topic
 22.06%   75.157      5 Template:Cite_web
 16.27%   55.423      1 Template:Short_description
  8.46%   28.807      1 Template:Cn
  8.04%   27.376      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.67%   26.137      1 Template:Culture_of_Oceania
  7.16%   24.385      1 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4964874:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014731 and revision id 1224444256. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Culture_of_Kiribati&oldid=1224444256#Bubuti_system " Category : Culture of Kiribati Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Articles needing additional references from June 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from July 2013 This page was last edited on 18 May 2024, at 13:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Culture of Kiribati 3 languages Add topic

