Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 United States Toggle United States subsection 1.1 Impact of Troxel v. Granville 2 Italy 3 References Toggle the table of contents Grandparent visitation 1 language Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Court-sanctioned visitation of grandchildren by grandparents Family law Family Marriage and other unions and status Types of marriages Cohabitation Concubinage Common-law marriage Civil union Domestic partnership Validity of marriages Marriage licence Marriage certificate Prenuptial agreement Matrimonial regime Void and Voidable marriages Annulment Marriageable age Sham marriage Amatonormativity Dissolution of marriages Divorce Adultery Grounds for divorce No-fault divorce Matrimonial Causes Act Legal separation Alimony Parenting plan Residence [UK (EW and NI)] Custody evaluator (US) Parenting coordinator (US) Children's issues Paternity DNA paternity testing Legitimacy Child custody Legal guardian Adoption Tender years doctrine Filial responsibility Contact & visitation CAFCASS [UK (EW)] Grandparent visitation UN Rights of the Child Children's rights Emancipation Foster care Ward Child support Paper abortion List of child abuse cases featuring long-term detention Private international law Private international law Divorce Marriage Hague Convention (adoption) International child abduction Hague Convention (child abduction) Hague Convention (maintenance) Family and criminal code (or criminal law) Bigamy Child abuse CPS (US) Child selling Domestic violence Incest Legality of incest Parental child abduction Parental duties Parents' rights Paternity fraud Paternal rights and abortion Right to family life v t e Grandparent visitation is a legal right that grandparents in some jurisdictions may have to have court-ordered contact (or visitation) with their grandchildren.  In no case is contact between grandparents and children considered an inalienable right .

United States [ edit ] As of 2013 [update] , all US states have statutes that permit non-parents to ask a court to grant them the legal right to maintain ongoing contact with a child.

[ 1 ] In many states, these statutes explicitly name grandparents and great-grandparents as potentially eligible people.

[ 1 ] These requests must be justifiable as being in the best interests of the child , and they may only apply under certain circumstances, such as after one parent dies or loses custody .

[ 1 ] State statutes pertaining to grandparent visitation must comport with the United States Supreme Court decision of Troxel v. Granville . This case, decided in 2000, involved a dispute between a widowed mother and her deceased partners parents, the child's paternal grandparents. The mother limited the grandparents time with her child, and the grandparents brought suit in Washington state. The trial court ruled that the paternal grandparents were entitled to visitation and set forth a schedule in its order delineating when and where the grandparents were permitted to see their grandchild. The mother appealed the decision, arguing that the Washington statute was unconstitutional. Ultimately, the Supreme Court ruled that the statute was unconstitutional on its face (that it could not be constitutionally applied in any circumstance), that the trial court had erred in requiring the mother to prove why visitation should not be granted rather than the burden of proof being on the petitioning party, and that the best interests standard alone is not enough to interfere with a parents constitutional right to control the upbringing of their children.

State laws vary greatly, and no state guarantees that the petitioning grandparents will receive a court order granting them visitation. All states, however, require the best interests of the child to be a controlling factor upon certain standards being met.

Impact of Troxel v. Granville [ edit ] In the case of Troxel v. Granville , the United States Supreme Court stated that "the interest of parents in the care, custody and control of their children–is perhaps the oldest of the fundamental liberty interests recognized by this Court." [ 2 ] The Supreme Court also said that this fundamental right is implicated in grandparent visitation cases, when visitation orders are imposed over parental objection.

The court held that grandparent visitation laws were not unconstitutional on their face , as requested in the case.  The Supreme Court declared that a parent's fundamental right to the "care, custody and control of their children" was "at issue in this case." They held that in order for state laws to be constitutional, three things need to be in the law: If there is a claim or action filed, it is the grandparent that has the burden of proof ; The court should give "deference" to a "fit" parent's decision; and The grandparent may still proceed with their request for grandparent visitation and overcome being denied contact; and each state should have a set of factors for the court to evaluate when deciding to either grant or deny a grandparent's request, over a parent's objections.

The Supreme Court ultimately ruled that the statute impermissibly interfered with a parents fundamental right to raise their child as they saw fit in that the statute was “breathtakingly over broad” and allowed anyone, biologically related or not, to, at any time, petition the court for an order granting them contact with a child.

State courts considering non-parent visitation petitions must apply "a presumption that fit parents act in the best interests of their children.".

[ 3 ] Troxel requires that state courts must give "deference" or some special weight to a fit parent's decision to deny non-parent visitation. "Choices [parents make] about the upbringing of children... are among constitutional rights, but were not an absolute right... sheltered by the Fourteenth Amendment against the State's unwarranted usurpation, disregard, or disrespect." [ 4 ] This principle must inform the understanding of the "special weight" that Troxel requires courts to give to parents' decisions concerning their choices regarding how the grandparents will associate with their children. Even though Troxel does not define "special weight," previous Supreme Court precedent indicates that "special weight" is a strong term signifying very considerable deference.

[ 5 ] The "special weight" requirement, as illuminated by the Supreme Court in its previously decided cases, means that the deference provided to the parent's wishes will be overcome only by some compelling governmental interest and by overwhelmingly clear factual circumstances supporting that governmental interest.

Italy [ edit ] Limited grandparent visitation rights exist in Italy.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Kagehiro, Dorothy K.; Laufer, William S. (2013-06-29).

Handbook of Psychology and Law . Springer Science & Business Media. pp.

295– 297.

ISBN 978-1-4757-4038-7 .

Currently, however, all states have visitation statues providing grandparents with independent standing to petition for visitation rights, with most states specifically naming grandparents as recipients of this privilege.

^ Troxel v. Granville , 530 U.S. 57, 65; 120 S Ct 2054, 2060 (2000).

^ Troxel , 530 US at 69; 120 S Ct at 2061, 2062.

^ M.L.B. v. S.L.J.

, 519 U.S. 102, 116-117 (1996).

^ See, for example, Comstock v. Group of Institutional Investors , 335 US 211, 230 (1948); Tibbs v. Florida , 457 US 31 (1982).

^ Giuffrida, Angela (2023-02-01).

"Court in Italy rules in favour of children who do not want to see grandparents" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2023-02-15 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Grandparent_visitation&oldid=1230490341 " Category : Family law in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2013 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 23 June 2024, at 01:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Grandparent visitation 1 language Add topic

