Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Tectonics 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Solomon Sea plate 13 languages Azərbaycanca Català Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano 日本語 Polski Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Minor tectonic plate near the Solomon Islands archipelago in the Pacific Ocean Solomon Sea plate Approximate surface projections of active tectonic plates. Key: Solomon Sea plate , South Bismarck plate , Trobriand plate , Woodlark plate , Active trench subduction boundaries , Inactive trench subduction boundaries , current spreading boundary . The Australian plate to the southeast and the Pacific plate to the northwest are not shown, but their complex collision has created these microplates. Click and then mouse over shows feature names.

Type Minor Approximate area 250,000 km 2 [ 1 ] Movement 1 north Speed 1 86mm/year Features Pacific Ocean 1 Relative to the African plate The Solomon Sea plate (also known as the Solomon plate [ 2 ] ) is a minor tectonic plate to the northwest of the Solomon Islands archipelago in the south Pacific Ocean . It roughly corresponds with the Solomon Sea east of Papua New Guinea . The plate boundaries are associated with high earthquake activity as part of the New Britain subduction zone .

Tectonics [ edit ] The red shading indicates the approximate location of the Solomon microplate. The labelling and size of the Woodlark plate is mistaken as is based on a now replaced 2003 tectonic model.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Main article: Trobriand plate The tectonic regime in this part of the world is extremely complex and involves a number of minor as well as major plates. The Solomon Sea plate is an oceanic crustal plate remnant which is likely disappearing into three subduction zones, to its north, east and west.

[ 4 ] Its southeast margin runs along the Woodlark Rise, which extends into a transform fault called the Nubara Transform Fault marking the boundary with the adjoining Woodlark plate .

[ 4 ] The northern subduction zone is located where the Solomon plate is diving below the South Bismarck plate to the northwest and the Pacific plate to the northeast at the New Britain Trench . This is area is extremely active seismologically.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The northwest part of the subduction zone is called the New Britain Subduction Zone .

New Britain in Papua New Guinea is the volcanic island formed from this collision and resulting volcanism. The complexities of its known geology, that of its island neighbour of New Ireland and the known Tabar , Lihir , Tanga and Feni Islands groups with undersaturated alkaline volcanics, some of which have been recently active, may not have resulted in a single accepted tectonic model to the north of the Solomon Sea plate that explains all observed features.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The southwestern subduction zone is where the Solomon Sea plate has been diving below the former Indo-Australian plate and has complexities still not fully resolved, but suggesting the possibility of a still active Trobriand plate separating it from the present Australian plate .

[ 4 ] If the Trobriand plate is presently fixed along the Solomon Sea plate's definite former subduction zone of the Trobriand Trough with the Solomon Sea plate, the Solomon Sea plate becomes quite a large microplate with much more complex tectonics. Accordingly, at this time more details on such tectonics are in the article on the Trobriand plate on the assumption that the Trobriand Trough is still an active subducting plate boundary.

See also [ edit ] List of earthquakes in Papua New Guinea References [ edit ] ^ "What You Should Know About Plate Tectonics" .

^ Hédervári, P.; Papp, Z. (1977).

"Seismicity maps of the New Guinea-Solomon Islands region" .

Tectonophysics .

42 ( 2– 4): 261– 281.

doi : 10.1016/0040-1951(77)90170-6 .

ISSN 0040-1951 .

^ Bird, Peter (2003).

"An updated digital model of plate boundaries" .

Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems .

4 (3).

Bibcode : 2003GGG.....4.1027B .

doi : 10.1029/2001GC000252 .

^ a b c d Benyshek, E. K.; Taylor, B. (2021).

"Tectonics of the Papua-Woodlark region" .

Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems .

22 (e2020GC009209).

doi : 10.1029/2020GC009209 .

^ Heidarzadeh, M; Gusman, AR; Harada, T; Satake, K. (28 July 2015).

"Tsunamis from the 29 March and 5 May 2015 Papua New Guinea earthquake doublet (Mw 7.5) and tsunamigenic potential of the New Britain trench" .

Geophysical Research Letters .

42 (4): 5958– 5965.

doi : 10.1002/2015GL064770 .

^ Yang, Guangliang; Shen, Chongyang; Wang, Jiapei; Xuan, Songbai; Wu, Guiju; Tan, Hongbo (2018).

"Isostatic anomaly characteristics and tectonism of the New Britain Trench and neighboring Papua New Guinea" .

Geodesy and Geodynamics .

9 (5): 404– 410.

doi : 10.1016/j.geog.2018.04.006 .

ISSN 1674-9847 .

^ Lindley, I. David (2006). Lavecchia, G.; Scalera, G. (eds.).

"Extensional and vertical tectonics in the New Guinea islands: implications for island arc evolution" (PDF) .

Annals of Geophysics (Annali di geofisica) . 49(supp.): 403– 426.

ISSN 1593-5213 . Retrieved 13 August 2023 .

^ Holm, RJ; Richards, SW (2013).

"A re-evaluation of arc–continent collision and along-arc variation in the Bismarck Sea region, Papua New Guinea" .

Australian Journal of Earth Sciences .

60 (5): 605– 19.

doi : 10.1080/08120099.2013.824505 .

External links [ edit ] Preliminary Analysis of the April 2007 Solomon Islands Tsunami, Southwest Pacific Ocean, USGS Report on interplate propagation of subduction stress rupture, Solomon earthquake of 2007 v t e Tectonic plates Major plates African Antarctic Eurasian Indo-Australian Australian Indian North American Pacific South American Minor plates Amurian Arabian Burma Caribbean Caroline Cocos Indian Nazca New Hebrides Okhotsk Philippine Scotia Somali Sunda Yangtze Microplates Adriatic Aegean Sea Anatolian Balmoral Reef Banda Sea Bird's Head Capricorn Coiba Conway Reef Explorer Futuna Galápagos Gonâve Gorda Greenland Halmahera Iberian Iranian Juan de Fuca Juan Fernández Kerguelen Kermadec Lwandle Madagascar Malpelo Manus Maoke Mariana Molucca Sea Niuafo’ou North Andes North Bismarck North Galápagos Okinawa Panama Pelso Philippine Mobile Belt Rivera Rovuma Sangihe Seychelles Shetland Solomon Sea South Bismarck South Sandwich Timor Tisza Tonga Trobriand Victoria Woodlark Ancient plates Baltic Bellingshausen Charcot Cimmeria Farallon Insular Intermontane Izanagi Kula Lhasa Malvinas Moa Phoenix Kshiroda Oceanic ridges Aden Ridge Carlsberg Ridge Central Indian Ridge Chile Ridge Cocos Ridge East Pacific Rise Explorer Ridge Gakkel Ridge Galápagos Spreading Center Gorda Ridge Juan de Fuca Ridge Mid-Atlantic Ridge Knipovich Ridge Kolbeinsey Ridge Mohns Ridge Reykjanes Ridge Pacific–Antarctic Ridge South American–Antarctic Ridge Southeast Indian Ridge Southwest Indian Ridge Ancient oceanic ridges Aegir Ridge Alpha Ridge Antarctic–Phoenix Ridge Kula–Farallon Ridge Mid-Labrador Ridge Pacific–Farallon Ridge Pacific–Kula Ridge Geology portal List Category Commons v t e Tectonic plates of Southeast Asia – New Guinea ( Australian plate – Pacific plate convergence zone) Large Caroline plate Philippine Sea plate Sunda plate Small West Burma plate Philippines Philippine Mobile Belt Indonesia Banda Sea plate Bird's Head plate Halmahera plate Molucca Sea Collision Zone Molucca Sea plate Sangihe plate Timor plate New Guinea Maoke plate North Bismarck plate Manus plate Solomon Sea plate South Bismarck plate Trobriand plate Woodlark plate Faults Flores back-arc thrust fault Great Sumatran Fault Marikina Valley fault system New Britain subduction zone Palu-Koro Fault Philippine fault system Ramu-Markham Fault Sorong Fault Trenches and troughs Java Trench (Sunda) with Mentawai Trough Sunda Trough Timor Trough Philippines Cotabato Trench Manila Trench North Luzon Trough Negros Trench Palawan Trench Philippine Trench East Luzon Trench Sulu Trench Sulawesi and Moluccas Aru Trough Banda Trench Ceram Trough Salajar Trough Sangihe Trough Talaud Trough Ternate Trough Timor Aur Trough Tanimbar Trough New Guinea Ayu Trough Kilinailau Trench Manokwari Trough Lyra Trough Mussau Trough New Guinea Trench Pocklington Trough New Britain Trench (Bougainville) West Caroline Trough West Melanesian Trench Subsea plateaus and basins Arafura Basin Aru-Tanimbar Basin Bengkulu Basin Benham Plateau Bula Basin East Natuna Basin Geelvinck (Cendrawasih) Basin Manus Basin Minahasa Basin North Australian Basin North Biak Basin North Flores Basin Northern East Java Basin Northern Makassar Basin Ontong Java Plateau Sawu Basin Southern Makassar Basin Talaud Basin Weber Deep West Halmahera Basin West Natuna Basin Woodlark Basin This tectonics article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Solomon_Sea_plate&oldid=1291890962 " Categories : Tectonic plates Geology of the Pacific Ocean Tectonics stubs Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All stub articles Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 00:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Solomon Sea plate 13 languages Add topic

