Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Function 2 Mythology Toggle Mythology subsection 2.1 Hesiod's account 2.2 Other versions 3 Ancient legacy 4 Modern legacy 5 See also 6 Footnotes 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Metis (mythology) 53 languages العربية অসমীয়া تۆرکجه Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Oceanid of Greek mythology Not to be confused with Meitei mythology or Meitei goddess .

Metis Goddess of wisdom, counsel and deep thought Member of the Oceanids A winged goddess depicted under Zeus' throne, possibly Metis.

Genealogy Parents Oceanus and Tethys Siblings Oceanids , River gods Consort Zeus Offspring Athena , Porus Metis ( / ˈ m iː t ɪ s / ; Ancient Greek : Μῆτις , romanized : Mêtis ; Modern Greek : Μήτις, meaning 'Wisdom', 'Skill', or 'Craft'), in ancient Greek religion and mythology , was the pre-Olympian goddess of wisdom, counsel and deep thought, and a member of the Oceanids .

[ 1 ] She is notable for being the advisor and first wife of Zeus , the king of the gods. She first helped him to free his siblings from their father Cronus ' stomach and later helped their daughter Athena to escape from the forehead of Zeus, who swallowed both mother and child after it was foretold that she would bear a son mightier than his father.

Metis has been applied as a concept of literary criticism , notably by Jean-Pierre Vernant , along with Marcel Detienne .

[ 2 ] Function [ edit ] By the era of Greek philosophy in the 5th century BC, Metis had become the first deity of wisdom and deep thought, but her name originally connoted "magical cunning" and was as easily equated with the trickster powers of Prometheus as with the "royal metis " of Zeus , who is titled Metieta ( Ancient Greek : Μητίετα , lit.

'the wise counsellor') in the Homeric poems.

[ 3 ] The Stoic commentators allegorised Metis as the embodiment of " prudence ", "wisdom" or "wise counsel", in which form she was inherited by the Renaissance .

[ 4 ] The Greek word metis meant a quality that combined wisdom and cunning. This quality was considered to be highly admirable, the hero Odysseus being the embodiment of it, for example using such a strategy against Polyphemus , son of Poseidon . In the Classical era, metis was regarded by Athenians as one of the notable characteristics of the Athenian character.

[ 5 ] Mythology [ edit ] Hesiod's account [ edit ] Metis was an Oceanid , one of the 3000 daughters of the Titans Oceanus and Tethys , [ 6 ] and a sister of the river-gods , which also numbered 3000. Metis gave her cousin Zeus an emetic potion to cause his father Cronus , the supreme ruler of the cosmos, to vomit out his siblings – Hestia , Demeter , Hera , Hades , and Poseidon – whom their father had swallowed out of fear of being overthrown.

[ 7 ] After Zeus and his siblings won the Titanomachy , the 10-year war among the Titans and the Olympians , he pursued Metis and they got married.

[ 8 ] [ 3 ] Metis was both an indispensable aid and a threat to Zeus.

[ 9 ] He lay with her, but immediately feared the consequences, for it had been prophesied by Gaia and Uranus that Metis would bear a daughter who would be wiser than her mother, and then a son more powerful than his father, who would eventually overthrow Zeus and become the king of the cosmos in his place.

[ 10 ] In order to forestall these consequences, Zeus tricked Metis into turning herself into a fly and promptly swallowed her.

[ 11 ] However, she was already pregnant with their first and only child, Athena , whom Metis raised in Zeus' mind. It is from this position that Metis continues to give Zeus advice as a ruler.

Once Athena fully grew up, Metis crafted robes, an armor, a shield, and a spear for her daughter, who banged her spear and shield together in order to give her father a terrible headache. Soon, Zeus could not take his headache anymore and had the smith god Hephaestus – a son of Hera, now Zeus' queen – cut his head open to let out whatever was in there on the river Triton 's banks. Athena emerged from Zeus's mind full grown, wearing the armor her mother made for her. She was soon made the goddess of wisdom, warfare, and crafts.

But Zeus lay with the fair-cheeked daughter of Ocean and Tethys apart from Hera ... deceiving Metis although she was full wise. But he seized her with his hands and put her in his belly, for fear that she might bring forth something stronger than his thunderbolt: therefore did Zeus, who sits on high and dwells in the aether, swallow her down suddenly. But she straightway conceived Pallas Athena: and the father of men and gods gave her birth by way of his head on the banks of the river Trito. And she remained hidden beneath the inward parts of Zeus, even Metis, Athena's mother, worker of righteousness, who was wiser than gods and mortal men.

[ 12 ] Other versions [ edit ] According to a scholiast on the Theogony , Metis had the ability of changing her shape at will . Zeus tricked her and swallowed his pregnant wife when she transformed into a πικρὰν [ a ] ( pikràn ).

[ 13 ] As Keightley notes, πικρὰ ("bitter") makes little or no sense in that context, and it has been variously corrected to μυῖαν [ a ] ( muîan , meaning "fly") or μικρὰν [ a ] ( mikràn , meaning "small thing") instead.

[ 14 ] According to Apollodorus , Metis was raped by Zeus and changed many forms in order to escape him after he pursued her.

[ 15 ] An alternative version of the same myth makes the Cyclops Brontes rather than Zeus the father of Athena before Metis is swallowed.

[ 16 ] Hesiod's account is followed by Acusilaus and the Orphic tradition, which enthroned Metis side by side with Eros as primal cosmogenic forces .

Plato makes Poros , or "creative ingenuity", a son of Metis.

[ 17 ] Ancient legacy [ edit ] The similarities between Zeus swallowing Metis and Cronus swallowing his children have been noted by several scholars. This also caused some controversy in regard to reproduction myths.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Modern legacy [ edit ] Metis Island in Antarctica is named after Metis.

9 Metis , one of the larger main-belt asteroids, is named after this goddess.

Metis , a moon of Jupiter , is named after the goddess.

See also [ edit ] Themis Epiphron Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b c In accusative .

Notes [ edit ] ^ Hesiod , Theogony 357 ; Smith, s.v. Metis .

^ Detienne, Marcel; Vernant, Jean-Pierre (18 June 1991).

Cunning Intelligence in Greek Culture and Society . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226143477 . Retrieved 10 August 2025 – via Internet Archive.

^ a b Norman O. Brown, "The Birth of Athena " Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philological Association 83 (1952), pp. 130–143.

^ A.B. Cook, Zeus (1914) 1940, noted in Brown 1952:133 note.

^ "METIS – TITAN OF WISDOM" .

^ Bane, Theresa (2013).

Encyclopedia of Fairies in World Folklore and Mythology . McFarland, Incorporated, Publishers. p. 232.

ISBN 9780786471119 .

^ Hesiod , Theogony 471 ; Apollodorus , Bibliotheca 1.2.1 ; Grimal, s.v. Metis.

^ M. Detienne and J.-P. Vernant , Les Ruses de l'intelligence: la Mètis des Grecs (Paris, 1974).

ISBN 2-08-081036-7 .

^ Brown 1952:133 ^ Hesiod , Theogony , 886–900 ; Hard, p.

77 ; Caldwell, p. 16; Tripp, s.v. Metis.

^ Lang, Andrew (1901).

Myth, Ritual and Religion . Vol. 2. Longmans, Green. pp. 194, 262– 263.

OCLC 13809803 . Retrieved 2018-04-10 .

^ Hesiod , Theogony 929 ^ Scholia on Hesiod 's Theogony 886 ^ Keightley, p.

153, note b.

^ Apollodorus , 1.3.6 .

^ Gantz, p. 51; Scholia on Homer , Iliad 8.39.

^ Plato , Symposium 203b ; Morford, p. 133–134 .

^ King, Helen .

"Reproduction Myths" .

Encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 2020-07-12 .

^ Leeming, s.v. Metis.

References [ edit ] Apollodorus , The Library with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. ISBN 0-674-99135-4.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.

Greek text available from the same website .

Caldwell, Richard, Hesiod's Theogony , Focus Publishing/R. Pullins Company (June 1, 1987).

ISBN 978-0-941051-00-2 .

Gantz, Timothy , Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources , Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996, Two volumes: ISBN 978-0-8018-5360-9 (Vol. 1), ISBN 978-0-8018-5362-3 (Vol. 2).

Grimal, Pierre, The Dictionary of Classical Mythology , Wiley-Blackwell, 1996.

ISBN 978-0-631-20102-1 .

Hard, Robin, The Routledge Handbook of Greek Mythology: Based on H.J. Rose's "Handbook of Greek Mythology" , Psychology Press, 2004, ISBN 9780415186360 .

Google Books .

Hesiod , Theogony from The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White, Cambridge, MA.,Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.

Greek text available from the same website .

Keightley, Thomas , The Mythology of Ancient Greece and Italy , second edition considerably enlarged and improved, London , Whittaker and Co., 1838.

Leeming, David, "Metis" . In The Oxford Companion to World Mythology , Oxford University Press, York University, 2004.

Morford, Mark P. O., Robert J. Lenardon, Classical Mythology , Eighth Edition, Oxford University Press, 2007.

ISBN 978-0-19-530805-1 .

Plato , (1989) The Symposium . Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Company.

Smith, William , Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology , London (1873).

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Tripp, Edward, Crowell's Handbook of Classical Mythology , Thomas Y. Crowell Co; First edition (June 1970).

ISBN 069022608X .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Metis (mythology) .

METIS from The Theoi Project METIS from greekmythology.com v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Religion and religious practice Main beliefs Ages of Man Golden Age Heroic Age Ancient accounts of Homer Apotheosis Arete Daemon Destiny Eudaimonia Euhemerism Eunoia Eusebeia Golden mean Golden Rule Greek words for love Hemitheos Hero cult Hubris Interpretatio graeca Katabasis Kleos Know thyself Metamorphosis Metempsychosis Nympholepsy Paradoxography Patron gods Pederasty Phronesis Polytheism Sophrosyne Soter Theia mania Xenia Texts / odes / epic poems Epic Cycle Aethiopis Cypria Iliad Iliupersis Little Iliad Nostoi Odyssey Telegony Theban Cycle Oedipodea Thebaid Epigoni Alcmeonis Others Aesop's Fables Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Catalogue of Women Cyranides Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Golden Verses of Pythagoras Greek Magical Papyri Homerica Homeric Hymns Interpretation of Dreams Oneirocritica Orphic Hymns Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Sortes Astrampsychi Stories from Plato Atlantis Myth of Er Ring of Gyges Theogony Works and Days Religions Antecedents Minoan religion Mycenaean religion List of Mycenaean deities Paleo-Balkan mythology Proto-Indo-European mythology Religions of the ancient Near East Expressions Atheism Henotheism Monotheism Polytheism Hellenistic religions Early Christianity Christianization Relationship with Greek philosophy Esoteric systems Early alchemy Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Hellenistic Judaism God-fearers Syncretic religions Alexander Ptolemaic cult Etruscan religion Greco-Buddhism Roman religion Imperial cult Religious views of emperor Julian Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Arcadian Mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Orphism Samothracian Mysteries New religious movements Discordianism Feraferia Gaianism Hellenism Religious practice Worship / rituals Amphidromia Arotoi Hieroi Astragalomancy Baptes Cult of Artemis at Brauron Daduchos Divination Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Greco-Roman mysteries Hero cult Heroön Hierophany Hieros gamos Hymns Incubation Komos Nekyia Omophagia Orgia Panegyris Prayer Sacrifice Animal sacrifice Hecatomb Holocaust Libation Pharmakos Votive offering Theatre Religious offices Amphictyonic league Archon basileus Basilinna Gerarai Hiereia Hierophant Hierophylakes Iatromantis Kanephoros Mystagogue Oracle Sibyl Thiasus Religious objects Baetyl Cult image Chryselephantine sculpture Xoanon Greek terracotta figurines Kernos Kykeon Loutrophoros Omphalos Panathenaic amphora Rhyton Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Thymiaterion Magic Apotropaic magic Curse tablet Divination Greek Magical Papyri Hermeticism Hermetica Necromancy Philia Events Festivals / feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Halieia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Leucophryna Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Ptolemaieia Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Heraean Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Actia Sacred places Temples / sanctuaries Asclepieion Delphinion Mithraeum Necromanteion of Acheron Nymphaeum Panionium Parthenon Ploutonion Telesterion Temenos Temple of Artemis, Ephesus Temple of Zeus, Olympia Oracles Amphiareion of Oropos Aornum Claros Delphi Didyma Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros Oracle of Menestheus Sanctuary of the Great Gods Tegyra Mountains Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Caves of Pan Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Island of Achilles Delos Islands of Diomedes Springs Castalian Spring Hippocrene Pierian Spring Others Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Theatre of Dionysus Myths and mythology Deities ( Family tree ) Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Water deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Proteus River gods Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Charon Hermes Hermanubis Thanatos Angelos Cabeiri The Erinyes (Furies) Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Darrhon Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Pasiphaë Art and beauty deities Aphrodite Apollo The Charites (Graces) Aglaea Euphrosyne Thalia Dionysus The Muses Calliope Clio Polyhymnia Euterpe Terpsichore Erato Melpomene Thalia Urania Other major deities The Anemoi (Winds) Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Azone Chrysaor Cybele Eileithyia Glycon Harmonia Nemesis Pan Pegasus Zelus Heroes / heroines Individuals Abderus Achilles Actaeon Adonis Aeneas Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Menelaus Narcissus Nestor Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Otrera Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Groups Argonauts Calydonian hunters Epigoni Seven against Thebes Oracles / seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyls Cimmerian Cumaean Delphic Erythraean Hellespontine Libyan Persian Phrygian Samian Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Other mortals Aegeus Aegisthus Agamemnon Andromache Andromeda Antigone Augeas Briseis Cassiopeia Creon of Thebes Chryseis Chrysothemis Clytemnestra Damocles Deidamia Deucalion Electra Eteocles Europa Gordias Hecuba Helen of Troy Hellen The Heracleidae Hermione Hippolyta Io Iphigenia Ismene Jocasta Laius Lycian peasants Lycaon The Maenads Memnon Messapian shepherds Midas Minos Myrrha Neoptolemus Niobe Orestes Paris Patroclus Penelope Philomela Phoenix Polybus of Corinth Polynices Priam Procne Pylades Pyrrha Telemachus Troilus Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Necromanteion (necromancy temple) Necromanteion of Acheron Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Isles of the Blessed Mourning Fields Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Residents Anticlea Danaïdes Eurydice Ixion Ocnus Salmoneus The Shades Sisyphus Tantalus Tiresias Titans Tityos Visitors Dionysus Heracles Hermes Odysseus Orpheus Pirithous Psyche Theseus Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Charon's obol Animals, daemons, and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Menoetius Mythical Beings Lists Deities Mythological creatures Mortals Minor figures Trojan War characters Minor spirits Daemon Agathodaemon Cacodaemon Eudaemon Nymph Satyr Beasts / creatures Centaur Centaurides Ichthyocentaur Cyclops Dragon Drakaina Echidna Giant Gorgon Harpy Hecatonchires Hippocampus Horses of Helios Lamia Phoenix Python Siren Scylla and Charybdis Sphinx Typhon Captured / slain by heroes Calydonian boar Cerberus Cerynian Hind Chimera Cretan Bull Crommyonian Sow Erymanthian boar Khalkotauroi Lernaean Hydra Mares of Diomedes Medusa Minotaur Nemean lion Orthrus Polyphemus Stymphalian birds Talos Teumessian fox Tribes Achaeans Amazons Anthropophagi Bebryces Cicones Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Laestrygonians Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Spartoi Telchines Places / Realms Aethiopia Ara Colchis Erytheia Hyperborea Ismarus Ithaca Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Phlegra Scheria Scythia Symplegades Tartessos Themiscyra Thrinacia Troy Events Apollo and Daphne Calydonian boar hunt Eros and Psyche Judgment of Paris Labours of Heracles Orpheus and Eurydice Returns from Troy Odyssey Wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Gigantomachy Indian War Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Argo Dragon's teeth Diipetes Eidolon Galatea Girdle of Aphrodite Golden apple Golden Fleece Gordian knot Harpe Ichor Labyrinth Lotus tree Milk of Hera Moly Necklace of Harmonia Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos ( Winged helmet ) Phaeacian ships Philosopher's stone Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thyrsus Trident of Poseidon Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of fire Symbols Bowl of Hygieia Caduceus Cornucopia Gorgoneion Kantharos Labrys Orphic egg Ouroboros Owl of Athena Phallus Rod of Asclepius Swan song Wind East West North South Modern treatments Classical mythology in western art and literature Classicism Classics Greek mythology in popular culture Modern understanding of Greek mythology v t e Ancient Greek deities Primal elements Aether Chaos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx The Ourea Pontus Tartarus Uranus Titans Twelve Titans Coeus Crius Cronus Dione Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Descendants of the Titans Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Olympian deities Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Olympian Gods Asclepius Eileithyia Enyo Eris Iris Harmonia Hebe Heracles Paean Pan Muses Daughters of Zeus Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Daughters of Apollo Apollonis Borysthenis Cephisso Boeotian Muses Aoide Melete Mneme Muses of the Lyre Hypate Mese Nete Muses at Sicyon Polymatheia Charites (Graces) Aglaia Euphrosyne Hegemone Pasithea Thalia Horae (Hours) Dike Eirene Eunomia Children of Styx Bia Kratos Nike Zelus Water deities Sea deities Amphitrite Benthesikyme Brizo Calliste Calypso Ceto Eurybia Glaucus Leucothea Melicertes Nereus Nerites Oceanus Phorcys Pontus Poseidon Proteus Rhodos Tethys Thalassa Thaumas Thetis Triton Oceanids Acaste Admete Asia Callirhoe Ceto Clymene (consort of Helios) Clymene (wife of Iapetus) Clytie Dione Dodone Doris Electra Eurynome Idyia Melia (consort of Apollo) Melia (consort of Inachus) Metis Perse Philyra Pleione Plouto Styx Telesto Theia Zeuxo Nereids Amatheia Amphithoe Amphitrite Arethusa Cymatolege Cymo Dynamene Galatea Galene Protomedeia Psamathe Sao Spio Thalia Thetis River gods Achelous Alpheus Anapus Asopus Asterion Axius Caanthus Cebren Cephissus Enipeus Kladeos Meander Nilus Numicus Phyllis Peneus Sangarius Scamander Selemnus Simoeis Strymon Naiads Aegina Achiroe Aganippe The Anigrides Argyra Bistonis Bolbe Caliadne Cassotis Castalia Cleocharia Creusa Daphne Drosera Harpina The Ionides Ismenis Larunda Lilaea Liriope Melite Metope Minthe Moria Nana Nicaea Orseis Pallas Pirene Salmacis Stilbe The Thriae Corycia Cleodora Melaina Tiasa Personifications Children of Eris Algos Amphillogiai The Androktasiai Atë Dysnomia Horkos Hysminai Lethe Logoi Limos Machai Neikea Phonoi Ponos Pseudea Children of Nyx Apate Eris Geras Hesperides Hypnos The Keres The Moirai Atropos Clotho Lachesis Momus Moros Nemesis Oizys The Oneiroi Philotes Thanatos Others Achlys Adephagia Aergia Aidos Aion Alala Alastor Aletheia Alke Amechania Anaideia Ananke Angelia Anteros Apheleia Arete The Arae Astraea Caerus Chronos Chrysus Corus Deimos Dikaiosyne Dyssebeia Eiresione Ekecheiria Eulabeia Eupraxia Eusebeia Ersa Eros Erotes Gelos Hedone Hedylogos Heimarmene Hermaphroditus Homados Homonoia Horme Hymen Iacchus Ioke Kakia Koalemos Kydoimos The Litae Lyssa The Maniae Methe Nomos Palioxis Peitharchia Peitho Penia Penthus Pepromene Pheme Phobos Phrike Phthonus Poine Polemos Poros Praxidice Proioxis Prophasis Soter Soteria Thrasos Tyche Other deities Sky The Anemoi Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Hesperus Phosphorus Phaethon Astrape and Bronte Aura The Hesperides The Hyades Nephele The Pleiades Alcyone Sterope Celaeno Electra Maia Merope Taygete Sirius Tritopatores Agriculture Aphaia Demeter Despoina Eunostus Opora Philomelus Plutus Health Asclepius Aceso Epione Iaso Hygieia Paean Panacea Telesphorus Rustic deities Aetna Agdistis The Alseids Amphictyonis Aristaeus Attis Britomartis The Cabeiri Comus The Dryades Erato The Hamadryades Chrysopeleia The Epimelides Hecaterus Leuce The Maenades The Meliae Hyperborean maidens The Oreads Echo Priapus Rhapso Silenus Telete Others Aphroditus Arke Auxesia Enodia Circe Enyalius Hecate Orthanes Palaestra Pasiphaë Phanes Sosipolis Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐z4v2g
Cached time: 20250817043943
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.777 seconds
Real time usage: 1.029 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3384/1000000
Revision size: 13895/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 398653/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2781/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 69499/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.414/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18636133/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  723.503      1 -total
 36.47%  263.856     27 Template:Navbox
 19.67%  142.327      2 Template:Reflist
 18.00%  130.253      1 Template:Greek_religion
 15.20%  109.942      2 Template:Langx
 14.56%  105.334      3 Template:Cite_book
 12.89%   93.228      1 Template:Infobox_deity
 10.14%   73.360      1 Template:Short_description
  7.01%   50.717      1 Template:Infobox
  6.27%   45.363      1 Template:IPAc-en Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:44657:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043943 and revision id 1305213274. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metis_(mythology)&oldid=1305213274 " Categories : Greek goddesses Oceanids Wisdom goddesses Divine women of Zeus Mercurian deities Mother goddesses Personifications in Greek mythology Mythological rape victims Shapeshifters in Greek mythology Deeds of Zeus Athena Mothers of the twelve Olympians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles having same image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 18:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Metis (mythology) 53 languages Add topic

