Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure 2 Variability Toggle Variability subsection 2.1 Table of hectocotyli 3 References Toggle the table of contents Hectocotylus 16 languages Български Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego 日本語 Plattdüütsch Polski Português Русский Simple English Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Hectocotyl arm ) Cephalopod sex organ Georges Cuvier 's original illustration of an octopus hectocotylus. Mistaking it for its own separate organism, he named it Hectocotyle octopodis .

A hectocotylus ( pl.

: hectocotyli ) is one of the arms of male cephalopods that is specialized to store and transfer spermatophores to the female.

[ 1 ] Structurally, hectocotyli are muscular hydrostats . Depending on the species, the male may use it merely as a conduit to the female, analogously to a penis in other animals, or he may wrench it off and present it to the female.

The hectocotyl arm was first described in Aristotle's biological works . Although Aristotle knew of its use in mating, he was doubtful that a tentacle could deliver sperm. The name hectocotylus was devised by Georges Cuvier , who first found one embedded in the mantle of a female argonaut . Thinking it to be a parasitic worm , in 1829 Cuvier gave it a generic name ( Hectocotyle ), [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] which is a New Latin term combining the Greek words for "hundred" ( hec(a)to(n) ) and for "hollow thing, cup" ( cotyle ).

Structure [ edit ] Generalized anatomy of squid and octopod hectocotyli: Squid Octopod Variability [ edit ] Hectocotyli are shaped in many distinctive ways, and vary considerably between species. The shape of the tip of the hectocotylus has been much used in octopus systematics .

Many coleoids lack hectocotyli altogether.

[ 6 ] Among Decapodiformes (ten-limbed cephalopods), generally either one or both of arms IV are hectocotylized.

In incirrate octopuses, it is one of arm pair III.

[ 6 ] Rare examples of double and bilateral hectocotylization have also been recorded in incirrate octopuses.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In male seven-arm octopuses ( Haliphron atlanticus ), the hectocotylus develops in an inconspicuous sac in front of the right eye that gives the male the appearance of having only seven arms.

In argonauts , the male transfers the spermatophores to the female by putting his hectocotylus into a cavity in the mantle of the female, called the pallial cavity . This is the only contact the male and female have with each other during copulation , and it can be at a distance. During copulation, the hectocotylus breaks off from the male. The funnel–mantle locking apparatus on the hectocotylus keeps it lodged in the pallial cavity of the female.

Table of hectocotyli [ edit ] Illustration Species Family Abraliopsis morisi Enoploteuthidae Argonauta bottgeri Argonautidae Bathypolypus arcticus Octopodidae Graneledone verrucosa Octopodidae Haliphron atlanticus Alloposidae Ocythoe tuberculata Ocythoidae Scaeurgus patagiatus Octopodidae Tremoctopus violaceus Tremoctopodidae Uroteuthis duvauceli Loliginidae References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hectocotylus .

^ Roger T. Hanlon; John B. Messenger (22 March 2018).

Cephalopod Behaviour . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-108-54674-4 .

^ Leroi, Armand Marie (25 September 2014).

The Lagoon: How Aristotle Invented Science . Penguin.

ISBN 9780698170391 .

^ Thompson, D'Arcy Wentworth (1913).

On Aristotle as a biologist, with a prooemion on Herbert Spencer . Being the Herbert Spencer Lecture before the University of Oxford, on February 14, 1913. Oxford University Press. p. 19.

^ Nixon M.; Young J.Z.

(2003).

The brains and lives of Cephalopods . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780198527619 .

^ "GBIF:Hectocotylus Cuvier, 1829" . Retrieved 21 November 2016 .

^ a b Young, R.E., M. Vecchione & K.M. Mangold (1999).

Cephalopoda Glossary .

Tree of Life Web Project .

^ Robson, G.C. 1929. On a case of bilateral hectocotylization in Octopus rugosus .

Journal of Zoology 99 (1): 95–97.

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-7998.1929.tb07690.x ^ Palacio, F.J. 1973.

"On the double hectocotylization of octopods" . Melbourne, Fla., etc., American Malacologists, inc., etc. 1973.

The Nautilus 87 : 99–102.

v t e Cephalopod anatomy Shell Types External Ammonoid shell Argonautid eggcase Nautiloid shell Orthocone Internal Belemnoid guard Cirrate shell Cuttlebone Gladius (pen) Spirula shell Stylet Features External Aperture Apex Callus Lirae Periostracum Sculpture Spire Sutures Umbilicus Internal Body chamber Camerae Nacre Phragmocone Septa Siphuncle Whorls Mantle & funnel External anatomy Dermal structures Fins (wings) Flotation devices ("secondary fins") Funnel–mantle locking apparatus Tail Internal anatomy Branchial hearts Ctenidia (gills) Hepatopancreas (digestive gland) Ink sac and ink Needham's sac Nephridia ("kidneys") Nidamental glands Osphradium Pericardial glands Head & limbs Brachial crown Arms Hectocotylus Tentacles Carpus Dactylus Manus Suckers and hooks Buccal region Aptychus Beak Odontophore Radula Spadix and antispadix Occipital region Nuchal crest (occipital crest) Nuchal folds (occipital folds) Occipital membrane Olfactory organ Nuchal organ Other parts Eyes Statocysts General Chromatophores Photophores Nervous system Squid giant axon Squid giant synapse Developmental stages: Spawn → Paralarva ( Doratopsis stage ) → Juvenile → Subadult → Adult • Egg fossils • Protoconch (embryonic shell) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hectocotylus&oldid=1305635342 " Categories : Cephalopod zootomy Sex organs Animal male reproductive system Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 06:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hectocotylus 16 languages Add topic

