Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Focus 3 Reception and influence Toggle Reception and influence subsection 3.1 Levy and Olynyk art project 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Skeptical Inquirer 15 languages Afrikaans العربية Български Čeština Español Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano Nederlands Polski Português Русский Simple English Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bimonthly magazine published by CSI This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's general notability guideline .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "Skeptical Inquirer" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Skeptical Inquirer" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Skeptical Inquirer Editor-in-chief Stephen Hupp Frequency Bimonthly Publisher Center for Inquiry Committee for Skeptical Inquiry Founded 1976 ; 49 years ago ( 1976 ) Country United States Based in Amherst, New York Language English Website skepticalinquirer .org ISSN 0194-6730 Skeptical Inquirer ( S.I.

) is a bimonthly American general-audience magazine published by the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry (CSI) with the subtitle "The Magazine for Science and Reason". The magazine initially focused on investigating claims of the paranormal , but evolved and expanded to address other pseudoscientific topics that are antithetical to critical thinking and science . Notable skeptics have credited the magazine in influencing their development of scientific skepticism . In the "Letters to the Editor", the most frequent letters of appreciation come from educators .

History [ edit ] The magazine was originally titled The Zetetic (from the Greek meaning "skeptical seeker" or "inquiring skeptic"), and was originally edited by Marcello Truzzi .

[ 1 ] About a year after its inception a schism developed between the editor Truzzi and the rest of the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal (CSICOP). CSICOP was more "firmly opposed to nonsense, more willing to go on the offensive and to attack supernatural claims" while Truzzi wanted science and pseudoscience to exist "happily together".

[ 2 ] Founder Paul Kurtz strongly believed "it's important that, when claims of the paranormal get wide public attention and belief, the skeptical position also get media attention".

[ 3 ] Truzzi resigned to start The Zetetic Scholar and CSICOP changed the magazine's name to Skeptical Inquirer and hired Kendrick Frazier as the new editor.

[ 4 ] [ 3 ] The first issue of S.I. was Fall/Winter 1976.

[ 5 ] In 1995, S.I. changed format from digest size to a standard magazine size, increased the publication frequency from quarterly to bimonthly, and added newsstand circulation in addition to subscription.

[ 6 ] : 176 In 2013, writer and skeptic Daniel Loxton posited that if Skeptical Inquirer was not the first skeptical publication, it is yet considered the " 'birth of modern skepticism' (at least for the English-speaking world)" because CSICOP organized "this scholarship collectively [and] comprised a distinct field of study", and was the first to establish "best practices... specialist experts... buildings... periodicals and professional writers and researchers".

[ 7 ] Barry Karr is the executive director of CSI and Skeptical Inquirer.

In June 2023, Stephen Hupp, a professor in the Department of Psychology at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville , was named as the magazine's editor.

[ 8 ] Hupp replaced Stuart Vyse , who was the interim editor in November 2022 following the passing of Kendrick Frazier.

[ 9 ] Barry Karr , Executive Director Stephen Hupp, Editor Kendrick Frazier , Editor 1977–2022 In 2025, as a way to be more inclusive, Skeptical Inquirer launched an audio version of the magazine, available on several podcast sites.

[ 10 ] Focus [ edit ] The Committee for Skeptical Inquiry functions as a scientific society and, upon editorial acceptance, publishes articles from independent scientists and investigators in the Skeptical Inquirer .

[ 6 ] : 170 Published topics have included fringe science , pseudoscience , paranormalism , psychic phenomena , astrology , ufology , homeopathy , and New Age , as well as articles on politics, general science, cyberterrorism, and others.

[ 6 ] [ 11 ] Writing for Scientific American in 1982 , cognitive scientist Douglas Hofstadter said that the purpose of Skeptical Inquirer was to "combat nonsense" with articles in English that require no special knowledge or expertise, only "curiosity about truth".

[ 4 ] [ 12 ] Loxton, writing in 2013 about the mission and goals of the skeptical movement, countered the idea that people no longer wanted to read about the paranormal, and recommended getting back to S.I.'s basics.

Paul Kurtz in 2009 seemed to share this sentiment and stated that the organization would still research some paranormal subjects as they have expertise in this area, but they would begin to investigate other areas. "CSICOP has reached an historic juncture: the recognition that there is a critical need to change our direction", Kurtz wrote. While editor Kendrick Frazier did expand the scope of the magazine to include more topics on subjects that attacked science or critical thinking—such as climate change denialism , conspiracy theories and the influence of the alternative medicine movement—Frazier also noted that "paranormal beliefs are still widespread", and quoted surveys that state that the public, given a list of ten general paranormal topics, will select four as topics they believe in. While the general skeptic community believes that we should not waste more time debunking the paranormal, topics long ago discredited, Frazier says "millions of Americans accept them today".

[ 11 ] Even with such long odds against "an organized paranormal lobby, a magical marketing machine", Loxton implores skeptics to continue researching, writing and publishing: "We can't win any ultimate victory over superstition or ignorance, but we can do a lot of good if we fight hard enough." [ 11 ] The January/February 2023 issue featured an article by Craig Foster that examined Skeptical Inquirer Vol. 1, no. 1 comparing it to the current publication, and found that "1976 principles of skepticism" still resonate forty-six years later "The Truzzi and Kurtz editorials are so consistent with contemporary skepticism, I think Skeptical Inquirer could reprint them today, without dates, and readers wouldn't find them peculiar." Furthermore "The only out-of-place sentiment seems to be imagining the journal as an exchange between skeptics and paranormal promotors" [ 5 ] Reception and influence [ edit ] Science communicator Neil deGrasse Tyson said Skeptical Inquirer is his favorite magazine and it tells him what people are currently "misthinking" about.

[ 13 ] In his 2017 book, Bill Nye recommended S.I. to his readers as a magazine that "promote[s] the aggressive form of critical thinking needed to immunize us to fakery".

[ 14 ] Eric Zorn wrote that S.I. "remains a favorite of those of us who can, in fact, handle the truth".

[ 15 ] Several notable skeptics have described the magazine as influential to the early stages of their development as scientific skeptics . In 1995, Perry DeAngelis and Steven Novella were friends that played Dungeons & Dragons together until DeAngelis noticed a Skeptical Inquirer magazine on the table in Novella's condo. DeAngelis, also an avid reader of the magazine, pointed out the back page to Novella and said "What is missing?" DeAngelis stated that what was missing was a Connecticut skeptic group, he said "we should do this" to which Novella agreed. They started the New England Skeptical Society and eventually the Skeptic's Guide to the Universe (SGU) podcast.

[ 16 ] Writing for Scientific American , Douglas Hofstadter asked the question, why would Skeptical Inquirer succeed when the only people who read it are people who do not believe in the paranormal? The answer, he says, lies in the back of the magazine in the "Letters to the Editor" section. "Many people write in to say how vital the magazine has been to them, their friends and their students. High school teachers are among the most frequent writers of thank-you notes to the magazine's editors, but I have also seen enthusiastic letters from members of the clergy, radio talk-show hosts and people in many other professions." [ 4 ] Daniel Loxton, in his essay "Ode to Joy" about discovering Skeptical Inquirer magazine as a freshman at his University writes...

But the true treasure, the lamp at the end of the cave, the thing that helped set the course of my life, was hidden away in the periodical collection: a complete set of the Skeptical Inquirer , going back to its launch in 1976. I couldn't believe such a wealth of skeptical research existed! I worked my way through the stack systematically, hungrily....

[ 17 ] Levy and Olynyk art project [ edit ] Inspired by the four decades of Skeptical Inquirer magazine, an exhibition titled Some Provocations from Skeptical Inquirers by artists Ellen Levy and Patricia Olynyk , was held at the Baruch College Mishkin Gallery in February 2016. Reviewer Eileen G'Sell wrote that the artists "plumb the depths of the murky ontological sea that is empirical belief." [ 18 ] Writing for The Brooklyn Rail , reviewer William Corwin stated that the artwork represented "this built-in confrontation between fact and fiction (which) was the basis of the Skeptical Inquirer itself and its playful willingness to consider the most unlikely phenomena." [ 19 ] See also [ edit ] CSICon Skeptic (U.S. magazine) The Skeptic (UK magazine) The Skeptic's Dictionary Skeptical movement Snopes.com References [ edit ] ^ Paul Kurtz (2010).

Exuberant Skepticism . Prometheus Books. p. 218.

ISBN 978-1615929702 . Retrieved December 14, 2015 .

^ Douglas Hofstadter (1985).

Metamagical Themas . Penguin. p. 95 . Retrieved April 14, 2020 .

^ a b Rensberger, Boyce (June 25, 1978).

"Skeptics are Scored on Paranormal Issue" .

The New York Times . Retrieved December 16, 2024 .

^ a b c Hofstadter, Douglas (February 1, 1982).

"About two kinds of Inquiry: 'National Enquirer' and 'The Skeptical Inquirer' " .

Scientific American .

246 (2): 18– 26.

doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican0282-18 .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2020 . Retrieved March 31, 2016 .

^ a b Foster, Craig (December 29, 2022).

"On the Origin of Skeptical Inquirer" .

Skeptical Inquirer . Archived from the original on January 24, 2023 . Retrieved January 10, 2024 .

^ a b c Frazier, Kendrick (1996). "Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal (CSICOP)". In Stein, Gordon (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of the Paranormal . Prometheus Books. pp.

168– 181.

ISBN 1573920215 .

OL 806063M .

^ Loxton, Daniel (May 13, 2013).

"Modern skepticism's unique mandate" .

Skepticblog . The Skeptic Society. Archived from the original on January 12, 2020 . Retrieved March 30, 2016 .

^ " 'Skeptical Inquirer' announces SIUE's Stephen Hupp as editor" .

Illinois Business Journal . July 31, 2023 . Retrieved December 16, 2024 .

^ "Skeptical Inquirer Magazine Introduces New Editor Stephen Hupp" .

Centerforinquiry.org . The Center for Inquiry. June 12, 2023 . Retrieved June 13, 2023 .

^ Hupp, Stephen.

"News Bites: From Hurricane Fake Photos to Skeptical Inquirer's Audio Edition" .

Skeptical Inquirer . Retrieved April 21, 2025 .

^ a b c Loxton, Daniel (2007).

"Where do we go from here?" (PDF) .

The Skeptics Society . The Skeptic Society.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 12, 2020 . Retrieved March 30, 2016 .

^ In Stein 1996 , p. 174. Douglas Hofstadter (1982): "The purpose of the Skeptical Inquirer is simply to combat nonsense. It does so by recourse to common sense, which means it is accessible to anyone who can read English. It does not require any special knowledge to read its pages, where nonsensical claims are routinely smashed to smithereens. All that is required to read this maverick journal is curiosity about how truth defends itself (through its agent CSI-COP) against attacks from all quarters by unimaginably imaginative theorizers, speculators, eccentrics, crackpots, and out-and-out-fakers." ^ Tyson, Neil deGrasse (September 15, 2023).

Miracle Drugs & Quick Fixes with Neil deGrasse Tyson & Nick Tiller .  3:13 minutes in . Retrieved December 16, 2024 – via YouTube.

...Skeptical Inquirer magazine, my single favorite magazine in the world — let the record show. Yes, every [inaudible] I wait for it to show up. How are people misthinking things today? And there it is, and they show it.

^ Nye, Bill (2017).

Everything All at Once : How to unleash your inner nerd, tap into radical curiosity and solve any problem . Rhodale. p. 211.

ISBN 9781623367916 . Retrieved December 16, 2024 .

A vaccine against deception ... As a counterforce to all the predatory deceivers, several skeptical organizations fight the good fight for science. The Committee for Skeptical Inquiry ... and the Skeptics Society are two of the leading lights. They seek out specific claims, evaluate them, and publicize their versions of the process ... Both CSI and the Skeptics Society put out magazines that promote the aggressive form of critical thinking needed to immunize us to fakery.

^ Zorn, Eric (October 23, 2020).

"Column: In memory of the amazing James Randi, ignore the charlatans and listen to science" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved December 16, 2024 .

In 1976, Randi was one of several founding members of the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal (CSICOP), an academically minded organization aimed at combating "a rising tide of uncritical belief in astrology, parapsychology and other unfounded subjects," as contemporary news reports put it. CSICOP's magazine, The Skeptical Inquirer, remains a favorite of those of us who can, in fact, handle the truth.

^ Bernstein, Evan (August 19, 2013).

"Remembering Perry DeAngelis Today" .

The Rogues Gallery . Archived from the original on January 5, 2014.

^ Loxton, Daniel (April 27, 2010).

"Ode to Joy" .

Skepticblog . The Skeptic Society. Archived from the original on April 10, 2016.

^ G'Sell, Eileen (March 19, 2016).

"Sumptuous Skeptics: Ellen K. Levy and Patricia Olynyk Stage Creative Inquisition" .

Arte Fuse .

Archived from the original on July 3, 2019 . Retrieved March 25, 2016 .

^ Corwin, William (April 2016).

"Truth in the Visual Arts Skepticism in the Work of Ellen K. Levy and Patricia Olynyk" .

The Brooklyn Rail .

Archived from the original on June 15, 2017.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Skeptical Inquirer .

Official website v t e Center for Inquiry Organizations Center for Inquiry Committee for Skeptical Inquiry CSICon Publications Skeptical Inquirer Free Inquiry People Paul Kurtz Kendrick Frazier Barry Karr James Randi Related Skepticism Scientific skepticism v t e Pseudoscience List of topics characterized as pseudoscience Terminology Cargo cult science Charlatan Crank Fringe theory Fringe science Pseudoarchaeology Pseudohistory Pseudomathematics Junk science Paranormal Pathological science Quackery Snake oil Superseded scientific theory True-believer syndrome Voodoo Science Topics characterized as pseudoscience Medicine Acupuncture Aromatherapy Adrenal fatigue Alternative medicine Anthroposophic medicine Applied kinesiology Ayurveda Bates method Biorhythms Bloodletting Body memory Chiropractic Chromotherapy Correactology Cryonics Crystal healing Cupping Detoxification Colon cleansing Doctrine of signatures Doktor Koster's Antigaspills Ear candling Electromagnetic hypersensitivity Energy medicine Fad diet FasciaBlaster Germ theory denialism HIV/AIDS denialism Homeopathy Humorism Iridology Leaky gut syndrome LGBTQ chemicals conspiracy theory Lunar effect Macrobiotic diet Magnet therapy Miracle Mineral Supplement Naturopathy Palmistry Panchagavya Patent medicine Phrenology Primal therapy Radionics Reiki Traditional medicine Traditional Chinese medicine Trepanning Vertebral subluxation Wind turbine syndrome Young blood transfusion Social science 2012 phenomenon Ancient astronauts Arabian Judah theory Catastrophism Conspiracy theory 5G conspiracy 9/11 conspiracy theories Chemtrail conspiracy theory Climate change denial COVID-19 misinformation Moon landing conspiracy theories Opposition to water fluoridation Conversion therapy Expanding Earth Theory Generational theory Generationism Strauss–Howe generational theory Hollow Earth theory Indigo children Japhetic theory Mediumship Nazi archaeology Nibiru cataclysm Parapsychology Pseudoarchaeology Pseudohistory Genocide denial Historical negationism Holocaust denial Tartarian Empire Pseudolaw Recovered-memory therapy Past life regression Scientific racism Aryan race Melanin theory Myers–Briggs Type Indicator Enneagram of Personality Physics Anti-gravity Cold fusion Faster-than-light travel Perpetual motion Quantum mysticism Reactionless drive Dean drive EMDrive Teleportation Tractor beam Water-fueled car Other Alchemy Aquatic ape hypothesis Astrology Biodynamic agriculture Biological transmutation Creation science Cryptozoology Dianetics Auditing Dowsing Electronic voice phenomenon Eugenics Facilitated communication Feng shui Flat Earth theory Modern flat Earth beliefs Graphology Intelligent design Laundry ball Law of attraction Levitation Lysenkoism Numerology Orgone Polygraph Pseudoscientific metrology Rapid prompting method Statement analysis Ufology Voice stress analysis Water memory Promoters of pseudoscience Sucharit Bhakdi Del Bigtree Igor and Grichka Bogdanoff Brigitte Boisselier Rhonda Byrne Robert Charroux Deepak Chopra Clonaid Vernon Coleman Michael Crichton Ignatius L. Donnelly Gaia, Inc.

Max Gerson Nicholas Gonzalez Goop (company) Graham Hancock David Icke William Donald Kelley Robert F. Kennedy Jr.

Corentin Louis Kervran The Light (newspaper) Mike Lindell Jenny McCarthy Joseph Mercola Judy Mikovits Ministry of Ayush Theodor Morell Hans Alfred Nieper Mehmet Oz Raël ( Claude Vorilhon ) Robby Starbuck Randolph Stone Paul Joseph Watson Andrew Wakefield Related topics Bogdanov affair Bourgeois pseudoscience Demarcation problem Scientific method Suppressed research in the Soviet Union Resources Committee for Skeptical Inquiry Cults of Unreason An Encyclopedia of Claims, Frauds, and Hoaxes of the Occult and Supernatural Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science Fortean Times James Randi Educational Foundation Quackwatch Skeptical Inquirer The Demon-Haunted World The Natural History of Quackery The Psychology of the Occult The Ragged Edge of Science The Skeptic Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience The Skeptic's Dictionary v t e Skeptical magazines Antireligioznik American Atheist Magazine Ateist Bezbozhnik u Stanka Bezbożnik wojujący Free Inquiry Freethought Today National Reformer New Humanist Secular Review Skepter Skeptical Inquirer Skeptic (US) The Freethinker The Humanist The Oracle of Reason The Skeptic (UK) The Truth Seeker Wonder en is gheen Wonder Yunyye Bezbozhniki Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Skeptical_Inquirer&oldid=1286771834 " Categories : 1976 establishments in the United States Bimonthly magazines published in the United States Quarterly magazines published in the United States Science and technology magazines published in the United States Biannual magazines published in the United States Magazines established in 1976 Magazines published in New York (state) Paranormal magazines Scientific skepticism mass media Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with topics of unclear notability from December 2024 All articles with topics of unclear notability Articles lacking reliable references from December 2024 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use American English from January 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from January 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 21 April 2025, at 21:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Skeptical Inquirer 15 languages Add topic

