Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Conservation 2 The social sciences Toggle The social sciences subsection 2.1 Sociology 2.2 Anthropology 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ethnozoology 12 languages Español فارسی Français Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano پښتو Português Slovenčina Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of human and animal interaction See also: Anthrozoology Ethnozoology is a field of study that explores the complex relationships between humans and animals in their environment.

[ 1 ] This discipline encompasses the classification and naming of various animal species, as well as the cultural knowledge and use of both wild and domesticated animals .

[ 2 ] Ethnozoology is a subdiscipline of ethnobiology , which also includes ethnobotany , the study of human-plant relationships. However, unlike ethnobotany, ethnozoology focuses specifically on human-animal relationships and the knowledge that humans have acquired about the animals in their surroundings.

The study of ethnozoology sheds light on the roles that animals have played in human societies throughout history, from their utilitarian functions to their cultural, religious, artistic, and philosophical significance. Ethnozoology can be approached from various perspectives, such as ecological, cognitive, and symbolic, and it connects scientific methods to traditional systems of knowledge and cultural beliefs.

Conservation [ edit ] In a broader context, ethnozoology and its companion discipline, ethnobotany, contribute to the larger science of ethnobiology . The history of ethnobiology is divided into three periods. The pre-classical period, which began around 1860, focused on collecting information about humans' use of resources, while the classical period, which began in 1954, produced anthropological studies on linguistics and biological classifications. The current period, or post-classical period, has been described as a meeting of social science and the study of natural resources .

[ 3 ] Given the profound human influence on faunal biodiversity, wildlife conservation planning is becoming increasingly urgent. It is widely acknowledged that environmental health is important to human health, and biodiversity loss can have both indirect and direct negative effects on human wellbeing. The close link between human health and ecological/faunal health is substantiated with five important concepts: animals cause and disseminate disease for humans and vice versa, animals can be guards of human health, animals are used in traditional medicine practices throughout the world, animals are a source of drugs and treatments in human diseases, and animals are used in medical research.

[ 3 ] The social sciences [ edit ] Sociology [ edit ] Sociology has been slow to explore ethnozoology and grant it credibility.

[ 4 ] The study of ethnozoology is important because policy makers and concerned citizens are too often left to be informed only by animal advocates or biomedical researchers, both of which are inherently biased. Animals provide humans with a better understanding of ourselves, and how we think and act toward animals has the potential to reveal our attitudes toward other people and social order. Evidence of this can be seen in the ways that animal images may at times be expressing underlying racism: "the most damning testimony given by accused police at the Rodney King trial involved characterization of King as a 'gorilla'; during the Persian Gulf War Saddam Hussein was described in the American press as a 'rat'; and the actions of people in the Los Angeles riots were likened by the media commentators to 'packs of vicious animals'".

[ 4 ] Sociology is a science concerned with groups and group formation, including those facing structural and interpersonal oppression, suffering, and vulnerability. Sub-fields in this area include African Americans studies , women's studies , and gay/lesbian studies . However, not much attention or legitimacy is awarded animal studies as a sub-field. Modern use of animals in the developed world, especially in the United States, can be characterized by exploitation, domination, and oppression.

[ 5 ] Animal cruelty and abuse is not only present in the industrial farming of livestock, but also in such circumstances as dog fighting, cow tipping, horse racing, circus acts, and other entertainment industries and practices. Furthermore, animals are often victims and pawns used in domestic violence. The widespread abuse of animals in modern society is important for sociology because it involves an entrenched assumption about the connection between cruelty toward animals and violence directed and human beings. Some research has even suggested ways in which the human-animal interaction can challenge dominant sociological theories about the self.

[ 5 ] Anthropology [ edit ] Anthropology has done more to study ethnozoology in terms of the history of the function of animals in non-industrialized societies and the role that animals play symbolically and religiously in different cultures around the world.

[ 4 ] The domestication process has been a chief concern for anthropologists, whose interests are in the history of human desire to understand animals, enslave them, and harness their power. Animal-derived products have been used especially for food, but also for clothing, tools, toys, and for medicinal and magic-religious purposes. Many cultures associate strong supernatural powers between the animal and human worlds, including mythologies and connections with totemic, ancestral, or magical animals and animal-gods.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Animals are given symbolic meaning, as in the western association of black cats with poor luck.

[ 7 ] Biological knowledge varies according to cultural and traditional knowledge and experiences. People share a basic way of comprehending the natural world based on common evolutionary history, and this foundation connects scientific biology with its historical roots in different cultures.

[ 8 ] The evolutionary perspective on human cognition and affect indicates some degree of universality in perception and decision-making with regard to the natural world and its fauna. The interaction between these aspects of psychology , biodiversity of the Earth's wildlife, and the unique social, cultural, and economic contexts within which humans interact and develop produces cultural diversity . Paleoanthropological studies suggest that linguistic approaches to ethnobiology have only recently evolved in the context of human history, [ 9 ] which suggests that these linguistic approaches only provide a partial understanding to how humans perceive and engage with the natural world around them.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Anthrozoology References [ edit ] ^ "Ethnozoology Index" . Archived from the original on May 8, 2008.

^ Johnson,  Leslie Main. Ethnobiology - Traditional Biological Knowledge in Contemporary Global Context.  Anthropology 491 study guide,  Athabasca University 2002. p. 71 ^ a b Alves, R. (2012). Relationships between fauna and people and the role of ethnozoology in animal conservation. Ethnobiology and Conservation, 1 ^ a b c Arluke, A. (2003). Ethnozoology and the future of sociology. International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy, 23(3), 26-45.

^ a b Irvine, L. (2008). Animals and sociology. Sociology Compass, 2(6), 1954–1971.

^ Alves, R. R., Rosa, I. L., Neto, N. A. L., & Voeks, R. (2012). Animals for the gods: Magical and religious faunal use and trade in Brazil. Human Ecology, 40(5), 751-780.

^ a b Sax, B. (2001). The mythical zoo. An Encyclopedia of Animals in World Myth, Legend and Folklore.Santa Barbara, CA: ABC Clio.

^ Ellen, 2003 ^ Hunn, E. (2007). Ethnobiology in four phases. Journal of Ethnobiology, 27(1), 1-10.

^ Mithen, S. (2006). Ethnobiology and the evolution of the human mind. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 12(s1), S45-S61.

External links [ edit ] Notes on Bukusu ethnozoology from western Kenya v t e Ethnobiology Primary subdisciplines Ethnobotany Ethnomycology Ethnozoology Ethnoecology Other subdisciplines Ethnoentomology Ethnoherpetology Ethnoichthyology Ethnolichenology Ethnoornithology Ethnoprimatology Correlated fields Cultural ecology Ecological anthropology Ethnoarchaeology Ethnomedicine Ethnopsychopharmacology Historical ecology Human ecology Paleoethnobotany Traditional ecological knowledge Zooarchaeology Notable ethnobiologists William Balée Brent Berlin Harold C. Conklin Wade Davis Roy Ellen Robin Wall Kimmerer Gary Paul Nabhan Andrew Pawley Darrell A. Posey Richard Evans Schultes Constantino Manuel Torres Nancy Turner List of paleoethnobotanists Category Project Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ethnozoology&oldid=1302157234 " Categories : Ethnobiology Traditional knowledge Zoology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 18:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ethnozoology 12 languages Add topic

