Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 The Institute of Charity 2 Writings 3 Thought 4 The cause for canonization 5 Works 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Antonio Rosmini 32 languages Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latina Lombard مصرى Nederlands Piemontèis Polski Português Русский Sardu Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian Catholic priest and philosopher (1797–1855) Blessed Antonio Rosmini-Serbati IC Portrait by Francesco Hayez Born ( 1797-03-25 ) 25 March 1797 Rovereto , Tyrol , Holy Roman Empire Died 1 July 1855 (1855-07-01) (aged 58) Stresa , Piedmont , Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia Nationality Italian Education Alma mater University of Padua Philosophical work Era 19th-century philosophy Region Western Philosophy Main interests Philosophy of Mind , Moral Philosophy , Metaphysics , Epistemology , Theodicy , Natural Theology , Political Philosophy , Education Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Monument to Rosmini in Milan (1896).

Antonio Francesco Davide Ambrogio Rosmini-Serbati , IC ( Italian pronunciation: [anˈtɔːnjo roˈzmiːni serˈbaːti] ; 25 March 1797 – 1 July 1855) was an Italian Catholic priest and philosopher. He founded the Rosminians , officially the Institute of Charity, and pioneered the concept of social justice and Italian Liberal Catholicism .

[ 1 ] Alessandro Manzoni considered Rosmini the only contemporary Italian author worth reading.

[ 2 ] Rosmini has been beatified in the Catholic Church.

Biography [ edit ] Antonio Rosmini Serbati was born on 24 March 1797, at Rovereto, in the Austrian Tyrol. His brother Carlo Rosmini was a secular writer. He studied at the University of Padua, and was ordained priest at Chioggia, on 21 April 1821. In 1822 he received a Doctorate in Theology and Canon Law.

[ 3 ] During this time Rosmini formulated his "Principle of Passivity". Rosmini felt compelled to ask himself: Do my plans spring more from my own subjective desire to do good than from a desire to do the will of God?”. Reflecting in this way, Rosmini articulated the principle in two parts: be ready to undertake any work of charity but only so long as it is God's Providence that presents it; in the meantime, immerse oneself in the commitment to continual conversion, seeking the amendment of one's own life.

[ 4 ] The Institute of Charity [ edit ] In 1828 he founded at Monte Calvario near Domodossola, a new religious community, the Institute of Charity, known generally since as the Rosminians . In the autumn of 1830, he inaugurated the observance of the rule at Calvario, and from 1834 to 1835 had charge of a parish at Rovereto. Later foundations followed at Stresa and Domodossola. The Constitutions of the institute were approved by presented to Pope Gregory XVI on 20 December 1838. The institute spread rapidly in England and Italy, and requests for foundations came from various countries.

[ 3 ] The members might be priests or laymen, who devoted themselves to preaching, the education of youth, and works of universal charity—material, spiritual and intellectual. They work in Italy , England , Ireland , France , Wales, New Zealand, Kenya, Tanzania, India, Venezuela, and the United States . In London they were attached to the historical Church of St Etheldreda , Ely Place, Holborn.

[ 5 ] In 1962, Rosmini College School for Boys was founded in Auckland, New Zealand by Father Catcheside.

[ 6 ] Rosmini was retained as a political advisor to the then government of Piedmont. In August 1848, he was sent to Rome by King Charles Albert of Piedmont to enlist the pope on the side of Italy as against Austria.

[ 3 ] Rosmini was invited to serve in the Roman Curia of Pope Pius IX as prime minister of the Papal States . He participated in the intellectual struggle which had for its object emancipation from Austria , but as a trusted ecclesiastical advisor and diplomat, he was not an initiator of the movement which ended in the freedom and unity of Italy. In fact, while eager for the deliverance of Italy from Austria, his aim was to bring about a confederation of the states of the country, which was to be under the control of the pope.

[ 5 ] Upon establishment of the Roman Republic , the Pontiff was forced to flee and became estranged from his former advisor in political matters. The tenuous political circumstances made it very difficult to reconcile the two men's differing projects: innovative social and juridical reforms, however modest, fell victim to the more pressing existential need to defend the supremacy of the Church's temporal powers.

[ citation needed ] Writings [ edit ] Rosmini's works, Of the five wounds of the Holy Church and The Constitution of Social Justice (see Works below), aroused great opposition, especially among the Jesuits , and in 1849 they were placed upon the Index .

[ 7 ] Rosmini at once declared his submission and retired to Stresa on Lago Maggiore , where he died. Before his death he had the satisfaction of learning that the works in question were dismissed, that is, proclaimed free from censure by the Congregation of the Index. Twenty years later, the word dismissed ( dimittantur ) became the subject of controversy, some maintaining that it amounted to a direct approval, others that it was purely negative and did not imply that the books were free from error.

[ 5 ] Vincenzo Maria Gatti, the Dominican professor of theology at the College of Saint Thomas, the forerunner of the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas and Master of the Sacred Palace , was instrumental in partially rehabilitating the works of Rosmini. In an article published in L'Osservatore Romano on 16 June 1876, Gatti made clear that Pius IX did not intend the "dimittantur" as amounting to wholesale condemnation.

[ 8 ] The controversy continued until 1887, when Pope Leo XIII condemned forty of Rosmini's propositions. Referring to this condemnation, however, the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith issued a document in 2001 in which it declared that "the meaning of the propositions, as understood and condemned by the Decree, does not belong to the authentic position of Rosmini." [ 9 ] In 1998 Rosmini was named by Pope John Paul II in the encyclical Fides et Ratio as one of the greater Christian thinkers.

Thought [ edit ] The most comprehensive view of Rosmini's philosophical standpoint is to be found in his Sistema filosofico , in which he set forth the conception of a complete encyclopaedia of the human knowable, synthetically conjoined, according to the order of ideas, in a perfectly harmonious whole. Contemplating the position of recent philosophy from John Locke to Georg Hegel , and having his eye directed to the ancient and fundamental problem of the origin, truth and certainty of our ideas, he wrote: "If philosophy is to be restored to love and respect, I think it will be necessary, in part, to return to the teachings of the ancients, and in part to give those teachings the benefit of modern methods" ( Theodicy , a. 148). He examined and analysed the facts of human knowledge, and obtained the following results: that the notion or idea of being or existence, in general, enters into, and is presupposed by, all our acquired cognitions, so that, without it, they would be impossible that this idea is essentially objective since what is seen in it is as distinct from and opposed to the mind that sees it as the light is from the eye that looks at it that it is essentially true, because being and truth are convertible terms, and because in the vision of it, the mind cannot err, since error could only be committed by a judgment, and here there is no judgment, but a pure intuition affirming nothing and denying nothing that by the application of this essentially objective and true idea the human being intellectually perceives, first, the animal body individually conjoined with him, and then, on the occasion of the sensations produced in him not by himself, the causes of those sensations, that is, from the action felt he perceives and affirms an agent, a being, and therefore a true thing, that acts on him, and he thus gets at the external world, these are the true primitive judgments, containing the subsistence of the particular being (subject), and its essence or species as determined by the quality of the action felt from it ( predicate ) that reflection, by separating the essence or species from the subsistence, obtains the full specific idea (universalization), and then from this, by leaving aside some of its elements, the abstract specific idea (abstraction) that the mind, having reached this stage of development, can proceed to further and further abstracts, including the first principles of reasoning, the principles of the several sciences, complex ideas, groups of ideas, and so on without end finally, that the same most universal idea of being, this generator and formal element of all acquired cognitions, cannot itself be acquired, but must be innate in us, implanted by God in our nature. Being, as naturally shining to our mind, must therefore be what men call the light of reason. Hence the name Rosmini gives it of ideal being; and this he laid down as the fundamental principle of all philosophy and the supreme criterion of truth and certainty. This he believed to be the teaching of St Augustine, as well as of St Thomas, of whom he was an ardent admirer and defender.

[ 5 ] According to Father Battista Mondin , Rosmini's philosophy cannot be defined as Thomism because it lacks the fundamental real distinction between essence and existence ( Actus essendi ), as well as the conception of God as Esse ut Actus .

[ 10 ] The cause for canonization [ edit ] On 26 June 2006, Pope Benedict XVI signed a Decree of the heroic virtues , and hence declared Rosmini to be Venerable .

[ 11 ] On 3 June 2007, Pope Benedict XVI authorized the promulgation of a decree approving Rosmini's beatification. On 18 November 2007, he was beatified in Novara , Italy.

Works [ edit ] Of his numerous works, of which a collected edition in 17 volumes was issued in Milan (1842–44), supplemented by Opere postume in 5 volumes (Turin, 1859–74), the most important are: The origin of ideas . Translated by anonymous (Translated from the 5th Italian ed.). London: Keegan Paul, Trench. 1883.

OCLC 818116370 .

The Principles of Moral Science (1831) The Restoration of Philosophy in Italy (1836) The Philosophy of Right (1841–45) The following have also been translated into English: The constitution under social justice . Translated by Alberto Mingardi. Lexington Books. 2006.

ISBN 9780739107256 .

A Catholic catechism . Translated by William Seth Agar . 1849.

Liddon, Henry P.

, ed. (1883).

Of the five wounds of the Holy Church (abridged ed.).

ISBN 9780837084664 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Maxims of Christian perfection . Translated by anonymous. London: Richardson. 1849.

Psychology (Anonymous) (1884–88) A short sketch of modern philosophies and of his own system . Translated by William Lockhart . London: Burns and Oates. 1882.

OCLC 551258110 .

The ruling principle of method applied to education . Translated by Maria Georgina Grey . Boston: D.C. Heath. 1887.

OCLC 769155902 .

Letters . Translated by Dominic Gazzola. London [u.a.]: Washbourne [u.a.] 1901.

References [ edit ] ^ Kraynak, Robert P. (2018). "The Origins of "Social Justice" in the Natural Law Philosophy of Antonio Rosmini".

The Review of Politics .

80 (1): 3– 29.

doi : 10.1017/S0034670517000754 .

S2CID 150287488 .

^ Mingardi, Alberto (2007).

Intro to The Constitution Under Social Justice . Lexington Books. p. xl.

^ a b c Cormack, George, and Daniel Hickey. "Rosmini and Rosminianism." The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 13. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1912. 15 November 2016.

^ "Antonio Rosmini", Rosminians, Ireland ^ a b c d One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Rosmini-Serbati, Antonio ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 23 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

738– 739.

^ "Rosmini College" .

rosmini.school.nz . Auckland, NZ.

^ "Muratore, Umberto. "Antonio Rosmini", Centro Internazionale di studi Rosminiani" . Archived from the original on 26 July 2020 . Retrieved 27 August 2015 .

^ Cattaneo, Massimo (1999).

"Gatti, Vincenzo Maria" .

Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani (in Italian). Vol. 52.

Archived from the original on 22 May 2013.

^ Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith.

"Note on the Force of the Doctrinal Decrees Concerning the Thought and Work of Fr Antonio Rosmini Serbati" .

vatican.va . Retrieved 15 March 2019 .

^ Father Battista Mondin , O.P. (2022). "11-Ontologia: dall'ente all'essere sussistente".

Ontologia e metafisica [ Ontology and metaphysics. 11-Ontology: from the being to the subsistent being ]. Filosofia (in Italian) (3rd ed.).

Edizioni Studio Domenicano . p. 72.

ISBN 978-88-5545-053-9 .

^ "A Chronological Summary of the Cause of Antonio Rosmini" .

rosmini.org . Institute of Charity.

Archived from the original on 28 January 2015.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Rosmini and Rosminianism ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Further reading [ edit ] Cleary, Denis (2008).

"Antonio Rosmini" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2008 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Davidson, Thomas (1882).

The philosophical system of Antonio Rosmini-Serbati . London: Kegan Paul, Trench.

OCLC 644511833 .

Includes a biographical sketch and bibliography.

MacWalter, Gabriel S., ed. (1883).

Life of Antonio Rosmini-Serbati . Vol. 1. London: Kegan Paul, Trench.

OCLC 613110882 .

Lockhart, William S., ed. (1886).

Life of Antonio Rosmini-Serbati . Vol. 2. London: Kegan Paul, Trench.

OCLC 902993060 .

The life of Antonio Rosmini-Serbati . Translated by Giambattista Pagani. London: G. Routledge. 1907.

OCLC 701254451 .

"Church reformation in Italy" .

Edinburgh Review .

114 (231): 233– 268. July 1861.

hdl : 2027/uc1.32106019934451 .

ISSN 1751-8482 .

External links [ edit ] Antonio Rosmini, Lezioni di Maria Scalisi sull'Antropologia in servizio della scienza morale, in https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pJyGUDrn2DA (in Italian) Official website "Website about beatification ceremony" . Archived from the original on 29 September 2007 . Retrieved 30 September 2007 .

"Rosmini Studies" (in Italian and English).

University of Trento .

ISSN 2385-216X .

( double-blind peer reviewed and Open Access journal) v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain 2 Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Antonio_Rosmini&oldid=1298057362 " Categories : 1797 births 1855 deaths 19th-century Italian male writers 19th-century Italian non-fiction writers 19th-century Italian philosophers 19th-century Italian Roman Catholic priests 19th-century Italian Roman Catholic theologians Beatifications by Pope Benedict XVI Founders of Catholic religious communities Italian beatified people Italian male non-fiction writers Italian religious writers Italian Roman Catholic writers Liberal Catholicism People from Rovereto People from Stresa Venerated Catholics by Pope Benedict XVI Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from August 2011 Use dmy dates from January 2020 Articles with hCards Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Pages with Italian IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2015 Articles containing Italian-language text CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 07:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Antonio Rosmini 32 languages Add topic

