Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Moral treatises 2.2 Councils and canons 2.3 Other works and treatises 3 De correctione rusticorum 4 Notes 5 Sources 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Martin of Braga 22 languages Asturianu Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego Italiano Kiswahili Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 6th century Archbishop of Braga in Portugal Saint Martin of Braga Image of Saint Martin of Braga in a 10th-century manuscript.

Born c. 520 Pannonia Died 580 (age 60) Venerated in Catholic Church Eastern Orthodox Church [ 1 ] Feast 20 March Saint Martin of Braga (in Latin Martinus Bracarensis , in Portuguese , known as Martinho de Dume c.

520–580 AD), also known as Saint Martin of Dumio , was an archbishop of Bracara Augusta in Gallaecia (now Braga in Portugal ), a missionary , a monastic founder, and an ecclesiastical author. According to his contemporary, the historian Gregory of Tours , Martin was plenus virtutibus ("full of virtue") and in tantum se litteris imbuit ut nulli secundus sui temporis haberetur ("he so instructed himself in learning that he was considered second to none in his lifetime").

[ 2 ] He was later canonized by the Catholic Church for his work in converting the inhabitants of Gallaecia to Chalcedonian Christianity , being granted the cognomen of " Apostle to the Suevi ". His feast day is 20 March.

[ 3 ] Life [ edit ] Eastern Orthodox Icon of St. Martin of Braga Born in Pannonia , in Central Europe , Martin made a pilgrimage to the Holy Land , where he became a monk.

[ 4 ] Around 550, he travelled by sea to Hispania and settled in Gallaecia . "His intentions in going to a place so remote by the standards of his own day are unknown," writes Roger Collins .

[ 5 ] Though some scholars have suggested that he was an agent of Byzantine diplomacy (owing to the coincidence between his date of travel and the beginnings of the Byzantine reconquest of parts of Visigothic south-eastern Hispania ), and others have suggested he was sent to the Suevic court as a missionary, neither hypothesis is certain.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Nonetheless, his arrival in Gallaecia was historically significant, for he played an important role in converting the Suevi from their current Arian beliefs to the Chalcedonian Christianity . While there he founded several monasteries, the best known of which was at Dumium (modern-day Dume ), established close to the Suevic capital at Braga.

[ 4 ] He became bishop of this monastic bishopric and attended the First Council of Braga in 561 in this capacity. He was subsequently raised to the status of metropolitan bishop of Braga some point before the Second Council of Braga , over which he presided in 572, near the end of his life.

[ 4 ] He played a central role in the reorganization of the church in the Suevic kingdom.

[ 7 ] Works [ edit ] Martin of Braga was a prolific author. Besides his contributions to the two provincial councils, produced numerous translations from Greek and original Latin works. He translated from Greek into Latin a collection of 109 Sayings of the Desert Fathers , producing a collection known as the Sententiae patrum Aegyptiorum.

Meanwhile, at Martin's instigation, the monk Paschasius of Dumium translated a larger collection of sayings, which he titled Liber geronticon and dedicated to Martin.

[ 8 ] Martin also produced a large collection of church canons , mostly translated from Greek. These were presented to the Suevic church at the Second Council of Braga.

[ 9 ] In the final decade of his life he composed two short treatises, De ira and Formula vitae honestae , which drew heavily on the work of Seneca the Younger . "Martin's tract are valuable evidence that some at least of Seneca's writings were still available in the land of his birth in the sixth century," writes Laistner. Three other short essays on ethics demonstrate his clear familiarity with the works of John Cassian .

[ 10 ] Another important work is his model sermon, written in the form of a letter to his fellow bishop Polemius of Asturica , De correctione rusticorum , which discusses the issue of rural paganism. Noting that this sermon has often been seen as evidence of Martin's missionary work against rural paganism, Collins asserts that a closer look does not support this thesis, for "there are no points of contact [in this work] with what is known of the indigenous pre-Christian cults of rural Galicia." [ 11 ] The influences present in this work have been debated: Laistner sees evidence of the sermons of the Gallic bishop Caesarius of Arles , who lived a generation ago; Collins believes it is modelled on a treatise of Augustine of Hippo on the same topic.

[ 12 ] Martin also composed poetry; Gregory of Tours notes that he authored the verses over the southern portal of the church of Saint Martins of Tours in that city.

[ 2 ] Moral treatises [ edit ] Formula vitae honestae or De quattuor virtutibus (Rules for an Honest Life, or On the Four Cardinal Virtues) : addressed to Miro , king of the Sueves , it gave an account of the four cardinal virtues , derivied from ancient philosophy. Due to its similarities to other works of Seneca the Younger , some modern scholars believe that Martin adapted his work from a lost writing of Seneca, in the same way as was done in De ira .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] By the twelfth century the work circulated widely without Martin's dedicatory preface, causing scribes and readers mistakenly to identify the treatise as a genuine work by Seneca. As such, over the next three centuries, Formula vitae honestae was used alongside the pseudo-epigraphic correspondence of Paul and Seneca as proof for Seneca's adherence to Christianity.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] (572) De ira (On Anger) : adapted from a work of the same name by Seneca .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Three linked treatises: the two vices, vanity and pride, are taken from a list of eight set out by John Cassian .

[ 14 ] Pro repellenda iactantia (Driving Away Vanity) De superbia (On Pride) Exhortatio humilitatis (Exhortation to Humility) Councils and canons [ edit ] (561) First Council of Braga (572) Second Council of Braga (572) Canons of St. Martin : appended to the text of the Second Council . These a collection of eighty-four canons translated by Martin from the (Greek and Egyptian) canons of the Eastern church .

[ 18 ] (570?) De Pascha (On Easter) : part of the Canons of St. Martin and the Second Council of Braga De Pascha is Martin's explanation on how to calculate the date of Easter . According to Martin, Easter may be observed no earlier than March 22, and no later than April 21, and the date may be announced during Advent so the people may know when Lent begins.

[ 14 ] Other works and treatises [ edit ] De correctione rusticorum (On the Reform of Rustics) De trina mersione (On Triple Immersion) : addressed to Bishop Boniface, of whom little is known other than that he resided in sixth century Visigothic Iberia . In his letter, Martin denounces the Arian practice of performing baptism in the three names of the Trinity . Martin insists the correct practice is to perform triple immersion in the Trinity's single name.

[ 14 ] Sententiae Patrum Aegyptiorum (Saying of the Egyptian Fathers) : translated by Martin from an anonymous Greek manuscript he carried with him to Iberia.

[ 14 ] Two translations exist: one by the monk Paschasius , who was instructed in Greek by Martin, and one by Martin himself. The version by Martin is twenty-two sections shorter than Paschasius's, as most of the anecdotes about the daily life of the Egyptian ascetic monks were removed to focus on their moral instruction.

[ 14 ] Poetry : only three poems by Martin are preserved from history. Two of them are inscriptions for buildings, [ 14 ] [ 19 ] and the third is a six-line epitaph about Martin's own life.

[ 14 ] De correctione rusticorum [ edit ] Martin, Archbishop of Braga In 572, the Second Council of Braga decreed that bishops are to call the people of their church together, so they may be converted to Christianity . After the council, a bishop named Polemius of Astorga wrote to Martin of Braga asking for advice on the conversion of rural pagans. Polemius was especially concerned about their perceived idolatry and sin . Martin's reply was a treatise in the form of a sermon, enclosed in his responding letter to Polemius.

Out of all of Martin's works, De correctione rusticorum (On the Reform of Rustics) is of particular interest to modern scholars. It contains both a detailed catalogue of sixth-century Iberian pagan practices, and an unusually tolerant approach to them by Martin. Alberto Ferreiro attributes Martin's acceptance to his classical education in the East, as well as the influence of philosophers like Seneca and Plato .

[ 20 ] Martin himself had avoided religious suppression by traveling to Dumium , in what is now Portugal .

[ 18 ] He had sailed east around 550, during the period when Justinian I was attempting to reunite the Later Roman Empire through consolidation of the empire's faith. In 529, Justinian had placed the Neoplatonic Academy under state control, effectively signifying the end of pagan philosophical teaching. Later, in 553, Origen was also anathematized, effectively crushing Origenism .

[ 13 ] The Codex Justinianus enforced Nicaean Christianity over all other rival doctrines.

[ 21 ] Martin may have chosen to flee east to avoid Rome's anti-intellectual policies, which possible explains his relatively gentle approach to the Suevi in Gallaecia .

[ 13 ] Although Martin's training as a monk was based on the ascetic Desert Fathers of the Egyptian desert, he lessened their severe monastic regulations to aid the Iberians to adapt. When converting the Suevi , he avoided enforcing Catholicism , preferring persuasion over coercion.

[ 18 ] He also wrote his sermon in a deliberately rustic style, incorporating ungrammatical Latin constructions and local vulgarisms.

[ 14 ] [ note 1 ] In his instructions, Martin objects to the astrological custom of naming the days of the week after gods ( planets ).

[ 23 ] [ note 2 ] Due to his influence Portuguese and Galician (which, at the time, were one single language), alone among the Romance languages , assumed names for the days from numbers and Catholic liturgy, rather than from pagan deities.

[ 24 ] Galician has largely returned to the earlier nomenclature.

Notes [ edit ] ^ From De correctione rusticorum : "Sed quia oportet ab initio mundi vel modicam illis rationis notitiam quasi pro gustu porrigere, necesse me fuit ingentem praeteritorum temporum gestorumque silvam breviato tenuis compendii sermone contingere et cibum rusticis rustico sermone condire." "Since it is necessary to offer them some small explanation for these idols' existence from the beginning of the world to whet the appetite, as it were, I have had to touch upon a vast forest of past times and events in a treatise of very brief compass and to offer the rustics food seasoned with rustic speech." [ 22 ] ^ From De correctione rusticorum : "for the infidels have angered God and do not believe wholeheartedly in the faith of Christ, but are such disbelievers that they place the very names of the demons on each day of the week, and speak of the day of Mars and of Mercury and of Jupiter and of Venus and of Saturn, who never created a day, but were evil and wicked men among the race of the Greeks." [ 22 ] Sources [ edit ] ^ "Russian Church officially adds saints of Spain, Portugal to liturgical calendar", Orthodox Christiantity ^ a b Decem Libri Historiarum , V.37; translated by Lewis Thorpe, History of the Franks (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1974), p. 301 ^ Ghezzi, Bert.

Voices of the Saints , Liturgical Press, ISBN 978-0-8294-2806-3 ^ a b c Ott, Michael. "St. Martin of Braga." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 9. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. 12 Mar. 2013 ^ Collins, Early Medieval Spain: Unity in Diversity 400-1000 , second edition (New York: St. Martins, 1995), p. 82 ^ Martin; Sabbah, Guy; Berthet, Jean-François; Angliviel de La Beaumelle, Laurent (2018).

Oeuvres morales et pastorales . Sources chrétiennes. Paris: les Éditions du Cerf. p. 18.

ISBN 978-2-204-12789-9 .

^ a b Díaz Martínez, Pablo de la Cruz (2011).

El reino suevo (411-585) . Akal universitaria. Serie Reinos y dominios en la historia de España. Tres Cantos: Akal. pp.

230– 44.

ISBN 978-84-460-2850-5 .

^ Freire, José Geraldes (2011).

A Versão Latina por Pascásio de Dume dos Apophthegmata Patrum (2nd ed.). Coimbra: Centro de Estudos Clássicos e Humanisticos da Universidade de Coimbra.

ISBN 978-989-8281-81-4 .

^ Martínez Díez, Gonzalo (1967). "La colección canónica de la Iglesia sueva. Los "Capitula Martini" ".

Actas do Congresso de estudos da comemoraçâo do 13 centenário da morte de S. Frutuoso, Vol. 1 . Braga. pp.

224– 43.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ M.L.W. Laistner, Thought and Letters in Western Europe: A.D. 500 to 900 , second edition (Ithaca: Cornell University, 1957), p. 117 ^ Collins, Early Medieval Spain , p. 83 ^ Laistner, Thought and letters , p. 118; Collins, Early Medieval Spain , p. 83 ^ a b c Follis, E. K. (1992).

"St. Martin of Braga : Sources for His Tolerance toward the Rustici in Sixth Century Galicia." (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). The University of British Columbia, Vancouver.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Braga, M. & Dumium, P. & Seville, L. & Barlow, C. W.(2010). Iberian Fathers, Volume 1 (The Fathers of the Church, Volume 62). Washington: The Catholic University of America Press. Retrieved March 5, 2015.

^ Everett Ferguson (2003).

Backgrounds of Early Christianity . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 365.

ISBN 978-0-8028-2221-5 .

^ Barlow, C. (1937).

"A Sixth-Century Epitome of Seneca, De Ira." Retrieved March 5, 2015 ^ Martin; Torre, Chiara (2008).

Martini Bracarensis "De ira": introduzione, testo, traduzione e commento . Studi e testi tardoantichi. Roma: Herder.

ISBN 978-88-89670-34-7 .

^ a b c Farmer, D.(2011).

Martin of Braga . In The Oxford Dictionary of Saints. : Oxford University Press. Retrieved 5 Mar. 2015 ^ Decem Libri Historiarum, V.37; translated by Lewis Thorpe, History of the Franks (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1974), p. 301 ^ Ferreiro, A. (1995).

"Braga and tours: Some Observations on Gregory's "De virtutibus sancti martini" (1.11). Journal of Early Christian Studies, 3, 195. Retrieved March 5, 2015 ^ Corcoran, S.(2009). Anastasius, Justinian, and the Pagans: A Tale of Two Law Codes and a Papyrus. Journal of Late Antiquity 2(2), 183-208. The Johns Hopkins University Press. Retrieved March 6, 2015, from Project MUSE database.

^ a b (Braga, M. & Dumium, P. & Seville, L. & Barlow, C. W.(2010). Iberian Fathers, Volume 1 (The Fathers of the Church, Volume 62). Washington: The Catholic University of America Press. Retrieved March 5, 2015.) ^ Kimminich, E. (1991).

"The way of vice and virtue: A medieval psychology." Comparative Drama, 25(1), 77-86. Retrieved March 5, 2015.

^ Richard A. Fletcher (1999).

The Barbarian Conversion: From Paganism to Christianity . University of California Press. p. 257.

ISBN 978-0-520-21859-8 .

Further reading [ edit ] Barlow, Claude W., Martini episcopi Bracarensis opera omnia (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1950). [Papers and Monographs of the American Academy in Rome, 12].

Barlow, Claude W. (trans.), Iberian Fathers, 1: Martin of Braga, Paschasius of Dumium, Leander of Seville (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1969). [Fathers of the Church, 62].

Berthet, Jean-François, and Guy Sabbah (eds and trans), Martin de Braga, Oeuvres morales et pastorales (Paris: Les Éditions du Cerf, 2018). [Sources chrétiennes, 594].

Díaz Martínez, Pablo de la Cruz , El Reino Suevo (411-585) (Madrid: Ediciones Akal, 2011).

Torre, Chiara (ed., trans., comm.).

Martini Bracarensis De ira: introduzione, testo, traduzione e commento (Roma: Herder, 2008). [Studi e testi tardoantichi, 7].

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Martin of Braga .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Spain Portugal 2 Netherlands Norway Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Martin_of_Braga&oldid=1290192403 " Categories : 520 births Bishops of Braga 580 deaths 6th-century bishops in the Visigothic Kingdom 6th-century Christian saints 6th-century writers in Latin Converts to Catholicism from Arianism Greek–Latin translators 6th-century translators Portuguese saints Portuguese Roman Catholic saints Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 May 2025, at 08:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Martin of Braga 22 languages Add topic

