Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Asclepieia 2 Hippocratic medicine Toggle Hippocratic medicine subsection 2.1 Humoral Theory 2.2 Female Biology 2.3 Female Afflictions and Cures 2.4 Herodicus 3 Aristotle 4 Herophilus, Erasistratus and ancient Greek anatomy 5 Greek medicine in the Roman empire Toggle Greek medicine in the Roman empire subsection 5.1 Dioscorides 5.2 Galen 6 Historical legacy 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Ancient Greek medicine 22 languages العربية Башҡортса Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Collection of medical theories and practices in ancient Greece Physician treating a patient ( Attic red-figure aryballos , 480–470 BC) Ancient Greek medicine was a compilation of theories and practices that were constantly expanding through new ideologies and trials. The Greek term for medicine was iatrikē ( Ancient Greek : ἰατρική ). Many components were considered in ancient Greek medicine, intertwining the spiritual with the physical.  Specifically, the ancient Greeks believed health was affected by the humors , geographic location, social class, diet, trauma, beliefs, and mindset. Early on the ancient Greeks believed that illnesses were "divine punishments" and that healing was a "gift from the Gods".

[ 1 ] As trials continued wherein theories were tested against symptoms and results, the pure spiritual beliefs regarding "punishments" and "gifts" were replaced with a foundation based in the physical, i.e., cause and effect.

[ 1 ] Asclepieia [ edit ] Rod of Asclepius View of the Asklepieion of Kos , the best preserved instance of an Asclepieion Asclepius was espoused as the first physician, and myth placed him as the son of Apollo .
Temples dedicated to the healer-god Asclepius, known as Asclepieia ( Greek : Ἀσκληπιεῖα ; sing. Ἀσκληπιεῖον Asclepieion ), functioned as centers of medical advice, prognosis, and healing.

[ 2 ] At these shrines, patients would enter a dream-like state of induced sleep known as "enkoimesis" ( Greek : ἐγκοίμησις ) not unlike anesthesia, in which they either received guidance from the deity in a dream or were cured by surgery.

[ 3 ] Asclepeia provided carefully controlled spaces conducive to healing and fulfilled several of the requirements of institutions created for healing.

[ 2 ] The Temple of Asclepius in Pergamum had a spring that flowed down into an underground room in the Temple.  People would come to drink the waters and to bathe in them because they were believed to have medicinal properties.  Mud baths and hot teas such as chamomile were used to calm them or peppermint tea to soothe their headaches, which is still a home remedy used by many today.  The patients were encouraged to sleep in the facilities too.  Their dreams were interpreted by the doctors and their symptoms were then reviewed. Dogs would occasionally be brought in to lick open wounds for assistance in their healing. In the Asclepieion of Epidaurus , three large marble boards dated to 350 BC preserve the names, case histories, complaints, and cures of about 70 patients who came to the temple with a problem and shed it there.  Some of the surgical cures listed, such as the opening of an abdominal abscess or the removal of traumatic foreign material, are realistic enough to have taken place, but with the patient in a state of enkoimesis induced with the help of soporific substances such as opium.

[ 3 ] The Rod of Asclepius is a universal symbol for medicine to this day. However, it is frequently confused with Caduceus , which was a staff wielded by the god Hermes.  The Rod of Asclepius embodies one snake with no wings whereas Caduceus is represented by two snakes and a pair of wings depicting the swiftness of Hermes.

Hippocratic medicine [ edit ] Main articles: Hippocratic Corpus and Humorism Surgical tools, 5th century BC. Reconstructions based on descriptions within the Hippocratic corpus .

Thessaloniki Technology Museum .

The Hippocratic Corpus was a body of writing that opposed ancient beliefs, offering biologically based approaches to disease instead of magical intervention. Ancient Greek physicians did not regard disease as being of supernatural origin, i.e., brought about from the dissatisfaction of the gods or demonic possession: "The Greeks developed a system of medicine based on an empirico-rational approach, such that they relied ever more on naturalistic observation, enhanced by practical trial and error experience, abandoning magical and religious justifications of human bodily dysfunction." [ 4 ] However, in some instances, the fault of the ailment was still placed on the patient and the role of the physician was to conciliate with the gods or exorcise the demon with prayers, spells, and sacrifices.

[ citation needed ] The Hippocratic Corpus was primarily focused on Pathology rather than creating a comprehensive Physiology of the human body.

[ 5 ] It is a collection of about seventy early medical works from ancient Greece that are associated with Hippocrates and his students. Although once thought to have been written by Hippocrates himself, many scholars today believe that these texts were written by a series of authors over several decades.

[ 6 ] Thus its theories and concepts about the human body are not fully systematized and have some inconsistencies.

[ 5 ] Nonetheless it is significant in that it was one of the first attempts to theorized a biological system and biological causes for disease in Greek Science. This is stated in its treatise, " the Sacred Disease ", which argues that if all diseases were derived from supernatural sources, biological medicines would not work.

Humoral Theory [ edit ] Humorism (or the four humors) refers to blood, phlegm, yellow bile and black bile. Each of the four humors were linked to an organ, temper, season and element.

[ 7 ] It was also theorized that sex played a role in medicine because some diseases and treatments were different for females than for males.  Moreover, geographic location and social class affected the living conditions of the people and might subject them to different environmental issues such as mosquitoes, rats, and availability of clean drinking water.  Diet was thought to be an issue as well and might be affected by a lack of access to adequate nourishment.  Trauma, such as that suffered by gladiators, from dog bites or other injuries, played a role in theories relating to understanding anatomy and infections. Additionally, there was significant focus on the beliefs and mindset of the patient in the diagnosis and treatment theories.  It was recognized that the mind played a role in healing, or that it might also be the sole basis for the illness.

[ 8 ] Ancient Greek medicine began to revolve around the theory of humors. The humoral theory states that good health comes from a perfect balance of the four humors: blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile. Consequently, poor health resulted from improper balance of the four humors.

Hippocrates , known as the "Father of Modern Medicine", [ 9 ] established a medical school at Cos and is the most important figure in ancient Greek medicine.

[ 10 ] Hippocrates and his students documented numerous illnesses in the Hippocratic Corpus , and developed the Hippocratic Oath for physicians, which is still in use today. He and his students also created medical terminology that is part of our vocabulary today. Medical words included acute, chronic, epidemic, exacerbation, relapse, and others.

[ 7 ] The contributions to ancient Greek medicine of Hippocrates, Socrates and others had a lasting influence on Islamic medicine and medieval European medicine until many of their findings eventually became obsolete in the 14th century.

The establishment of the humoral theory of medicine focused on the balance between blood, yellow and black bile, and phlegm in the human body. Being too hot, cold, dry or wet disturbed the balance between the humors, resulting in disease and illness. Gods and demons were not believed to punish the patient, but attributed to bad air ( miasma theory ). Physicians who practiced humoral medicine focused on reestablishing balance between the humors. The shift from supernatural disease to biological disease did not completely abolish Greek religion, but offered a new method of how physicians interacted with patients.

Ancient Greek physicians who followed humorism emphasized the importance of environment. Physicians believed patients would be subjected to various diseases based on the environment they resided. The local water supply and the direction the wind blew influenced the health of the local populace.

Female Biology [ edit ] Due to its primary focus on Pathology (rather than physiology), Hippocratic theories on the female anatomy were generally not fully comprehensive.

[ 5 ] However there were some consistent themes to their theories of the Female body. In particular, Hippocratic authors had similar views of menstruation, the development of breasts, and the nature of the womb.  Hippocratic views in the Breasts and Menstruation were rooted in an assumption that the Flesh of a woman was of a completely different essential nature (or physis) compared to that of a man. For instance,  they believed women’s Flesh to be “Spongy, loose and porous” (Diseases of Women 1.1 (=8.2) whereas the flesh of a man was more firm and compact .

It was believed that this nature of female flesh caused it to soak up excess blood generated by the body, which was then expelled through Menstruation as a way of regulating the blood humor.  Likewise the “looseness” of female flesh was used to account for the existence of Female breasts. It was believed that in both male and female bodies, the breast was a gland that absorbs fluids and moisture, and thus the loose porous nature of women’s flesh allowed their breast to absorb more and grow larger.

[ 5 ] Finally, in regards to the Womb, Hippocratic scholars believed the Wandering Womb theory; that it was a detached organ within the female body and had the ability to migrate. The migration of the Womb was assumed to be the cause of many maladies and 
symptoms of discomfort or bad mood in women.

These Hippocratic theories assumed that the male body was the normal/ideal body, and that female differences were abnormal and inferior. Thus Hippocratic theories of Female anatomy aligned with the Patriarchal views of “Female Inferiority” in Ancient Greek society. For instance the theory on the ‘loose and porous nature’ of women's’ flesh was framed as a general inefficiency in female bodies compared to the more “fit and tight” male body, which was better at managing its humors. Menstruation was seen as an adaptation to an inherently inferior constitution that didn't manage the blood humor well. It was assumed that these “inefficiencies” in the female body made them unfit for male labor or male roles.

[ 5 ] Likewise, the theory that the womb migrated was partially based on observations that the male body did not contain a womb. Because the male body was seen as "the norm", it was assumed that the womb had no specified place in the body and thus naturally migrated.

[ 11 ] These patriarchal views, consequentially, affected Hippocratic conceptions about the nature of afflictions that women experienced, as well as the remedies for these afflictions.

Female Afflictions and Cures [ edit ] The concept of humoral imbalance played a crucial role in the diagnosis and treatment of women in ancient Greek society. With blood being one of the four humors, it can be seen as a reason for a woman to become manic and crazy with changes in mood because of the imbalance in the aforementioned humors. Blood’s relationship to the uterus was considered crucial to the well-being and health of the individual. Hippocrates believed and stated that if a woman’s period blood is not expelled from her body in full amount, it would rush to her heart and to her lungs, causing her affected organs to slow down; this would lead to shivering and fevers called ‘erratic fevers’ which would instill feelings of murderous feelings of madness because she tries to choke herself with the blood, leaving evil to set in on itself due to the bad condition of the blood.

[ 12 ] Medical treatments for women were generally womb-centered, focused on an emphasis on the misplacement of the uterus, also known as the “wandering womb”. In ancient Greek medicine, women were thought to contain an organ that resembles an animal; for it would move to its own accord and is often subject to displacement.

[ 13 ] It is attracted to pleasant smells, causing the womb to move closer to it and repelled from putrid smells, causing it to flee. This belief led to the treatment using sweet smells held above the vagina as a means to entice the womb to move back down if it is choking the thorax and pungent smells held below the nose for the same reason of it being prolapsed.

[ 14 ] Symptoms from a woman’s womb moving upwards includes sluggishness, vertigo, headache, and exhaustion while symptoms for the womb moving down to the hypochondriac regions include heartburn, irregular and intermittent heartbeat, loss of speech, choking, and death .

[ 15 ] One of the medical treatments for a prolapsed womb was to put the woman in a vapor bath, then put wild figs into wine, then boil it, and then cut a hole at the top of the container used to store the wine, typically a gourd; the vapor from the wine must reach through the channel and reach the womb; following this procedure was the implementation of inflammatory drugs to induce menstruation through a culmination of cow dung, beef bile, myrrh, galbanum, and anything similar .

[ 16 ] Asclepius (center) arrives in Kos and is greeted by Hippocrates (left) and a citizen (right), mosaic from the Asclepieion of Kos, 2nd–3rd century AD.

Herodicus [ edit ] Main article: Herodicus Herodicus ( Greek : Ἡρóδιĸος ) was a Greek physician of the 5th century BC, who is considered to be the father of sports medicine . The first use of therapeutic exercise for the treatment of disease and maintenance of health is credited to him, and he is believed to have been one of the tutors of Hippocrates .  He also recommended good diet and massage using beneficial herbs and oils, and his theories are considered the foundation of sports medicine .  He was specific in the manner that a massage should be given.  He recommended that rubbing be initially slow and gentle, then subsequently faster, with the application of more pressure, which was to be followed by more gentle friction.

[ 17 ] Aristotle [ edit ] Ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle was the most influential scholar of the living world from antiquity .

Aristotle's biological writings demonstrate great concern for empiricism , biological causation, and the diversity of life.

[ 18 ] He made countless observations of nature, especially the habits and attributes of plants and animals in the world around him, which he devoted considerable attention to categorizing . In all, Aristotle classified 540 animal species, and dissected at least 50.

Due to Aristotle's interest in creating a more systemic empirical understanding of nature, his theories of female anatomy were generally more consistently grounded in observation compared to Hippocratic theories. The Primary difference between Aristotle’s concept of the female body and a Hippocratic concept was that his saw the female body as being from the same general Physis (or same essential biological system) as the male one, with variation existing primarily in sexual organs.

[ 5 ] Likewise, unlike Hippocratic theorist, he believed the womb to be a natural part of the female body that was normally fixed in place (like the womb of other animals), though it could be displaced due to certain health conditions.

[ 5 ] However Aristotle’s theories of female anatomy were still inflected with patriarchal values of Greek society. For instance, Mensuration was still seen as evidence of inefficiencies of Female biology. Though it was no longer seen as the result of  inherently inferior constitution, Menstruation was now seen as the cause of "Physical Weakness" when compared to men.

[ 5 ] Likewise, some of Aristotle's theories on differences in biological sex seem to be based entirely on Patriarchal assumptions of male superiority, rather that empirical evidence. For instance, in his writings "History of Animals" he states that men have more skull sutures than women, which demonstrates a larger brain and thinking capacity.

[ 5 ] However, there is no actual observable difference in the number of skill sutures in men or women. He likewise claims that men have more teeth than women, which correlates with a longer lifespan in men, despite the fact that both men and women have the same number of teeth.

[ 5 ] Herophilus, Erasistratus and ancient Greek anatomy [ edit ] Despite their known respect for ancient Egyptian medicine , attempts to discern any particular influence on Greek practice at this early time have not been dramatically successful because of the lack of sources and the challenge of understanding ancient medical terminology .  It is clear, however, that the Greeks imported Egyptian substances into their pharmacopoeia , and the influence became more pronounced after the establishment of a school of Greek medicine in Alexandria .

[ 19 ] Nomenclature, methods and applications for the study of anatomy all date back to the Greeks.

[ 20 ] The first medical teacher at Alexandria was Herophilus of Chalcedon ( the father of anatomy ), [ 21 ] who differed from Aristotle, placing intelligence in the brain, and connected the nervous system to motion and sensation. Herophilus also distinguished between veins and arteries , noting that the latter had a pulse while the former do not. He did this using an experiment involving cutting certain veins and arteries in a pig's neck until the squealing stopped.

[ 22 ] In the same vein, he developed a diagnostic technique which relied upon distinguishing different types of pulse.

[ 23 ] He, and his contemporary, Erasistratus of Chios , researched the role of veins and nerves , mapping their courses across the body .

Erasistratus connected the increased complexity of the surface of the human brain compared to other animals to its superior intelligence . He sometimes employed experiments to further his research, at one time repeatedly weighing a caged bird and noting its weight loss between feeding times. Following his teacher's researches into pneumatics , he claimed that the human system of blood vessels was controlled by vacuums , drawing blood across the body. In Erasistratus' physiology, air enters the body, is then drawn by the lungs into the heart, where it is transformed into vital spirit, and is then pumped by the arteries throughout the body. Some of this vital spirit reaches the brain , where it is transformed into animal spirit, which is then distributed by the nerves.

[ 24 ] Herophilus and Erasistratus performed their experiments upon criminals given to them by their Ptolemaic kings. They dissected these criminals alive , and "while they were still breathing they observed parts which nature had formerly concealed, and examined their position, colour, shape, size, arrangement, hardness, softness, smoothness, connection." [ 25 ] Greek medicine in the Roman empire [ edit ] See also: Medicine in ancient Rome Through long contact with Greek culture, and their eventual conquest of Greece, the Romans adopted a favorable view of Hippocratic medicine.

[ 26 ] This acceptance led to the spread of Greek medical theories throughout the Roman Empire, and thus a large portion of the West.  The most influential Roman scholar to continue and expand on the Hippocratic tradition was Galen (d. c. 207). Not all Roman perspectives were favorable toward Greek medicine. The Roman author and natural philosopher Pliny the Elder was a vocal critic, suggesting that Greek doctors were unskilled and motivated by profit rather than healing. In his Natural History , Pliny expressed concerns about Greek practitioners, accusing them of exploiting patients rather than genuinely caring for their health. Nevertheless, historian of medicine Vivian Nutton cautions against taking Pliny’s criticism at face value, noting that it underestimates the substantial contributions of Greek physicians. Archaeological findings, including Greek inscriptions on doctors’ tombstones, suggest that at least 10% of known medical inscriptions in the Roman Empire were Greek, indicating the prominence and impact of Greek practitioners within Roman society.

[ 27 ] Dioscorides [ edit ] Main article: Pedanius Dioscorides The first century AD Greek physician, pharmacologist , botanist, and Roman army surgeon Pedanius Dioscorides authored an encyclopedia of medicinal substances commonly known as De Materia Medica .

This work did not delve into medical theory or explanation of pathogenesis, but described the uses and actions of some 600 plants  drugs, based on empirical observation. Unlike other works of Classical antiquity, Dioscorides' manuscript was never out of publication; it formed the basis for the Western pharmacopeia through the 19th century, a true testament to the efficacy of the medicines described; moreover, the influence of work on European herbal medicine eclipsed that of the Hippocratic Corpes .

[ 28 ] Galen [ edit ] Main article: Galen Aelius Galenus was a prominent Greek physician , surgeon and philosopher in the Roman Empire .

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] Arguably the most accomplished of all medical researchers of antiquity , Galen influenced the development of various scientific disciplines , including anatomy , [ 32 ] physiology , pathology , [ 33 ] pharmacology , [ 34 ] and neurology , as well as philosophy [ 35 ] and logic .

Galen also spent over 50 years in Rome, where he served as a physician to Roman emperors. Galen’s extensive body of work, originally written in Greek, provided a foundation for the preservation of medical knowledge that would later be translated into Latin. These translations facilitated the enduring legacy of Greek medical ideas in Roman and, ultimately, in Western medical traditions.

[ 27 ] The son of Aelius Nicon , a wealthy architect with scholarly interests, Galen received a comprehensive education that prepared him for a successful career as a physician and philosopher. Born in Pergamon (present-day Bergama , Turkey), Galen traveled extensively, exposing himself to a wide variety of medical theories and discoveries before settling in Rome , where he served prominent members of Roman society and eventually was given the position of personal physician to several emperors .

Galen's understanding of anatomy and medicine was principally influenced by the then-current theory of humorism , as advanced by ancient Greek physicians such as Hippocrates. His theories dominated and influenced Western medical science for more than 1,300 years. His anatomical reports, based mainly on dissection of monkeys , especially the Barbary macaque , and pigs , remained uncontested until 1543, when printed descriptions and illustrations of human dissections were published in the seminal work De humani corporis fabrica by Andreas Vesalius [ 36 ] [ 37 ] where Galen's physiological theory was accommodated to these new observations.

[ 38 ] Galen's theory of the physiology of the circulatory system endured until 1628, when William Harvey published his treatise entitled De motu cordis , in which he established that blood circulates, with the heart acting as a pump.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Medical students continued to study Galen's writings until well into the 19th century. Galen conducted many nerve ligation experiments that supported the theory, which is still accepted today, that the brain controls all the motions of the muscles by means of the cranial and peripheral nervous systems .

[ 41 ] Galen saw himself as both a physician and a philosopher, as he wrote in his treatise entitled That the Best Physician is also a Philosopher .

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] Galen was very interested in the debate between the rationalist and empiricist medical sects, [ 45 ] and his use of direct observation, dissection and vivisection represents a complex middle ground between the extremes of those two viewpoints.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] Historical legacy [ edit ] See also: Byzantine medicine , Medicine in the medieval Islamic world , and Medieval medicine of Western Europe Study of Hippocratic and Galenic texts all but disappeared in the Latin West in the Early Middle Ages , following the collapse of the Western Empire, although the Hippocratic-Galenic tradition of Greek medicine continued to be studied and practiced in the Eastern Roman Empire (Byzantium). After AD 750, Arab, Persian and Andalusi scholars translated Galen's and Dioscorides' works in particular.

[ citation needed ] Thereafter the Hippocratic-Galenic medical tradition was assimilated and eventually expanded, with the most influential Muslim doctor-scholar being Avicenna .

Beginning in the late eleventh century, the Hippocratic-Galenic tradition returned to the Latin West with a series of translations of the Classical texts, mainly from Arabic translations but occasionally from the original Greek. In the Renaissance, more translations of Galen and Hippocrates directly from the Greek were made from newly available Byzantine manuscripts. Galen's influence was so great that even after Western Europeans started making dissections in the thirteenth century, scholars often assimilated findings into the Galenic model that otherwise might have thrown Galen's accuracy into doubt.  Over time, however, Classical medical theory came to be superseded by increasing emphasis on scientific experimental methods in the 16th and 17th centuries. Nevertheless, the Hippocratic-Galenic practice of bloodletting was practiced into the 19th century, despite its empirical ineffectiveness and riskiness.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] History of medicine On Ancient Medicine (Hippocratic Corpus) Unani Phanostratê Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Cartwright, Mark (2013).

"Greek Medicine" .

World History Encyclopedia . UK . Retrieved 9 November 2013 .

{{ cite encyclopedia }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b Risse, Guenter B. (1999).

Mending Bodies, Saving Souls: A History of Hospitals . Oxford University Press. p. 56.

ISBN 978-0-19-974869-3 .

^ a b Askitopoulou, Helen; Konsolaki, Eleni; Ramoutsaki, Ioanna A.; Anastassaki, Maria (2002). "Surgical cures under sleep induction in the Asclepieion of Epidauros".

International Congress Series .

1242 : 11– 17.

doi : 10.1016/S0531-5131(02)00717-3 .

^ Kaba, R.; Sooriakumaran, P. (2007).

"The evolution of the doctor-patient relationship" .

International Journal of Surgery .

5 (1): 57– 65.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijsu.2006.01.005 .

PMID 17386916 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Dean-Jones, Lesley (1991). "The Cultural Construct of the Female Body in Classical Greek Science". In Pomeroy, Sarah B. (ed.).

Women's History and Ancient History . University of North Carolina Press. pp.

111– 137.

ISBN 978-0-8078-4310-9 .

^ Vivian Nutton'Ancient Medicine'(Routledge 2004) ^ a b "Ancient Greek medicine: Influences and practice" .

www.medicalnewstoday.com . 9 November 2018 . Retrieved 8 April 2021 .

^ Bendick, Jeanne.  "Galen – And the Gateway to Medicine."  Ignatius Press, San Francisco, CA, 2002.

ISBN 1-883937-75-2 .

^ "medicinaantiqua.org.uk" .

www.medicinaantiqua.org.uk . Archived from the original on 15 February 2008 . Retrieved 8 March 2008 .

"The Father of Modern Medicine: Hippocrates" . 28 February 2008. Archived from the original on 28 February 2008 . Retrieved 21 April 2012 .

Grammaticos PC, Diamantis A (2008). "Useful known and unknown views of the father of modern medicine, Hippocrates and his teacher Democritus".

Hellenic Journal of Nuclear Medicine .

11 (1): 2– 4.

PMID 18392218 .

The father of modern medicine: the first research of the physical factor of tetanus Archived 18 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine , European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases "Hippocrates" .

World History Encyclopedia . Archived from the original on 16 July 2021.

^ Atlas of Anatomy, ed. Giunti Editorial Group, Taj Books LTD 2002, p. 9 ^ Hanson, Ann Ellis (1991). "Continuity and Change: Three Case Studies in Hippocratic Gynecological Therapy and Theory.". In Pomeroy, Sarah B. (ed.).

Women’s History and Ancient History . University of North Carolina Press. pp.

71– 110.

ISBN 978-0-8078-4310-9 .

^ Hippocrates, On Virgins = VIII.466-70 Littré. G ^ Aretaeus, On the Causes and Symptoms of Acute Diseases 2, excerpts. Tr. F. Adams. G ^ Aretaeus, On the Causes and Symptoms of Acute Diseases 2, excerpts. Tr. F. Adams. G ^ Aretaeus, On the Causes and Symptoms of Acute Diseases 2, excerpts. Tr. F. Adams. G ^ Hippocrates, Places in Human Anatomy 47 = V 344–6 Littré. G ^ Early American Manual Therapy (Version 5.0) - Chapter 1 History and Development of Mechanical Vibration Therapy Archived 2005-03-09 at the Wayback Machine , Accessed: October 6, 2008. "In the 5th century Herodicus advocated exercise the treatment of disease and compelled his patients to have their bodies rubbed, he being a firm believer in the efficacy of massage. Joseph Schreiber, M. D., author of "Treatment of Massage and Exercise," translated by Walter Mendelson, M. D., of New York, claims that Herodicus first laid down principles for rational, mechanical methods of treatment. HERODICUS, 484 B. C., was one of the first to refer to the manner of giving massage.  He said friction should be gentle and slow at first, then rapid in combination with pressure, which was to be followed by gentle friction.  Other advocates were Plato, Socrates, and Hippocrates, who said "rubbing can bind a joint that is too loose, and loosen a joint that is too rigid. Hard rubbing binds, soft rubbing loosens, much rubbing causes parts to waste, moderate rubbing makes them grow." This is the earliest definite information relative to the effect of variations in the application of massage.  These maxims should be remembered by those who use mechanical vibration for they well define its general therapeutic application.  Hippocrates also suggested the direction in which to apply massage the art of rubbing up, thereby assisting mechanical and physical processes, aiding circulation, relieving stasis and consequently quickening metabolic processes." ^ Mason, A History of the Sciences pp 41 ^ Heinrich von Staden , Herophilus: The Art of Medicine in Early Alexandria (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), pp. 1-26.

^ Singer, Charles (1957).

A Short History of Anatomy & Physiology from Greeks to Harvey . NEw York: Dover Publications Inc. p. 5.

^ Elizabeth H. Oakes, Encyclopedia of World Scientists, p 321 ^ Mason, A History of the Sciences pp 56 ^ Barnes, Hellenistic Philosophy and Science pp 383 ^ Mason, A History of the Sciences , p 57 ^ Barnes, Hellenistic Philosophy and Science , pp 383-384 ^ Heinrich von Staden , "Liminal Perils: Early Roman Receptions of Greek Medicine", in Tradition, Transmission, Transformation , ed. F. Jamil Ragep and Sally P. Ragep with Steven Livesey (Leiden: Brill, 1996), pp. 369-418.

^ a b Nutton, Vivian (2012).

Galen and Roman Medicine: or can a Greek become a Latin?

. European Review. pp.

534– 542.

^ De Vos (2010).

"European Materia Medica in Historical Texts: Longevity of a Tradition and Implications for Future Use" .

Journal of Ethnopharmacology .

132 (1): 28– 47.

doi : 10.1016/j.jep.2010.05.035 .

PMC 2956839 .

PMID 20561577 .

^ " Life, death, and entertainment in the Roman Empire ". David Stone Potter, D. J. Mattingly (1999).

University of Michigan Press . p. 63.

ISBN 0-472-08568-9 ^ " Galen on bloodletting: a study of the origins, development, and validity of his opinions, with a translation of the three works ". Peter Brain, Galen (1986).

Cambridge University Press . p.1.

ISBN 0-521-32085-2 ^ Nutton Vivian (1973). "The Chronology of Galen's Early Career".

Classical Quarterly .

23 (1): 158– 171.

doi : 10.1017/S0009838800036600 .

PMID 11624046 .

S2CID 35645790 .

^ "Galen on the affected parts. Translation from the Greek text with explanatory notes" .

Med Hist .

21 (2): 212. 1977.

doi : 10.1017/s0025727300037935 .

PMC 1081972 .

^ Arthur John Brock (translator), Introduction. Galen. On the Natural Faculties . Edinburgh 1916 ^ Galen on pharmacology ^ Galen on the brain ^ Andreas Vesalius (1543).

De humani corporis fabrica, Libri VII (in Latin).

Basel , Switzerland : Johannes Oporinus . Retrieved 7 August 2010 .

^ O'Malley, C., Andreas Vesalius of Brussels, 1514–1564 , Berkeley: University of California Press ^ Siraisi, Nancy G., (1991) Girolamo Cardano and the Art of Medical Narrative, Journal of the History of Ideas. pp. 587–88.

^ William Harvey (1628).

Exercitatio Anatomica de Motu Cordis et Sanguinis in Animalibus (in Latin).

Frankfurt am Main , Germany : Sumptibus Guilielmi Fitzeri. p. 72.

ISBN 0-398-00793-4 . Retrieved 7 August 2010 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Furley, D, and J. Wilkie, 1984, Galen On Respiration and the Arteries , Princeton University Press, and Bylebyl, J (ed), 1979, William Harvey and His Age , Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press [ page needed ] ^ Frampton, Michael (2008).

Embodiments of Will: Anatomical and Physiological Theories of Voluntary Animal Motion from Greek Antiquity to the Latin Middle Ages, 400 B.C.-A.D. 1300 . Michael Frampton.

ISBN 978-3-639-08294-4 .

[ page needed ] ^ Claudii Galeni Pergameni (1992). Odysseas Hatzopoulos (ed.).

"That the best physician is also a philosopher" with a Modern Greek Translation .

Athens , Greece : Odysseas Hatzopoulos & Company: Kaktos Editions.

^ Theodore J. Drizis (Fall 2008).

"Medical ethics in a writing of Galen" .

Acta Med Hist Adriat .

6 (2): 333– 336.

PMID 20102254 .

^ Brain, P. (26 November 1977).

"Galen on the Ideal of the Physician" (PDF) .

Suid-Afrikaanse Tydskrif vir Geneeskunde .

52 (23): 936– 938.

hdl : 10520/AJA20785135_18319 .

PMID 339375 .

^ Frede, M. and R. Walzer, 1985, Three Treatises on the Nature of Science, Indianapolis: Hacket.

[ page needed ] ^ Lacy, Phillip De (January 1972). "Galen's Platonism".

The American Journal of Philology .

93 (1): 27– 39.

doi : 10.2307/292898 .

JSTOR 292898 .

PMID 11616518 .

^ Cosans, Christopher E. (1997). "Galen's Critique of Rationalist and Empiricist Anatomy".

Journal of the History of Biology .

30 (1): 35– 54.

doi : 10.1023/a:1004266427468 .

PMID 11618979 .

S2CID 35323972 .

^ Cosans, Christopher E (March 1998).

"The experimental foundations of Galen's teleology" .

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A .

29 (1): 63– 80.

Bibcode : 1998SHPSA..29...63C .

doi : 10.1016/s0039-3681(96)00005-2 .

References [ edit ] Annas, Julia.

Classical Greek Philosophy . In Boardman, John; Griffin, Jasper; Murray, Oswyn (ed.) The Oxford History of the Classical World .

Oxford University Press : New York, 1986.

ISBN 0-19-872112-9 Barnes, Jonathan.

Hellenistic Philosophy and Science . In Boardman, John; Griffin, Jasper; Murray, Oswyn (ed.) The Oxford History of the Classical World .

Oxford University Press : New York, 1986.

ISBN 0-19-872112-9 Guthrie, W. K. C.

A History of Greek Philosophy. Volume I: The earlier Presocratics and the Pythagoreans .

Cambridge University Press : New York, 1962.

ISBN 0-521-29420-7 Lovejoy, Arthur O.

The Great Chain of Being: A Study of the History of an Idea .

Harvard University Press , 1936. Reprinted by Harper & Row, ISBN 0-674-36150-4 , 2005 paperback: ISBN 0-674-36153-9 Mason, Stephen F.

A History of the Sciences . Collier Books: New York, 1956.

Mayr, Ernst .

The Growth of Biological Thought: Diversity, Evolution, and Inheritance .  The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press : Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1982.

ISBN 0-674-36445-7 Heinrich von Staden (ed. trans.).

Herophilus: The Art of Medicine in Early Alexandria .

Cambridge University Press , 1989.

ISBN 0-521-23646-0 , ISBN 978-0-521-23646-1 ] Further reading [ edit ] Cohn-Haft, Louis.

The Public Physicians of Ancient Greece , Northampton, Massachusetts, 1956.

Jones, W. H. S.

Philosophy and Medicine in Ancient Greece , Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1946.

Lennox, James (15 February 2006).

"Aristotle's Biology" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Longrigg, James.

Greek Rational Medicine: Philosophy and Medicine from Alcmæon to the Alexandrians , Routledge, 1993.

Longrigg, James.

Greek Medicine From the Heroic to the Hellenistic Age . New York, NY, 1998.

ISBN 0-415-92087-6 Majno, Guido.

The Healing Hand: Man and Wound in the Ancient World , Harvard University Press , 1975.

Majno, Guido.

The Healing Hand: Man and Wound in the Ancient World . Routledge, 2004 External links [ edit ] Greek and Roman Medicine: An Introductory Bibliography for Graduate Students in Classics at Ancient Medicine compiled by Lee T. Pearcy Connor, J. T. H.

An English Language Bibliography of Classical Greek Medicine v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Traditional medicine Africa Ancient Egyptian medicine Tabernanthe iboga Muti Nganga Saltigue Traditional African medicine Traditional Hausa medicine Traditional healers of Southern Africa Yorùbá medicine Americas Aztec medicine Brazilian traditional medicine Chumash traditional medicine Curandero Kallawaya Mapuche medicine Maya medicine Navajo medicine Traditional Alaska Native medicine Asia Ayurveda Dhivehi beys Georgian folk medicine Hilot Iranian traditional medicine Ancient Jamu Kampo Ramuan Siddha medicine Sri Lankan traditional medicine Traditional Thai medicine Traditional Chinese medicine Traditional Korean medicine Traditional Mongolian medicine Traditional Tibetan medicine Traditional Vietnamese medicine Unani medicine Europe Ancient Greek medicine Byzantine medicine Medicine in ancient Rome Medieval medicine of Western Europe Oceania Bush medicine Other Alchemy Alternative medicine Apothecary Medicine in the medieval Islamic world Electuary Ethnomedicine Health care Herbal medicine herbs and fungi History of alternative medicine Humorism Mithridatism Naturopathy Prehistoric medicine Shamanism Theriac Category:Traditional medicine Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐kxs99
Cached time: 20250814225907
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.823 seconds
Real time usage: 1.021 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4634/1000000
Revision size: 42452/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 228015/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5356/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 168721/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.503/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17538782/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  809.217      1 -total
 37.39%  302.601      1 Template:Reflist
 16.39%  132.618      1 Template:Ancient_Greece_topics
 16.07%  130.007      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 13.94%  112.810      4 Template:Langx
 10.43%   84.371      3 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
 10.18%   82.382      6 Template:Fix
  8.92%   72.208      1 Template:Short_description
  7.46%   60.391     11 Template:Cite_journal
  7.11%   57.573      3 Template:Cn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4831143:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814225907 and revision id 1297829347. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ancient_Greek_medicine&oldid=1297829347 " Categories : Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Greek anatomists Ancient Greek physicians Ancient Greek science writers Ancient Roman medicine Byzantine medicine European traditional medicine Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Latin-language sources (la) CS1 errors: ISBN date Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2024 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 19:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ancient Greek medicine 22 languages Add topic

