Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 History 3 References Toggle the table of contents Construct (philosophy) 11 languages العربية Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی עברית Македонски Norsk bokmål Português 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Object whose existence depends upon a subject's mind Not to be confused with Social construct .

An object's center of mass certainly "exists" in some sense, but not in the same sense in which the object itself does.

In philosophy , a construct is an object which is ideal , that is, an object of the mind or of thought, meaning that its existence may be said to depend upon a subject's mind . This contrasts with any possibly mind-independent objects, the existence of which purportedly does not depend on the existence of a conscious observing subject.

[ 1 ] Thus, the distinction between these two terms may be compared to that between phenomenon and noumenon in other philosophical contexts and to many of the typical definitions of the terms realism and idealism also. In the correspondence theory of truth , ideas, such as constructs, are to be judged and checked according to how well they correspond with their referents , often conceived as part of a mind-independent reality.

Overview [ edit ] As mind-dependent objects, concepts that are typically viewed as constructs include the abstract objects designated by such symbols as 3 or 4, or words such as liberty or cold as they are seen as a result of induction or abstraction that can be later applied to observable objects or compared to other constructs. Therefore, scientific hypotheses and theories (e.g.

evolutionary theory , gravitational theory ), as well as classifications (for example, in biological taxonomy ), are also conceptual entities often considered to be constructs in the aforementioned sense. In contrast, most everyday, concrete things that surround the observer can be classified as objective (in the sense of being "real," that is, believed to be existing externally to the observer).

How much of what the observer perceives is objective is controversial, so the exact definition of constructs varies greatly across different views and philosophies. The view that the senses capture most or all of the properties of external objects directly is usually associated with the term direct realism . Many forms of nominalism ascribe the process of conceptual construction to language itself, for instance, constructing the idea of "fishness" by drawing distinctions between the word "fish" and other words (such as "rock") or through some kind of resemblance between the referents that the class implied by the word encompasses. Conversely, Platonic idealism generally maintains that a "reality" independent of the subject exists, though this reality is seen as ideal, not physical or material, and so it cannot be known by the senses. As such, the idea of "liberty" or "coldness" is just as real as that of "rockness" or "fishness." The creation of constructs is a part of operationalization , especially the creation of theoretical definitions . The usefulness of one conceptualization over another depends largely on construct validity . To address the non-observability of constructs, U.S. federal agencies such as the National Institutes of Health and the National Cancer Institute have created a construct database termed Grid-Enabled Measures (GEM) to improve construct use and reuse.

In the philosophy of science , particularly in reference to scientific theories , a hypothetical construct is an explanatory variable which is not directly observable. For example, the concepts of intelligence and motivation are used to explain phenomena in psychology , but neither is directly observable. A hypothetical construct differs from an intervening variable in that it has properties and implications which have not been demonstrated in empirical research. These serve as a guide to further research. An intervening variable, on the other hand, is a summary of observed empirical findings.

History [ edit ] Cronbach and Meehl (1955) define a hypothetical construct as a concept for which there is not a single observable referent, which cannot be directly observed, and for which there exist multiple referents, but none all-inclusive.

[ 2 ] For example, according to Cronbach and Meehl a fish is not a hypothetical construct because, despite variation in species and varieties of fish, there is an agreed upon definition for a fish with specific characteristics that distinguish a fish from a bird. Furthermore, a fish can be directly observed. On the other hand, a hypothetical construct has no single referent; rather, hypothetical constructs consist of groups of functionally related behaviors, attitudes, processes, and experiences. Instead of seeing intelligence, love, or fear we see indicators or manifestations of what we have agreed to call intelligence, love, or fear.

Diseases like Leukemia are important explanatory concepts, but do not 'exist' in the same way as a rock or a pencil McCorquodale and Meehl (1948) discussed the distinction between what they called intervening variables and these hypothetical constructs.

[ 3 ] They describe hypothetical constructs as containing surplus meaning, as they imply more than just the operations by which they are measured.

In the positivist tradition, Boring (1923) described intelligence as whatever the intelligence test measures.

[ 4 ] As a reaction to such operational definitions , Cronbach and Meehl (1955) emphasized the necessity of viewing constructs like intelligence as hypothetical constructs. They asserted that there is no adequate criterion for the operational definition of constructs like abilities and personality. Thus, according to Cronbach and Meehl (1955), a useful construct of intelligence or personality should imply more than simply test scores. Instead, these constructs should predict a wide range of behaviors.

References [ edit ] ^ Bunge, M. 1974.

Treatise on Basic Philosophy, Vol. I Semantics I: Sense and Reference . Dordrecth-Boston: Reidel Publishing Co.

^ Cronbach, L.J.,  and Meehl, P.E. (1955) "Construct validity in psychological tests", Psychological Bulletin 52 :281-302.

^ MacCorquodale, K.,&  Meehl, P.E. (1948). "On a distinction between hypothetical constructs and intervening variables", Psychological Review 55 :95-107.

^ Boring, E.G. (1923) "Intelligence as the tests test it", New Republic 36 :35-37.

v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐6ljm6
Cached time: 20250812021148
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.209 seconds
Real time usage: 0.278 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 438/1000000
Revision size: 6862/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 25520/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 656/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 15946/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.129/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 2622499/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  221.019      1 -total
 43.60%   96.362      1 Template:Philosophy_of_science
 43.51%   96.176      2 Template:Navbox
 29.66%   65.565      1 Template:Short_description
 16.25%   35.917      2 Template:Pagetype
 12.81%   28.306      1 Template:Authority_control
  9.00%   19.899      3 Template:Main_other
  8.21%   18.152      1 Template:SDcat
  8.16%   18.029      1 Template:Distinguish
  5.83%   12.875      2 Template:Portal-inline Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:15234652:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021148 and revision id 1286395909. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Construct_(philosophy)&oldid=1286395909 " Categories : Concepts in epistemology Concepts in metaphysics Concepts in the philosophy of science Scientific method Abstract object theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 April 2025, at 17:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Construct (philosophy) 11 languages Add topic

