Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Properties 2 Production 3 Applications 4 History 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Nomex 15 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Hrvatski Italiano עברית 日本語 Polski Português Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Flame-resistant meta-aramid material A firefighter in Toronto, Canada wears a Nomex hood in 2007.

Nomex is a trademarked term for an inherently flame-resistant fabric with meta - aramid chemistry widely used for industrial applications and fire protection equipment. It was developed in the early 1960s by DuPont and first marketed in 1967.

[ 1 ] The fabric is often combined with Kevlar to increase its resistance for breakage or tear.

Properties [ edit ] Nomex and related aramid polymers are related to nylon , but have aromatic backbones, and hence are more rigid and more durable. Nomex is an example of a meta variant of the aramids ( Kevlar is a para aramid). Unlike Kevlar, Nomex strands cannot align during filament polymerization and have less strength: its ultimate tensile strength is 340 MPa (49,000 psi).

[ 2 ] However, it has excellent thermal, chemical, and radiation resistance for a polymer material. It can withstand temperatures of up to 370 °C (700 °F).

[ 3 ] Production [ edit ] Nomex is produced by condensation reaction from the monomers m -phenylenediamine and isophthaloyl chloride .

[ 1 ] It is sold in both fiber and sheet forms and is used as a fabric where resistance from heat and flame is required. Nomex sheet is actually a calendered paper and made in a similar fashion. Nomex Type 410 paper was the first Nomex paper developed and one of the higher volume grades made, mostly for electrical insulation purposes.

Wilfred Sweeny (1926–2011), the DuPont scientist responsible for discoveries leading to Nomex, earned a DuPont Lavoisier Medal [ 4 ] in 2002 partly for this work.

Applications [ edit ] Nomex Paper is used in electrical laminates such as circuit boards and transformer cores as well as fireproof honeycomb structures where it is saturated with a phenolic resin . Honeycomb structures such as these, as well as mylar -Nomex laminates, are used extensively in aircraft construction. Firefighting, military aviation, and vehicle racing industries use Nomex to create clothing and equipment that can withstand intense heat.

A Nomex hood is a common piece of racing and firefighting equipment. It is placed on the head on top of a firefighter 's face mask. The hood protects the portions of the head not covered by the helmet and face mask from the intense heat of the fire.

Wildland firefighters wear Nomex shirts and trousers as part of their personal protective equipment during wildfire suppression activities.

Racing car drivers wear driving suits constructed of Nomex and or other fire retardant materials , along with Nomex gloves, long underwear, balaclavas , socks, helmet lining and shoes, to protect them in the event of a fire .

Military pilots and aircrew wear flight suits made of over 92 percent Nomex to protect them from cockpit fires (previously issued flight suits were treated in borax solution prior to the introduction). It is also worn as sailors' anti-flash gear . Troops riding in ground vehicles often wear Nomex for fire protection. Kevlar thread is often used to hold the fabric together at seams.

Military tank drivers also typically use Nomex hoods as protection against fire.

[ 5 ] In the U.S. space program, Nomex has been used for the Thermal Micrometeoroid Garment on the Extravehicular Mobility Unit (in conjunction with Kevlar and Gore-Tex ) and ACES pressure suit, both for fire and extreme environment (water immersion to near vacuum) protection, and as thermal blankets on the payload bay doors, fuselage, and upper wing surfaces of the Space Shuttle Orbiter. It has also been used for the airbags for the Mars Pathfinder and Mars Exploration Rover missions [ citation needed ] , the Galileo atmospheric probe , the Cassini-Huygens Titan probe, as an external covering on the AERCam Sprint , and is planned to be incorporated into NASA's upcoming Crew Exploration Vehicle .

Nomex has been used as an acoustic material in Troy, NY, at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute's Experimental Media and Performing Arts Center ( EMPAC ) main concert hall. A ceiling canopy of Nomex reflects high and mid frequency sound, providing reverberation, while letting lower frequency sound partially pass through the canopy.

[ 6 ] According to RPI President Shirley Ann Jackson, EMPAC is the first venue in the world to use Nomex as an architectural material for acoustic reasons.

[ citation needed ] Nomex (like Kevlar) is also used in the production of loudspeaker drivers.

Honeycomb-structured Nomex paper is used as a spacer between layers of lead in the ATLAS Liquid Argon Calorimeter, [ 7 ] and as a laminate core for hull and deck construction in custom boats such as Stiletto Catamarans like the Stiletto 27 .

[ 8 ] Nomex is used in industrial applications as a filter in exhaust filtration systems, typically a baghouse , that deal with hot gas emissions found in asphalt plants, cement plants, steel smelting facilities, and non-ferrous metal production facilities.

[ 9 ] Nomex is used in some classical guitar tops in order to create a 'composite' soundboard.

[ 10 ] When Nomex is laminated between 2 spruce or cedar 'skins', a rigid and lightweight plate is produced, which can improve the efficiency of the soundboard. While the 'laminated' technique was created by Matthias Dammann, the use of Nomex within was first employed by luthier Gernot Wagner.

[ 10 ] History [ edit ] The deaths in fiery crashes of race car drivers Fireball Roberts at Charlotte, and Eddie Sachs and Dave MacDonald at Indianapolis in 1964, led to the use of flame-resistant fabrics such as Nomex.

[ 11 ] In early 1966 Competition Press and Autoweek reported: "During the past season, experimental driving suits were worn by Walt Hansgen , Masten Gregory , Marvin Panch and Group 44's Bob Tullius ; these four representing a fairly good cross section in the sport. The goal was to get use-test information on the comfort and laundering characteristics of Nomex. The Chrysler-Plymouth team at the recent Motor Trend 500 at Riverside also wore these suits." [ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Aramid Gore-Tex Kevlar Marlan PET film Silica Aerogel Thermal Micrometeoroid Garment Twaron Vectran References [ edit ] ^ a b Mera, Hiroshi; Takata, Tadahiko (2000). "High-Performance Fibers".

Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry .

doi : 10.1002/14356007.a13_001 .

ISBN 978-3-527-30673-2 .

^ "DuPont™ Nomex® N301 Nomex® Aramid Staple Fiber" .

^ Sabir, Tasneem (2018). "Fibers used for high-performance apparel".

High-Performance Apparel . pp.

7– 32.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-08-100904-8.00002-X .

ISBN 978-0-08-100904-8 .

^ "Nomex Scientist Earns Lavoisier Medal" . FiberSource. June 20, 2002. Archived from the original on January 23, 2013 . Retrieved 2008-08-08 .

^ "Intense Battles Call for Intense Flash Fire Protection" . Archived from the original on 2013-01-16 . Retrieved 2013-01-22 .

^ Immersive Art: Surrounded by Science, Art Flourishes Archived 2011-07-10 at the Wayback Machine by Michael Eddy, Stage Directions , February 1, 2009 ^ Hervas, L. (2005).

"The ATLAS Liquid Argon Electromagnetic Calorimeter: Construction, Commissioning and Selected Test Beam Results" .

IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement .

54 (4): 1505– 1512.

Bibcode : 2005ITIM...54.1505H .

doi : 10.1109/TIM.2005.851233 .

S2CID 26075945 .

^ Boat Building: Process and Advances, How Core Materials Make Better Boats by Eric W. Sponberg, Naval Architect ^ "Hot Gas Filtration" .

^ a b Kamen, Chris (23 February 2017).

"The origin and development of the double top guitar" .

Classic Guitars International . Retrieved 2022-12-19 .

^ Competition Press , June 27-July 10, 1964, Page 2.

^ Competition Press and Autoweek , April 9, 1966, Page 17.

External links [ edit ] DuPont Nomex Dupont.com Archived 2012-02-17 at the Wayback Machine - 40th anniversary of Nomex - 2007 Comparison of single-layer Nomex suits v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline v t e DuPont Selected directors Edward D. Breen Alexander M. Cutler Rajiv L. Gupta Products Corian FE-13 Freon Hypalon Kalrez Kapton Kevlar Mylar Neoprene Nomex Nylon Sorona Teflon Tyvek Vespel Viton Zodiaq Zytel Subsidiaries and joint ventures Antec International Divisions and facilities DuPont Central Research DuPont Experimental Station DuPont Building Notable people Éleuthère Irénée du Pont Alfred I. du Pont Eugene du Pont Francis Gurney du Pont Francis Irénée du Pont Henry du Pont Lammot du Pont Pierre S. du Pont T. Coleman du Pont Jeffery Stanford Agate Anthony Joseph Arduengo III Jacques Antoine Bidermann Samuel Bodman Norman Borlaug Donaldson Brown Richard H. Brown Wallace Carothers Uma Chowdhry Thomas M. Connelly Curtis J. Crawford John T. Dillon Linda Fisher Richard Goodmanson Jeff Gordon Charles O. Holliday Steven Ittel Edward G. Jefferson Ellen J. Kullman Stephanie Kwolek James Lynah Rudolph Pariser George Parshall Charles J. Pedersen William Dale Phillips Roy J. Plunkett John J. Raskob William K. Reilly Irving S. Shapiro Richard R. Schrock Joseph Shivers Howard Ensign Simmons Jr.

Charles Stine Frederick N. Tebbe Chadwick A. Tolman Earl Tupper Charles M. Vest Edgar S. Woolard Jr.

Nathaniel C. Wyeth History DuPont (1802–2017) Du Pont family Atlas Chemical Industries B Reactor ( Manhattan Project ) Eleutherian Mills Hagley Museum and Library Hercules Powder Company Kinetic Chemicals Nemours Estate Remington Arms Savannah River Site Wilmington Trust Winterthur Museum, Garden and Library Conoco Consolidation Coal Company DuPont analysis DuPont v. Kolon Industries Du Pont Motors DuPont Building (incl. The Playhouse on Rodney Square, formerly the DuPont Playhouse) Chemours Sponsorship Tour DuPont Pioneer 250 Hendrick Motorsports Car No. 24 ( NASCAR Cup Series career of Jeff Gordon ) The DuPont Show with June Allyson DuPont Show of the Month Category Commons v t e Fibers Natural Plant Abacá Bagasse Bamboo Bashō Coir Cotton Fique Flax Linen Hemp Jute Kapok Kenaf Lotus silk Piña Pine Raffia Ramie Rattan Sisal Wood Animal Alpaca Angora Byssus Camel hair Cashmere Catgut Chiengora Guanaco Hair Llama Mohair Pashmina Qiviut Rabbit Silk Tendon Spider silk Wool Vicuña Yak Mineral Asbestos Synthetic Regenerated Artificial silk Milk fiber Semi-synthetic Acetate Diacetate Lyocell Modal Piñatex Rayon Triacetate Mineral Glass Carbon Boron Basalt Metallic Polymer Acrylic Aramid Twaron Kevlar Technora Nomex Microfiber Modacrylic Nylon Olefin Polyester Polyethylene UHMWPE Spandex Vectran Vinylon Vinyon Zylon Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nomex&oldid=1301795388 " Categories : Flame retardant fabrics Synthetic materials Firefighting equipment Synthetic fibers Brand name materials DuPont products Trademarks Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2019 This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 18:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nomex 15 languages Add topic

