Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Regional variants Toggle Regional variants subsection 1.1 Europe 1.1.1 Companies 1.2 North America 1.3 Oceania 1.4 Asia 1.4.1 China 1.5 International 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Environmentally friendly 24 languages العربية Bosanski Català Español Esperanto فارسی 한국어 Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar मराठी Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Português Simple English کوردی Suomi ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sustainability and marketing term A sewage treatment plant that uses solar energy , located at Santuari de Lluc monastery in Spain .

Environmentally friendly speed warning powered by solar and wind power .

Environment Human impact on the climate Issues Environmentalism Stewardship Environmental studies Environment in Consulting Education Engineering Humanities Law Policy Science Social science Article index Lists Portal Category Commons v t e Part of a series on Green politics Core topics Climate change litigation Fossil fuels lobby Green party List of topics Politics of climate change Four pillars Ecological wisdom Social justice Grassroots democracy Nonviolence Perspectives Alter-globalization Bright green environmentalism Criticisms of globalization Deep ecology Degrowth Dirty hands Disinvestment Ecoauthoritarianism Eco-capitalism Ecocentrism Ecofascism Ecofeminism Eco-nationalism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Green anarchism Green conservatism Green left Green liberalism Green libertarianism Green Zionism Social ecology Queer ecology Intellectuals Abbey Albert Anderson Bari Best Beuys Berry Bookchin Brown (Lester) Brower Carson Dodds d'Eaubonne Gandhi George Hawken Jackson Khosla Klein Kovel LaDuke Latouche Linkola Löwy Maathai Mason Næss Negri Nussbaum Porritt Raworth Rendueles Salleh Sassen Schumacher Scruton Shiva Singer Snyder Sukhdev Thoreau Zerzan Politicians Bandt Bausch Benčić Bennett Betancourt Brélaz Brown (Bob) Camejo Cohn-Bendit Cuffe Emsis Fajardo Feinstein Fischer Frassoni Grodzka Habeck Halsema Harris Hourigan Joly Kelly Kogler Kretschmann Kuhn Lalonde Lipietz López Lucas Lunacek Martin Manning May Nader O'Gorman Roth Schmidt-Nielsen Silva Sirkis Stein Trittin Van der Bellen Vējonis Wall Organizations Asia Pacific Greens Federation European Green Party Federation of Green Parties of Africa Federation of the Green Parties of the Americas Federation of Young European Greens Global Greens Global Young Greens World Ecological Parties Related topics Carbon fee and dividend Carbon tax Circular economy Climate change mitigation Climate finance Climate justice Climate target Conservation movement Corporate political activism Eco-investing Ecological economics Ecological modernization Ecomodernism Eco-tariff Ecotax Eco-terrorism Environmental conflict effects of agriculture effects of aviation finance issues justice movement planning pricing reform racism technology Environmentalism opposition Environmental skepticism Stewardship in music Fossil fuel phase-out Green development economy growth grabbing greening imperialism industrial policy infrastructure job New Deal recovery retrofit state theory transport hierarchy vehicle washing Localism Low-carbon economy List of environmental incidents conflicts killings Political ecology Progressivism Renewable energy Sustainable design development energy engineering refurbishment transport War on coal Water conflict Environment portal Politics portal v t e Environment friendly processes , or environmental-friendly processes (also referred to as eco-friendly , nature-friendly , and green ), are sustainability and marketing terms referring to goods and services , laws , guidelines and policies that claim reduced, minimal, or no harm upon ecosystems or the environment .

[ 1 ] Companies use these ambiguous terms to promote goods and services, sometimes with additional, more specific certifications, such as ecolabels . Their overuse can be referred to as greenwashing .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] To ensure the successful meeting of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) companies are advised to employ environmental friendly processes in their production.

[ 5 ] Specifically, Sustainable Development Goal 12 measures 11 targets and 13 indicators "to ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns".

[ 6 ] The International Organization for Standardization has developed ISO 14020 and ISO 14024 to establish principles and procedures for environmental labels and declarations that certifiers and eco-labellers should follow. In particular, these standards relate to the avoidance of financial conflicts of interest , the use of sound scientific methods and accepted test procedures, and openness and transparency in the setting of standards.

[ 7 ] Regional variants [ edit ] Europe [ edit ] Products located in members of the European Union can use the EU Ecolabel pending the EU's approval.

[ 8 ] EMAS is another EU label [ 9 ] [ 10 ] that signifies whether an organization management is green as opposed to the product.

[ 11 ] Germany also uses the Blue Angel , based on Germany's standard.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] In Europe, there are many different ways that companies are using environmentally friendly processes, eco-friendly labels, and overall changing guidelines to ensure that there is less harm being done to the environment and ecosystems while their products are being made. In Europe, for example, many companies are already using EMAS [ citation needed ] labels to show that their products are friendly.

[ 14 ] Companies [ edit ] Many companies in Europe make putting eco-labels on their products a top-priority since it can result to an increase in sales when there are eco-labels on these products. In Europe specifically, a study was conducted that shows a connection between eco-labels and the purchasing of fish: "Our results show a significant connection between the desire for eco-labeling and seafood features, especially the freshness of the fish, the geographical origin of the fish and the wild vs farmed origin of the fish".

[ 15 ] This article shows that eco-labels are not only reflecting a positive impact on the environment when it comes to creating and preserving products, but also increase sales.  However, not all European countries agree on whether certain products, especially fish, should have eco-labels. In the same article, it is remarked: "Surprisingly, the country effect on the probability of accepting a fish eco-label is tricky to interpret. The countries with the highest level of eco-labeling acceptability are Belgium and France".

[ 16 ] According to the same analysis and statistics, France and Belgium are most likely of accepting these eco-labels.

North America [ edit ] In the United States , environmental marketing claims require caution. Ambiguous titles such as environmentally friendly can be confusing without a specific definition; some regulators are providing guidance.

[ 17 ] The United States Environmental Protection Agency has deemed some ecolabels misleading in determining whether a product is truly "green".

[ 18 ] In Canada , one label is that of the Environmental Choice Program .

[ 12 ] Created in 1988, [ 19 ] only products approved by the program are allowed to display the label.

[ 20 ] Overall, Mexico was one of the first countries in the world to pass a specific law on climate change . The law set an obligatory target of reducing national greenhouse-gas emissions by 30% by 2020. The country also has a National Climate Change Strategy, which is intended to guide policymaking over the next 40 years.

[ 21 ] Oceania [ edit ] The Energy Rating Label is a Type III label [ 22 ] [ 23 ] that provides information on "energy service per unit of energy consumption".

[ 24 ] It was first created in 1986, but negotiations led to a redesign in 2000.

[ 25 ] Oceania generates the second most e-waste, 16.1 kg, while having the third lowest recycling rate of 8.8%.

[ 26 ] Out of Oceania, only Australia has a policy in policy to manage e-waste, that being the Policy Stewardship Act published in 2011 that aimed to manage the impact of products, mainly those in reference to the disposal of products and their waste.

[ 27 ] Under the Act the National Television and Computer Recycling Scheme (NTCRS) was created, which forced manufactures and importers of electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) importing 5000 or more products or 15000 or more peripherals be liable and required to pay the NTCRS for retrieving and recycling materials from electronic products.

New Zealand does not have any law that directly manages their e-waste, instead they have voluntary product stewardship schemes such as supplier trade back and trade-in schemes and voluntary recycling drop-off points. Though this has helped it costs the provider money with labor taking up 90% of the cost of recycling. In addition, e-waste is currently not considered a priority product, which would encourage the enforcement of product stewardship. In Pacific Island Regions (PIR), e-waste management is a hard task since they lack the adequate amount of land to properly dispose of it even though they produce one of the lowest amounts of e-waste in the world due to their income and population. Due to this there are large stockpiles of waste unable to be recycled safely.

Currently, The Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP), an organization in charge of managing the natural resources and environment of the Pacific region, is in charge of region coordination and managing the e-waste of the Oceania region.

[ 28 ] SPREP uses Cleaner Pacific 2025 as a framework to guide the various governments in the region.

[ 29 ] They also work with PacWaste (Pacific Hazardous Waste) to identify and resolve the different issues with waste management of the islands, which largely stem from the lack of government enforcement and knowledge on the matter.

[ 30 ] They have currently proposed a mandatory product stewardship policy be put in place along with an advance recycling fee which would incentivize local and industrial recycling. They are also in the mindset that the islands should collaborate and share resources and experience to assist in the endeavor.

With the help from the NTCRS, though the situation has improved they have been vocal about the responsibilities of stakeholders in the situation and how they need to be more clearly defined. In addition to there being a differences in state and federal regulations, with only Southern Australia, Australian Capital Territory, and Victoria having banned e-waste landfill, it would be possible to make this apply the rest of the region if a federal decision was made. They have also advocated for reasonable access to collection points for waste, with there being only one collection point within a 100 km radius in some cases. It has been shown that the reason some residents do not recycle is because of their distance from a collection point. In addition, there have been few campaigns to recycle, with the company, Mobile Muster, a voluntary collection program managed by the Australian Mobile Telecommunication Association, aimed to collect phones before they went to a landfill and has been doing so since 1999. Upon further study, it was found that only 46% of the public was award of the program, which later increased to 74% in 2018, but this was after an investment of $45 million from the Australian Mobile Telecommunication Association.

Asia [ edit ] "Economic growth in Asia has increased in the past three decades and has heightened energy demand, resulting in rising greenhouse gas emissions and severe air pollution. To tackle these issues, fuel switching and the deployment of renewables are essential." [ 31 ] However, as countries continue to advance, it leads to more pollution as a result of increased energy consumption. In recent years, the biggest concern for Asia is its air pollution issues. Major Chinese cities such as Beijing have received the worst air quality rankings (Li et al ., 2017). Seoul, the capital of South Korea, also suffers from air pollution (Kim et al ., 2017). Currently, Indian cities such as Mumbai and Delhi are overtaking Chinese cities in the ranking of worst air quality. In 2019, 21 of the world's 30 cities with the worst air quality were in India." The environmentally friendly trends are marketed with a different color association, using the color blue for clean air and clean water, as opposed to green in western cultures. Japanese- and Korean-built hybrid vehicles use the color blue instead of green all throughout the vehicle, and use the word "blue" indiscriminately.

[ 32 ] China [ edit ] According to Shen, Li, Wang, and Liao, the emission trading system that China had used for its environmentally friendly journey was implemented in certain districts and was successful in comparison to those which were used in test districts that were approved by the government.

[ 33 ] This shows how China tried to effectively introduce new innovative systems to impact the environment. China implemented multiple ways to combat environmental problems even if they didn't succeed at first. It led to them implementing a more successful process which benefited the environment. Although China needs to implement policies like, "The “fee-to-tax” process should be accelerated, however, and the design and implementation of the environmental tax system should be improved. This would form a positive incentive mechanism in which a low level of pollution correlates with a low level of tax." By implementing policies like these companies have a higher incentive to not over pollute the environment and instead focus on creating an eco-friendlier environment for their workplaces. In doing so, it will lead to less pollution being emitted while there also being a cleaner environment. Companies would prefer to have lower taxes to lessen the costs they have to deal with, so it encourages them to avoid polluting the environment as much as possible.

International [ edit ] Energy Star is a program with a primary goal of increasing energy efficiency and indirectly decreasing greenhouse gas emissions .

[ 34 ] Energy Star has different sections for different nations or areas, including the United States, [ 35 ] the European Union [ 36 ] and Australia.

[ 37 ] The program, which was founded in the United States, also exists in Canada, Japan, New Zealand, and Taiwan.

[ 38 ] Additionally, the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 17 has a target to promote the development, transfer, dissemination, and diffusion of environmentally friendly technologies to developing countries as part of the 2030 Agenda .

[ 39 ] See also [ edit ] Environment portal Climate justice Cradle-to-cradle design Design for Environment Ecolabel Environmental Choice Program Environmental enterprise Environmental movement Environmental organizations Environmental protection Environmentalism Green brands Green trading Greenwashing List of environmental issues List of environmental organizations List of environmental topics Market-based instruments Natural capital Natural resource Renewable energy Sustainability Sustainable products Corporate sustainability References [ edit ] ^ "nature-friendly".

Webster's New Millennium Dictionary of English, Preview Edition (v 0.9.7) . Lexico Publishing Group, LLC.

^ Motavalli, Jim (12 February 2011).

"A History of Greenwashing: How Dirty Towels Impacted the Green Movement" .

AOL .

^ "Grønvaskere invaderer børsen" [Greenwashers invade the market].

EPN.dk (in Danish). Jyllands-Posten. 21 June 2008. Archived from the original on 5 July 2008 . Retrieved 22 December 2012 .

^ Greenwashing Fact Sheet. 22 March 2001. Retrieved 14 November 2009. from corpwatch.org Archived 7 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Eco friendly production key to achieving sdgs" .

‘Eco-friendly production key to achieving SDGs’ | theindependentbd.com .

^ United Nations (2017) Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 6 July 2017, Work of the Statistical Commission pertaining to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development ( A/RES/71/313 ) ^ "international standards for eco-labeling" . Green Seal. Archived from the original on 28 November 2012 . Retrieved 9 December 2012 .

^ "Welcome to the European Union Eco-label Homepage" .

EUROPA . Retrieved 10 July 2007 .

^ "EMAS" .

EUROPA . Retrieved 10 July 2007 .

^ "Eco-Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS)" .

Green Business . Retrieved 15 May 2023 .

^ "Minutes" (PDF) .

EUEB Coordination and Cooperation Management Group . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 February 2007 . Retrieved 10 July 2007 .

^ a b "Environmental Labels Type I" .

Ricoh . Retrieved 10 July 2007 .

^ Freimann, Jurgen; Schwedes, Roswitha (2000).

<99::aid-ema135>3.0.co;2-x "EMAS experiences in German companies: a survey on empirical studies" .

Eco-Management and Auditing .

7 (3): 99– 105.

doi : 10.1002/1099-0925(200009)7:3<99::aid-ema135>3.0.co;2-x .

ISSN 0968-9427 .

^ "EUROPA - Environment - Ecolabel - FAQ" .

ec.europa.eu . Retrieved 22 February 2023 .

^ Brécard, Dorothée; Hlaimi, Boubaker; Lucas, Sterenn; Perraudeau, Yves; Salladarré, Frédéric (15 November 2009).

"Determinants of demand for green products: An application to eco-label demand for fish in Europe" .

Ecological Economics . The DPSIR framework for Biodiversity Assessment.

69 (1): 115– 125.

Bibcode : 2009EcoEc..69..115B .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2009.07.017 .

ISSN 0921-8009 .

^ Miras Rodríguez, María del Mar; Escobar Pérez, Bernabé; Carrasco Gallego, Amalia (2015).

"Are companies less environmentally-friendly due to the crisis? Evidence from Europe" .

hdl : 11441/85190 .

ISSN 2182-8466 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "Environmental Claims" . Federal Trade Commission. 17 November 2008 . Retrieved 17 November 2008 .

^ "Labels -environmentally friendly" .

ecolabels . Archived from the original on 11 October 2007 . Retrieved 9 July 2007 .

^ "About the Program" .

EcoLogo . Archived from the original on 27 May 2006 . Retrieved 10 July 2007 .

^ "Environmental Choice (Canada)" .

Environment Canada . Archived from the original on 25 November 2007 . Retrieved 10 July 2007 .

^ Stiftung, Bertelsmann.

"SGI 2017 | Mexico | Environmental Policies" .

www.sgi-network.org . Retrieved 19 February 2021 .

^ "Overview of Regulatory Requirements - Labelling and MEPS" .

Energy Rating Label . Archived from the original on 1 July 2007 . Retrieved 10 July 2007 .

^ Arnaud Bizard; Brett Lee; Karen Puterrman.

"AWARE and Environmental Labeling Programs: One Step Closer to a Sustainable Economy" (PDF) . ME 589 . Retrieved 10 July 2007 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "Overview of how are star ratings calculated?" .

Energy Rating Label . Archived from the original on 13 July 2007 . Retrieved 10 July 2007 .

^ "The Energy Label" .

Energy Rating Label . Archived from the original on 13 July 2007 . Retrieved 10 July 2007 .

^ Van Yken, Jonovan; Boxall, Naomi J.; Cheng, Ka Yu; Nikoloski, Aleksandar N.; Moheimani, Navid R.; Kaksonen, Anna H. (August 2021).

"E-Waste Recycling and Resource Recovery: A Review on Technologies, Barriers and Enablers with a Focus on Oceania" .

Metals .

11 (8): 1313.

doi : 10.3390/met11081313 .

^ "Review of the Product Stewardship Act 2011" (PDF) .

^ "About Us | Pacific Environment" .

^ "Cleaner Pacific 2025. Pacific Regional Waste and Pollution Management Strategy" (PDF) .

un.org . Retrieved 26 September 2023 .

^ "What is Pacwaste? | Pacific Environment" .

^ Arimura, Toshi H.; Sugino, Makoto (7 August 2020).

"Energy-Related Environmental Policy and Its Impacts on Energy Use in Asia" .

Asian Economic Policy Review .

16 (1). Wiley: 44– 61.

doi : 10.1111/aepr.12319 .

ISSN 1832-8105 .

S2CID 225416259 .

^ "S.Korea unveils 'recharging road' for eco-friendly buses" .

phys.org . Retrieved 28 May 2021 .

^ Ge, Wenjun; Yang, Derong; Chen, Weineng; Li, Sheng (7 February 2023).

"Can Setting Up a Carbon Trading Mechanism Improve Urban Eco-Efficiency? Evidence from China" .

Sustainability .

15 (4). MDPI AG: 3014.

Bibcode : 2023Sust...15.3014G .

doi : 10.3390/su15043014 .

ISSN 2071-1050 .

^ "About Energy Star" .

Energy Star . Retrieved 10 July 2007 .

^ "United States Energy Star Home Page" .

Energy Star . Retrieved 10 July 2007 .

^ "EU Energy Star Home Page" .

Energy Star . Retrieved 10 July 2007 .

^ "Australia Energy Star Home Page" .

Energy Star . Archived from the original on 3 July 2007 . Retrieved 10 July 2007 .

^ "Who's Working With ENERGY STAR? International Partners" .

Energy Star . Retrieved 3 February 2009 .

^ "Goal 17 | Department of Economic and Social Affairs" .

sdgs.un.org . Retrieved 26 September 2020 .

v t e Environmentalism Outline of environmentalism Key topics Climate justice Ecological crisis Environmental conflict Environmental movement History List of environmental conflicts Organizations Environmental studies Human impact on the environment Disciplines Communication Ecology Education Ethics Health History Humanities Law Philosophy Politics Psychology Religion Science Social science Sociology Views Philosophical Political ecology Environmental philosophy Biocentrism Deep ecology Earth jurisprudence Ecocentrism Resacralization of nature Social ecology Political Bioconservatism Bright green environmentalism Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Ecofascism Ecofeminism Eco-nationalism Eco-socialism Eco-terrorism Ecomodernism Free-market environmentalism Green anarchism Green conservatism Green left Green liberalism Green libertarianism Green politics Green syndicalism War on coal Religious Ecotheology Christianity Evangelical Islam Judaism Stewardship (theology) Opposition Anti-environmentalism Environmental skepticism List of environmental killings Biophilia hypothesis Environmentalism of the poor Environmental stewardship Hardline Nature conservation Radical environmentalism Offshoots Anti-fracking movement Anti-nuclear movement Car-free movement Climate movement Conservation movement Cultural environmentalism Degrowth Earth Optimism Eco-anxiety Ecological grief Environmental defender Environmental justice Ethical banking Ethical consumerism Flight shame Impact investing Product stewardship Slow movement Sustainability organization Goals Circular economy Climate action Climate change mitigation Conservation community Ecological civilization Environmental personhood Environmental protection Environmental policy Environmental, social, and corporate governance Environmentally friendly Greening Green economy Greenwashing Natural resource management Environmental resource management Rights of nature Short-haul flight ban Smoke abatement Sustainability Vegetarianism Protests Tree sitting By country Albania Australia Brazil Rio Grande do Sul China Anti-incinerator movement India Chipko movement Israel New Zealand Philippines South Africa Switzerland United Kingdom United States In culture Art Books Ecofiction Conspicuous conservation Film list festivals horror Journalism The Lord of the Rings Music Ecomusicology Motorsport Sculpture Surfing Tourism Eco hotel Publications Environmentalists Environmentalist Environmental defender Water protector Notable people Sunderlal Bahuguna Murray Bookchin David Brower Rachel Carson Jacques Cousteau Ng Cho-nam Tim Flannery Al Gore Aldo Leopold Wangari Maathai Seyyed Hossein Nasr Chico Mendes John Muir Theodore Roosevelt Shōzō Tanaka Greta Thunberg Related topics Barriers to pro-environmental behaviour Business ethics Land ethic Lifeboat ethics Tragedy of the commons Environment portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Environmentally_friendly&oldid=1291889660 " Categories : Sustainable business Sustainable technologies Environmentalism Hidden categories: CS1 Danish-language sources (da) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 00:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Environmentally friendly 24 languages Add topic

