Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions 2 Types Toggle Types subsection 2.1 RNA interference 2.2 Mycopesticide 3 Examples 4 Applications 5 Disadvantages 6 Market research 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Biopesticide 20 languages العربية বাংলা Català Čeština Español Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia עברית Kiswahili മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu नेपाली 日本語 Português Русский සිංහල Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Biological insecticide ) This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( September 2022 ) Several types of pest management intervention A biopesticide is a biological substance or organism that damages, kills, or repels organisms seens as pests . Biological pest management intervention involves predatory, parasitic, or chemical relationships.

They are obtained from organisms including plants , bacteria and other microbes , fungi , nematodes , etc .

[ 1 ] [ page needed ] [ 2 ] They are components of integrated pest management (IPM) programmes, and have received much practical attention as substitutes to synthetic chemical plant protection products (PPPs).

[ 3 ] Definitions [ edit ] Regulatory positions can be influenced by public perceptions, thus: the EU, defines biopesticides as "a form of pesticide based on micro-organisms or natural products".

[ 4 ] the US EPA states that they "include naturally occurring substances that control pests (biochemical pesticides), microorganisms that control pests (microbial pesticides), and pesticidal substances produced by plants containing added genetic material (plant-incorporated protectants) or PIPs".

[ citation needed ] Types [ edit ] Biopesticides usually have no known function in photosynthesis, growth or other basic aspects of plant physiology. Many chemical compounds produced by plants protect them from pests ; they are called antifeedants . These materials are biodegradable and renewable, which can be economical for practical use.

Organic farming systems embraces this approach to pest control.

[ 5 ] Biopesticides can be classified thusly: Microbial pesticides consist of bacteria, entomopathogenic fungi or viruses (and sometimes includes the metabolites that bacteria or fungi produce).

Entomopathogenic nematodes may be classed as microbial pesticides, even though they are multicellular.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ page needed ] Bio-derived chemicals. Four groups are in commercial use: pyrethrum , rotenone , neem oil , and various essential oils are naturally occurring substances that control (or monitor in the case of pheromones ) pests and microbial disease.

[ 9 ] [ 5 ] Plant-incorporated protectants (PIPs) incorporate genetic material from other species ( i.e.

GM crops ). Their use is controversial, especially in European countries.

[ 10 ] RNAi pesticides, some of which are topical and some of which are absorbed by the crop.

RNA interference [ edit ] RNA interference is under study for use in spray-on insecticides ( RNAi insecticides ) by companies including Syngenta and Bayer . Such sprays do not modify the genome of the target plant. The RNA can be modified to maintain its effectiveness as target species evolve to tolerate the original. RNA is a relatively fragile molecule that generally degrades within days or weeks of application.

Monsanto estimated costs to be on the order of $5/acre.

[ 11 ] RNAi has been used to target weeds that tolerate Roundup . RNAi can be mixed with a silicone surfactant that lets the RNA molecules enter air-exchange holes in the plant's surface. This disrupted the gene for tolerance long enough to let the herbicide work. This strategy would allow the continued use of glyphosate -based herbicides.

[ 11 ] They can be made with enough precision to target specific insect species. Monsanto is developing an RNA spray to kill Colorado potato beetles . One challenge is to make it stay on the plant for a week, even if it's raining. The potato beetle has become resistant to more than 60 conventional insecticides.

[ 11 ] Monsanto lobbied the U.S. EPA to exempt RNAi pesticide products from any specific regulations (beyond those that apply to all pesticides) and be exempted from rodent toxicity, allergenicity and residual environmental testing. In 2014 an EPA advisory group found little evidence of a risk to people from eating RNA.

[ 11 ] However, in 2012, the Australian Safe Food Foundation claimed that the RNA trigger designed to change the starch content of wheat might interfere with the gene for a human liver enzyme . Supporters countered that RNA does not appear to survive human saliva or stomach acids. The US National Honey Bee Advisory Board told EPA that using RNAi would put natural systems at "the epitome of risk". The beekeepers cautioned that pollinators could be hurt by unintended effects and that the genomes of many insects are still undetermined. Other unassessed risks include ecological (given the need for sustained presence for herbicides) and possible RNA drift across species boundaries.

[ 11 ] Monsanto invested in multiple companies for their RNA expertise, including Beeologics (for RNA that kills a parasitic mite that infests hives and for manufacturing technology) and Preceres (nanoparticle lipidoid coatings) and licensed technology from Alnylam and Tekmira . In 2012 Syngenta acquired Devgen, a European RNA partner. Startup Forest Innovations is investigating RNAi as a solution to citrus greening disease that in 2014 caused 22 percent of oranges in Florida to fall off the trees.

[ 11 ] Mycopesticide [ edit ] Mycopesticides include fungi and fungi cell components. Propagules such as conidia, blastospores, chlamydospores, oospores, and zygospores have been evaluated, along with hydrolytic enzyme mixtures. The role of hydrolytic enzymes especially chitinases in the killing process, and the possible use of chitin synthesis inhibitors are the prime research areas.

[ 12 ] Examples [ edit ] Bacillus thuringiensis is a bacterium capable of causing disease of Lepidoptera , Coleoptera and Diptera . The toxin from B. thuringiensis ( Bt toxin ) has been incorporated directly into plants via genetic engineering . Bt toxin manufacturers claim it has little effect on other organisms , and is more environmentally friendly than synthetic pesticides.

Other microbial control agents include products based on: entomopathogenic fungi ( e.g.

Beauveria bassiana , Isaria fumosorosea , Lecanicillium and Metarhizium spp.), plant disease control agents: include Trichoderma spp. and Ampelomyces quisqualis (a hyperparasite of grape powdery mildew ); Bacillus subtilis is also used to control plant pathogens.

[ 6 ] beneficial nematodes attacking insects ( e.g. Steinernema feltiae ) or slugs ( e.g.

Phasmarhabditis hermaphrodita ) entomopathogenic viruses ( e.g.

.

Cydia pomonella granulovirus ).

weeds and rodents have been controlled with microbial agents.

Various animal, fungal, and plant  organisms and extracts have been used as biopesticides. Products in this category include: Insect pheromones and other semiochemicals Fermentation products such as Spinosad (a macrocyclic lactone) Chitosan : a plant in the presence of this product naturally induces systemic resistance (ISR) to allow the plant to defend itself against disease, pathogens and pests.

[ 13 ] Biopesticides may include natural plant-derived products, which include alkaloids , terpenoids , phenolics and other secondary chemicals. Vegetable oils such as canola oil have pesticidal properties [ 14 ] [ citation needed ] . Products based on plant extracts such as garlic have now been registered in the EU and elsewhere [ 15 ] [ citation needed ] .

Applications [ edit ] Microbial agents, effective control requires appropriate formulation [ 16 ] and application .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Biopesticides have established themselves on a variety of crops for use against crop disease. For example, biopesticides help control downy mildew diseases. Their benefits include: a 0-day pre-harvest interval (see: maximum residue limit ), success under moderate to severe disease pressure, and the ability to use as a tank mix or in a rotational program with other fungicides. Because some market studies estimate that as much as 20% of global fungicide sales are directed at downy mildew diseases, the integration of biofungicides into grape production has substantial benefits by extending the useful life of other fungicides, especially those in the reduced-risk category.

[ citation needed ] A major growth area for biopesticides is in the area of seed treatments and soil amendments .

Fungicidal and biofungicidal seed treatments are used to control soil-borne fungal pathogens that cause seed rot, damping-off, root rot and seedling blights. They can also be used to control internal seed-borne fungal pathogens as well as fungal pathogens on the seed surface. Many biofungicidal products show capacities to stimulate plant host defense and other physiological processes that can make treated crops more resistant to stresses.

[ citation needed ] Disadvantages [ edit ] High specificity: which may require an exact identification of the pest/pathogen and the use of multiple products used; although this can also be an advantage in that the biopesticide is less likely to harm non-target species Slow action speed (thus making them unsuitable if a pest outbreak is an immediate threat) Variable efficacy due to the influences of various factors (since some biopesticides are living organisms, which bring about pest/pathogen control by multiplying within or nearby the target pest/pathogen) Living organisms evolve and increase their tolerance to control. If the target population is not exterminated or rendered incapable of reproduction, the surviving population can acquire tolerance of whatever pressures are brought to bear, resulting in an evolutionary arms race .

Unintended consequences : Studies have found broad spectrum biopesticides have lethal and nonlethal risks for non-target native pollinators such as Melipona quadrifasciata in Brazil.

[ 19 ] Market research [ edit ] The market for agricultural biologicals was forecast to reach $19.5 billion by 2031.

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Antagonism (phytopathology) Bioherbicide Biological pest control Cembratrienol Integrated Pest Management LUBILOSA Pest resistance management plans Plant defense against herbivory Use as a population control agent References [ edit ] ^ Copping, Leonard G. (2009).

The Manual of Biocontrol Agents: A World Compendium . BCPC.

ISBN 978-1-901396-17-1 .

^ "Regulating Biopesticides" .

Pesticides . Environmental Protection Agency of the USA. 2 November 2011. Archived from the original on 6 September 2012 . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

^ M. Kaushal and R. Prasad, ed. (2021).

Microbial Biotechnology in Crop Protection . Singapore: Springer Nature.

ISBN 978-981-16-0048-7 .

^ "Encouraging innovation in biopesticide development" (PDF) (News alert). European Commission DG ENV. 18 December 2008. Issue 134. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 May 2012 . Retrieved 20 April 2012 .

^ a b Pal GK, Kumar B.

"Antifungal activity of some common weed extracts against wilt causing fungi, Fusarium oxysporum " (PDF) .

Current Discovery .

2 (1): 62– 67. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 December 2013.

^ a b Coombs, Amy (1 June 2013).

"Fighting Microbes with Microbes" .

The Scientist .

Archived from the original on 2013-01-07 . Retrieved 18 April 2013 .

^ Malherbe, Stephanus (21 January 2017).

"Listing 17 microbes and their effects on soil, plant health and biopesticide functions" .

Explogrow . London.

Archived from the original on 2016-02-19 . Retrieved 14 February 2021 .

^ Francis Borgio J, Sahayaraj K and Alper Susurluk I (eds) . Microbial Insecticides: Principles and Applications, Nova Publishers, USA. 492pp.

ISBN 978-1-61209-223-2 ^ Isman, Murray B. (2006).

"Botanical Insecticides, Deterrents, and Repellants in Modern Agriculture and an Increasingly Regulated World" (PDF) .

Annual Review of Entomology .

51 : 45– 66.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.ento.51.110104.151146 .

PMID 16332203 .

S2CID 32196104 – via Semantic Scholar.

^ National Pesticide Information Center. Last updated November 21, 2013 Plant Incorporated Protectants (PIPs) / Genetically Modified Plants ^ a b c d e f "With BioDirect, Monsanto Hopes RNA Sprays Can Someday Deliver Drought Tolerance and Other Traits to Plants on Demand | MIT Technology Review" . Retrieved 2015-08-31 .

^ Deshpande, M. V. (1999-01-01).

"Mycopesticide Production by Fermentation: Potential and Challenges" .

Critical Reviews in Microbiology .

25 (3): 229– 243.

doi : 10.1080/10408419991299220 .

ISSN 1040-841X .

PMID 10524330 .

^ Benhamou, N.; Lafontaine, P. J.; Nicole, M. (December 2012).

"Induction of Systemic Resistance to Fusarium Crown and Root Rot in Tomato Plants by Seed Treatment with Chitosan" (PDF) .

Phytopathology .

84 (12).

American Phytopathological Society : 1432– 44.

doi : 10.1094/Phyto-84-1432 .

ISSN 0031-949X .

OCLC 796025684 . Retrieved February 8, 2014 .

^ "Canola Oil insectide" (PDF) . 18 Nov 2012 . Retrieved 19 November 2020 .

^ "EU Pesticides database - European Commission" .

ec.europa.eu . Retrieved 2020-11-19 .

^ Burges, H.D. (ed.) 1998 Formulation of Microbial Biopesticides, beneficial microorganisms, nematodes and seed treatments Publ. Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, 412 pp.

^ Matthews GA, Bateman RP, Miller PCH (2014) Pesticide Application Methods (4th Edition), Chapter 16. Wiley, UK.

^ L Lacey & H Kaya (eds.) (2007) Field Manual of Techniques in Invertebrate Pathology 2nd edition. Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, NL.

^ Tomé, Hudson Vaner V.; Barbosa, Wagner F.; Martins, Gustavo F.; Guedes, Raul Narciso C. (2015-04-01).

"Spinosad in the native stingless bee Melipona quadrifasciata: Regrettable non-target toxicity of a bioinsecticide" .

Chemosphere .

124 : 103– 109.

Bibcode : 2015Chmsp.124..103T .

doi : 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.11.038 .

PMID 25496737 .

^ Dent, Dr. Michael (2020).

Biostimulants and Biopesticides 2021-2031: Technologies, Markets and Forecasts . IDTechEx.

ISBN 9781913899066 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Biopesticides .

Bioinsecticides Market (Acquire Market Research) Registered Biopesticides 04/29/02 United States Environmental Protection Agency . Updated 29 March 2002. Retrieved 25 November 2011.

International Biocontrol Manufacturers' Association (IBMA) v t e Pesticides Pesticide types Acaricide Bactericide Biocide Bioherbicide Biopesticide Fungicide Herbicide Defoliant Insecticide Molluscicide Nematicide Piscicide Rodenticide Slimicide Related topics Agrochemical Health effects Environmental effects Fumigation Agricultural spray adjuvant Biological pest control Gene silencing Integrated pest management Maximum residue limit Non-pesticide management Persistent organic pollutant Pest control Application Drift Formulation Degradation Misuse Paradox of the pesticides Poisoning Research Residue Resistance Resurgence Bee toxicity Restricted use Pesticide Action Network Silent Spring The Pesticide Question Toxicity class By country Canada European Union New Zealand United States Integrated Pest Management Index of pesticide articles Pesticide categories Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biopesticide&oldid=1298995436 " Categories : Biopesticides Biotechnology Biological pest control Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles in need of updating from September 2022 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2018 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 00:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biopesticide 20 languages Add topic

