Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Scientific work 2 Death 3 Legacy 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents David Fabricius 33 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaelg 한국어 Italiano Lëtzebuergesch Magyar მარგალური مصرى 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German pastor and astronomer David Fabricius (9 March 1564 – 7 May 1617) was a Frisian pastor who made two major discoveries in the early days of telescopic astronomy , jointly with his eldest son, Johannes Fabricius (1587–1615).

David Fabricius (Latinization of his proper name David Faber , or David Goldschmidt ; possibly Hebrew) was born at Esens , studied at the University of Helmstedt starting in 1583 [ 1 ] and served as pastor for small towns near his birthplace in Frisia (now northwest Germany and northeast Netherlands ), at Resterhafe near Dornum in 1584 and at Osteel in 1603. As was common for Protestant ministers of the day, he dabbled in science: his particular interest was astronomy. Fabricius corresponded with astronomer Johannes Kepler .

[ 2 ] Scientific work [ edit ] Fabricius discovered the first known periodic variable star (as opposed to cataclysmic variables, such as novas and supernovas ), Mira , in August 1596. At first he believed it to be "just" another nova, as the whole concept of a recurring variable did not exist at the time. When he saw Mira brighten again in 1609, however, it became clear that a new kind of object had been discovered in the sky.

Two years later, his son Johannes Fabricius (1587–1615) returned from university in the Netherlands with telescopes that they turned on the Sun . Despite the difficulties of observing the Sun directly, they noted the existence of sunspots , the first confirmed instance of their observation (though unclear statements in East Asian annals suggest that Chinese astronomers may have discovered them with the naked eye previously, and Fabricius may have noticed them himself without a telescope a few years before). The pair soon invented camera obscura telescopy so as to save their eyes and get a better view of the solar disk, and observed that the spots moved. They would appear on the eastern edge of the disk, steadily move to the western edge, disappear, then reappear at the east again after the passage of the same amount of time that it had taken for it to cross the disk in the first place. This suggested that the Sun rotated on its axis , which had been postulated before but never backed up with evidence. Johannes then published Maculis in Sole Observatis, et Apparente earum cum Sole Conversione Narratio ("Narration on Spots Observed on the Sun and their Apparent Rotation with the Sun") in June 1611. Unfortunately, after Johannes Fabricius' early death at the age of 29, the book remained obscure and was eclipsed by the independent discoveries of and publications about sunspots by Christoph Scheiner and Galileo Galilei , few months later.

[ 3 ] Death [ edit ] After Fabricius denounced a local goose thief from the pulpit at Osteel in 1617, the accused man struck him on the head with a shovel and killed him.

[ 4 ] Legacy [ edit ] Copies of a map he made of Frisia in 1589 are also still extant. He is also name-checked in Jules Verne 's 1865 novel From the Earth to the Moon as someone who claimed to have seen lunar inhabitants through his telescope, though that particular fact is merely part of Verne's fiction. The large (79-kilometer) crater Fabricius in the Moon 's southern hemisphere is named after David Fabricius.  In 1895 a monument was erected to his memory in the churchyard at Osteel where he was pastor from 1603 until 1617.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Hockey, Thomas (2009).

The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers .

Springer Publishing .

ISBN 978-0-387-31022-0 . Retrieved August 22, 2012 .

^ The Galileo Project.

David (1564-1617) and Johannes (1587-1616) Fabricius ^ Carlowicz, Michael J.; López, Ramón (2002).

Storms from the Sun: The Emerging Science of Space Weather . Joseph Henry Press. p. 66.

ISBN 9780309076425 . Retrieved 19 June 2020 .

^ Fabricus, David (1564–1617) , additional text.

References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Gilman, D. C.

; Peck, H. T.; Colby, F. M., eds. (1905).

New International Encyclopedia (1st ed.). New York: Dodd, Mead.

{{ cite encyclopedia }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) External links [ edit ] The Galileo Project – biography of David and Johannes Fabricius.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Netherlands Norway Poland Academics zbMATH People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=David_Fabricius&oldid=1294044081 " Categories : 1564 births 1617 deaths East Frisians 16th-century German astronomers 17th-century German Lutheran clergy 17th-century German astronomers 16th-century German Lutheran clergy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata CS1 errors: missing title Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating text via vb from the New International Encyclopedia Cite NIE template missing title parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the New International Encyclopedia This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 06:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents David Fabricius 33 languages Add topic

