Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Modern 3 Products 4 Gallery 5 Sources 6 References 7 See also Toggle the table of contents Hanging garden 10 languages العربية Беларуская Català Eesti فارسی Français Italiano Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Artistic garden or small urban farm that is attached to or built on a wall For other uses, see Hanging Garden .

A hanging garden is a form of sustainable landscape architecture that can take several different forms, such as roof gardens , but is generally defined as a garden planted at a suspended or elevated position off the ground. These gardens are created with walls, fences, planted on terraces, growing from cliffs, or anything where the garden is not touching the earth.

[ 1 ] Space optimization is the main intention with the gardens, with aesthetics and providing cleaner air also commonly cited reasons.

[ 2 ] Hanging gardens are popular in urban environments with limited space such as in New York City or Los Angeles.

History [ edit ] Hanging Gardens of Babylon The first known instance of hanging gardens is the Hanging Gardens of Babylon . Considered one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World and the source of the term, the Hanging Gardens of Babylon are still of uncertain historicity.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Another example of "reclaiming for nature the land occupied by the building" in the form of hanging gardens is the modernist Villa Savoye by the Swiss-French architect Le Corbusier , a project mentioned in his Five Points of Architecture .

[ 5 ] Modern [ edit ] Modern hanging garden with rimless swimming pool, Singapore.

Trump Tower trees In contemporary use, hanging gardens are a green wall on a ground level facade, a balcony, a terrace , or part of a roof garden of a home, or skyrise greenery with a residential, commercial, or government office building. During the present day, many differing types of hanging gardens can be found. Perhaps the most well known hanging garden would be the one attached to the Trump Tower , where occasionally trees will be planted in each section of the slanted side of the building.

Oakland Museum , located in Oakland California, also embraces the hanging gardens and roof gardens with their Great Lawn. The lawn is welcome to all who visit, also allowing the rooftop patio of the museum to be host to concerts and events.

[ 6 ] Vertical farms are another version of hanging gardens that have become much more common within the last decade, usually being grown indoors and stacked on top of each other to take up the least amount of horizontal space. These have some practical advantages over standard gardens as well, such as being grown with soilless systems such as hydroponics and aquaponics.

[ 7 ] These gardens also have less worry about the environment they're being grown in, as the environment can be produced and curated to whatever is needed.

Products [ edit ] Prefabricated modular hanging wall garden systems have been developed and are on the market internationally. Hanging pots as well as structures like trellises can easily be bought at a local hardware store or supermarket, making setting up a personal hanging garden relatively easy and accessible.

Gallery [ edit ] Hanging gardens at La Défense 1 The Hanging Gardens, Auchincruive, South Ayrshire Vertical Farm Trellis Sources [ edit ] “Garden.” Oakland Museum of California (OMCA) , 25 May 2023, museumca.org/on-view/garden/.

“Green Roofs and Rooftop Gardens - Calrecycle Home Page.” National Park Service , calrecycle.ca.gov/organics/compostmulch/toolbox/greenroofs/. Accessed 2 December 2023.

“The Hanging Gardens of Babylon: History, Legends, and More.” TheCollector , 28 November 2023, www.thecollector.com/hanging-gardens-babylon/.

“Hanging Gardens.” National Park Service , U.S. Department of the Interior, www.nps.gov/glca/learn/nature/hanginggardens.htm. Accessed 1 December 2023.

“Roof Garden.” TCLF , www.tclf.org/category/designed-landscape-types/roof-garden. Accessed 2 December 2023.

“Vertical Farming – No Longer a Futuristic Concept.” Vertical Farming – No Longer A Futuristic Concept : USDA ARS , www.ars.usda.gov/oc/utm/vertical-farming-no-longer-a-futuristic-concept/. Accessed 2 December 2023.

Wright, Richardson.

The Story of Gardening: From the Hanging Gardens of Babylon to the Hanging Gardens of New York . Dover, 1963.

References [ edit ] ^ Page, Mailing Address: PO Box 1507; MST, AZ 86040 Phone: 928 608-6200 Receptionist available at Glen Canyon Headquarters from 7 am to 4 pm; emergency, Monday through Friday The phone is not monitored when the building is closed If you are having an; Us, call 911 or hail National Park Service on Marine Band 16 Contact.

"Hanging Gardens - Glen Canyon National Recreation Area (U.S. National Park Service)" .

www.nps.gov . Retrieved 2023-12-02 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Green Roofs and Rooftop Gardens" .

CalRecycle . December 2, 2023 . Retrieved December 2, 2023 .

^ "The Hanging Gardens of Babylon: History, Legends, and More" .

TheCollector . 2023-01-03 . Retrieved 2023-12-02 .

^ McGuinness, Frank (2013-10-03).

"The Hanging Gardens" .

doi : 10.5040/9780571362301.00000002 .

ISBN 9780571362301 .

{{ cite book }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ "Villa Savoye" .

www.iconichouses.org . Retrieved 2024-09-22 .

^ "Garden" .

Oakland Museum of California (OMCA) . Retrieved 2023-12-02 .

^ "Vertical Farming – No Longer A Futuristic Concept : USDA ARS" .

www.ars.usda.gov . Retrieved 2023-12-02 .

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hanging gardens .

Urban agriculture Container gardening Sustainable planting v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hanging_garden&oldid=1284034161 " Categories : Hanging gardens Landscape architecture Sustainable gardening Sustainable products Sustainable architecture Types of garden Urban agriculture Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 errors: missing title Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 April 2025, at 04:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hanging garden 10 languages Add topic

