Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Criticism 3 See also 4 Citations 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Civic nationalism 35 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latviešu Lombard Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of nationalism Not to be confused with Constitutional patriotism or national liberalism .

Part of a series on Nationalism Nation forming Nationalism in Antiquity Nationalism in the Middle Ages Anthem Church Colours Emblem Father Flag Epic God Identity Persona Language Myth Sport State Symbol Treasure Animal Core values Allegiance Independence Patriotism Self-determination Solidarity Types Anarchist Blind Bourgeois Business Welfare Civic Communist Constitutional patriotism Corporate Cyber- Ecological Economic Ethnic Ethnopluralism Expansionist Homosexual Indigenism Integral Left-wing ( populism ) Musical Mystic Neo- Pan- Racial Religious Clerical Resource Revolutionary National syndicalist National Bolshevik Fascism Nazism Ethnocacerism Romantic Technological Territorial Trans- Ultra- Organizations List of nationalist organizations Related concepts Anationalism Anti-nationalism Anti-globalization movement Anti-imperialism Banal nationalism Civil religion Communitarianism Cosmopolitanism Cultural nationalism Diaspora politics Ethnocentrism Francoism Gastronationalism Gender and nationalism Globalism Historiography and nationalism Imagined community Imperialism Internationalism Irredentism Jingoism Localism Militarism National indifference Nationalism studies Nativism Plurinationalism Post- Racism Revanchism Right-wing populism Seasonal or cultural festival Subsidiarity in Catholicism Trumpism Xenophobia Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Civic nationalism , otherwise known as democratic nationalism , is a form of nationalism that adheres to traditional liberal values of freedom , tolerance , equality , and individual rights , and is not based on ethnocentrism .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Civic nationalists often defend the value of national identity by saying that individuals need it as a partial shared aspect of their identity (an upper identity) in order to lead meaningful, autonomous lives [ 4 ] and that democratic polities need a national identity to function properly.

[ 5 ] Liberal nationalism is used in the same sense as 'civic nationalism', but liberal ethnic nationalism also exists, [ 6 ] [ 7 ] and " state nationalism " is a branch of civic nationalism, but it can also be illiberal.

Civic nationhood is a political identity built around shared citizenship within the state. Thus, a " civic nation " defines itself not by culture but by political institutions and liberal principles, which its citizens pledge to uphold. Membership in the civic nation is open to every person by citizenship, regardless of culture or ethnicity. Those who share these values are considered members of the nation [ 8 ] and, in theory, a civic nation or state does not aim to promote one culture over another.

[ 8 ] German philosopher Jürgen Habermas has argued that immigrants to a liberal-democratic state need not assimilate into the host culture but only accept the principles of the country's constitution ( constitutional patriotism ).

[ 8 ] Civic nationalism is frequently contrasted with ethnic nationalism . According to Donald Ipperciel , civic nationalism historically was a determining factor in the development of modern constitutional and democratic forms of government, whereas ethnic nationalism has been more associated with authoritarian rule and even dictatorship .

[ 9 ] Indeed, the 20th-century revival of civic nationalism played a key role in the ideological war against racism .

[ 10 ] However, as Umut Özkırımlı states, "civic" nations can be as intolerant and cruel as the so-called "ethnic" nations, citing French Jacobin techniques of persecution that were utilized by 20th-century fascists .

[ 11 ] Some argue civic nationalism inevitably involves an underlying ethnic concept of national belonging because abstract values cannot be related to a specific place.

[ 12 ] History [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( January 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Civic nationalism lies within the traditions of rationalism and liberalism , but as a form of nationalism it is contrasted with ethnic nationalism .

Ernest Renan is often thought to be an early civic nationalist.

[ 13 ] Philosopher Hans Kohn was one of the first to differentiate civic nationalism from ethnic nationalism in his 1944 publication The Idea of Nationalism: A Study in Its Origins and Background .

[ 14 ] Membership of the civic nation is considered voluntary, as in  Renan's classical definition in " Qu'est-ce qu'une nation?

" of the nation as a "daily referendum" characterized by the "will to live together".

[ 15 ] Some authors criticize that definition used by Renan, based on a "daily referendum", because of the ambiguity of the concept and its idealization. They argue that the arguments used by Renan at the conference "What is a Nation?" are not consistent with his thinking.

[ 16 ] Civic-national ideals influenced the development of representative democracy in countries such as the United States and France (see the United States Declaration of Independence of 1776, and the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 1789).

[ 17 ] The Corsican nationalist movement organized around the FLNC is giving a civic definition of the Corsican nation ("destiny community") in the continuity of Pasquale Paoli and the ideas of the Lumières .

The Scottish National Party [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] and Plaid Cymru , [ 20 ] which advocate independence of their respective nations from the United Kingdom, proclaim themselves to be civic nationalist parties, in which they advocate the independence and popular sovereignty of the people living in their nation's society, not individual ethnic groups.

The Republican Left of Catalonia supports a civic Catalan independentism and defends a Catalan Republic based on republicanism and civic values within a diverse society.

[ 21 ] The Union of Cypriots define its ideology as Cypriot nationalism , [ 22 ] a civic nationalism that focuses on the shared identity of Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots . It highlights both communities' common culture, heritage and traditions as well as economic, political, and social rights. It also supports the reunification of Cyprus and the end of foreign interference by Greece , Turkey , and the United Kingdom .

[ 23 ] Outside Europe , it has also been used to describe the Republican Party in the United States during the Civil War Era.

[ 24 ] Civic nationalism shares elements of the Swiss concept of Willensnation [ de ] , which is German for "nation by will", coined by Carl Hilty , understood as shared experience and dedication by citizens.

[ citation needed ] Criticism [ edit ] Former Israeli minister Yael Tamir has argued that the differences between ethnic and civic nationalism are blurred. She posits: "By waving the civic flag, Western democracies pretend to be more peaceful and inclusive than they really are, fostering a self-image that allows them to exonerate themselves, leaving them unprepared to deal with internal conflicts".

[ 25 ] The distinction between ethnic and civic nationalism has also been criticized by scholars like Bernard Yack [ 26 ] and Umut Özkırımlı .

[ 27 ] Yack rejects Renan's notion of "voluntary" civic nationality as an illusion, arguing this "misrepresents political reality as surely as the ethnonationalist myths it is designed to combat", going on to state how cultural memories form an inseparable part of every national political identity.

[ 26 ] Quoting Rogers Brubaker , Özkırımlı argues: Since all nations lay claim to a unique place in history and to certain boundaries, all national identities are exclusionary. In that sense, all nations are ethnic nations [...] Brubaker elaborates on this, claiming that there are two different ways of mapping culture onto the ethnic-civic distinction. Ethnic nationalism may be interpreted narrowly, as involving an emphasis on descent. In this case, Brubaker argues, there is very little ethnic nationalism around, since on this view an emphasis on common culture has to be coded as a species of civic nationalism. If, however, ethnic nationalism is interpreted broadly, as ethnocultural, while civic nationalism is interpreted narrowly, as involving a cultural conception of citizenship, the problem is the opposite: 'civic nationalism gets defined out of existence, and virtually all nationalisms would be coded as ethnic or cultural'. Even the paradigmatic cases of civic nationalism, France and America, would cease to count as civic nationalism, since they have a crucial cultural component.

— Umut Özkırımlı, Contemporary Debates on Nationalism: A Critical Introduction, pp.24-5 Following Brubaker, John Etherington demonstrates how civic nationalism inevitably involves an underlying ethnic concept of national belonging. Because supposed civic values are abstract, universal and thus open to all, "they cannot be related to a specific place – the national homeland. Thus, any civic conception of the nation is dependent on a prior ethnic conception because of the need to establish who belongs to the nation and its homeland and who does not".

[ 28 ] See also [ edit ] Americanism (ideology) Civic virtue Composite nationalism Constitutional patriotism Cultural nationalism Imagined community Liberal Nationalism (book) Nation-building National liberalism Plurinationalism Postcolonial anarchism State nationalism , a form of civic nationalism, but can support politically authoritarianism.

Bourgeois nationalism Citations [ edit ] ^ Auer, Stefan (2004).

Liberal Nationalism in Central Europe . Routledge. p. 5.

ISBN 1134378602 . Retrieved 13 May 2017 .

^ Tamir, Yael. 1993.

Liberal Nationalism.

Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-07893-9 [ page needed ] ; Will Kymlicka . 1995.

Multicultural Citizenship.

Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-827949-3 [ page needed ] ; David Miller. 1995.

On Nationality.

Archived 1 June 2000 at the Wayback Machine Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-828047-5 .

^ Beiner, Ronald (2003).

Liberalism, Nationalism, Citizenship: Essays on the Problem of Political Community . UBC Press.

ISBN 978-0-7748-0987-0 .

As soon as there emerges a form of civic life, norms and practices of citizenship, a shared political history, and a politically defined way of life, there is a basis for individuals relating to each other as citizens (as opposed to as co-religionists, members of the same ethnic group, of the same gender or sexual orientation, and so on): the distinctively civic relation. This whole conception is sometimes called civic nationalism (or what Jürgen Habermas calls constitutional patriotism).

^ Kymlicka, Will. 1995.

Multicultural Citizenship . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-827949-3 . For criticism, see: Patten, Alan. 1999.

"The Autonomy Argument for Liberal Nationalism." Nations and Nationalism .

5(1): 1-17.

^ Miller, David. 1995. On Nationality. Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-828047-5 . For criticism, see: Abizadeh, Arash . 2002.

"Does Liberal Democracy Presuppose a Cultural Nation? Four Arguments." American Political Science Review 96 (3): 495-509; Abizadeh, Arash. 2004. " Liberal Nationalist versus Postnational Social Integration ." Nations and Nationalism 10(3): 231-250.

^ Glenn Drover; Graham Johnson; Julia Lai Po-Wah Tao (2001).

Regionalism and Subregionalism in East Asia: The Dynamics of China . Nova Science. p. 101.

ISBN 978-1-56072-872-6 .

^ Mark Hewitson; Timothy Baycroft (2001).

What Is a Nation?; Europe 1789-1914 . OUP Oxford. p. 180.

^ a b c ANNA STILZ. "Civic Nationalism and Language Policy".

Philosophy & Public Affairs .

37 (3): 257.

^ Ipperciel, Donald (2007). "Constitutional democracy and civic nationalism".

Nations and Nationalism .

13 (3).

Wiley-Blackwell on behalf of the Association for the Study of Ethnicity and Nationalism : 395– 416.

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-8129.2007.00293.x .

ISSN 1469-8129 .

^ Nancy Foner ; Patric Simon (2015).

Fear, Anxiety, and National Identity Immigration and Belonging in North America and Western Europe .

Russell Sage Foundation . p. 38.

ISBN 9781610448536 .

^ Özkırımlı, Umut (2005).

Contemporary Debates on Nationalism: A Critical Introduction (1st ed.). London: Red Globe Press . pp.

27– 28.

ISBN 9780333947739 .

^ Etherington, John (2007).

"Nationalism, Exclusion and Violence: A Territorial Approach" .

Studies in Ethnicity and Nationalism .

7 (3): 24– 44.

doi : 10.1111/j.1754-9469.2007.tb00160.x . Retrieved 20 February 2024 .

p.31 ^ Ernest Renan. " What is a Nation?

", 1882; cf. Chaim Gans, The Limits of Nationalism , Cambridge University Press, 2003, p. 11.

^ Tamir, Yael (Yuli) (11 May 2019).

"Not So Civic: Is There a Difference Between Ethnic and Civic Nationalism?" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

22 (1): 419– 434.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-022018-024059 .

ISSN 1094-2939 .

^ Renan, Ernest (11 March 1882).

"What Is A Nation" (PDF) .

UCParis . Retrieved 29 November 2022 .

^ Azurmendi, Joxe (2014): Historia, arraza, nazioa . Donostia, Elkar.

ISBN 978-84-9027-297-8 ^ Michael Keating (1996).

Nations Against the State The New Politics of Nationalism in Quebec, Catalonia and Scotland .

Palgrave Macmillan . p. 6.

ISBN 9780230374348 .

^ Michael O'Neill (2004).

Devolution and British Politics . Pearson/Longman. pp. 92–.

ISBN 978-0-582-47274-7 .

^ Trevor C. Salmon; Mark F. Imber (6 June 2008).

Issues In International Relations . Taylor & Francis. pp. 50–.

ISBN 978-0-203-92659-8 .

^ a b Brubaker, Rogers (2004).

Ethnicity Without Groups . Harvard University Press. p. 134.

ISBN 0674015398 .

^ "Els valors republicans com a pilar de la nostra societat" (in Catalan).

^ Aldrich, Alan (17 August 2018).

"Cypriotism in the Twenty-First Century" .

Bella Caledonia . Scotland. Archived from the original on 21 August 2018 . Retrieved 21 August 2018 .

^ Colin Hay; Anand Menon (18 January 2007).

European Politics . OUP Oxford. p. 125.

ISBN 978-0-19-928428-3 .

^ Snay, Mitchell (2007).

Fenians, Freedmen, and Southern Whites: Race and Nationality in the Era of Reconstruction . Louisiana State University Press.

ISBN 9780807132739 .

^ Tamir, Yael (Yuli) (2019).

"Not So Civic: Is There a Difference Between Ethnic and Civic Nationalism?" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

22 (1): 419– 434.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-022018-024059 .

ISSN 1094-2939 .

^ a b Yack, Bernard (1996).

"The myth of the civic nation" .

Critical Review .

10 (2): 193– 211.

doi : 10.1080/08913819608443417 .

^ Özkırımlı, Umut. (2005). Contemporary Debates on Nationalism: A Critical Introduction. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

^ Etherington, John (2007).

"Nationalism, Exclusion and Violence: A Territorial Approach" .

Studies in Ethnicity and Nationalism .

7 (3): 24– 44.

doi : 10.1111/j.1754-9469.2007.tb00160.x . Retrieved 20 February 2024 .

p.31 Sources [ edit ] Tournier-Sol, Karine (2015). "Reworking the Eurosceptic and Conservative Traditions into a Populist Narrative: UKIP's Winning Formula?".

Journal of Common Market Studies .

53 (1): 140– 56.

doi : 10.1111/jcms.12208 .

S2CID 142738345 .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of when in Rome, do as the Romans do at Wiktionary v t e Nationalism Development Nationalism in Antiquity Nationalism in the Middle Ages Anthem Colours Flag Epic God Identity Language Music Myth Religion Sport Symbol Animal Emblem Flower Treasure By type African Anarchist Blind Bourgeois Business Welfare Civic Constitutional patriotism Corporate- Cyber- Ecological Economic Ethnic European Expansionist Palingenetic ultranationalism Homo- Integral Left-wing Communist Linguistic Mystic Neo-/New Pan- Queer Right-wing Racial Arab Berber Black Korean White Zionism Religious Christian Catholic Clerico- Mormon Hindu Hindutva Islamic Resource Revolutionary Ethnocacerism National syndicalist Falangism Fascism List of fascist movements Romantic Technological Territorial Terrorism Trans- Ultra- Japan Organizations List of nationalist organizations Nationalist Clubs Related concepts Anarchism and nationalism Anationalism Anti-nationalism Banal nationalism Cultural nationalism Diaspora politics Eliminationism Exceptionalism Gastronationalism Gender and nationalism Historiography and nationalism Internationalism Irredentism Jingoism Nation-building National indifference National question National revival Nation state Nationalism studies Natural border Plurinationalism Principle of nationalities [ fr ] Revanchism State-building Wars of national liberation v t e Liberalism Ideas Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history Schools Classical Economic Fiscal Neo Equity feminism Georgist Radical Anti-clerical Civic nationalism Republican Utilitarian Whig Physiocratic Encyclopaedist Conservative Liberal conservatism National Ordo Social Green Liberal feminism Ecofeminism Liberal socialism Social democracy Progressivism Third Way Other Constitutional Constitutional patriotism Cultural Corporate International Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Geolibertarianism Neoclassical liberalism Paleolibertarianism Right-libertarianism Radical centrism Religious Christian Islamic Secular Techno By region Africa Egypt Nigeria Senegal South Africa Tunisia Zimbabwe Asia China Hong Kong India Iran Israel Japan South Korea Anti- Chinilpa Centrist reformist Progressive Philippines Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech lands Denmark Estonia Finland France Orléanist Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Italy Berlusconism Liberism Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Moldova Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Muscular Radical Whiggist Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Brazil Lulism Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay North America Canada United States Jacksonian Jeffersonian Libertarian Modern Progressive Oceania Australia Small-l New Zealand Philosophers Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organisations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Civic_nationalism&oldid=1302514050 " Categories : Anti-racism Communitarianism Cosmopolitanism Cultural politics Immigration activism Liberalism National liberalism Pluralism (philosophy) Political philosophy Political science terminology Rationalism Social ideologies Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from June 2016 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Catalan-language sources (ca) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2019 Articles with excerpts Articles that may contain original research from January 2017 All articles that may contain original research All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 22:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Civic nationalism 35 languages Add topic

