Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Dinshah P. Ghadiali 2 Conceptual basis 3 Scientific rejection 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Chromotherapy 20 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara Français Italiano Latviešu Nederlands Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Suomi ไทย Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Alternative medicine method also known as color therapy "Colorology" redirects here. For the scientific theory of colors, see Color science .

Chromotherapy Alternative medicine Edwin Dwight Babbitt, an early proponent of Chromotherapy Claims Colored light can balance "energy" in a human body.

Year proposed 1876 Original proponents Augustus Pleasonton Subsequent proponents Seth Pancoast, Edwin Dwight Babbitt Part of a series on Alternative medicine General information Alternative medicine History Terminology Alternative veterinary medicine Quackery (health fraud) Rise of modern medicine Pseudoscience Antiscience Skepticism Scientific Therapeutic nihilism Fringe medicine and science Acupressure Acupuncture Alkaline diet Anthroposophic medicine Apitherapy Applied kinesiology Aromatherapy Association for Research and Enlightenment Auriculotherapy Bates method Biological terrain assessment Black salve Bodywork Bone-setting Bowen technique Breathwork Fake COVID-19 treatments Camel urine Cancer treatments Charcoal cleanse Chiropractic Chiropractic treatment techniques Vertebral subluxation Christian Science Chromotherapy Colloidal silver Colon cleansing Coffee enema Colorpuncture Conversion therapy Craniosacral therapy Crystal healing Cupping therapy Dental amalgam controversy Detoxification Foot detox Dry needling Ear candling Energy medicine Correactology Esoteric energy Reiki Therapeutic touch Estrogen dominance Fabunan Antiviral Injection Facilitated communication FasciaBlaster Feldenkrais method Functional medicine Hair analysis Holistic dentistry Hologram bracelet Homeopathy Bach flower remedies Hydrotherapy Hypnotherapy Ionized jewelry Iridology Jilly Juice Lightning Process Lymphotherapy Magnet therapy Manual therapy Manual lymphatic drainage Medical intuitive Megavitamin therapy Mesmerism Mind–body interventions MMS Myofascial release NAET Naturopathy Oil pulling Orgone Orthomolecular medicine Orthopathy Osteomyology Osteopathy Ozone therapy Parapsychology Phrenology Postural Integration Psychic surgery Psychodermatology Quantum healing Radionics Rapid prompting method Reflexology RBOP Rolfing Scientific racism ThetaHealing Thomsonianism Thought Field Therapy Urophagia Vaginal steaming Vegetotherapy Vision therapy Vitalism Young blood transfusion Zero balancing Controversies Big Pharma conspiracy theories HIV/AIDS denialism OPV AIDS hypothesis Anti-vaccinationism Vaccine misinformation Vaccines and autism MMR vaccine and autism in chiropractic Water fluoridation controversy COVID-19 misinformation Turbo cancer Classifications Alternative medical systems Mind–body intervention Biologically based therapy Manipulative methods Energy therapy Traditional medicine African Muti Southern Africa Ayurveda Dosha MVAH Balneotherapy Brazilian Bush medicine Cambodian Chinese Blood stasis Chinese herbology Dit da Gua sha Gill plate trade Long gu Meridian Moxibustion Pressure point Qi San Jiao Tui na Zang-fu Chumash Curandero Faith healing Herbal medicine Hilot Iranian Jamu Kayakalpa Kambo Japanese Korean Maya Mien Shiang Mongolian Naftalan oil Prophetic medicine Shamanism Shiatsu Siddha Sri Lankan Thai massage Tibetan Unani Vietnamese Alternative diagnoses Adrenal fatigue Aerotoxic syndrome Candida hypersensitivity Chronic Lyme disease Electromagnetic hypersensitivity Heavy legs Leaky gut syndrome Multiple chemical sensitivity Vertebral subluxation Wilson's temperature syndrome v t e Chromotherapy , sometimes called color therapy , colorology or cromatherapy , is a pseudoscientific form of alternative medicine which proposes certain diseases can be treated by exposure to certain colors.

[ 1 ] Its practice is considered to be quackery .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Chromotherapists claim to be able to use light in the form of color to balance "energy" lacking from a person's body, whether it be on physical, emotional, spiritual, or mental levels.  For example, they thought that shining a colored light on a person would cure constipation . Historically, chromotherapy has been associated with mysticism and occultism .

[ 2 ] Color therapy is unrelated to photomedicine , such as phototherapy and blood irradiation therapy , which are scientifically accepted medical treatments for a number of conditions, [ 6 ] as well as being unrelated to photobiology , which is the scientific study of the effects of light on living organisms.

History [ edit ] Avicenna (980–1037), seeing color as of vital importance both in diagnosis and in treatment , discussed chromotherapy in The Canon of Medicine . He wrote that "color is an observable symptom of disease" and also developed a chart that related color to the temperature and physical condition of the body. His view was that red moved the blood, blue or white cooled it, and yellow reduced muscular pain and inflammation.

Pioneer of photography Robert Hunt performed experiments on the effects of different wavelengths of light on the germination and growth of plants, detailed in his 1844 book Researches on Light .

[ 7 ] Apparently influenced by this work, [ 8 ] : 214–215 from 1860 Augustus Pleasonton started to conduct original experiments, and in 1876 published the book The Influence of the Blue Ray of the Sunlight and of the Blue Color of the Sky , detailing how the color blue can improve the growth of crops and livestock and can help heal diseases in humans. This led to the birth of modern chromotherapy, influencing contemporary scientists Dr. Seth Pancoast and Edwin Dwight Babbitt to conduct experiments and publish Blue and Red Light; or, Light and Its Rays as Medicine (1877) and The Principles of Light and Color (1878), respectively.

[ 8 ] : 214, 222, 229 Pancoast's book has been described by historians as a confusing mix of color therapy, mysticism, and occultism.

[ 2 ] He held a lifelong interest in the Kabbalah and was a founding member of the Theosophical Society . Pancoast believed that God is light and "the one universal pathological agent" that could cure disease. He would expose medications to colored light before administering them to a patient and also utilized sun-baths fitted with colored panes of glass.

[ 2 ] Throughout the 19th century, "color healers" claimed colored glass filters could treat many diseases, including constipation and meningitis .

[ 9 ] In Germany in the late 1890s, Georg von Langsdorff promoted Babbitt's ideas and mixed color therapy with psychometry and spiritualism .

[ 2 ] The Buddhist monk Bhante Dharmawara was a notable advocate of color therapy who promoted the use of green, blue, and yellow for health.

[ 10 ] Other notable advocates include Anthroposophist Theo Gimbel, who authored many books on the subject and founded the Hygeia Institute for Colour Therapy in 1968.

[ 11 ] Dinshah P. Ghadiali [ edit ] In 1933, Indian scientist Dinshah P. Ghadiali published The Spectro Chromemetry Encyclopaedia , a work on color therapy.

[ 12 ] Ghadiali claimed to have discovered why and how the different colored rays have various therapeutic effects on organisms. He believed that colors represent chemical potencies in higher octaves of vibration, and for each organism and system of the body, there is a particular color that stimulates and another that inhibits the work of that organ or system. He also thought that, by knowing the action of the different colors upon the different organs and systems of the body, one can apply the correct color that will tend to balance the action of any organ or system that has become abnormal in its function or condition. The American Medical Association published refutations of Ghadiali's color therapy claims. In 1958, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) facilitated a permanent injunction against Ghadiali's Visible Spectrum Research Institute.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Ghadiali's son, Darius Dinshah, continues to provide information about color therapy via his Dinshah Health Society, a nonprofit organization dedicated to advancing non-pharmaceutical home color therapy, and his book Let There Be Light .

[ 14 ] Conceptual basis [ edit ] A New Age conceptualisation of the chakras of Indian body culture and their positions in the human body Practitioners of ayurvedic medicine believe the body has seven " chakras ", which some claim are 'spiritual centers', and are thought to be located along the spine .

New Age thought associates each of the chakras with a single color of the visible light spectrum, along with a function and organ or bodily system. According to this view, the chakras can become imbalanced and result in physical and mental diseases, but application of the appropriate color can allegedly correct such imbalances.

[ 15 ] Scientific rejection [ edit ] Chromotherapy is a popular pseudoscience.

[ 1 ] Its practice is regarded by health experts and historians as a form of quackery .

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] According to a book published by the American Cancer Society , "available scientific evidence does not support claims that alternative uses of light or color therapy are effective in treating cancer or other illnesses".

[ 6 ] Regarding Dinshah Ghadiali's work, science writer Martin Gardner had described him as "perhaps the greatest quack of them all".  According to Gardner, photographs of Ghadiali at work in his laboratory are "indistinguishable from stills of a grade D movie about a mad scientist".

[ 16 ] Historian Deborah Ascher Barnstone has noted that chromotherapy is "distinct from scientifically verified light treatments such as neonatal jaundice treatment. As, unlike chromotherapy, the light used in such therapies, whether scientifically proven or not, was not always colored, their particulars are not relevant in this context." [ 2 ] Photobiology , the term for the scientific study of the effects of light on living tissue, has sometimes been used instead of the term chromotherapy in an effort to distance it from its roots in Victorian mysticism and to strip it of its associations with symbolism and magic.

[ 9 ] Light therapy is a specific treatment approach using high intensity light to treat specific sleep, skin, and mood disorders.

A review of the existing research on chromotherapy found that there is no evidence to support a causal link between specific colors to health outcomes, there is not enough evidence to support a causal link between specific colors and emotional or mental states, and there is no research to suggest there exists one-to-one relationships between specific colors and emotions.

[ 17 ] Chromotherapy has been accused of oversimplifying psychological responses to colors, making sweeping statements based on myths or beliefs that lack empirical support. Guidelines for chromotherapy lack consistency and appear to be subjective judgements that have inconclusive and nonspecific applicability in healthcare systems. While twelve colors have been reported as beneficial for health and well-being, a rigorous definition of each of these colors has yet to be provided, making it impossible to know if all color therapists are using the same wavelengths for these colors.

[ 17 ] More recently, concern regarding the theory has questioned the risks associated with the emergence of light-emitting diode (LED) based lamps that have been created for use in chromotherapy. These lamps are classified as low risk for exposure and do not require any warnings to accompany the products. However, certain chromotherapy procedures require the individual to place the lamps near their eyes, which is not the recommended use for these lights and may alter the exposure duration to a level that can cause risk of retinal damage . With no consensus or regulation regarding how these products are to be used and whether eyewear is required, this treatment puts participants at risk for serious eye damage.

[ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Colorpuncture List of ineffective cancer treatments List of topics characterized as pseudoscience References [ edit ] ^ a b "How Pseudoscience Generated US Material and Device Regulations" (PDF) .

AMA Journal of Ethics .

23 (9): E721–738. 2021-09-01.

doi : 10.1001/amajethics.2021.721 .

ISSN 2376-6980 . Retrieved 2025-03-24 .

^ a b c d e f g Barnstone, Deborah Ascher. (2022).

The Color of Modernism: Paints, Pigments, and the Transformation of Modern Architecture in 1920s Germany . Bloomsbury Academic. pp. 175–183.

ISBN 978-1350251335 ^ Williams, William F. (2000).

Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience: From Alien Abductions to Zone Therapy . Facts on File Inc. p. 52.

ISBN 1-57958-207-9 ^ a b Raso, Jack. (1993).

Mystical Diets: Paranormal, Spiritual, and Occult Nutrition Practices . Prometheus Books. pp. 256–257.

ISBN 0-87975-761-2 ^ a b Swan, Jonathan. (2003).

Quack Magic: The Dubious History of Health Fads and Cures . Ebury Press. p. 216.

ISBN 978-0091888091 ^ a b Ades, Terri (2009).

Complete Guide to Complementary & Alternative Cancer Therapies . American Cancer Society. p. 210.

ISBN 9781604430530 .

^ Hunt, Robert (1844). "The Influence of the Solar Rays upon Vital Organisation and upon Simple Inorganic Bodies".

Researches on Light: An Examination of All the Phenomena Connected with the Chemical and Molecular Changes Produced by the Influence of the Solar Rays; Embracing All the Known Photographic Processes and New Discoveries in the Art . London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans. pp.

181– 194 . Retrieved 5 August 2023 .

^ a b Collins, Paul (2002).

Banvard's Folly . London: Picador.

ISBN 0330486896 .

OCLC 50495295 .

OL 10492488M .

^ a b Gruson, L (1982-10-19).

"Color has a powerful effect on behavior, researchers assert" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2009-09-18 .

^ York, Michael. (2009).

The A to Z of New Age Movements . Scarecrow Press. pp. 60–61.

ISBN 978-0-8108-6816-8 ^ "Theophilus Gimbel" . thetimes.co.uk. Retrieved 30 September 2023.

^ a b Schwarcz, Joe.

"Colorful Nonsense: Dinshah Ghadiali and His Spectro-Chrome Device" . Quackwatch.

^ "How Pseudoscience Generated US Material and Device Regulations" . journalofethics.ama-assn.org. Retrieved 30 September 2023.

^ Dinshah, Darius (2012).

Let There be Light . Dinshah Health Society.

ISBN 978-0933917309 .

^ Parker, D (2001).

Color Decoder . Barron's.

ISBN 978-0-7641-1887-6 .

[ page needed ] ^ Gardner, Martin . (2012 edition, originally published in 1957).

Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science . Dover Publications. pp. 211–212.

ISBN 0-486-20394-8 ^ a b Tofle, R.B. (2004).

"Color in Healthcare Environments – A Research Report" (PDF) .

California: Coalition for Health Environments Research .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-08-10 . Retrieved March 20, 2020 .

^ Point, Sébastien (2007).

"The Danger of Chromotherapy" .

The Skeptical Inquirer .

41 (4): 50– 53.

ProQuest 1922421856 .

Further reading [ edit ] Edwin Dwight Babbitt. (1886).

The Principles of Light and Color . East Orange, New Jersey.

Martin Gardner . (1957).

Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science . Dover Publications.

ISBN 0-486-20394-8 External links [ edit ] Color+Therapy at the U.S. National Library of Medicine Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) v t e Pseudoscience List of topics characterized as pseudoscience Terminology Cargo cult science Charlatan Crank Fringe theory Fringe science Pseudoarchaeology Pseudohistory Pseudomathematics Junk science Paranormal Pathological science Quackery Snake oil Superseded scientific theory True-believer syndrome Voodoo Science Topics characterized as pseudoscience Medicine Acupuncture Aromatherapy Adrenal fatigue Alternative medicine Anthroposophic medicine Applied kinesiology Ayurveda Bates method Biorhythms Bloodletting Body memory Chiropractic Chromotherapy Correactology Cryonics Crystal healing Cupping Detoxification Colon cleansing Doctrine of signatures Doktor Koster's Antigaspills Ear candling Electromagnetic hypersensitivity Energy medicine Fad diet FasciaBlaster Germ theory denialism HIV/AIDS denialism Homeopathy Humorism Iridology Leaky gut syndrome LGBTQ chemicals conspiracy theory Lunar effect Macrobiotic diet Magnet therapy Miracle Mineral Supplement Naturopathy Palmistry Panchagavya Patent medicine Phrenology Primal therapy Radionics Reiki Traditional medicine Traditional Chinese medicine Trepanning Vertebral subluxation Wind turbine syndrome Young blood transfusion Social science 2012 phenomenon Ancient astronauts Arabian Judah theory Catastrophism Conspiracy theory 5G conspiracy 9/11 conspiracy theories Chemtrail conspiracy theory Climate change denial COVID-19 misinformation Moon landing conspiracy theories Opposition to water fluoridation Conversion therapy Expanding Earth Theory Generational theory Generationism Strauss–Howe generational theory Hollow Earth theory Indigo children Japhetic theory Mediumship Nazi archaeology Nibiru cataclysm Parapsychology Pseudoarchaeology Pseudohistory Genocide denial Historical negationism Holocaust denial Tartarian Empire Pseudolaw Recovered-memory therapy Past life regression Scientific racism Aryan race Melanin theory Myers–Briggs Type Indicator Enneagram of Personality Physics Anti-gravity Cold fusion Faster-than-light travel Perpetual motion Quantum mysticism Reactionless drive Dean drive EMDrive Teleportation Tractor beam Water-fueled car Other Alchemy Aquatic ape hypothesis Astrology Biodynamic agriculture Biological transmutation Creation science Cryptozoology Dianetics Auditing Dowsing Electronic voice phenomenon Eugenics Facilitated communication Feng shui Flat Earth theory Modern flat Earth beliefs Graphology Intelligent design Laundry ball Law of attraction Levitation Lysenkoism Numerology Orgone Polygraph Pseudoscientific metrology Rapid prompting method Statement analysis Ufology Voice stress analysis Water memory Promoters of pseudoscience Sucharit Bhakdi Del Bigtree Igor and Grichka Bogdanoff Brigitte Boisselier Rhonda Byrne Robert Charroux Deepak Chopra Clonaid Vernon Coleman Michael Crichton Ignatius L. Donnelly Gaia, Inc.

Max Gerson Nicholas Gonzalez Goop (company) Graham Hancock David Icke William Donald Kelley Robert F. Kennedy Jr.

Corentin Louis Kervran The Light (newspaper) Mike Lindell Jenny McCarthy Joseph Mercola Judy Mikovits Ministry of Ayush Theodor Morell Hans Alfred Nieper Mehmet Oz Raël ( Claude Vorilhon ) Robby Starbuck Randolph Stone Paul Joseph Watson Andrew Wakefield Related topics Bogdanov affair Bourgeois pseudoscience Demarcation problem Scientific method Suppressed research in the Soviet Union Resources Committee for Skeptical Inquiry Cults of Unreason An Encyclopedia of Claims, Frauds, and Hoaxes of the Occult and Supernatural Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science Fortean Times James Randi Educational Foundation Quackwatch Skeptical Inquirer The Demon-Haunted World The Natural History of Quackery The Psychology of the Occult The Ragged Edge of Science The Skeptic Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience The Skeptic's Dictionary v t e Color topics Color science Color physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colors Chromophore Structural coloration Animal coloration Color of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Color perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Color calibration Color constancy Color task Color code Color temperature Color vision test Evolution of color vision Impossible colors Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Color psychology Color symbolism Color preferences Lüscher color test Kruithof curve Political color National colors Chromophobia Chromotherapy Color reproduction Color photography Color balance Color cast Digital image processing Color management Color printing Multi-primary color display Quattron Color model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Color space Color mapping Color philosophy Color scheme Color tool Monochromatic colors Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colors Analogous colors Achromatic colors (Neutral) Polychromatic colors Light-on-dark Web colors Tinctures in heraldry Color theory Color mixing Primary color Secondary color Chromaticity Color solid Color wheel Color triangle Color analysis (fashion) Color realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Color terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Gray Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Color history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Color in Chinese culture Traditional colors of Japan Human skin color Color dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colorfulness Pastel colors Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Color organizations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Color Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) List of colors by shade List of color palettes List of color spaces List of Crayola crayon colors history Color chart List of RAL colors List of web colors Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chromotherapy&oldid=1293589799 " Categories : Color Energy therapies Pseudoscience Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2015 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 15:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chromotherapy 20 languages Add topic

