Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 WAGBI 1.2 BASC 2 Modern day 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents British Association for Shooting and Conservation Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Registered society in the United Kingdom This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "British Association for Shooting and Conservation" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) British Association for Shooting and Conservation Established 1908 Type Industrial and provident society [ 1 ] Headquarters Rossett , Wrexham , Wales Area served United Kingdom Publication Shooting and Conservation Employees 137 (2023) [ 2 ] Website basc .org .uk The British Association for Shooting and Conservation ( BASC ) is a registered society under the Co-operative and Community Benefit Societies Act 2014, whose mission is to promote and protect sporting shooting and the well-being of the countryside throughout the United Kingdom and overseas. It has a membership of over 150,000.

[ 3 ] Its magazine Shooting and Conservation had an average circulation of around 135,000 in 2017.

[ 4 ] Sporting shooting includes wildfowling , game , and rough shooting, deer stalking , target shooting and air gunning , pigeon shooting and pest control , gundogs and promoting practical habitat conservation . BASC is also involved in the political representation of shooting, training and the setting of standards in shooting sports and the association undertakes research in its area of interest.

History [ edit ] WAGBI [ edit ] BASC began as the Wildfowlers Association of Great Britain and Ireland (WAGBI), founded by Stanley Duncan, an engineer and gun shop owner from Hull , in 1908. Duncan was a wildfowler and naturalist who  feared for the future of wildfowling which was under threat from attempts to control the foreshore. He was also concerned to protect coastal habitats to preserve wildfowl and defend shooting from "protectionist extremists" wishing to ban the sport. The first president was Sir Ralph Payne-Gallwey , a notable Victorian and Edwardian sportsman and author of several books on shooting.

[ 5 ] Duncan remained the secretary of WAGBI until 1946.

[ 5 ] Duncan was also a member of the Zoological Society.

[ 6 ] For his fowling expeditions Duncan stayed at the Black Hut on Patrington Haven on the Humber . The first WAGBI meeting was held in an hotel in Hull. The Black Hut was allegedly washed away by a big tide in 1969 but was more likely destroyed by a digger clearing the site.

[ 5 ] Following this, WAGBI appointed its first full-time director, a former naval officer and Liverpool businessman, Commander John Anderton, who summed up his agenda as "doing one's best for something one likes – backed by the conviction that what one is doing is right."  Under Anderton WAGBI focused its efforts on raising standards among wildfowlers and establishing a network of wildfowling clubs to preserve local shooting and maintain records of wildfowl populations.

In 1975 the Gamekeepers Association merged with WAGBI and in 1977, the association was a founding member of FACE , the federation for shooting sports in the European Union .

[ 5 ] BASC [ edit ] In addition, shooting had become more open with individuals pursuing several forms of the sport. The change of name to the British Association for Shooting and Conservation (BASC) was agreed at the Annual General Meeting in 1981 in recognition that shooting sports required a single representative body and that WAGBI was the most suitably placed organisation to take on the role.

[ 5 ] Modern day [ edit ] BASC is a representative body for shooting sports and is a registered society under the Co-operative and Community Benefit Societies Act 2014. Each member has one share in the association. BASC is governed by a council elected from the members.

[ 7 ] The council is advised by a series of committees for Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland, game shooting, deer stalking and wildfowling.

[ 8 ] Marford Mill, the association's headquarters, was acquired in 1976. The property is a former water mill at Rossett , in Wrexham . Among the collections held by BASC at the headquarters are firearms such as Irish Tom, a punt gun of unusual length and bore and Col.

Peter Hawker 's double punt gun.

The association has country offices in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland as well as four English regional directors and their staff based in the North, Central, the South East and the South West.

[ 9 ] While the main purpose of the association is the protection and promotion of country shooting and its associated conservation activities, BASC also runs the wildfowling permit scheme, deer stalking schemes and the Goshooting initiative which links those looking for a shooting opportunity with those providing them. Members can also request advice from BASC's expert staff on issues involving shooting and firearms certification and licensing, land management and gamekeeping.

Other projects include Green Shoots, which links members to local biodiversity plans; Young Shots, which seeks to educate young people about field sports; and Taste of Game which promotes game meat. BASC is a signatory to the Code of Good Shooting Practice [ 10 ] and produces a series of codes of practice on aspects of shooting.

In politics BASC operates on an all-party basis and they ensured that shooting was not damaged by the Hunting Act 2004 , preserved the legal right for young people to continue to go shooting with airguns, where they have the permission of the landowner, and secured an exemption from the ban on the cosmetic docking of dogs tails for working gundogs.

Hunting dogs with catch The patron of the association was Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh , who held the office from 1967 till 2021.

[ 11 ] Princess Anne accepted an invitation to succeed her father as Patron in October 2022.

[ 12 ] Richard Ali succeeded John Swift as chief executive of the association in 2013, a position he held until March 2017, when the association announced his dismissal due to gross misconduct.

[ 13 ] BASC has announced that Ian Bell took over as chief executive in February 2018.

[ 14 ] BASC has in the past opposed attempts to ban the use of lead shot, despite the stance of its former chief executive, arguing that further restrictions do not have a robust evidence base and that compliance with the law and proper processing of game meat manages the risks.

[ 15 ] In February 2020, BASC, alongside eight other shooting and rural organisations, announced a voluntary five-year transition away from lead shot and single-use plastics for live quarry shooting. The statement claimed significant recent advances in technology has enabled the transition to take place.

[ 16 ] Despite this, in June 2020 BASC strongly opposed EU legislation to restrict the use of lead shot around wetlands.

[ 17 ] A year into the transition, a study found that of 180 birds tested, 179 were shot with lead.

[ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Driven grouse shooting Game & Wildlife Conservation Trust Game (food) Gamekeeper Hunting in the United Kingdom Wildfowling Wildlife management Firearm regulation in the United Kingdom References [ edit ] ^ "About Us" .

BASC . Retrieved 20 August 2020 .

^ "Annual Review 2023" .

British Association for Shooting and Conservation . Retrieved 15 January 2025 .

^ "BASC | Membership hits a record-breaking 150,000" .

basc.org.uk . Retrieved 13 November 2017 .

^ "Shooting and Conservation – media information – ABC | Audit Bureau of Circulations" .

www.abc.org.uk . Retrieved 13 November 2017 .

^ a b c d e Graham., Downing (2007).

A sporting century : the history of the British Association for Shooting & Conservation . Shrewsbury: Quiller.

ISBN 9781846890260 .

OCLC 421758307 .

^ Channel, Fieldsports.

"Shooting Politics, episode 13, 17th February 2010" . fieldsportschannel.tv . Retrieved 25 October 2012 .

^ "BASC | BASC Council and Constitution and Objects" .

basc.org.uk . Retrieved 13 November 2017 .

^ "BASC | BASC constitution" .

basc.org.uk . Retrieved 13 November 2017 .

^ "In your area" . BASC . Retrieved 30 May 2020 .

^ "Code of Good Shooting Practice" . Retrieved 30 May 2020 .

^ "Prince Philip opens BASC's communication centre" . BASC. Archived from the original on 7 January 2014 . Retrieved 7 January 2014 .

^ "Princess Anne is the new BASC Patron | BASC" .

www.basc.org.uk . Retrieved 11 October 2022 .

^ "BASC chief executive dismissed for gross misconduct – BASC website" .

BASC . 2 March 2017. Archived from the original on 7 March 2017 . Retrieved 6 March 2017 .

^ "BASC | BASC appoints new chief executive" .

basc.org.uk . Retrieved 13 November 2017 .

^ "BASC | BASC Policy on Lead Ammunition" .

basc.org.uk . Retrieved 13 November 2017 .

^ "Moving away from lead shot" .

BASC . Retrieved 30 May 2020 .

^ "BASC fights EU lead ammunition restrictions" .

BASC . Retrieved 19 June 2020 .

^ "Most pheasants sold for food 'contain lead shot' " .

BBC News . 24 February 2021 . Retrieved 26 February 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to British Association for Shooting and Conservation .

Official website v t e Game animals and shooting in the United Kingdom Game birds Common pheasant Grey partridge Red-legged partridge Red grouse Rock ptarmigan Black grouse 1 Eurasian woodcock Common snipe Quarry species Mallard Teal Wood pigeon Golden plover Canada goose Greylag goose Pink-footed goose Eurasian wigeon Tufted duck Northern shoveler Northern pintail Gadwall Common pochard Common goldeneye Common moorhen Eurasian coot Deer Red deer Roe deer European fallow deer Sika deer Reeves's muntjac Water deer Other quarry European hare Red fox European rabbit Opponents League Against Cruel Sports Animal Aid Law Game Act 1831 Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Act 2002 Hunting Act 2004 See also British Association for Shooting and Conservation Hunting and shooting in the United Kingdom Game & Wildlife Conservation Trust Countryside Alliance Driven grouse shooting Glorious Twelfth Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Deer stalking Deer forest 1 Rarely shot because of declining numbers.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=British_Association_for_Shooting_and_Conservation&oldid=1269660143 " Categories : Hunting and shooting in the United Kingdom Organisations based in Wrexham County Borough Organizations established in 1908 Shooting sports in the United Kingdom 1908 establishments in the United Kingdom Gun rights advocacy groups Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2014 Use British English from October 2014 Articles needing additional references from October 2014 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 January 2025, at 19:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents British Association for Shooting and Conservation Add languages Add topic

