Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 History of international relations Toggle History of international relations subsection 2.1 Emergence as academic discipline 3 Theory Toggle Theory subsection 3.1 Realism 3.2 Liberalism 3.2.1 Liberal institutionalism 3.2.1.1 Regime theory 3.3 Constructivism 3.4 Critical theory (post-structuralism) 3.4.1 Marxism 3.4.1.1 Dependency theory 3.4.2 Feminism 3.4.3 International society theory (the English school) 4 Levels of analysis Toggle Levels of analysis subsection 4.1 Systemic level concepts 4.1.1 Sovereignty 4.1.2 Power 4.1.3 National interest 4.1.4 Non-state actors 4.1.5 Power blocs 4.1.6 Polarity 4.1.7 Interdependence 4.1.8 Dependency 4.1.9 Systemic tools of international relations 4.2 Unit-level concepts in international relations 4.2.1 Regime type 4.2.2 Revisionism versus status quo 4.2.3 Religion 4.3 Individual or sub-unit level concepts 5 Area studies Toggle Area studies subsection 5.1 Major fields of area studies 6 Institutions in international relations Toggle Institutions in international relations subsection 6.1 Generalist inter-state organizations 6.1.1 United Nations 6.1.2 Organisation of Islamic Cooperation 6.1.3 Other 6.2 Regional security arrangements 6.3 Economic institutions 6.4 International legal bodies 6.4.1 Human rights 6.4.2 Legal 7 See also 8 References 9 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 9.1 Theory 9.2 Textbooks 9.3 History of international relations 10 External links Toggle the table of contents International relations 82 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Luganda Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of relationships between two or more states "International Relations" redirects here. For the academic journal, see International Relations (journal) .

"International affairs" redirects here. For the academic journal, see International Affairs (journal) . For other uses, see International affairs (disambiguation) .

In 2012 alone, the Palace of Nations in Geneva , Switzerland, hosted more than 10,000 intergovernmental meetings. The city hosts the highest number of international organizations in the world.

[ 1 ] The field of international relations dates from the time of the Greek historian Thucydides .

Part of a series on Politics Outline Index Category Primary topics Outline of political science Index of politics articles Politics by country Politics by subdivision Political economy Political history Political history of the world Political philosophy Political systems Anarchy City-state Collective leadership Confessional system Democracy Dictatorship Directorial Federacy Feudalism Hybrid regime Meritocracy Monarchy Parliamentary Presidential Republic Semi-parliamentary Semi-presidential Theocracy Academic disciplines Political science ( political scientists ) International relations ( theory ) Comparative politics Election science Political analysis Political theory Policy studies Political psychology Political sociology Public administration Bureaucracy ( street-level ) Technocracy Adhocracy Service ( Public / Civil ) Policy Public policy ( doctrine ) Domestic policy Foreign policy Civil society Public interest Government branches Separation of powers Legislature Executive Judiciary Election commission Related topics Sovereignty Polity / State / Country Biology and political orientation Critique of political economy Political censorship Political organisations Theories of political behavior Subseries Electoral systems Elections voting Unitarism Federalism Government ( forms / Governance ) Ideology Culture Political campaigning Political parties Politics portal v t e Conflict resolution Principles Democracy Might makes right Non-aggression Nonviolence Pacifism Rule of man Speaking truth to power Toleration paradox Law Collaborative Dispute resolution Right to an effective remedy Rule of law Management Arbitration Alternative dispute resolution Auction Conciliation Family therapy Mediation Party-directed Negotiation Nonviolent Communication Peacebuilding International relations Appeasement Armistice Ceasefire Diplomacy Multilateralism Peacebuilding Peacemaking Peace process Peace treaty Track II diplomacy War Models and theories Brinkmanship Conflict escalation Conflict avoidance Conflict continuum Conflict style inventory Deterrence theory Game theory Prisoner's dilemma v t e International relations ( IR , and also referred to as international studies , international politics , [ 2 ] or international affairs ) [ 3 ] is an academic discipline.

[ 4 ] In a broader sense, the study of IR, in addition to multilateral relations, concerns all activities among states—such as war , diplomacy , trade , and foreign policy —as well as relations with and among other international actors, such as intergovernmental organizations (IGOs), international nongovernmental organizations (INGOs), international legal bodies , and multinational corporations (MNCs).

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] International relations is generally classified as a major multidiscipline of political science , along with comparative politics , political methodology , political theory , and public administration .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] It often draws heavily from other fields, including anthropology , economics , geography , history , law , philosophy , and sociology .

[ 9 ] There are several schools of thought within IR, of which the most prominent are realism , liberalism , and constructivism .

While international politics has been analyzed since antiquity , it did not become a discrete field until 1919, when it was first offered as an undergraduate major by Aberystwyth University in the United Kingdom .

[ 7 ] [ 10 ] The Second World War and its aftermath provoked greater interest and scholarship in international relations, particularly in North America and Western Europe , where it was shaped considerably by the geostrategic concerns of the Cold War . The collapse of the Soviet Union and the subsequent rise of globalization in the late 20th century have presaged new theories and evaluations of the rapidly changing international system .

[ 11 ] Terminology [ edit ] Depending on the academic institution, international relations or international affairs is either a subdiscipline of political science or a broader multidisciplinary field encompassing global politics , law, economics or world history. As a subdiscipline of political science, the focus of IR studies lies on political, diplomatic and security connections among states, as well as the study of modern political world history. In many academic institutions, studies of IR are thus situated in the department of politics/social sciences. This is for example the case in Scandinavia, where international relations are often simply referred to as international politics (IP).

[ citation needed ] In institutions where international relations refers to the broader multidisciplinary field of global politics, law, economics and history, the subject may be studied across multiple departments, or be situated in its own department, as is the case at for example the London School of Economics.

[ 12 ] An undergraduate degree in multidisciplinary international relations may lead to a more specialised master's degree of either international politics, economics, or international law .

In the inaugural issue of World Politics , Frederick S. Dunn wrote that IR was about "relations that take place across national boundaries" and "between autonomous political groups in a world system".

[ 13 ] Dunn wrote that unique elements characterized IR and separated it from other subfields: international politics is concerned with the special kind of power relationships that exist in a community lacking an overriding authority; international economics deals with trade relations across national boundaries that are complicated by the uncontrolled actions of sovereign states; and international law is law that is based on voluntary acceptance by independent nations.

[ 13 ] The terms "International studies" and " global studies " have been used by some to refer to a broader multidisciplinary IR field.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] History of international relations [ edit ] See also: International relations (1648–1814) , International relations (1814–1919) , Diplomatic history of World War I , International relations (1919–1939) , Diplomatic history of World War II , Cold War , and International relations since 1989 The official portraits of King Władysław IV dressed according to French , Spanish , and Polish fashion reflects the complex politics of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth during the Thirty Years' War .

Studies of international relations started thousands of years ago; Barry Buzan and Richard Little considered the interaction of ancient Sumerian city-states, starting in 3,500 BC , as the first fully-fledged international system.

[ 16 ] Analyses of the foreign policies of sovereign city states have been done in ancient times, as in Thucydides ' analysis of the causes of the Peloponnesian War between Athens and Sparta , [ 17 ] as well as by Niccolò Machiavelli in The Prince , published in 1532, where he analyzed the foreign policy of the renaissance city state of Florence .

[ 18 ] The contemporary field of international relations, however, analyzes the connections existing between sovereign nation-states . This makes the establishment of the modern state system the natural starting point of international relations history.

[ citation needed ] The establishment of modern sovereign states as fundamental political units traces back to the Peace of Westphalia of 1648 in Europe . During the preceding Middle Ages , European organization of political authority was based on a vaguely hierarchical religious order. Contrary to popular belief, Westphalia still embodied layered systems of sovereignty, especially within the Holy Roman Empire .

[ 19 ] More than the Peace of Westphalia, the Treaty of Utrecht of 1713 is thought to reflect an emerging norm that sovereigns had no internal equals within a defined territory and no external superiors as the ultimate authority within the territory's sovereign borders. These principles underpin the modern international legal and political order.

The period between roughly 1500 to 1789 saw the rise of independent sovereign states , multilateralism , and the institutionalization of diplomacy and the military. The French Revolution contributed the idea that it was the citizenry of a state, defined as the nation, that were sovereign, rather than a monarch or noble class. A state wherein the nation is sovereign would thence be termed a nation-state, as opposed to a monarchy or a religious state; the term republic increasingly became its synonym. An alternative model of the nation-state was developed in reaction to the French republican concept by the Germans and others, who instead of giving the citizenry sovereignty, kept the princes and nobility, but defined nation-statehood in ethnic-linguistic terms, establishing the rarely if ever fulfilled ideal that all people speaking one language should belong to one state only. The same claim to sovereignty was made for both forms of nation-state. In Europe today, few states conform to either definition of nation-state: many continue to have royal sovereigns, and hardly any are ethnically homogeneous.

The particular European system supposing the sovereign equality of states was exported to the Americas, Africa, and Asia via colonialism and the "standards of civilization". The contemporary international system was finally established through decolonization during the Cold War . However, this is somewhat over-simplified. While the nation-state system is considered "modern", many states have not incorporated the system and are termed "pre-modern".

A handful of states have moved beyond insistence on full sovereignty, and can be considered "post-modern". The ability of contemporary IR discourse to explain the relations of these different types of states is disputed. "Levels of analysis" is a way of looking at the international system, which includes the individual level, the domestic state as a unit, the international level of transnational and intergovernmental affairs, and the global level.

What is explicitly recognized as international relations theory was not developed until after World War I , and is dealt with in more detail below. IR theory, however, has a long tradition of drawing on the work of other social sciences . The use of capitalizations of the "I" and "R" in international relations aims to distinguish the academic discipline of international relations from the phenomena of international relations. Many cite Sun Tzu 's The Art of War (6th century BC), Thucydides ' History of the Peloponnesian War (5th century BC), Chanakya 's Arthashastra (4th century BC), as the inspiration for realist theory, with Hobbes ' Leviathan and Machiavelli 's The Prince providing further elaboration.

Similarly, liberalism draws upon the work of Kant and Rousseau , with the work of the former often being cited as the first elaboration of democratic peace theory .

[ 20 ] Though contemporary human rights is considerably different from the type of rights envisioned under natural law , Francisco de Vitoria , Hugo Grotius , and John Locke offered the first accounts of universal entitlement to certain rights on the basis of common humanity. In the 20th century, in addition to contemporary theories of liberal internationalism , Marxism has been a foundation of international relations.

[ citation needed ] Emergence as academic discipline [ edit ] International relations as a distinct field of study began in Britain . IR emerged as a formal academic discipline in 1919 with the founding of the first IR professorship: the Woodrow Wilson Chair at Aberystwyth , University of Wales (now Aberystwyth University ), [ 7 ] [ 21 ] held by Alfred Eckhard Zimmern [ 22 ] and endowed by David Davies . International politics courses were established at the University of Wisconsin in 1899 by Paul Samuel Reinsch and at Columbia University in 1910.

[ 23 ] By 1920, there were four universities that taught courses on international organization .

[ 23 ] Georgetown University 's Walsh School of Foreign Service is the oldest continuously operating school for international affairs in the United States, founded in 1919.

[ 24 ] In 1927, the London School of Economics ' department of international relations was founded at the behest of Nobel Peace Prize winner Philip Noel-Baker : this was the first institute to offer a wide range of degrees in the field. That same year, the Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies , a school dedicated to teaching international affairs, was founded in Geneva , Switzerland. This was rapidly followed by establishment of IR at universities in the US. The creation of the posts of Montague Burton Professor of International Relations at LSE and at Oxford gave further impetus to the academic study of international relations. Furthermore, the International History department at LSE developed a focus on the history of IR in the early modern , colonial , and Cold War periods.

[ 25 ] The first university entirely dedicated to the study of IR was the Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies , which was founded in 1927 to form diplomats associated to the League of Nations . In 1922, Georgetown University graduated its first class of the Master of Science in Foreign Service (MSFS) degree, making it the first international relations graduate program in the United States.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] This was soon followed by the establishment of the Committee on International Relations (CIR) at the University of Chicago , where the first research graduate degree was conferred in 1928.

[ 28 ] The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy , a collaboration between Tufts University and Harvard University , opened its doors in 1933 as the first graduate-only school of international affairs in the United States.

[ 29 ] In 1965, Glendon College and the Norman Paterson School of International Affairs were the first institutions in Canada to offer an undergraduate and a graduate program in international studies and affairs, respectively.

The lines between IR and other political science subfields is sometimes blurred, in particular when it comes to the study of conflict , institutions , political economy and political behavior .

[ 7 ] The division between comparative politics and international relations is artificial, as processes within nations shape international processes, and international processes shape processes within states.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Some scholars have called for an integration of the fields.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Comparative politics does not have similar " isms " as international relations scholarship.

[ 35 ] Critical scholarship in international relations has explored the relationship between the institutionalization of IR as an academic discipline and the demands of national governments.

Robert Vitalis [ ar ] 's book White World Order, Black Power Politics details the historical imbrication of IR in the projects of colonial administration and imperialism, [ 36 ] while other scholars have traced the emergence of international relations in relation to the consolidation of newly independent nation-states within the non-West , such as Brazil and India.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Theory [ edit ] Main article: International relations theory See also: International legal theories Within the study of international relations, there exists multiple theories seeking to explain how states and other actors operate within the international system. These can generally be divided into three main strands: realism, liberalism, and constructivism.

[ 39 ] Realism [ edit ] Main article: Realism (international relations) The realist framework of international relations rests on the fundamental assumption that the international state system is an anarchy , with no overarching power restricting the behaviour of sovereign states. As a consequence, states are engaged in a continuous power struggle, where they seek to augment their own military capabilities, economic power, and diplomacy relative to other states; this in order to ensure the protection of their political system, citizens, and vital interests.

[ 40 ] The realist framework further assumes that states act as unitary, rational actors, where central decision makers in the state apparatus ultimately stand for most of the state's foreign policy decisions.

[ 41 ] International organizations are in consequence merely seen as tools for individual states used to further their own interests, and are thought to have little power in shaping states' foreign policies on their own.

[ 42 ] The realist framework is traditionally associated with the analysis of power politics, and has been used to analyze the conflicts between states in the early European state system; the causes of the First and Second World Wars , as well as the behavior of the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War . In settings such as these, the realist framework carries great interpretative insights in explaining how the military and economic power struggles of states lead to larger armed conflicts.

History of the Peloponnesian War , written by Thucydides , is considered a foundational text of the realist school of political philosophy.

[ 43 ] There is debate over whether Thucydides himself was a realist; Richard Ned Lebow has argued that seeing Thucydides as a realist is a misinterpretation of a more complex political message within his work.

[ 44 ] Amongst others, philosophers like Machiavelli , Hobbes , and Rousseau are considered to have contributed to the realist philosophy.

[ 45 ] However, while their work may support realist doctrine, it is not likely that they would have classified themselves as realists in this sense. Political realism believes that politics, like society, is governed by objective laws with roots in human nature . To improve society, it is first necessary to understand the laws by which society lives. The operation of these laws being impervious to our preferences, persons will challenge them only at the risk of failure. Realism, believing as it does in the objectivity of the laws of politics, must also believe in the possibility of developing a rational theory that reflects, however imperfectly and one-sidedly, these objective laws. It believes also, then, in the possibility of distinguishing in politics between truth and opinion—between what is true objectively and rationally, supported by evidence and illuminated by reason, and what is only a subjective judgment, divorced from the facts as they are and informed by prejudice and wishful thinking.

Major theorists include E. H. Carr , Robert Gilpin , Charles P. Kindleberger , Stephen D. Krasner , Hans Morgenthau , Kenneth Waltz , Robert Jervis , Stephen Walt , and John Mearsheimer .

Liberalism [ edit ] Main article: Liberalism (international relations) See also: Liberal internationalism In contrast to realism, the liberal framework emphasises that states, although they are sovereign, do not exist in a purely anarchical system. Rather, liberal theory assumes that states are institutionally constrained by the power of international organisations, and mutually dependent on one another through economic and diplomatic ties. Institutions such as the United Nations , the World Trade Organisation (WTO), and the International Court of Justice are taken to, over time, have developed power and influence to shape the foreign policies of individual states. Furthermore, the existence of the globalised world economy makes continuous military power struggle irrational, as states are dependent on participation in the global trade system to ensure their own survival. As such, the liberal framework stresses cooperation between states as a fundamental part of the international system. States are not seen as unitary actors, but pluralistic arenas where interest groups, non-governmental organisations, and economic actors also shape the creation of foreign policy.

[ 42 ] [ 46 ] The liberal framework is associated with analysis of the globalised world as it emerged in the aftermath of World War II . Increased political cooperation through organisations such as the UN , as well as economic cooperation through institutions such as the WTO, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund , was thought to have made the realist analysis of power and conflict inadequate in explaining the workings of the international system.

[ 47 ] Immanuel Kant 's essay Perpetual Peace from 1795 is often cited as the intellectual basis of liberal theory. In it, he postulates that states, over time, through increased political and economic cooperation, will come to resemble an international federation—a world government —which will be characterised by continual peace and cooperation.

[ 48 ] In modern times, liberal international relations theory arose after World War I in response to the ability of states to control and limit war in their international relations. Early adherents include Woodrow Wilson and Norman Angell , who argued that states mutually gained from cooperation and that war was so destructive as to be essentially futile.

[ 49 ] Liberalism was not recognized as a coherent theory as such until it was collectively and derisively termed idealism by E. H. Carr . A new version of "idealism" that focused on human rights as the basis of the legitimacy of international law was advanced by Hans Köchler .

Major theorists include Montesquieu , Immanuel Kant , Michael W. Doyle , Francis Fukuyama , and Helen Milner .

[ 50 ] Liberal institutionalism [ edit ] Main article: Liberal institutionalism Further information: Complex interdependence Liberal institutionalism (some times referred to as neoliberalism) shows how cooperation can be achieved in international relations even if neorealist assumptions apply (states are the key actors in world politics, the international system is anarchic, and states pursue their self interest). Liberal institutionalists highlight the role of international institutions and regimes in facilitating cooperation between states.

[ 51 ] Prominent neoliberal institutionalists are John Ikenberry , Robert Keohane , and Joseph Nye . Robert Keohane's 1984 book After Hegemony used insights from the new institutional economics to argue that the international system could remain stable in the absence of a hegemon, thus rebutting hegemonic stability theory.

[ 52 ] Regime theory [ edit ] Main article: Regime theory Regime theory is derived from the liberal tradition that argues that international institutions or regimes affect the behaviour of states (or other international actors). It assumes that cooperation is possible in the anarchic system of states, indeed, regimes are by definition, instances of international cooperation.

While realism predicts that conflict should be the norm in international relations, regime theorists say that there is cooperation despite anarchy. Often they cite cooperation in trade, human rights and collective security among other issues. These instances of cooperation are regimes. The most commonly cited definition of regimes comes from Stephen Krasner , who defines regimes as "principles, norms, rules, and decision-making procedures around which actor expectations converge in a given issue-area".

[ 53 ] Not all approaches to regime theory, however, are liberal or neoliberal; some realist scholars like Joseph Grieco have developed hybrid theories which take a realist based approach to this fundamentally liberal theory. (Realists do not say cooperation never happens, just that it is not the norm; it is a difference of degree).

Constructivism [ edit ] Main article: Constructivism (international relations) The constructivist framework rests on the fundamental assumption that the international system is built on social constructs; such as ideas , norms , and identities . Various political actors, such as state leaders , policy makers , and the leaders of international organisations, are socialised into different roles and systems of norms, which define how the international system operates. The constructivist scholar Alexander Wendt , in a 1992 article in International Organization , noted in response to realism that "anarchy is what states make of it". By this he means that the anarchic structure that realists claim governs state interaction is in fact a phenomenon that is socially constructed and reproduced by states.

Constructivism is part of critical theory, and as such seeks to criticise the assumptions underlying traditional IR theory. Constructivist theory would for example claim that the state leaders of the United States and Soviet Union were socialised into different roles and norms, which can provide theoretical insights to how the conflict between the nations was conducted during the Cold War. E.g., prominent US policy makers frequently spoke of the USSR as an 'evil empire', and thus socialised the US population and state apparatus into an anti-communist sentiment, which defined the norms conducted in US foreign policy. Other constructivist analyses include the discourses on European integration; senior policy-making circles were socialised into ideas of Europe as an historical and cultural community, and therefore sought to construct institutions to integrate European nations into a single political body. Constructivism is also present in the analysis of international law , where norms of conduct such as the prohibition of chemical weapons , torture , and the protection of civilians in war , are socialised into international organisations, and stipulated into rules.

Prominent constructivist IR scholars include Michael Barnett , Martha Finnemore , Ted Hopf , Peter Katzenstein , Kathryn Sikkink , and Alexander Wendt .

Critical theory (post-structuralism) [ edit ] Post-structuralism theories of international relations (also called critical theories due to being inherently critical of traditional IR frameworks) developed in the 1980s from postmodernist studies in political science . Post-structuralism explores the deconstruction of concepts traditionally not problematic in IR (such as "power" and "agency") and examines how the construction of these concepts shapes international relations. The examination of "narratives" plays an important part in poststructuralist analysis; for example, feminist poststructuralist work has examined the role that "women" play in global society and how they are constructed in war as "innocent" and "civilians". Rosenberg's article "Why is there no International Historical Sociology" [ 54 ] was a key text in the evolution of this strand of international relations theory. Post-structuralism has garnered both significant praise and criticism, with its critics arguing that post-structuralist research often fails to address the real-world problems that international relations studies is supposed to contribute to solving. Constructivist theory (see above) is the most prominent strand of post-structuralism. Other prominent post-structuralist theories are Marxism, dependency theory, feminism, and the theories of the English school. See also Critical international relations theory .

Marxism [ edit ] Main article: Marxist international relations theory Marxist theories of IR reject the realist/liberal view of state conflict or cooperation; instead focusing on the economic and material aspects. It makes the assumption that the economy trumps other concerns, making economic class the fundamental level of analysis. Marxists view the international system as an integrated capitalist system in pursuit of capital accumulation . Thus, colonialism brought in sources for raw materials and captive markets for exports, while decolonialization brought new opportunities in the form of dependence.

A prominent derivative of Marxian thought is critical international relations theory which is the application of " critical theory " to international relations. Early critical theorists were associated with the Frankfurt School , which followed Marx's concern with the conditions that allow for social change and the establishment of rational institutions. Their emphasis on the "critical" component of theory was derived significantly from their attempt to overcome the limits of positivism. Modern-day proponents such as Andrew Linklater , Robert W. Cox , and Ken Booth focus on the need for human emancipation from the nation-state. Hence, it is "critical" of mainstream IR theories that tend to be both positivist and state-centric.

Dependency theory [ edit ] Further linked in with Marxist theories is dependency theory and the core–periphery model , which argue that developed countries, in their pursuit of power, appropriate developing states through international banking, security and trade agreements and unions on a formal level, and do so through the interaction of political and financial advisors, missionaries, relief aid workers, and MNCs on the informal level, in order to integrate them into the capitalist system, strategically appropriating undervalued natural resources and labor hours and fostering economic and political dependence.

Feminism [ edit ] Main article: Feminism in international relations Feminist IR considers the ways that international politics affects and is affected by both men and women and also at how the core concepts that are employed within the discipline of IR (e.g. war, security, etc.) are themselves gendered. Feminist IR has not only concerned itself with the traditional focus of IR on states, wars, diplomacy and security, but feminist IR scholars have also emphasized the importance of looking at how gender shapes the current global political economy. In this sense, there is no clear cut division between feminists working in IR and those working in the area of International Political Economy (IPE). From its inception, feminist IR has also theorized extensively about men and, in particular, masculinities. Many IR feminists argue that the discipline is inherently masculine in nature. For example, in her article "Sex and Death in the Rational World of Defense Intellectuals" (1988), Carol Cohn claimed that a highly masculinized culture within the defense establishment contributed to the divorcing of war from human emotion. Alternatively, Stanley Kubrick claimed that a masculinized culture characterizes only great powers while small states express rather feminized culture within their defense establishment: "The great nations have always acted like gangsters, and the small nations like prostitutes." [ 55 ] Feminist IR emerged largely from the late 1980s onward. The end of the Cold War and the re-evaluation of traditional IR theory during the 1990s opened up a space for gendering International Relations. Because feminist IR is linked broadly to the critical project in IR, by and large most feminist scholarship have sought to problematize the politics of knowledge construction within the discipline—often by adopting methodologies of deconstructivism associated with postmodernism/poststructuralism. However, the growing influence of feminist and women-centric approaches within the international policy communities (for example at the World Bank and the United Nations) is more reflective of the liberal feminist emphasis on equality of opportunity for women.

Prominent scholars include Carol Cohn , Cynthia Enloe , Sara Ruddick , and J. Ann Tickner .

International society theory (the English school) [ edit ] Main article: English school of international relations theory International society theory, also called the English school, focuses on the shared norms and values of states and how they regulate international relations. Examples of such norms include diplomacy, order, and international law . Theorists have focused particularly on humanitarian intervention, and are subdivided between solidarists, who tend to advocate it more, and pluralists, who place greater value in order and sovereignty. Nicholas Wheeler is a prominent solidarist, while Hedley Bull and Robert H. Jackson are perhaps the best known pluralists. Some English school theoreticians have used historical cases in order to show the influence that normative frameworks have on the evolution of the international political order at various critical junctures.

[ 56 ] Levels of analysis [ edit ] Systemic level concepts [ edit ] International relations are often viewed in terms of levels of analysis . The systemic level concepts are those broad concepts that define and shape an international milieu, characterized by anarchy . Focusing on the systemic level of international relations is often, but not always, the preferred method for neo-realists and other structuralist IR analysts.

Sovereignty [ edit ] Main article: Westphalian sovereignty Preceding the concepts of interdependence and dependence, international relations relies on the idea of sovereignty. Described in Jean Bodin 's Six Books of the Commonwealth in 1576, the three pivotal points derived from the book describe sovereignty as being a state, that the sovereign power(s) have absolute power over their territories, and that such a power is only limited by the sovereign's "own obligations towards other sovereigns and individuals".

[ 57 ] Such a foundation of sovereignty is indicated by a sovereign's obligation to other sovereigns, interdependence and dependence to take place. While throughout world history there have been instances of groups lacking or losing sovereignty, such as African nations prior to decolonization or the occupation of Iraq during the Iraq War , there is still a need for sovereignty in terms of assessing international relations.

Power [ edit ] Main article: Power (international relations) The concept of power in international relations can be described as the degree of resources, capabilities, and influence in international affairs. It is often divided up into the concepts of hard power and soft power , hard power relating primarily to coercive power, such as the use of force, and soft power commonly covering economics , diplomacy , and cultural influence. However, there is no clear dividing line between the two forms of power.

National interest [ edit ] Perhaps the most significant concept behind that of power and sovereignty, national interest is a state's action in relation to other states where it seeks to gain advantage or benefits to itself. National interest, whether aspirational or operational, is divided by core/vital and peripheral/non-vital interests. Core or vital interests constitute the things which a country is willing to defend or expand with conflict such as territory, ideology (religious, political, economic), or its citizens. Peripheral or non-vital are interests which a state is willing to compromise. For example, in Germany's annexation of the Sudetenland in 1938 (a part of Czechoslovakia) under the Munich Agreement , Czechoslovakia was willing to relinquish territory which was considered ethnically German in order to preserve its own integrity and sovereignty.

[ 58 ] Non-state actors [ edit ] In the 21st century, the status-quo of the international system is no longer monopolized by states alone. Rather, it is the presence of non-state actors, who autonomously act to implement unpredictable behaviour to the international system. Whether it is transnational corporations , liberation movements , non-governmental agencies , or international organizations , these entities have the potential to significantly influence the outcome of any international transaction. Additionally, this also includes the individual person as while the individual is what constitutes the states collective entity, the individual does have the potential to also create unpredicted behaviours.

Al-Qaeda , as an example of a non-state actor, has significantly influenced the way states (and non-state actors) conduct international affairs.

[ 59 ] Power blocs [ edit ] The existence of power blocs in international relations is a significant factor related to polarity . During the Cold War , the alignment of several nations to one side or another based on ideological differences or national interests has become an endemic feature of international relations. Unlike prior, shorter-term blocs, the Western and Eastern Blocs sought to spread their national ideological differences to other nations. Leaders like US President Harry S. Truman under the Truman Doctrine believed it was necessary to spread democracy whereas the Warsaw Pact under Soviet policy sought to spread communism . After the Cold War, and the dissolution of the ideologically homogeneous Eastern Bloc still gave rise to others such as the South-South Cooperation movement.

[ 60 ] Polarity [ edit ] Main article: Polarity (international relations) Empires of the world in 1910 Polarity in international relations refers to the arrangement of power within the international system. The concept arose from bipolarity during the Cold War , with the international system dominated by the conflict between two superpowers , and has been applied retrospectively by theorists. However, the term bipolar was notably used by Stalin who said he saw the international system as a bipolar one with two opposing power bases and ideologies. Consequently, the international system prior to 1945 can be described as multipolar, with power being shared among great powers .

The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 had led to unipolarity, with the United States as a sole superpower, although many refuse to acknowledge the fact.

China 's continued rapid economic growth—it became the world's second-largest economy in 2010—respectable international position, and the power the Chinese government exerts over its people (consisting of the second largest population in the world), resulted in debate over whether China is now a superpower or a possible candidate in the future. However, China's strategic force unable of projecting power beyond its region and its nuclear arsenal of 250 warheads (compared to 7,315+ of the United States [ 61 ] ) mean that the unipolarity will persist in the policy-relevant future.

Several theories of international relations draw upon the idea of polarity . The balance of power was a concept prevalent in Europe prior to the First World War , the thought being that by balancing power blocs it would create stability and prevent war. Theories of the balance of power gained prominence again during the Cold War , being a central mechanism of Kenneth Waltz 's neorealism . Here, the concepts of balancing (rising in power to counter another) and bandwagoning (siding with another) are developed.

Robert Gilpin 's hegemonic stability theory also draws upon the idea of polarity, specifically the state of unipolarity.

Hegemony is the preponderance of power at one pole in the international system, and the theory argues this is a stable configuration because of mutual gains by both the dominant power and others in the international system. This is contrary to many neorealist arguments, particularly made by Waltz, stating that the end of the Cold War and the state of unipolarity is an unstable configuration that will inevitably change.

The case of Gilpin proved to be correct and Waltz's article titled "The Stability of a Bipolar World" [ 62 ] was followed in 1999 by William Wohlforth 's article titled "The Stability of a Unipolar World".

[ 63 ] Waltz's thesis can be expressed in power transition theory , which states that it is likely that a great power would challenge a hegemon after a certain period, resulting in a major war. It suggests that while hegemony can control the occurrence of wars, it also results in the creation of one. Its main proponent, A. F. K. Organski , argued this based on the occurrence of previous wars during British, Portuguese, and Dutch hegemony.

Interdependence [ edit ] Many advocate that the current international system is characterized by growing interdependence; the mutual responsibility and dependency on others. Advocates of this point to growing globalization , particularly with international economic interaction. The role of international institutions, and widespread acceptance of a number of operating principles in the international system, reinforces ideas that relations are characterized by interdependence.

Dependency [ edit ] NATO International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan Dependency theory is a theory most commonly associated with Marxism , stating that a set of core states exploit a set of weaker periphery states for their prosperity. Various versions of the theory suggest that this is either an inevitability (standard dependency theory), or use the theory to highlight the necessity for change (Neo-Marxist).

Systemic tools of international relations [ edit ] Diplomacy is the practice of communication and negotiation between representatives of states. To some extent, all other tools of international relations can be considered the failure of diplomacy. Keeping in mind, the use of other tools are part of the communication and negotiation inherent within diplomacy. Sanctions, force, and adjusting trade regulations, while not typically considered part of diplomacy, are actually valuable tools in the interest of leverage and placement in negotiations.

Sanctions are usually a first resort after the failure of diplomacy, and are one of the main tools used to enforce treaties. They can take the form of diplomatic or economic sanctions and involve the cutting of ties and imposition of barriers to communication or trade.

War , the use of force, is often thought of as the ultimate tool of international relations. A popular definition is that given by Carl von Clausewitz , with war being "the continuation of politics by other means". There is a growing study into "new wars" involving actors other than states. The study of war in international relations is covered by the disciplines of " war studies " and " strategic studies ".

The mobilization of international shame can also be thought of as a tool of international relations. This is attempting to alter states' actions through ' naming and shaming ' at the international level. This is mostly done by the large human rights NGOs such as Amnesty International (for instance when it called Guantanamo Bay a "Gulag"), [ 64 ] or Human Rights Watch . A prominent use of was the UN Commission on Human Rights 1235 procedure, which publicly exposes state's human rights violations. The current UN Human Rights Council has yet to use this mechanism.

The allotment of economic and/or diplomatic benefits such as the European Union 's enlargement policy ; candidate countries are only allowed to join if they meet the Copenhagen criteria .

The mutual exchange of ideas, information, art, music, and language among nations through cultural diplomacy has also been recognized by governments as an important tool in the development of international relations.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] [ 67 ] [ 68 ] Unit-level concepts in international relations [ edit ] As a level of analysis the unit level is often referred to as the state level, as it locates its explanation at the level of the state, rather than the international system.

Regime type [ edit ] It is often considered that a state's form of government can dictate the way that a state interacts with others in the international relation.

Democratic peace theory is a theory that suggests that the nature of democracy means that democratic countries will not go to war with each other. The justifications for this are that democracies externalize their norms and only go to war for just causes, and that democracy encourages mutual trust and respect.

Communism justifies a world revolution , which similarly would lead to peaceful coexistence, based on a proletarian global society.

Revisionism versus status quo [ edit ] States can be classified by whether they accept the international status quo , or are revisionist—i.e., want change. Revisionist states seek to fundamentally change the rules and practices of international relations, feeling disadvantaged by the status quo. They see the international system as a largely western creation which serves to reinforce current realities.

Japan is an example of a state that has gone from being a revisionist state to one that is satisfied with the status quo, because the status quo is now beneficial to it.

Religion [ edit ] Religion can have an effect on the way a state acts within the international system, and different theoretical perspectives treat it in somewhat different fashion. One dramatic example is the Thirty Years' War (1618–1648) that ravaged much of Europe, which was at least partly motivated by theological differences within Christianity. Religion is a major organizing principle particularly for Islamic states , whereas secularism sits at the other end of the spectrum, with the separation of state and religion being responsible for the liberal international relations theory . The September 11 attacks in the United States, the role of Islam in terrorism , and religious strife in the Middle East have made the role of religion in international relations a major topic. China's reemergence as a major international power is believed by some scholars to be shaped by Confucianism .

[ 69 ] Individual or sub-unit level concepts [ edit ] Maison de la Paix , home to the Graduate Institute Geneva The level beneath that of the unit (state) can be useful both for explaining factors in international relations that other theories fail to explain, and for moving away from a state-centric view of international relations.

[ 70 ] Psychological factors in international relations – Understanding a state is not a "black box" as proposed by realism , and that there may be other influences on foreign policy decisions. Examining the role of personalities in the decision-making process can have some explanatory power , as can the role of misperception between various actors. A prominent application of sub-unit level psychological factors in international relations is the concept of Groupthink , another is the propensity of policymakers to think in terms of analogies.

Bureaucratic politics – Looks at the role of the bureaucracy in decision-making, and sees decisions as a result of bureaucratic infighting, and as having been shaped by various constraints.

Religious, ethnic, and secessionist groups – Viewing these aspects of the sub-unit level has explanatory power with regards to ethnic conflicts , religious wars , transnational diaspora ( diaspora politics ) and other actors which do not consider themselves to fit with the defined state boundaries. This is particularly useful in the context of the pre-modern world of weak states.

Science, technology and international relations – How science and technology impact global health, business, environment, technology, and development.

International political economy , and economic factors in international relations [ 71 ] International political culturology – Looks at how culture and cultural variables impact in international relations [ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] Personal relations between leaders [ 75 ] Area studies [ edit ] Area studies are the divisional parts of international studies in which various geopolitical regions are studied in detail. Many university departments are offering area studies in diverse titles.

[ 76 ] Major fields of area studies [ edit ] Middle Eastern studies (Also variably known as Near Eastern studies, West Asian studies, and Arab studies) Central Asian studies African studies [ 77 ] South Asian studies American studies European studies Southeast Asian studies Indo-Pacific studies Australian studies Armenian studies Russian studies Latin American studies Institutions in international relations [ edit ] The United Nations Secretariat Building at the United Nations headquarters in New York City International institutions form a vital part of contemporary international relations.

Generalist inter-state organizations [ edit ] United Nations [ edit ] Main article: United Nations The United Nations (UN) is an international organization that describes itself as a "global association of governments facilitating co-operation in international law , international security , economic development , and social equity"; It is the most prominent international institution. Many of the legal institutions follow the same organizational structure as the UN.

Organisation of Islamic Cooperation [ edit ] Main article: Organisation of Islamic Cooperation The Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) is an international organization consisting of 57 member states. The organisation attempts to be the collective voice of the Muslim world (Ummah) and attempts to safeguard the interests and ensure the progress and well-being of Muslims .

Other [ edit ] Other generalist inter-state organizations include: African Union Association of Southeast Asian Nations Arab League BRICS Commonwealth of Independent States Commonwealth of Nations Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations Council of Europe Economic Community of West African States Eurasian Economic Union European Union Group of Seven G20 Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Organization of American States Organization of Turkic States Pacific Islands Forum South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Regional security arrangements [ edit ] Main article: Collective security United Nations Security Council Collective Security Treaty Organization Council for Security Cooperation in the Asia Pacific GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development NATO Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Shanghai Cooperation Organisation Union of South American Nations Economic institutions [ edit ] The World Bank headquarters in Washington, D.C.

NATO E-3A flying with USAF F-16s in a NATO exercise Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank Asian Development Bank African Development Bank Eurasian Development Bank European Bank for Reconstruction and Development Bank of International Settlements Black Sea Trade and Development Bank Inter-American Development Bank International Bank for Reconstruction and Development International Monetary Fund Islamic Development Bank New Development Bank Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation World Bank World Trade Organization International legal bodies [ edit ] Human rights [ edit ] European Court of Human Rights Human Rights Committee Inter-American Court of Human Rights International Criminal Court International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia United Nations Human Rights Council Legal [ edit ] African Court of Justice European Court of Justice International Court of Justice International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea See also [ edit ] Politics portal World portal Cold War , 1947 to 1991 Comparative politics Diplomatic history Diplomatic history of World War I Diplomatic history of World War II The European Institute for International Law and International Relations Extraterritoriality Geopolitics International community International order List of international relations institutes and organisations List of international relations journals Multilateralism Peace and conflict studies Peace economics Political geography Periods in international relations International relations (1648–1814) International relations (1814–1919) International relations (1919–1939) International relations since 1989 Responsibility to protect Right of conquest Security studies References [ edit ] ^ François Modoux, "La Suisse engagera 300 millions pour rénover le Palais des Nations", Le Temps , Friday 28 June 2013, page 9.

(in French) .

^ "International Politics" .

Political Science . Retrieved 2023-06-18 .

^ "International Relations" .

Department of Political Science . Retrieved 2022-04-05 .

^ "International relations | Definition, Theory, History, Examples, & Facts | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 2024-07-24 . Retrieved 2024-08-16 .

^ "International Relations" .

^ "What is International Relations? | BISA" . 3 February 2020.

^ a b c d Reiter, Dan (2015).

"Should We Leave Behind the Subfield of International Relations?" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

18 (1): 481– 499.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-053013-041156 .

ISSN 1094-2939 .

^ Caramani, Daniele, ed. (2020).

Comparative politics (Fifth ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-882060-4 .

OCLC 1144813972 .

^ "international relations | politics" .

Britannica . Retrieved 2022-04-07 .

^ "Where exactly does 'International Relations' begin?" .

Ritsumeikan University . July 2, 2018 . Retrieved 2021-04-10 .

^ Pfaltzgraff, Robert (22 July 2005).

"International relations – Between the two world wars" .

Encyclopaedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on Oct 5, 2021 . Retrieved 2021-04-10 .

^ "Department of International Relations" .

London School of Economics and Political Science . Retrieved 2021-04-14 .

^ a b Dunn, Frederick S. (1948).

"The Scope of International Relations" .

World Politics .

1 (1): 142– 146.

doi : 10.2307/2009164 .

ISSN 1086-3338 .

JSTOR 2009164 .

S2CID 145188338 .

^ "About International Studies" .

British International Studies Association . Archived from the original on 20 July 2018 . Retrieved 14 March 2022 .

^ "global studies" .

Cambridge Dictionary .

Archived from the original on Mar 19, 2024 . Retrieved 2021-04-14 .

^ Barry Buzan, Richard Little.

International Systems in World History: Remaking the Study of International Relations (2000).

^ Thucydides (March 15, 2003) [431 BC].

The History of the Peloponnesian War . Translated by Crawley, Richard . Retrieved 2021-04-10 – via Project Gutenberg.

^ Nederman, Cary (2019).

"Niccolò Machiavelli" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2019 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 19 March 2024 . Retrieved 2021-04-12 .

^ Stéphane Beaulac: " The Westphalian Model in defining International Law: Challenging the Myth ", Australian Journal of Legal History Vol. 9 (2004); Krasner, Stephen D.: "Westphalia and all that" in Judith Goldstein & Robert Keohane (eds): Ideas and Foreign Policy (Ithaca, NY: Cornell UP, 1993), pp.235–264.

^ Gaus, Gerald; Courtland, Shane D.; Schmidtz, David (22 January 2018) [First published November 1996; substantive revision 2018].

"Liberalism" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ((September–December) Fall 2020 ed.). Stanford Press . Retrieved 5 March 2014 .

^ "Aberystwyth University – Department of International Politics" .

www.aber.ac.uk .

^ Abadía, Adolfo A. (2015).

"Del liberalismo al neo-realismo. Un debate en torno al realismo clásico" [From Liberalism to Neorealism. A Discussion Around Classical Realism].

Telos. Revista de Estudios Interdisciplinarios en Ciencias Sociales (in Spanish).

17 (3): 438– 459.

doi : 10.36390/telos173.05 .

ISSN 1317-0570 .

S2CID 147564996 .

SSRN 2810410 .

^ a b Potter, Pitman B. (1923).

"Political Science in the International Field" .

American Political Science Review .

17 (3): 381– 391.

doi : 10.2307/1944041 .

ISSN 0003-0554 .

JSTOR 1944041 .

S2CID 153640855 .

^ Oren, Ido (2020-12-14).

"Schools of international affairs in the United States: a historical sketch" .

Cambridge Review of International Affairs .

36 (3): 328– 351.

doi : 10.1080/09557571.2020.1855630 .

ISSN 0955-7571 .

S2CID 230562181 .

^ Carlsnaes, Walter; et al., eds. (2012).

Handbook of International Relations . SAGE Publications. pp.

1– 28.

ISBN 9781446265031 . Retrieved 2016-02-24 .

^ "Master of Science in Foreign Service / Master of Public Policy (MSFS/MPP)" .

Quacquarelli Symonds . Retrieved 2022-05-03 .

^ "First master's degrees are granted" .

SFS - School of Foreign Service - Georgetown University . Retrieved 2022-05-03 .

^ "About the Committee on International Relations" .

The University of Chicago . Retrieved 2022-05-15 .

^ "A History of Excellence" .

The Fletcher School . Tufts. Archived from the original on 2018-01-19 . Retrieved 2018-01-31 .

^ Kopstein, Jeffrey; Lichbach, Mark (2005).

Comparative Politics: Interests, Identities, and Institutions in a Changing Global Order . Cambridge University Press. p. 3.

ISBN 978-1-139-44604-4 .

^ Hurrell, Andrew ; Menon, Anand (1996).

"Politics like any other? Comparative politics, international relations and the study of the EU" .

West European Politics .

19 (2): 386– 402.

doi : 10.1080/01402389608425139 .

ISSN 0140-2382 .

^ Pollack, Mark A. (2005).

"Theorizing the European Union: International Organization, Domestic Polity, or Experiment in New Governance?" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

8 (1): 357– 398.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.polisci.8.082103.104858 .

ISSN 1094-2939 .

^ Milner, Helen V. (1998).

"Rationalizing Politics: The Emerging Synthesis of International, American, and Comparative Politics" .

International Organization .

52 (4): 759– 786.

doi : 10.1162/002081898550743 .

ISSN 1531-5088 .

S2CID 145584969 .

^ Nadkarni, Vidya; Williams, J. Michael (2010).

"International Relations and Comparative Politics" .

Oxford Research Encyclopedia of International Studies .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190846626.013.408 .

ISBN 978-0-19-084662-6 .

^ Finnemore, Martha; Sikkink, Kathryn (2001).

"Taking Stock: The Constructivist Research Program in International Relations and Comparative Politics" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

4 (1): 391– 416.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.polisci.4.1.391 .

S2CID 3640392 .

^ Vitalis, Robert (2015).

White World Order, Black Power Politics: The Birth of American International Relations . Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-1-5017-0188-7 .

OCLC 927444487 .

^ Alejandro, Audrey (2020).

Western Dominance in International Relations?: The Internationalisation of IR in Brazil and India . Routledge. pp.

59– 65.

ISBN 978-0-367-54010-4 .

OCLC 1145913401 .

^ Bilgin, Pinar (2016).

The international in security, security in the international . New York, NY: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-40730-0 .

OCLC 953735190 .

^ Snyder, Jack(2004). "One World, Rival Theories", Foreign Policy , 145 (November/December): p.52 ^ Korab-Karpowicz, W. Julian (May 24, 2017) [Jul 26, 2010], "Political Realism in International Relations" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2018 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-04-12 ^ Morganthau, Hans (1978).

"Six principles of political realism" .

Politics Among Nations: The struggle for Power and Peace . New York: Mount Holyoke College. pp.

4– 15. Archived from the original on 2019-12-22 . Retrieved 2016-02-24 .

^ a b Grieco, Joseph (2018).

Introduction to International Relations . Macmillan International Higher Education. pp.

32– 57.

ISBN 9781352004236 .

^ Norris, Cochrane, Charles (1929).

Thucydides and the Science of History . Oxford University Press. p. 179.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Lebow, Richard Ned (2001). "Thucydides the Constructivist".

The American Political Science Review .

95 (3): 547– 560.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055401003112 .

JSTOR 3118232 .

S2CID 144587521 .

^ Baylis, John; Smith, Steve (2001).

The globalization of world politics: An introduction to international relations (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 149.

ISBN 978-0198782636 .

^ Mingst, Karen A., & Arreguín-Toft, Ivan M. (2011). Essentials of International Relations (5th ed.). New York: W. W. Norton & Company.

^ Doyle, Michael W. (December 1986).

"Liberalism and World Politics" .

American Political Science Review . 04. Vol. 80. pp.

1151– 1169.

doi : 10.2307/1960861 .

ISSN 0003-0554 .

JSTOR 1960861 . Archived from the original on 2020-07-11 . Retrieved 2021-03-12 .

^ Cristol, Jonathan (November 2019).

"Liberalism" .

Oxford Bibliographies . Retrieved 2021-03-12 .

^ Trueman, CN (22 May 2015), "Woodrow Wilson" , The History Learning Site , retrieved 5 March 2014 ^ Mingst, Karen A., & Snyder, Jack L. (2011). Essential Readings in World Politics (4th ed.). New York: W. W. Norton & Company.

^ Axelrod, Robert; Keohane, Robert O. (1985).

"Achieving Cooperation under Anarchy: Strategies and Institutions" .

World Politics .

38 (1): 226– 254.

doi : 10.2307/2010357 .

ISSN 1086-3338 .

JSTOR 2010357 .

S2CID 37411035 .

^ Keohane, Robert O. (2020).

"Understanding Multilateral Institutions in Easy and Hard Times" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

23 (1): 1– 18.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-050918-042625 .

ISSN 1094-2939 .

^ Krasner, Stephen D., ed. 1983. "Structural Causes and Regime Consequences: Regimes as Intervening Variables." In International Regimes , Ithaca: Cornell University Press, pp. 1.

^ Rosenberg, Justin (2006). "Why is There No International Historical Sociology?".

European Journal of International Relations .

12 (3): 307– 340.

doi : 10.1177/1354066106067345 .

ISSN 1354-0661 .

S2CID 145406417 .

^ "Stanley Kubrick: Quotes." Britannica , https://www.britannica.com/quotes/Stanley-Kubrick ^ Lewkowicz, Nicolas (2010).

The German Question and the International Order, 1943–48 . Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave MacMillan. pp.

169– 170.

ISBN 978-0-230-24812-0 .

^ Mimiko (2012) , p. 13.

^ Mimiko (2012) , pp. 17–20.

^ Mimiko (2012) , pp. 14–15.

^ Mimiko (2012) , pp. 15–16.

^ "Federation of American Scientists :: Status of World Nuclear Forces" .

programs.fas.org . Retrieved 2023-11-20 .

^ Daedalus, 93/3: (1964), 881–909.

^ International Security, 24/1: (1999), 5–41.

^ "Error – Amnesty International" .

www.amnesty.org .

Archived from the original on May 29, 2009.

^ Music, Art and Diplomacy East-West cultural Interactions and the Cold War Editors: Siom Mukkonen & Pekka Suutari. Ashgate Books, 2016 See Introduction & Chapter 1 – Introduction to the Logic of East-West Artistic Interactions -Cultural Diplomacy on books.google.com.

^ The History of United States Cultural Diplomacy – 1770 to the Present Michael L. Krenn. Bloomsbury Academic, New York 2017 ISBN 978-1-4725-0860-7 p. 1-8 Introduction.

^ Searching for a Cultural Diplomacy Editors: Jessica C. E. Gienow-Hecht & Mark C. Donfried. Berghahn Books , Oxford 2010 ISBN 978-1-845-45-746-4 p. 3-13 Introduction – cultural diplomacy (around the world before and during the cold war) on google.books.

^ Cultural Diplomacy: Beyond the National Interest?

Editors: Len Ang, Yudhishthir Raj Isar, Philip Mar. Routledge, UK 2016 Chapter 1 – Cultural Diplomacy- Beyond the National Interest? on google.books.com.

^ Snyder, Jack, ed. (2011).

Religion and International Relations Theory . Columbia University Press. pp.

1– 23.

ISBN 9780231153386 . Retrieved 2016-02-24 .

^ Morin, Jean-Frederic and Jonathan Paquin, Foreign Policy Analysis: A Toolbox, Palgrave, 2018.

^ E.g., Donald Markwell , John Maynard Keynes and International Relations: Economic Paths to War and Peace , Oxford University Press, 2006.

Donald Markwell , Keynes and International Economic and Political Relations , Trinity Paper 33 Archived 2011-03-06 at the Wayback Machine , Trinity College, University of Melbourne.

^ Rivault, Fabrice (1999).

"Culturologie Politique Internationale: Une approche systémique et matérialiste de la culture et du système social global" . McGill–Queen's University Press.

^ Xintian, Yu (2005) "Cultural Factors In International Relations" , Chinese Philosophical Studies.

Archived 2010-04-10 at the Wayback Machine ^ Xintian, Yu (2009), "Combining Research on Cultural Theory and International Relations".

^ Bovt, Georgy (15 August 2013).

"US-Russian relations: Demanding equal treatment" .

Russia Beyond . Rossiyskaya Gazeta . Retrieved 16 March 2021 .

^ "MA Middle Eastern Studies | SOAS" .

www.soas.ac.uk . September 1, 2022.

^ "African Studies" .

Bibliography [ edit ] Carlsnaes, Walter; et al., eds. (2012).

Handbook of International Relations . SAGE Publications.

ISBN 9781446265031 . Retrieved 2016-02-24 .

Dyvik, Synne L., Jan Selby and Rorden Wilkinson , eds.

What's the Point of International Relations (2017) Mimiko, [Nahzeem] N. Oluwafemi (2012).

Globalization: The politics of global economic relations and international business . Durham, North Carolina, United States: Carolina Academic Press.

ISBN 978-1-61163-129-6 .

Reus-Smit, Christian, and Duncan Snidal, eds.

The Oxford Handbook of International Relations (2010) Theory [ edit ] Norman Angell The Great Illusion (London: Heinemann, 1910) Raymond Aron Peace and War (English edition 1966) Hedley Bull The Anarchical Society (New York: Columbia University Press, 1977) Barry Buzan, People, States and Fear E. H. Carr The Twenty Years' Crisis (2001) [1939] (New York: Perennial) Robert Cooper The Post-Modern State Robert W. Cox, Production, Power, and World Order (1987) Enloe, Cynthia.

"'Gender' Is Not Enough: The Need for a Feminist Consciousness".

International Affairs 80.1 (2004): 95–97. Web. 17 Sept. 2013.

Robert Gilpin, War and Change ín World Politics (1981) Joshua S. Goldstein, Long Cycles (1988) Goodin, Robert E., and Hans-Dieter Klingemann, eds.

A New Handbook of Political Science (1998) ch 16–19 pp 401–78 John H. Herz, The Nation-State and the Crisis of World Politics (1976) Charlotte Hooper "Masculinities, IR and the 'Gender Variable': A Cost-Benefit Analysis for (Sympathetic) Gender Sceptics".

International Studies 25.3 (1999): 475–491.

James C. Hsiang Anarchy & Order: The Interplay of Politics and Law in International Relations 1555875718, 9781555875718 Lynne Rienner Pub 1997 Andrew Hurrell On Global Order: Power, Values, and the Constitution of International Society (Oxford University Press, 2008).

On Global Order: Power, Values, and the Constitution of International Society Robert Keohane After Hegemony Robert Keohane , ed., Neo-Realism and Its Critics (1986) Hans Köchler , Democracy and the International Rule of Law . Vienna/New York: Springer, 1995 Andrew Linklater Men and citizens in the theory of international relations Donald Markwell John Maynard Keynes and International Relations: Economic Paths to War and Peace (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006).

John Mearsheimer The Tragedy of Great Power Politics (2001) Hans J. Morgenthau Scientific Man Vs. Power Politics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1946) Reinhold Niebuhr Moral Man and Immoral Society 1932 Joseph Nye Soft Power: The Means to Success in World Politics , Public Affairs Ltd 2004 Paul Raskin The Great Transition Today: A Report from the Future Benno Teschke The Myth of 1648 (New York: Verso Press, 2003).

J. Ann Tickner Gender in International Relations (New York: Columbia University Press, 1992).

Kenneth Waltz Man, the State, and War Kenneth Waltz Theory of International Politics (1979) Michael Walzer Just and Unjust Wars 1977 Alexander Wendt Social Theory of International Politics 1999 Textbooks [ edit ] Baylis, John, Steve Smith, and Patricia Owens.

The Globalization of World Politics: An Introduction to International Relations (2011) Mingst, Karen A., and Ivan M. Arreguín-Toft.

Essentials of International Relations (5th ed. 2010) Morgenthau, Hans J.

Politics Among Nations (1948 and subsequent editions) Nau, Henry R.

Perspectives on International Relations: Power, Institutions, Ideas (2008) Rochester, J. Martin Fundamental Principles of International Relations (Westview Press, 2010) Roskin, Michael G.

, and Nicholas O. Berry.

IR: The New World of International Relations (8th ed. 2009) Alexander, F. (1998). Encyclopedia of World History. New York: Oxford University Press History of international relations [ edit ] Main article: International relations of the Great Powers (1814–1919) § Further reading Beaulac, Stéphane. " The Westphalian Model in defining International Law: Challenging the Myth ", Australian Journal of Legal History Vol. 9 (2004).

Black, Jeremy.

A History of Diplomacy (2010) Calvocoressi, Peter .

World Politics since 1945 (9th Edition, 2008) 956pp E. H. Carr The Twenty Years Crisis (1940), 1919–39 Kennedy, Paul .

The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers Economic Change and Military Conflict From 1500–2000 (1987), stress on economic and military factors Kissinger, Henry.

Diplomacy (1995), not a memoir but an interpretive history of international diplomacy since the late 18th century Krasner, Stephen D.: "Westphalia and All That" in Judith Goldstein & Robert Keohane (eds): Ideas and Foreign Policy (Ithaca, NY: Cornell UP, 1993), pp. 235–264 New Cambridge Modern History (13 vol 1957–79), thorough coverage from 1500 to 1900 Ringmar, Erik.

History of International Relations Open Textbook Project , Cambridge: Open Book, forthcoming.

Schroeder, Paul W.

The Transformation of European Politics 1763–1848 (Oxford History of Modern Europe) (1994) 920pp; history and analysis of major diplomacy Taylor, A.J.P.

The Struggle for Mastery in Europe 1848–1918 (1954) (Oxford History of Modern Europe) 638pp; history and analysis of major diplomacy Van der Pijl, Kees , The Discipline of Western Supremacy: Modes of Foreign Relations and Political Economy, Volume III , Pluto Press, 2014, ISBN 9780745323183 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to International relations .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to International relations .

Issues in development cooperation at Wikibooks The European Institute for International Law and International Relations v t e Social sciences Outline History Index Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural social physical Economics microeconomics macroeconomics econometrics mathematical Geography physical human technical integrated History cultural auxiliary sciences economic human military political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems public law private law Linguistics semiotics Political science international relations comparative philosophy public policy public administration Psychology abnormal cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Administration business public Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Criminology Critical animal studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental social science studies Food studies Gender studies Global studies Historical sociology History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Linguistics Management Media studies Philosophies science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Political sociology Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Quantum social science Social work Vegan studies List List of social science journals Other categorizations Behavioural sciences Geisteswissenschaft Human science Humanities Category v t e International relations Glossary Organizations Present BRICS Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) International Criminal Court (ICC) Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) United Nations (UN) Past League of Nations Warsaw Pact History 1648–1814 1814–1919 1919–1939 Diplomatic history of World War II Cold War International relations since 1989 Concepts Alliance Entente Coalition Military Appeasement Co-belligerence Collective security Colonialism / Colonization Crisis Deterrence theory Expansionism Grey-zone Hegemony Idealism Imperialism International community Internationalism Internationality Liberal Interventionism Isolationism National interest Neutral country Non-belligerent Non-state actor Peace Power Regionalism Right of conquest Sovereignty Sovereigntism Suzerainty Treaty Bilateral Friendship Multilateral Non-aggression Peace War Whole-of-society Theory Constructivism English school Feminism Liberalism Marxism Postcolonialism Realism Related fields and subfields Comparative politics Counterproliferation Diplomacy Foreign policy analysis Geopolitics International law International political economy International political sociology Peace and conflict studies Security studies Authority control databases International FAST National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Latvia Korea Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐pc4w6
Cached time: 20250815082548
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.091 seconds
Real time usage: 1.269 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8134/1000000
Revision size: 81801/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 241578/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 24990/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 38/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 284485/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.667/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 28955566/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1030.561      1 -total
 45.79%  471.925      1 Template:Reflist
 14.31%  147.462     20 Template:Cite_web
  9.65%   99.465      1 Template:Politics_sidebar
  9.51%   98.012      1 Template:Politics_series_sidebar
  9.33%   96.167      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.96%   92.318     14 Template:Cite_book
  7.42%   76.476      1 Template:In_lang
  6.65%   68.492     13 Template:Cite_journal
  6.11%   62.968      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:82533:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815082548 and revision id 1303134014. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_relations&oldid=1303134014 " Categories : International relations Politics Hidden categories: Articles with French-language sources (fr) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from June 2017 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 07:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International relations 82 languages Add topic

