Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Cause and effects 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Indonesian Throughflow 9 languages Català Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 05°36′20″S 115°16′55″E ﻿ / ﻿ 5.60556°S 115.28194°E ﻿ / -5.60556; 115.28194 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ocean current Schematic of the ITF.  Values of the average flow and the major passages are indicated by red.  Water enters the ITF from the western Pacific and exits into the Indian Ocean.

The Indonesian Throughflow (ITF; Indonesian : Arus Lintas Indonesia ) is an ocean current with importance for global climate as is the low-latitude movement of warm, relative freshwater from the north Pacific to the Indian Ocean . It thus serves as a main upper branch of the global heat/salt conveyor belt .

Cause and effects [ edit ] The ocean surface of this part of the far western Pacific is on average each day higher than that in the adjacent part of the Indian Ocean. The difference drives upper thermocline water "downhill" through the deep, straight, westerly, north–south Makassar Strait then to meet the in reality combined Java Sea - Banda Sea . About 15% of this then exits directly through the very narrow Lombok Strait . Weaker flows of saltier and denser South Pacific slightly augment the Banda Sea via the Lifamatola Passage, both inflows mixing there due to its bounds and tides, Ekman pumping , and heat and freshwater flux .  From this sea 85% of the ITF uses the broad Timor and narrow Ombai passage.

The location and topography of the channels that make up the ITF are shown inset.   Lombok Strait is 300m deep and roughly 35 km wide and the currents vary between 0.286 m/s (0.6 mi/hr) eastward to 0.67 m/s westward and average 0.25 m/s westward.  Currents in Ombai vary between 0.12 m/s eastward to 0.16 m/s westward, averaging 0.11 m/s westward and are funneled within the 1250m deep and 35 km wide passage.   Timor passage, which is 1890 m deep by 160 km wide, is the widest of the exit pathways and averages only 0.02 m/s.  From 2004 to 2006, 11 moorings were deployed across the entrance and exit regions of the ITF and were positioned to accurately measure each passage's contribution as part of the International Nusantara Stratification and Transport (INSTANT) program. A study using Princeton Ocean Model has observed that the ITF has maximum volume transport from the Pacific Ocean to Indian Ocean through Savu strait (~6/5 Sv, 1 Sv = 10 6 m³/s), followed by Timor passage (~3.5/2 Sv) and Lombok strait (~2/1.75 Sv) thus the gross volume transport of ITF is ~10/9 Sv and also it is observed that the ITF increases the temperature of the Southern Indian Ocean while it has no significant effect on the sea surface salinity of Indian Ocean.

[ 1 ] Flow in through Makassar (11.6 Sv) and Lifamatola (1.1 Sv) sums to 12.7 Sv.  Total outflow transport corresponds to 15.0 Sv (varying from 10.7 to 18.7 Sv) and is made up of Lombok (2.6 Sv), Ombai (4.9 Sv) and Timor (7.5 Sv) contributions.

[ 2 ] Heat Transport of the Indonesian Throughflow is 1.087 PW (1 PW=10 15 Watt).

[ 3 ] Turbulence Kinetic Energy (TKE) of the ITF is of the order of 10 −3 m 2 s −2 in the upper layer whereas it is 10 −4 m 2 s −2 in the middle layer. Corresponding values of ITF TKE dissipation rate are of the order of 10 −6 m 2 s −3 and 10 −8 m 2 s −3 which indicate that this ITF archipelagoes region is a highly turbulent and a high heat dissipative in nature.

[ 4 ] Circulation and transport within the Indonesian Seas vary along with large-scale monsoon flow.  During June to August, southeasterlies of the southwest monsoon predominate over Indonesia and drive strong Ekman divergence (southwestward flow in the Southern Hemisphere thus increasing ITF to 15 Sv) whereas from December to February, Northwest Monsoon westerlies serve to directly reduce the ITF.  During monsoon transitions, strong westerly winds in the eastern Indian Ocean force equatorial downwelling Kelvin waves (eastward moving, eastward flow) that propagate through the Indonesian passages as coastally trapped Kelvin waves and serve to reduce the ITF flow with a minimum in April of 9 Sv.  Another way to think about it is that downwelling on the Indian Ocean side increases sea level and so reduces the normal Pacific-to-Indian pressure head reducing the flow.

Global-scale, ocean waves such as equatorial/coastal Kelvin and Rossby waves drive interannual variation of the ITF with an amplitude of roughly +/-3 Sv.

[ 5 ] Western-central Pacific westerly winds from El Nino force westward moving-equatorial Rossby waves and eastward currents that hit eastern New Guinea and propagate around the west coast as coastal Kelvin waves and down through the ITF along the west Australia Shelf coast serving to reduce the ITF. Upwelling (i.e. reduced sea level) associated with Rossby waves on the Pacific side reduces the Pacific-to-Indian pressure gradient and reduces the ITF. Interannual variability of Indian Ocean westerlies acts in the same manner as the seasonal equatorial Kelvin waves to reduce the normal westward ITF flow as well.

An important feature of the Indonesian Throughflow is that because the water in the western equatorial Pacific Ocean has a higher temperature and lower salinity than the water in the Indian Ocean, the Throughflow transports large amounts of relatively warm and fresh water to the Indian Ocean. When the Indonesian Throughflow (through Lombok Strait, Ombai and the Timor Passages) enters the Indian Ocean it is advected towards Africa within the Indian South Equatorial Current . There it eventually exits the Indian Ocean with the Agulhas Current around South Africa into the Atlantic Ocean . So the Indonesian Throughflow transports a significant amount of Pacific Ocean heat into the southwest Indian Ocean, which is approximately 10,000 km (6,200 mi) away from the Lombok Strait.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Ocean gyre Throughflow References [ edit ] ^ "Impact of Indonesian throughflow blockage on the southern Indian ocean by   Pandey, Vivek K ; Bhatt, V ; Pandey, AC and Das, IML in Current Science (August, 2007), Vol. 93, Issue .3, pp. 399-406" Archived 2021-01-22 at the Wayback Machine . (PDF) ITF net effect observed through artificial blockage using Princeton Ocean Model.

^ Sprintall, J., S.E. Wijffels, R. Molcard, and I. Jaya, Direct estimates of the Indonesian Throughflow entering the Indian Ocean: 2004-2006, Journal of Geophysical Research-Oceans, 114, 19, 2009.

^ “Heat transport through Indonesian throughflow by Vivek Kumar Pandey and Avinash Chand Pandey in J. Ind. Geophys. Union ( October 2006 ) Vol.10, No.4, pp.273-277” . (PDF) ITF heat transport result from POM Model.

^ “Turbulent kinetic energy and its dissipation rate of the Indonesian throughflow region via Lombok and Savu Straits by Vivek Kumar Pandey and Avinash Chand Pandey in J. Ind. Geophys. Union (April 2007) Vol.11, No.2, pp.117-122” .(PDF) Indonesian Throughflow high turbulent in nature and its heat dissipation characteristics analyzed at Lombok and Savu Straits of it by POM model.

^ Schiller, A., S.E. Wijffels, J. Sprintall, R. Molcard, and P.R. Oke, Pathways of intraseasonal variability in the Indonesian Throughflow region, Dynamics of Atmospheres and Oceans, 50 (2), 174-200, 2010.

^ Indonesian Throughflow -Mr Shahid nawaz Archived 2011-06-05 at the Wayback Machine External links [ edit ] The Indonesian Throughflow at whoi.edu .

v t e Ocean currents and gyres Currents Arctic Ocean East Greenland North Icelandic Norwegian Transpolar Drift Stream Atlantic Ocean Angola Antilles Azores Baffin Island Benguela Brazil Canary Cape Horn Caribbean East Greenland East Iceland Falkland Florida Guinea Gulf Stream Irminger Labrador Lomonosov Loop North Atlantic North Brazil North Equatorial Norwegian Portugal South Atlantic South Equatorial West Greenland West Spitsbergen Indian Ocean Agulhas Agulhas Return East Madagascar Equatorial Counter Indian Monsoon Indonesian Throughflow Leeuwin Madagascar Mozambique North Madagascar Somali South Equatorial West Australian Pacific Ocean Alaska Aleutian California Cromwell Davidson East Australian East Korea Warm Equatorial Counter Humboldt Indonesian Throughflow Kamchatka Kuroshio Mindanao North Equatorial North Korea Cold North Pacific Oyashio South Equatorial Tasman Front Southern Ocean Antarctic Circumpolar Tasman Outflow Gyres Major gyres Indian Ocean Gyre North Atlantic Gyre South Atlantic Gyre North Pacific Gyre South Pacific Gyre Other gyres Beaufort Gyre Ross Gyre Weddell Gyre Related Atmospheric circulation Boundary current Coriolis force Ekman transport Marine debris Marine garbage patches Great Pacific Indian Ocean North Atlantic South Pacific Thermohaline circulation Environment portal Oceans portal 05°36′20″S 115°16′55″E ﻿ / ﻿ 5.60556°S 115.28194°E ﻿ / -5.60556; 115.28194 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indonesian_Throughflow&oldid=1254711760 " Categories : Geography of Indonesia Currents of the Indian Ocean Currents of the Pacific Ocean Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing Indonesian-language text Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 November 2024, at 08:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Indonesian Throughflow 9 languages Add topic

