Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Structure 3 Legacy 4 English translations 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents The City of God 43 languages العربية Arpetan বাংলা Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Nouormand Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book by Augustine of Hippo For other uses, see City of God (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "The City of God" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The City of God The City of God , opening text, manuscript c.

1470 Author Augustine of Hippo Original title De civitate Dei contra paganos Language Latin Subject Christian philosophy , Christian theology Genre Theology Publication date Completed work published AD 426 Publication place Western Roman Empire Media type Manuscript Dewey Decimal 239.3 LC Class BR65 .A64 Original text De civitate Dei contra paganos at Latin Wikisource Translation The City of God at Wikisource Part of a series on Augustine of Hippo Augustine in The Four Doctors of the Western Church Augustinianism Divine command Amillennialism Original sin Augustinian predestination Invisible church Incurvatus in se Augustinian hypothesis Just war Augustinian theodicy Allegorical interpretations of Genesis Works The City of God Confessions On Christian Doctrine Soliloquies Enchiridion On the Trinity Harmony of the Gospels De Genesi ad litteram Influences and followers Saint Monica Ambrose Possidius Anselm Aquinas Bonaventure Luther Calvin Jansen Newman Related topics Rule of Saint Augustine Augustinians Pelagianism Presentism (historical analysis) Philosophical presentism Scholasticism Jansenism Order of Saint Augustine Great Schism of 1054 Related categories Augustine of Hippo Catholicism portal Christianity portal Philosophy portal v t e On the City of God Against the Pagans ( Latin : De civitate Dei contra paganos ), often called The City of God , is a book of Christian philosophy written in Latin by Augustine of Hippo in the early 5th century AD . Augustine wrote the book to refute allegations that Christianity initiated the decline of Rome and is considered one of his seminal works, standing alongside the Confessions , the Enchiridion , On Christian Doctrine , and On the Trinity .

[ 1 ] As a work of one of the most influential Church Fathers , The City of God is a cornerstone of Western thought , expounding on many questions of theology, such as the suffering of the righteous, the existence of evil , the conflict between free will and divine omniscience , and the doctrine of original sin .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Background [ edit ] The sack of Rome by the Visigoths in 410 left Romans in a deep state of shock, and many Romans saw it as punishment for abandoning traditional Roman religion in favor of Christianity . In response to these accusations, and in order to console Christians, Augustine wrote The City of God as an argument for the truth of Christianity over competing religions and philosophies. He argues that Christianity was not responsible for the Sack of Rome but instead responsible for Rome's success. Even if the earthly rule of the Empire was imperiled, it was the City of God that would ultimately triumph. Augustine's focus was Heaven , a theme of many Christian works of Late Antiquity . Despite Christianity's designation as the official religion of the Empire , Augustine declared its message to be spiritual rather than political. Christianity, he argued, should be concerned with the mystical , heavenly city, the New Jerusalem , rather than with earthly politics.

The book presents human history as a conflict between what Augustine calls the Earthly City (often colloquially referred to as the City of Man, and mentioned once on chapter 1 of book 15) and the City of God, a conflict that is destined to end in victory for the latter. The City of God is marked by people who forgo earthly pleasure to dedicate themselves to the eternal truths of God, now revealed fully in the Christian faith. The Earthly City, on the other hand, consists of people who have immersed themselves in the cares and pleasures of the present, passing world.

[ 4 ] Woodcut depicting Augustine writing The City of God Augustine's thesis depicts the history of the world as universal warfare between God and the Devil . This metaphysical war is not limited by time but only by geography on Earth. In this war, God moves (by divine intervention , Providence ) those governments, political/ideological movements and military forces aligned (or aligned the most) with the Church (the City of God) in order to oppose by all means—including military—those sociopolitical regimes and movements of the Devil (the City of the World).

Structure [ edit ] Part I (Books I–X): a polemical critique of Roman religion and philosophy, corresponding to the Earthly City Book I–V: A critique of pagan religion Book I: a criticism of the pagans who attribute the sack of Rome to Christianity despite being saved by taking refuge in Christian churches. The book also explains good and bad things happen to righteous and wicked people alike, and it consoles the women violated in the recent calamity.

Book II: a proof that because of the worship of the pagan gods, Rome suffered the greatest calamity of all, that is, moral corruption.

Book III: a proof that the pagan gods failed to save Rome numerous times in the past from worldly disasters, such as the sack of Rome by the Gauls .

Book IV: a proof that the power and long duration of the Roman empire was due not to the pagan gods but to the Christian God.

Book V: a refutation of the doctrine of fate and an explanation of the Christian doctrine of free will and its consistency with God's omniscience. The book proves that Rome's dominion was due to the virtue of the Romans and explains the true happiness of the Christian emperors.

Book VI–X: A critique of pagan philosophy Book VI: a refutation of the assertion that the pagan gods are to be worshipped for eternal life (rather than temporal benefits). Augustine claimed that even the esteemed pagan theologist Varro held the gods in contempt.

Book VII: a demonstration that eternal life is not granted by Janus , Jupiter , Saturn , and other select gods.

Book VIII: an argument against the Platonists and their natural theology , which Augustine views as the closest approximation of Christian truth, and a refutation of Apuleius ' insistence of the worship of demons as mediators between God and man. The book also contains a refutation against Hermeticism .

Book IX: a proof that all demons are evil and that only Christ can provide man with eternal happiness.

Book X: a teaching that the good angels wish that God alone is worshipped and a proof that no sacrifice can lead to purification except that of Christ.

Part II (Books XI–XXII): discussion on the City of God and its relationship to the Earthly City Books XI–XIV: the origins of the two cities Book XI: the origins of the two cities from the separation of the good and bad angels, and a detailed analysis of Genesis 1.

Book XII: answers to why some angels are good and others bad, and a close examination of the creation of man.

Book XIII: teaching that death originated as a penalty for Adam's sin, the fall of man .

Book XIV: teachings on the original sin as the cause for future lust and shame as a just punishment for lust.

Books XV–XVIII: the history or progress of the two cities, including foundational theological principles about Jews.

Book XV: an analysis of the events in Genesis between the time of Cain and Abel to the time of the flood .

Book XVI: the progress of the two cities from Noah to Abraham , and the progress of the heavenly city from Abraham to the kings of Israel .

Book XVII: the history of the city of God from Samuel to David and to Christ, and Christological interpretations of the prophecies in Kings and Psalms .

Book XVIII: the parallel history of the earthly and heavenly cities from Abraham to the end. Doctrine of Witness, that Jews received prophecy predicting Jesus, and that Jews are dispersed among the nations to provide independent testimony of the Hebrew Scriptures .

Books XIX–XXII: the deserved destinies of the two cities.

Book XIX: the end of the two cities, and the happiness of the people of Christ.

Book XX: the prophecies of the Last Judgment in the Old and New Testaments.

Book XXI: the eternal punishment for the city of the devil.

Book XXII: the eternal happiness for the saints and explanations of the resurrection of the body.

Excerpt from a copy of the manuscript "The City of God", made by Jacobus De Stephelt in 1472.

[ 5 ] Legacy [ edit ] Part of a series on Integralism Principles Anti-communism Anti-liberalism Anti-Masonry Anti-Zionism Catholic social teaching Common good Confessionalism Consistent life ethic Corporatism Counter-revolution Decentralization ( Fueros ) Medievalism ( Medieval Church-State Estamentalism Manorialism Feudal duties Medieval Communalism ) Organicism Doctrine of the two swords Distributism ( Cooperativism Guildism ) By the Grace of God ( Deposing power ) Ecclesiastical court " Error has no rights " Familialism Gelasian Diarchy Integral Education Integral nationalism Integral state Monarchism ( Accidentalism ) Natural law Panhispanism Patriotism Political traditionalism Res publica Christiana Sun and Moon allegory Social Kingship Solidarity Traditionalist Catholicism Ultramontanism Variants Brazilian Neo- Catholic French Lusitano Spanish Thinkers Ambrose Aquinas Augustine Balmes Barbey d'Aurevilly Billot Blanc de Bonald Chesterton Castellani de Chateaubriand Corrêa de Oliveira Cuesta Delassus Donoso Cortés Eyzaguirre Ezcurra Feser Fita Fontcuberta Gago Gaume Gelasius I Genta Gómez Gómez Davila González Groulx Hahn Koneczny Madiran Maeztu Maurras Meinvielle Menéndez y Pelayo Ousset Pemán Pie Pius IX Pius X le Play Raposo Reale Salgado Salvany dos Santos Sardinha Solana Taparelli Urquiza Valdivieso Vázquez de Mella Vermeule Veuillot Politicians Abascal Ahimeir Barroso Charlemagne Clavarana Constantine I Estévanez Fernández García Gomar Gómez Lamamié (José) Lamamié (Juan) Larraín Louis IX Maurras Moreno Nocedal Olazábal du Pin Pujo Quiroga Rocamora Sánchez Santamaria dos Santos Senante Theodosius I de Villèle Works Catholic Bible The City of God De regno, ad regem Cypri Treatise on Law El liberalismo es pecado Papal documents ( Famuli vestrae pietatis Mirari Vos Quanta Cura Immortale Dei Rerum novarum Pascendi Dominici Gregis ) El Siglo Futuro Mes idées politiques O que é o Integralismo Organizations Action Française Acción Española Brazilian Patrianovist Imperial Action Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Integralist Front Catalan Patriotic Movement Catholic and Royal Army Cristeros Integrist Party Milícia Catalana Palmarian Catholic Church Los TECOS El Yunque Popular Representation Party Sanfedisti Spanish Catholic Movement Viva Maria Related Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Traditionalism Legitimism Federales Carlism Christ the King Deus vult Miguelism Neocatólicos Sodalitium Pianum Clerico-nationalism Clerical fascism ( Estado Novo Falangism Francoism Tacuara ) Nacionalismo Person Dignity Theory Orthodox Peronism Third Position Common good constitutionalism Gremialismo High Tory Politics portal v t e Pope John XXIII used Augustine's distinction between two cities as a summary of his assessment of the position of the Catholic Church in the late 1950s as he assumed papal office : on the one hand, "the grace of Christ" continues to bear fruit; on the other, many people are entirely concerned with securing earthly goods.

[ 6 ] Augustine's concept of world history guided by Divine Providence in a universal war between God and the Devil forms part of the official doctrine of the Catholic Church , as stated in the Second Vatican Council 's Pastoral Constitution Gaudium et spes : "The Church ... holds that in her most benign Lord and Master can be found the key, the focal point and the goal of man, as well as of all human history ... all of human life, whether individual or collective, shows itself to be a dramatic struggle between good and evil, between light and darkness ... The Lord is the goal of human history the focal point of the longings of history and of civilization, the center of the human race, the joy of every heart and the answer to all its yearnings." [ 7 ] English translations [ edit ] The City of God . Translation by William Babcock, notes by Boniface Ramsey. Hyde Park, NY: New City Press, 2012.

The City of God against the Pagans . Translation by R. W. Dyson. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1998.

ISBN 0-521-46475-7 The City of God . Translation by Henry Bettenson . Harmondsworth, England: Penguin Books, 1972.

The City of God: Volumes XVI–XVIII Translation by Eva Matthews Sanford with William M. Green.

Loeb Classical Library 415, 1965.

City of God . Translation by William M. Green. Cambridge University Press, 1963 The City of God . Translation by Gerald G. Walsh, S. J., et al. Introduction by Étienne Gilson . New York: Doubleday, Image Books, 1958.

The City of God . Translation by Marcus Dods . Introduction by Thomas Merton . New York: The Modern Library, a division of Random House, Inc., 1950. First published: 1871.

The City of God . Translation by John Healey . Introduction by Ernest Barker . New York: E. P. Dutton & Co., 1945.

Of the Citie of God . Translation by John Healey . Notes by Juan Luis Vives . London: George Eld, 1610.

References [ edit ] ^ Comstock, Patrick.

"Historical Context for City of God by Augustine" .

Columbia College .

Archived from the original on 13 March 2022 . Retrieved 19 August 2022 .

^ Peterson, Brandon (July 2014).

"Augustine: Advocate of Free Will, Defender of Predestination" (PDF) .

Journal of Undergraduate Research – via University of Notre Dame.

^ Tornau, Christian (25 September 2019).

"Saint Augustine" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 11 August 2022 . Retrieved 19 August 2022 .

^ Mommsen, Theodor (1951).

"St. Augustine and the Christian Idea of Progress: The Background of the City of God" .

Journal of the History of Ideas .

12 (3): 346– 374.

doi : 10.2307/2707751 .

JSTOR 2707751 .

^ "De civitate Dei; Epigrammata in S. Maximinum" .

lib.ugent.be . Retrieved 2020-08-26 .

^ Pope John XXIII, Allocuzione del Santo Padre Giovanni XXIII con la quale Annuncia il Sinodo Romano, il Concilio Ecumenico e l'Aggiornamento del Codice di Diritto Canonico , in Italian, delivered on 25 January 1959, accessed on 11 April 2025 ^ Holy See, Gaudium et spes , paragraph 13, published on 7 December 1965, accessed on 12 April 2025 Further reading [ edit ] Horn, Christoph (1997).

Augustinus. De civitate dei.

Klassiker auslegen, vol. 11. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag , ISBN 3-05-002871-8 .

Vareille, Agnès (2023).

Saint Augustin et l'écriture polyphonique. Citations classiques et genèse de la pensée dans la Cité de Dieu.

Turnhout: Brepols, ISBN 9782851213280 (see the English summary in the Review by James J. O'Donnell at Bryn Mawr Classical Review ).

Wetzel, James (2012).

Augustine's City of God: A Critical Guide . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-139-57644-4 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to De Civitate Dei at Wikimedia Commons Works related to The City of God at Wikisource Latin Wikisource has original text related to this article: De civitate Dei De civitate dei (in Latin) – The Latin Library .

The City of God – Dods translation, New Advent. Excerpts only.

The City of God public domain audiobook at LibriVox (Dods translation) The City of God – Marcus Dods translation, CCEL Lewis E 197 Expositio in civitatem dei S. Augustini (Commentary on St. Augustine's City of God) at OPenn Texts about the work An introduction to The City of God by James J. O'Donnell Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Poland Vatican Israel Other IdRef NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wt7qj
Cached time: 20250817230817
Cache expiry: 21600
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.650 seconds
Real time usage: 0.851 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2506/1000000
Revision size: 15429/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 87469/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4124/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 58189/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.435/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17890132/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  733.048      1 -total
 23.80%  174.459      1 Template:Infobox_book
 21.26%  155.849      1 Template:Infobox
 17.91%  131.324      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.05%  110.338      1 Template:Augustine
 13.27%   97.248      2 Template:Lang
 10.37%   76.021      3 Template:ISBN
  9.31%   68.256      1 Template:Reflist
  8.24%   60.384      1 Template:Short_description
  8.14%   59.650      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:434485:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817230817 and revision id 1295154660. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_City_of_God&oldid=1295154660 " Categories : 5th-century books in Latin Prose texts in Latin Theodosian dynasty 5th-century Christian texts 5th-century Christianity Philosophy books Political thought in ancient Rome Works by Augustine of Hippo Christian theology books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text Articles that link to foreign-language Wikisources Articles that link to Wikisource Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Latin-language sources (la) Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 02:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The City of God 43 languages Add topic

