Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Industry-specific definitions Toggle Industry-specific definitions subsection 1.1 Information technology 1.2 Social and health sciences 2 Role of end users Toggle Role of end users subsection 2.1 Designer concerns 3 Critique of the premise of implementation 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Implementation 24 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Ido Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Shqip Simple English Soomaaliga Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Realization concept This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Implementation" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Look up implementation in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Implementation is the realization of an application, execution of a plan , idea, model , design , specification , standard , algorithm , policy , or the administration or management of a process or objective .

Industry-specific definitions [ edit ] Information technology [ edit ] In the information technology industry, implementation refers to the post-sales process of guiding a client from purchase to use of the software or hardware that was purchased. This includes requirements analysis, scope analysis, customizations, systems integrations, user policies, user training and delivery. These steps are often overseen by a project manager using project management methodologies. Software Implementations involve several professionals that are relatively new to the knowledge based economy such as business analysts , software implementation specialists, solutions architects , and project managers.

To implement a system successfully, many inter-related tasks need to be carried out in an appropriate sequence. Utilising a well-proven implementation methodology and enlisting professional advice can help but often it is the number of tasks, poor planning and inadequate resourcing that causes problems with an implementation project, rather than any of the tasks being particularly difficult. Similarly with the cultural issues it is often the lack of adequate consultation and two-way communication that inhibits achievement of the desired results.

Social and health sciences [ edit ] Implementation is defined as a specified set of activities designed to put into practice an activity or program of known dimensions.

[ 1 ] According to this definition, implementation processes are purposeful and are described in sufficient detail such that independent observers can detect the presence and strength of the "specific set of activities" related to implementation. In addition, the activity or program being implemented is described in sufficient detail so that independent observers can detect its presence and strength.

In computer science, implementation results in software, while in social and health sciences, implementation science studies how the software can be put into practice or routine use.

[ 2 ] Role of end users [ edit ] System implementation generally benefits from high levels of user involvement and management support. User participation in the design and operation of information systems has several positive results. First, if users are heavily involved in systems design, they move opportunities to mold the system according to their priorities and business requirements, and more opportunities to control the outcome.  Second, they are more likely to react positively to the change process. Incorporating user knowledge and expertise leads to better solutions.

The relationship between users and information systems specialists has traditionally been a problem area for information systems implementation efforts.  Users and information systems specialists tend to have different backgrounds, interests, and priorities.  This is referred to as the user-designer communications gap.  These differences lead to divergent organizational loyalties, approaches to problem solving, and vocabularies.

[ 3 ] Examples of these differences or concerns are below: Designer concerns [ edit ] How much disk storage space will the master file consume?

How many lines of program code will it take to perform this function?

How can we cut down on CPU time when we run the system?

What are the most efficient ways of storing this data?

What database management system should we use?

[ 3 ] Critique of the premise of implementation [ edit ] Social scientific research on implementation also takes a step away from the project oriented at implementing a plan, and turns the project into an object of study.

Lucy Suchman 's work has been key, in that respect, showing how the engineering model of plans and their implementation cannot account for the situated action and cognition involved in real-world practices of users relating to plans: [ 4 ] that work shows that a plan cannot be specific enough for detailing everything that successful implementation requires. Instead, implementation draws upon implicit and tacit resources and characteristics of users and of the plan's components.

See also [ edit ] Application software Situated cognition References [ edit ] ^ "Framework 2: Implementation Stages | NIRN" .

nirn.fpg.unc.edu . National Implementation Research Network. Archived from the original on 2022-05-23 . Retrieved 2022-01-26 .

^ Chomutare, T; Tejedor, M; Svenning, TO; Marco-Ruiz, L; Tayefi, M; Lind, K; Godtliebsen, F; Moen, A; Ismail, L; Makhlysheva, A; Ngo, PD (2022).

"Artificial Intelligence Implementation in Healthcare: A Theory-Based Scoping Review of Barriers and Facilitators" .

International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health .

19 (23): 16359.

doi : 10.3390/ijerph192316359 .

PMC 9738234 .

PMID 36498432 .

^ a b Laudon, K., & Laudon, J. (2010). "Management Information Systems: Managing the Digital Firm." Eleventh Edition (11 ed.). New Jersey: Prentice Hall.

^ Suchman, Lucy (1987).

Plans and situated actions: The problem of human-machine communication . Cambridge MA: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521337397 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Implementation&oldid=1305981396 " Categories : Implementation Computing terminology Political science terminology Design Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2009 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 06:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Implementation 24 languages Add topic

