Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin of the term Toggle Origin of the term subsection 1.1 Usage 2 Proponents 3 Hypotheses relating social change and evolution 4 Young Turks 5 Nazi Germany 6 Other regional distributions Toggle Other regional distributions subsection 6.1 United States 6.2 Japan 6.3 China 6.4 Germany 7 Criticism of social Darwinism as a category 8 Criticism of social Darwinism as an ideology Toggle Criticism of social Darwinism as an ideology subsection 8.1 Nazism, eugenics, fascism, imperialism 8.2 Peter Kropotkin and mutual aid 8.3 Fabianism 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Primary sources 10.2 Secondary sources 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Social Darwinism 54 languages Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of scientific theories and societal practices Charles Darwin , after whom social Darwinism is named Social Darwinism is a body of pseudoscientific theories and societal practices that purport to apply biological concepts of natural selection and survival of the fittest to sociology, economics and politics.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Social Darwinists believe that the strong should see their wealth and power increase, while the weak should see their wealth and power decrease. Social Darwinist definitions of the strong and the weak vary, and differ on the precise mechanisms that reward strength and punish weakness. Many such views stress competition between individuals in laissez-faire capitalism , while others, emphasizing struggle between national or racial groups, support eugenics , racism , imperialism and/or fascism .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Today, scientists generally consider social Darwinism to be discredited as a theoretical framework, but it persists within popular culture.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Scholars debate the extent to which the various social Darwinist ideologies reflect Charles Darwin 's own views on human social and economic issues. References to social Darwinism since have usually been pejorative.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Some groups, including creationists such as William Jennings Bryan , argued social Darwinism is a logical consequence of Darwinism .

[ 9 ] Academics such as Steven Pinker have argued this is a fallacy of appeal to nature .

[ 11 ] While most scholars recognize historical links between the popularisation of Darwin's theory and forms of social Darwinism, they generally maintain that social Darwinism is not a necessary consequence of the principles of biological evolution .

[ 12 ] Social Darwinism declined in popularity following World War I, and its purportedly scientific claims were largely discredited by the end of World War II—partially due to its association with Nazism and due to a growing scientific consensus that eugenics and scientific racism were unfounded.

[ 3 ] [ 13 ] [ 8 ] Origin of the term [ edit ] The term Darwinism was coined by Thomas Henry Huxley in his March 1861 review of On the Origin of Species ; [ 14 ] by the 1870s, it was used to describe a range of concepts of evolution or development, without any specific commitment to Charles Darwin's theory of natural selection.

[ 15 ] The phrase social Darwinism first appeared in Joseph Fisher's 1877 article on The History of Landholding in Ireland , which was published in the Transactions of the Royal Historical Society .

[ 16 ] Fisher was commenting on how a system for borrowing livestock called "tenure" had led to the false impression that the early Irish had already evolved or developed land tenure ; [ 17 ] These arrangements did not in any way affect that which we understand by the word "tenure", that is, a man's farm, but they related solely to cattle, which we consider a chattel . It has appeared necessary to devote some space to this subject, inasmuch as that usually acute writer Sir Henry Maine has accepted the word "tenure" in its modern interpretation and has built up a theory under which the Irish chief "developed" into a feudal baron . I can find nothing in the Brehon laws to warrant this theory of social Darwinism, and believe the further study will show that the Cáin Saerrath and the Cáin Aigillne relate solely to what we now call chattels, and did not in any way affect what we now call the freehold , the possession of the land.

— Joseph Fisher [ 17 ] Despite the fact that social Darwinism bears Charles Darwin's name, it is primarily linked today with others, notably Herbert Spencer , Thomas Malthus , and Francis Galton , the founder of eugenics. In fact, Spencer was not described as a social Darwinist until the 1930s, long after his death.

[ 18 ] The term "social Darwinism" first appeared in Europe in 1879, and journalist Émile Gautier had coined the term with reference to a health conference in Berlin 1877.

[ 16 ] Around 1900 it was used by sociologists, some being opposed to the concept.

[ 19 ] The American historian Richard Hofstadter popularized the term in the United States in 1944. He used it in the ideological war effort against fascism to denote a reactionary creed that promoted competitive strife, racism, and chauvinism. Hofstadter later also recognized (what he saw as) the influence of Darwinist and other evolutionary ideas upon those with collectivist views, enough to devise a term for the phenomenon, Darwinist collectivism .

[ 5 ] Before Hofstadter's work the use of the term "social Darwinism" in English academic journals was quite rare.

[ 20 ] In fact, ...

there is considerable evidence that the entire concept of "social Darwinism" as we know it today was virtually invented by Richard Hofstadter.

Eric Foner , in an introduction to a then-new edition of Hofstadter's book published in the early 1990s, declines to go quite that far. "Hofstadter did not invent the term Social Darwinism", Foner writes, "which originated in Europe in the 1860s and crossed the Atlantic in the early twentieth century. But before he wrote, it was used only on rare occasions; he made it a standard shorthand for a complex of late-nineteenth-century ideas, a familiar part of the lexicon of social thought." — Jeff Riggenbach [ 1 ] Usage [ edit ] Social Darwinism has many definitions, not all of which are compatible with one another. As such, social Darwinism has been criticized for being an inconsistent philosophy, which does not lead to any clear political conclusions. For example, The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics states: Part of the difficulty in establishing sensible and consistent usage is that commitment to the biology of natural selection and to 'survival of the fittest' entailed nothing uniform either for sociological method or for political doctrine. A 'social Darwinist' could just as well be a defender of laissez-faire as a defender of state socialism, just as much an imperialist as a domestic eugenist.

[ 21 ] The term social Darwinism has rarely been used by advocates of the supposed ideologies or ideas; instead it has almost always been used pejoratively by its opponents.

[ 10 ] The term draws upon the common meaning of Darwinism , which includes a range of evolutionary views , but in the late 19th century was applied more specifically to natural selection as first advanced by Darwin to explain speciation in populations of organisms . The process includes competition between individuals for limited resources, popularly but inaccurately described by the phrase " survival of the fittest ", a term coined by sociologist Herbert Spencer .

[ 22 ] Spencer published [ 23 ] his Lamarckian evolutionary ideas about society before Darwin first published his hypothesis in 1859, and Spencer and Darwin promoted their own conceptions of moral values. Spencer supported laissez-faire capitalism on the basis of his Lamarckian belief that struggle for survival spurred self-improvement which could be inherited.

[ 24 ] Creationists have often maintained that social Darwinism—leading to policies designed to reward the most competitive—is a logical consequence of "Darwinism" (the theory of natural selection in biology).

[ 9 ] Biologists and historians have stated that this is a fallacy of appeal to nature and should not be taken to imply that this phenomenon ought to be used as a moral guide in human society.

[ 11 ] While there are historical links between the popularization of Darwin's theory and forms of social Darwinism, most scholars agree that social Darwinism is not a necessary consequence of the principles of biological evolution.

[ 12 ] Darwin's writings have passages that can be interpreted as opposing aggressive individualism, while other passages appear to promote it.

[ 25 ] Darwin's early evolutionary views and his opposition to slavery ran counter to many of the claims that social Darwinists would eventually make about the mental capabilities of the poor and indigenous peoples in the European colonies.

[ 26 ] After publication of On the Origin of Species in 1859, one strand of Darwin's followers argued natural selection ceased to have any noticeable effect on humans once organised societies had been formed.

[ 27 ] However, some scholars argue Darwin's view gradually changed and came to incorporate views from other theorists such as Spencer.

[ 28 ] While the term has been applied to the claim that Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection can be used to understand the social endurance of a nation or country, social Darwinism commonly refers to ideas that predate Darwin's publication of On the Origin of Species . Others whose ideas are given the label include the 18th-century clergyman Thomas Malthus , and Darwin's cousin Francis Galton who founded eugenics towards the end of the 19th century.

[ citation needed ] The massive expansion in Western colonialism during the New Imperialism era fitted in with the broader notion of social Darwinism used from the 1870s onwards to account for the phenomenon of "the Anglo-Saxon and Latin overflowing his boundaries", as phrased by the late-Victorian sociologist Benjamin Kidd in Social Evolution , published in 1894.

[ 29 ] The concept also proved useful to justify what was seen by some as the inevitable "disappearance" of "the weaker races ... before the stronger" not so much "through the effects of ... our vices upon them" as "what may be called the virtues of our civilisation." Winston Churchill , a political proponent of eugenics, maintained that if fewer "feebleminded" individuals were born, less crime would take place.

[ 30 ] Proponents [ edit ] Herbert Spencer Herbert Spencer's ideas, like those of evolutionary progressivism , stemmed from his reading of Thomas Malthus, and his later theories were influenced by those of Darwin. However, Spencer's major work, Progress: Its Law and Cause (1857), was released two years before the publication of Darwin's On the Origin of Species , and First Principles was printed in 1860.

In The Social Organism (1860), Spencer compares society to a living organism and argues that, just as biological organisms evolve through natural selection, society evolves and increases in complexity through analogous processes.

[ 31 ] In many ways, Spencer's theory of cosmic evolution has much more in common with the works of Lamarck and Auguste Comte 's positivism than with Darwin's.

Jeff Riggenbach argues that Spencer's view was that culture and education made a sort of Lamarckism possible [ 1 ] and notes that Herbert Spencer was a proponent of private charity.

[ 1 ] However, the legacy of his social Darwinism was less than charitable.

[ 32 ] Thomas Malthus Spencer's work also served to renew interest in the work of Malthus. While Malthus's work does not itself qualify as social Darwinism, his 1798 work An Essay on the Principle of Population , was incredibly popular and widely read by social Darwinists. In that book, for example, the author argued that as an increasing population would normally outgrow its food supply, this would result in the starvation of the weakest and a Malthusian catastrophe .

According to Michael Ruse , Darwin read Malthus' famous Essay on a Principle of Population in 1838, four years after Malthus' death. Malthus himself anticipated the social Darwinists in suggesting that charity could exacerbate social problems.

Another of these social interpretations of Darwin's biological views, later known as eugenics, was put forth by Darwin's cousin, Francis Galton, in 1865 and 1869. Galton argued that just as physical traits were clearly inherited among generations of people, the same could be said for mental qualities (genius and talent). Galton argued that social morals needed to change so that heredity was a conscious decision, to avoid both the over-breeding by less fit members of society and the under-breeding of the more fit ones.

Francis Galton In Galton's view, social institutions such as welfare and insane asylums were allowing inferior humans to survive and reproduce at levels faster than the more "superior" humans in respectable society, and if corrections were not soon taken, society would be awash with "inferiors". Darwin read his cousin's work with interest, and devoted sections of Descent of Man to discussion of Galton's theories. Neither Galton nor Darwin, though, advocated any eugenic policies restricting reproduction, due to their Whiggish distrust of government.

[ 33 ] Friedrich Nietzsche 's philosophy addressed the question of artificial selection, yet Nietzsche's principles did not concur with Darwinian theories of natural selection. Nietzsche's point of view on sickness and health, in particular, opposed him to the concept of biological adaptation as forged by Spencer's "fitness". Nietzsche criticized Haeckel, Spencer, and Darwin, sometimes under the same banner by maintaining that in specific cases, sickness was necessary and even helpful.

[ 34 ] Thus, he wrote: Wherever progress is to ensue, deviating natures are of greatest importance. Every progress of the whole must be preceded by a partial weakening. The strongest natures retain the type, the weaker ones help to advance it. Something similar also happens in the individual. There is rarely a degeneration, a truncation, or even a vice or any physical or moral loss without an advantage somewhere else. In a warlike and restless clan, for example, the sicklier man may have occasion to be alone, and may therefore become quieter and wiser; the one-eyed man will have one eye the stronger; the blind man will see deeper inwardly, and certainly hear better. To this extent, the famous theory of the survival of the fittest does not seem to me to be the only viewpoint from which to explain the progress of strengthening of a man or of a race.

[ 35 ] Ernst Haeckel 's recapitulation theory was not Darwinism, but rather attempted to combine the ideas of Goethe , Lamarck and Darwin. It was adopted by emerging social sciences to support the concept that non-European societies were "primitive", in an early stage of development towards the European ideal, but since then it has been heavily refuted on many fronts.

[ 36 ] Haeckel's works led to the formation of the Monist League in 1904 with many prominent citizens among its members, including the Nobel Prize winner Wilhelm Ostwald .

The simpler aspects of social Darwinism followed the earlier Malthusian ideas that humans, especially males, require competition in their lives to survive. Further, the poor should have to provide for themselves and not be given any aid. However, amidst this climate, most social Darwinists of the early 20th century actually supported better working conditions and salaries. Such measures would grant the poor a better chance to provide for themselves yet still distinguish those who are capable of succeeding from those who are poor out of laziness, weakness, or inferiority.

[ 37 ] Hypotheses relating social change and evolution [ edit ] Further information: Sociocultural evolution One of the earliest uses of the term "social Darwinism" was by Eduard Oscar Schmidt of the University of Strasbourg , when reporting at a scientific and medical conference held in Munich in 1877. He noted how socialists, although opponents of Darwin's theory, used it to add force to their political arguments. Schmidt's essay first appeared in English in Popular Science in March 1879.

[ 38 ] There followed an anarchist tract published in Paris in 1880 entitled "Le darwinisme social" by Émile Gautier . However, the use of the term was very rare—at least in the English-speaking world [ 18 ] [ 39 ] —until the American historian Richard Hofstadter published his influential Social Darwinism in American Thought (1944) during World War II .

Hypotheses of social evolution and cultural evolution were common in Europe. The Enlightenment thinkers who preceded Darwin, such as Hegel , often argued that societies progressed through stages of increasing development. Earlier thinkers also emphasized conflict as an inherent feature of social life.

Thomas Hobbes 's 17th-century portrayal of the state of nature seems analogous to the competition for natural resources described by Darwin. Social Darwinism is distinct from other theories of social change because of the way it draws Darwin's distinctive ideas from the field of biology into social studies.

Darwin, unlike Hobbes, believed that this struggle for natural resources allowed individuals with certain physical and mental traits to succeed more frequently than others, and that these traits accumulated in the population over time, which under certain conditions could lead to the descendants being so different that they would be defined as a new species.

However, Darwin felt that "social instincts " such as "sympathy" and " moral sentiments " also evolved through natural selection, and that these resulted in the strengthening of societies in which they occurred, so much so that he wrote about it in Descent of Man : The following proposition seems to me in a high degree probable—namely, that any animal whatever, endowed with well-marked social instincts, the parental and filial affections being here included, would inevitably acquire a moral sense or conscience, as soon as its intellectual powers had become as well, or nearly as well developed, as in man. For, firstly, the social instincts lead an animal to take pleasure in the society of its fellows, to feel a certain amount of sympathy with them, and to perform various services for them.

[ 40 ] Young Turks [ edit ] The Committee of Union and Progress in the Ottoman Empire adopted social Darwinist ideology. Belief that there was a life-or-death conflict between Turks and other ethnicities motivated them to carry out genocides and ethnic cleansing campaigns against the Armenians . Social Darwinism enabled them to view extermination of entire population groups and the murder of women and children as a necessary and justified course of action.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ excessive citations ] Nazi Germany [ edit ] Part of a series on Nazism Organizations Ahnenerbe Artaman League Geheime Staatspolizei Deutscher Fichte-Bund Deutsches Jungvolk Franz Eher Nachfolger Hitler Youth League of German Girls Organisation Todt NSDÄB NSDStB NSRL NSFK NSKK NSF Nazi media organizations Nationalsozialistische Monatshefte Neues Volk NS-Frauen-Warte Das Reich Das Schwarze Korps Nazi Party Sicherheitsdienst (SD) Sturmabteilung (SA) Schutzstaffel (SS) SS Gefolge Waffen-SS History Early timeline National Socialist Program Hitler's rise to power Machtergreifung Gleichschaltung German rearmament Nazi Germany Kirchenkampf Hitler's personality cult Enabling Act of 1933 Night of the Long Knives Nuremberg rallies Nuremberg Laws Anti-Comintern Pact Kristallnacht Anschluss World War II The Holocaust 1938–1939 German expedition to Tibet Tripartite Pact Denazification Nuremberg trials Final solution Concentration camps Deportations Doctors' Trial Extermination camps Genocide Ghettos Human experimentation Labour camps Pogroms Racial segregation Ideology Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-liberalism Anti-pacifism Blood and soil Chauvinism Class collaboration Conspiracism Dolchstoßlegende International Jewry Judeo-Bolshevism Corporatism Counter-Enlightenment Cult of personality Dictatorship Führerprinzip Direct action Economic interventionism Eugenics Geopolitik Heimat Imperialism Greater Germanic Reich Heim ins Reich Lebensraum Pan-Germanism Militarism Morality Nationalism Ethno Racial Palingenetic Revolutionary Ultra New Man New Order One-party state Populism Propaganda Prussianism Racism Antisemitism Anti-Slavic sentiment Aryan race Aryanism Master race Nordicism Nordic Indo-Germanic people Renordification Rassenschande Untermenschen Völkisch equality Völkisch movement Reactionary modernism Romanticism Social Darwinism Social interventionism Social order State capitalism Syncretism Totalitarianism Volksgemeinschaft Volk ohne Raum Volkskörper Politicians Bloem Bormann Daluege Dönitz Drexler Eichmann Esser Fischer Frank Frick Hess Heydrich Himmler Hitler Goebbels Göring Keller Lammers Lutze Mitford von Neurath Quisling von Ribbentrop Röhm Schacht von Schirach Scholtz-Klink Seldte Seyss-Inquart Speer Strasser (Gregor) Strasser (Otto) Streicher Thierack Ideologues Pre- Machtergreifung Arndt Burnouf Chamberlain Drumont Eckart Fritsch de Gobineau Grant von Liebenfels von List Löns Lueger Marr Nietzsche (contentious) Ratzel Riehl Ruskin Wagner Post- Machtergreifung Anacker Baeumler Bergmann Berndt Darré Eggers Eichrodt Feder Ford Grimm Günther Hauer Haushofer Heidegger (contentious) Hentschel Hoche al-Husseini Jung Krannhals Kriek Lindbergh Müller Plenge Rahn Rosenberg Saadeh Schäfer Schmalenbach Schmitt (contentious) von Sebottendorf Schwarz Stapel Wirsing Zimmermann Literature The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century (1899) The Protocols of the Elders of Zion (1903) The Passing of the Great Race (1916) Prussianism and Socialism (1919) " 25-point Program " (1920) The International Jew (1920s) Rassenkunde des deutschen Volkes (1922) Das Dritte Reich (1923) Mein Kampf (1925) Hitlers Zweites Buch (1928) Michael (1929) The Myth of the Twentieth Century (1930) Gelöbnis treuester Gefolgschaft (1933) I Fight (1942) Religion Ariosophy Thule Society Aspects Catholic Church persecution Germany Poland Christmas Esotericism German Evangelical Church Deutsche Christen German Faith Movement Germanic paganism Heathenry Gottgläubig Kirchenkampf Occultism Positive Christianity Religion under Nazism Hitler's views Symbolism Outside Germany Americas Brazil Chile Mexico Europe Greece Sweden Parties Arrow Cross Party Frontist movement German American Bund German National Movement in Liechtenstein Nasjonal Samling National Socialist Movement (Netherlands) National Socialist Movement of Chile National Socialist Workers' Party of Denmark Ossewabrandwag Lists Doctors Last surviving war crime suspects Nazi Party members Nicknames and pseudonyms NSDAP leaders and officials Publishers SS personnel Related topics Analogies Art Architecture Cinema Atsızism " Beefsteak Nazi " Economy Denordification Renordification Glossary Drang nach Osten Generalplan Ost German American Bund Horst-Wessel-Lied Hitler's political views Propaganda and the UK Racial theories Strasserism Women Germany portal Politics portal v t e Alfred Rosenberg Nazi Germany's justification for its aggression was regularly promoted in Nazi propaganda films depicting scenes such as beetles fighting in a lab setting to demonstrate the principles of "survival of the fittest" as depicted in Alles Leben ist Kampf (English translation: All Life is Struggle ).

Hitler often refused to intervene in the promotion of officers and staff members, preferring instead to have them fight amongst themselves to force the "stronger" person to prevail—"strength" referring to those social forces void of virtue or principle.

[ 48 ] One key proponent was Alfred Rosenberg , who was hanged later at Nuremberg. Such ideas also helped to advance mass murder by involuntary euthanasia in Germany, especially Aktion T4 , which targeted mentally ill and disabled people in Germany.

[ 49 ] The argument that Nazi ideology was strongly influenced by social Darwinist ideas is often found in historical and social science literature.

[ 50 ] For example, the philosopher and historian Hannah Arendt analysed the historical development via social Darwinist ethics to racist ideology.

[ 51 ] Another example is recent scholarship that portrays Ernst Haeckel's Monist League as a mystical progenitor of the Völkisch movement and, ultimately, of the Nazi Party of Adolf Hitler. Scholars opposed to this interpretation, however, have pointed out that the Monists were freethinkers who opposed all forms of mysticism , and that their organizations were immediately banned following the Nazi takeover in 1933 because of their association with a wide variety of causes including feminism , pacifism , human rights, and early gay rights movements .

[ 52 ] Other regional distributions [ edit ] United States [ edit ] Within American society, ideas of social Darwinism reached their greatest prominence during the Gilded Age . Some argue that the rationale of the late 19th-century " captains of industry " such as John D. Rockefeller (1839–1937) and Andrew Carnegie (1835–1919) owed much to social Darwinism, [ 53 ] and that monopolists of this type applied Darwin's concept of natural selection to explain corporate dominance in their respective fields and thus to justify their exorbitant accumulations of success and social advancement.

[ 54 ] Rockefeller, for example, proclaimed: "The growth of a large business is merely a survival of the fittest ... the working out of a law of nature and a law of God." [ 55 ] Robert Bork (1927–2012) backed this notion of inherent characteristics as the sole determinant of survival in the business-operations context when he said: "In America, the rich are overwhelmingly people—entrepreneurs, small-business men, corporate executives, doctors, lawyers, etc.—who have gained their higher incomes through intelligence, imagination, and hard work." [ 56 ] Moreover, William Graham Sumner (1840–1910) lauded this same cohort of magnates, and further extended the theory of "corporate Darwinism". Sumner argued that societal progress depended on the "fittest families" passing down wealth and genetic traits to their offspring, thus allegedly creating a lineage of superior citizens.

[ 53 ] However, contemporary social scientists reject such claims and have understood that economic status is largely a result of other factors.

[ 57 ] In 1883 Sumner published a highly-influential pamphlet entitled "What Social Classes Owe to Each Other", in which he insisted that the social classes owe each other nothing, synthesizing Darwin's findings with free-enterprise capitalism for his justification.

[ citation needed ] According to Sumner, those who feel an obligation to provide assistance to those unequipped or under-equipped to compete for resources, will lead to a country in which the weak and inferior are encouraged to breed more like themselves, eventually dragging the country down. Sumner also believed that the best equipped to win the struggle for existence was the American businessman , and concluded that taxes and regulations serve as dangers to his survival. This pamphlet makes no mention of Darwinism, and only refers to Darwin in a statement on the meaning of liberty, that "There never has been any man, from the primitive barbarian up to a Humboldt or a Darwin, who could do as he had a mind to." [ 58 ] Sumner never fully embraced Darwinian ideas, and some contemporary historians do not believe that Sumner ever actually believed in social Darwinism.

[ 59 ] The great majority of American businessmen rejected the anti-philanthropic implications of Sumner's theory. Instead they gave millions to build schools, colleges, hospitals, art institutes, parks and many other institutions.

Andrew Carnegie , who admired Spencer, was the leading philanthropist in the world in the period from 1890 to 1920, and a major leader against imperialism and warfare.

[ 60 ] For these and other reasons (such as the general lack of interest in academic pursuits most Gilded Age barons displayed) other writers, such as Irvin G. Wyllie and Thomas C. Leonard , argue that businessmen in the Gilded Age in fact displayed little support for the ideas of social Darwinism.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] The Englishman H. G. Wells (1866–1946) was heavily influenced by Darwinist thought, but reacted against social Darwinism.

[ 63 ] American novelist Jack London (1876–1916) wrote stories of survival that incorporated his views on social Darwinism.

[ 64 ] American film-director Stanley Kubrick (1928–1999) has been described as "just an old-fashioned social Darwinist".

[ 65 ] On the basis of U.S. theory and practice, commercial Darwinism operates in markets worldwide, pitting corporation against corporation in struggles for survival.

[ 66 ] Japan [ edit ] See also: Eugenics in Japan Social Darwinism has influenced political, public health and social movements in Japan since the late 19th and early 20th century. Social Darwinism was originally brought to Japan through the works of Francis Galton and Ernst Haeckel as well as United States, British and French Lamarckian eugenic written studies of the late 19th and early 20th centuries.

[ 67 ] Eugenism as a science was hotly debated at the beginning of the 20th century, in Jinsei-Der Mensch , the first eugenics journal in the empire. As Japan sought to close ranks with the west, this practice was adopted wholesale along with colonialism and its justifications.

China [ edit ] Social Darwinism was formally introduced to China through the translation by Yan Fu of Huxley's Evolution and Ethics , in the course of an extensive series of translations of influential Western thought.

[ 68 ] Yan's translation strongly impacted Chinese scholars because he added national elements not found in the original. Yan Fu criticized Huxley from the perspective of Spencerian social Darwinism in his own annotations to the translation.

[ 69 ] He understood Spencer's sociology as "not merely analytical and descriptive, but prescriptive as well", and saw Spencer building on Darwin, whom Yan summarized thus: Peoples and living things struggle for survival. At first, species struggle with species; as they [people] gradually progress, there is a struggle between one social group and another. The weak invariably become the prey of the strong, the stupid invariably become subservient to the clever.

[ 70 ] By the 1920s, social Darwinism found expression in the promotion of eugenics by the Chinese sociologist Pan Guangdan . When Chiang Kai-shek started the New Life movement in 1934, he "...

harked back to theories of Social Darwinism", writing that "only those who readapt themselves to new conditions, day by day, can live properly. When the life of a people is going through this process of readaptation, it has to remedy its own defects, and get rid of those elements which become useless. Then we call it new life." [ 71 ] Zhang Jingsheng was a notable proponent of Social Darwinism, eugenics, and scientific racism in 20th-century China. His chosen name, Jingsheng, translated to "competition for survival".

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] He advocated a form of positive eugenics , recommending interracial marriage with Europeans and the Japanese to combat what he perceived as "weaknesses" of the Chinese race .

[ 72 ] [ 74 ] Germany [ edit ] In the 1860s and 1870s, social Darwinism began to take shape in the interaction between Charles Darwin and his German advocates, namely August Schleicher , Max Müller and Ernst Haeckel.

Evolutionary linguistics was taken as a platform to construe a Darwinian theory of mankind. Since it was thought at the time that the orangutan and human brain were roughly the same size, Darwin and his colleagues suspected that only the invention of language could account for differentiation between humans and other Great Apes . It was suggested that the evolution of language and the mind must go hand in hand. From this perspective, empirical evidence from languages from around the world was interpreted by Haeckel as supporting the idea that nations, despite having rather similar physiology, represented such distinct lines of 'evolution' that mankind should be divided into nine different species. Haeckel constructed an evolutionary and intellectual hierarchy of such species.

[ 75 ] In a similar vein, Schleicher regarded languages as different species and sub-species, adopting Darwin's concept of selection through competition to the study of the history and spread of nations.

[ 76 ] Some of their ideas, including the concept of living space were adopted to the Nazi ideology after their deaths.

[ 75 ] Social evolution theories in Germany gained large popularity in the 1860s and had a strong antiestablishment connotation first. Social Darwinism allowed people to counter the connection of Thron und Altar , the intertwined establishment of clergy and nobility, and provided as well the idea of progressive change and evolution of society as a whole.

Ernst Haeckel propagated both Darwinism as a part of natural history and as a suitable base for a modern Weltanschauung , a world view based on scientific reasoning in his Monist League.

Friedrich von Hellwald had a strong role in popularizing it in Austria. Darwin's work served as a catalyst to popularize evolutionary thinking.

[ 77 ] A sort of aristocratic turn, the use of the struggle for life as a base of social Darwinism sensu stricto came up after 1900 with Alexander Tille 's 1895 work Entwicklungsethik ('Ethics of Evolution'), which asked to move "from Darwin till Nietzsche ". Further interpretations moved to ideologies propagating a racist and hierarchical society and provided ground for the later radical versions of social Darwinism.

[ 77 ] Social Darwinism came to play a major role in the ideology of Nazism , which combined it with a similarly pseudo-scientific theory of racial hierarchy to identify the Germans as a part of what the Nazis regarded as an Aryan or Nordic master race .

[ 78 ] Nazi social Darwinist beliefs led them to retain business competition and private property as economic engines.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] Nazism likewise opposed social welfare based on a social Darwinist belief that the weak and feeble should perish.

[ 81 ] This association with Nazism, coupled with increasing recognition that it was scientifically unfounded, contributed to the broader rejection of social Darwinism after the end of World War II .

[ 13 ] [ 8 ] Criticism of social Darwinism as a category [ edit ] Social Darwinism has many definitions, and some of them are incompatible with each other. As such, the term has been criticized for being inconsistent and not describing a coherent ideology. For example, The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics states: Part of the difficulty in establishing sensible and consistent usage is that commitment to the biology of natural selection and to "survival of the fittest" entailed nothing uniform either for sociological method or for political doctrine. A "social Darwinist" could just as well be a defender of laissez-faire as a defender of state socialism, just as much an imperialist as a domestic eugenist.

[ 82 ] Criticism of social Darwinism as an ideology [ edit ] Nazism, eugenics, fascism, imperialism [ edit ] Part of a series on Fascism Principles Actual idealism Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-materialism Anti-pacifism Authoritarianism Chauvinism Class collaboration Corporatism Proprietary Corporation Counter-Enlightenment Cult of personality Dictatorship Direct action Dirigisme Eugenics Heroic capitalism Heroic realism Heroism Imperialism Economic Social Irrationalism Machismo Masculinity Militarism National syndicalism Nationalism Integral Palingenetic Ultra New Man One-party state Perpetual war Populism Proletarian nation Propaganda Racism Reactionary modernism Social Darwinism Social order Spazio vitale State capitalism Statolatry Supercapitalism Syncretism Third Position Totalitarianism Topics Definitions Economics Ideology Martyrs Movements Mysticism Symbolism Politicians al-Gaylani Arcand Araki Balbo Bandera Bose Böszörmény Bottai Blythe Bucard Ciano Codreanu Darnand Déat Degrelle Déroulède Doriot Engdahl Federzoni Flores Franco Frashëri Goga Hitler Hlinka Hoornaert Ljotić de Man von Marées Monshizadeh Mosley Mussolini Nakano O'Duffy Quisling Pavelić Pavolini Pelley Preto Primo de Rivera Rodzaevsky Saadeh Salgado Sima Starace Starhemberg Strasser (Gregor) Strasser (Otto) Szálasi Tiso Türkeş Vallat Valois Van Severen Wilson Intellectuals Ahimeir Arthuys Bardèche Béraud Brăileanu Brasillach Céline Chamberlain Chesterton Civinini Cogni Collins Corradini Crainic Croce Cupcea D'Annunzio Dilling Drieu La Rochelle Evola Gentile Giani Gini de Gobineau Herseni Ionescu Kita Krannhals de Lapouge Lewis Malaparte Manuilă Marinetti Maxence Michels Mosley Ojetti Ōkawa Olivetti Orano Panero Panunzio Pirandello Pitt-Rivers Pound Ramos Rebatet Reghini Rosenberg Sadoveanu-Evan Saint-Loup Savarkar Scaligero Schmitt Schwarz Soffici Sorel Spirito Streel Thomson Ungaretti Valois Literature Triumph of Death (1894) The Flame (1900) The Will to Power (1901) Reflections on Violence (1908) Fascio Rivoluzionario d'Azione Internazionalista (1914) Prussianism and Socialism (1919) " Futurist Manifesto " (1919) Fascist Manifesto (1919) Das Dritte Reich (1923) Mein Kampf (1925) Manifesto of the Fascist Intellectuals (1925) Frederick the Second (1927) My Autobiography (1928) The Myth of the Twentieth Century (1930) The Outlaws (1930) " The Doctrine of Fascism " (1932) Twenty-Six Point Program of the Falange (1934) Man, the Unknown (1935) For My Legionaries (1936) Guide to Kulchur (1938) A Warning to the Hindus (1939) Gilles (1939) Organizations Arrow Cross Party Blackshirts Blueshirts Brazilian Integralist Action British Democratic Party (2013) British National Party British Union of Fascists Stewards Canadian Union of Fascists Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Fasci Italiani di Combattimento Fatherland Front FE de las JONS FET y de las JONS French Popular Party Futurist Political Party IKL Iron Guard Kataeb Party Kokumin Dōmei Lapua Movement Mouvement Franciste Nasjonal Samling National Christian Party National Fascist Party Nazi Party Gestapo Hitler Youth RAD SA SS National Radical Camp National Social Movement New Party Opera Nazionale Balilla Patriotic People's Movement Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh Ratniks Republican Fascist Party Revolutionary Mexicanist Action Revolutionary Union Rexist Party Russian Fascist Party Silver Legion of America Squadrismo School of Fascist Mysticism Slovak People's Party Taisei Yokusankai Tōhōkai UR Group Ustaše Ustaše Youth Verdinaso VFO Vlajka VNV Media Action Ajan Suunta The American Review Der Angriff Arriba The Blackshirt Buna Vestire Critica fascista Fashist Gândirea Gringoire Il Popolo d'Italia Je suis partout La Conquista del Estado Le Pays Réel L'Idea Nazionale Lidel Nash Put' Nástup Neues Volk Nippon Fujin NS-Frauen-Warte Das Schwarze Korps Volk en Staat Völkischer Beobachter History March on Rome Beer Hall Putsch Gentile Reform Aventine Secession Second Italo-Senussi War Mukden Incident German election of 1932 Enabling Act Austrian Civil War Exhibition of the Fascist Revolution 1934 Montreux Fascist conference Second Italo-Ethiopian War 1935 Revolution Day Zócalo Battle Spanish Civil War Unification Decree Battle of Cable Street Second Sino-Japanese War Marco Polo Bridge Incident Japanese war crimes Anti-Comintern Pact Kristallnacht Italian invasion of Albania Pact of Steel Peasant March World War II The Holocaust Downfall in Italy Downfall in Germany Surrender of Japan Nuremberg trials International Military Tribunal for the Far East Variants Albanian Arab Argentine Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Austrian Brazilian British Christian Christian Identity Clerical Crypto- Croatian socialism Eco- Falangism Francoism French Doriotism Pétainism Valoisism Hindutva Hungarism Hutu Ibañism Ilminism Irish Islamic Qutbism Khomeinism Italian Intransigent Japanese Emperor-system Reform bureaucratism Statism Restoration Ultra- Jewish/Israeli Kahanism Revisionist Maximalism Nazism Austrian Esoteric Hitlerism Strasserism Swedish Neo- Finnish Legionarism Pan-Turkic Rexism Romanian Legionarism National Legionary State Neo- Romanianism/Stelism Russian Syndicalist Syrian Social Nationalism Techno- Third Position National-anarchism National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism Ukrainian Banderism National Shevchenkoism Uruguayan Marzism Revisionism Sosism By continent Asia Europe Bulgaria Netherlands Russia North America Canada United States South America Peru Uruguay Related topics Anti-fascism Axis powers Criticism of fascism Donald Trump and fascism Extremism of the centre F-scale Fascist as an insult Feudal fascism Futurism Glossary of Fascist Italy Lebensphilosophie Mediterraneanism Para-fascism Paramilitary Post-fascism Proto-fascism Red fascism Social fascism Politics portal v t e Social Darwinism was predominantly found in laissez-faire societies where the prevailing view was that of an individualist order to society. A different form of social Darwinism was part of the ideological foundations of Nazism and other fascist movements. This form did not envision survival of the fittest within an individualist order of society, but rather advocated a type of racial and national struggle where the state directed human breeding through eugenics .

[ 83 ] Names such as "Darwinian collectivism" or "Reform Darwinism" have been suggested to describe these views to differentiate them from the individualist type of social Darwinism.

[ 5 ] As mentioned above, social Darwinism has often been linked to nationalism and imperialism.

[ 84 ] During the age of New Imperialism, the concepts of evolution justified the exploitation of "lesser breeds without the law" by "superior races".

[ 84 ] To elitists, strong nations were composed of white people who were successful at expanding their empires, and as such, these strong nations would survive in the struggle for dominance.

[ 84 ] With this attitude, Europeans, except for Christian missionaries, seldom adopted the customs and languages of local people under their empires.

[ 84 ] Peter Kropotkin and mutual aid [ edit ] Peter Kropotkin argued in his 1902 book Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution that Darwin did not define the fittest as the strongest, or most clever, but recognized that the fittest could be those who cooperated with each other. In many animal societies, "struggle is replaced by co-operation".

It may be that at the outset Darwin himself was not fully aware of the generality of the factor which he first invoked for explaining one series only of facts relative to the accumulation of individual variations in incipient species. But he foresaw that the term [evolution] which he was introducing into science would lose its philosophical and its only true meaning if it were to be used in its narrow sense only—that of a struggle between separate individuals for the sheer means of existence. And at the very beginning of his memorable work he insisted upon the term being taken in its "large and metaphorical sense including dependence of one being on another, and including (which is more important) not only the life of the individual, but success in leaving progeny." [Quoting Origin of Species , chap. iii, p. 62 of first edition.] While he himself was chiefly using the term in its narrow sense for his own special purpose, he warned his followers against committing the error (which he seems once to have committed himself) of overrating its narrow meaning. In The Descent of Man he gave some powerful pages to illustrate its proper, wide sense. He pointed out how, in numberless animal societies, the struggle between separate individuals for the means of existence disappears, how struggle is replaced by co-operation, and how that substitution results in the development of intellectual and moral faculties which secure to the species the best conditions for survival. He intimated that in such cases the fittest are not the physically strongest, nor the cunningest, but those who learn to combine so as mutually to support each other, strong and weak alike, for the welfare of the community. "Those communities", he wrote, "which included the greatest number of the most sympathetic members would flourish best, and rear the greatest number of offspring" (2nd ed., p. 163). The term, which originated from the narrow Malthusian conception of competition between each and all, thus lost its narrowness in the mind of one who knew Nature.

[ 85 ] Kropotkin, an anarchist , described how co-operation exists in nature, and that it too must serve a purpose in natural selection. This is only social Darwinism in that the case for mutual aid in society is made by appealing to evolutionary biology. To Kropotkin, the state is "unnatural" in the sense that it prevents the realisation of what he deemed to be the next stage of human social evolution: anarcho-communism . Though there are similarities, this position differs from dialectical materialism .

Fabianism [ edit ] In contrast, Fabians in the early 1900s sought to use the state as the means through which a collectivist social Darwinism was to be put into effect. The common Fabian views of the time reconciled a specific form of state socialism and the goal of reducing poverty with eugenics policies.

"[These policies] imply a total disregard for any idea of individual self-fulfilment as the aim of a socialist society ...These policies also implied a notion of the person as a set of genetically fixed qualities, where experience and environment came a very poor second by comparison with innate characteristics. In the debate between nature and nurture, the former was seen to have a massive advantage." [ 86 ] See also [ edit ] Biodiversity Critias Cultural elitism Cultural evolution Cultural selection theory Environmental racism Evolutionary linguistics Eugenics Hierarchy Historical race concepts Meritocracy Might Is Right (1896) Racial hygiene Scientific racism Social ecology Social implications of the theory of evolution Social progress Sociobiology and evolutionary psychology Supremacism Titan (mythology) Transhumanism Universal Darwinism References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Riggenbach, Jeff (2011-04-24) The Real William Graham Sumner , Mises Institute ^ Williams, Raymond (2000). "Social Darwinism". In John Offer (ed.).

Herbert Spencer: Critical Assessment . London; New York: Routledge. pp.

186– 199.

ISBN 9780415181846 .

^ a b Claeys, Gregory (2000). "The "Survival of the Fittest" and the Origins of Social Darwinism".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

61 (2): 223– 240.

doi : 10.1353/jhi.2000.0014 .

S2CID 146267804 .

^ Bowler 2003 , pp. 298–299 ^ a b c Leonard, Thomas C. (2009) "Origins of the Myth of Social Darwinism: The Ambiguous Legacy of Richard Hofstadter's Social Darwinism in American Thought" , Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 71, pp. 37–51.

^ Rohatynskyj, Marta (5 September 2018). "Social Darwinism".

The International Encyclopedia of Anthropology . pp.

1– 3.

doi : 10.1002/9781118924396.wbiea1641 .

ISBN 978-0-470-65722-5 .

^ "Social Darwinism" .

APA Dictionary of Psychology . 19 April 2018.

^ a b c Bannister, Robert C. (2000).

"Social Darwinism" .

Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2000 . Archived from the original on 2 October 2019.

^ a b c Paul, Diane B. in Gregory Radick (2009).

The Cambridge Companion to Darwin . Cambridge University Press. pp.

219– 20.

ISBN 978-0521711845 .

Like many foes of Darwinism, past and present, the American populist and creationist William Jennings Bryan thought a straight line ran from Darwin's theory ('a dogma of darkness and death') to beliefs that it is right for the strong to crowd out the weak ^ a b Hodgson 2004 , pp. 428–430 ^ a b Sailer, Steve (30 October 2002).

"Q&A: Steven Pinker of 'Blank Slate' " .

UPI .

Archived from the original on 5 December 2015 . Retrieved 5 December 2015 .

^ a b Dennis, Rutledge M. (1995).

"Social Darwinism, Scientific Racism, and the Metaphysics of Race" .

TJNE .

64 (3): 243– 252.

doi : 10.2307/2967206 .

JSTOR 2967206 .

^ a b "Social Darwinism" .

History.com . 21 August 2018 . Retrieved 31 May 2019 .

^ Huxley, T.H.

(April 1860).

"ART. VIII. – Darwin on the origin of Species" .

Westminster Review . pp.

541– 570 . Retrieved 19 June 2008 .

What if the orbit of Darwinism should be a little too circular?

^ Bowler 2003 , p. 179 ^ a b Fisher 1877 , as quoted in the Oxford English Dictionary ^ a b Fisher 1877 , pp. 249–250 ^ a b Hodgson 2004 .

^ Ward, Lester F (1907).

"Social Darwinism" .

American Journal of Sociology .

12 (5): 709– 710.

doi : 10.1086/211544 .

^ Hodgson 2004 , pp. 445–446 ^ McLean, Iain (2009).

The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics . Oxford University: Oxford University Press. p. 490.

ISBN 978-0199207800 .

^ "Survival of the Fittest | Definition & Examples | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 14 June 2024 . Retrieved 19 June 2024 .

^ Spencer, Herbert (1852). "4"A Theory of Population, Deduced from the General Law of Human Fertility".

Westminster Review .

57 : 468– 501.

^ Bowler 2003 , pp. 301–302 ^ Bowler 2003 , pp. 300–301 ^ Adrian Desmond and, James Richard Moore (2009).

Darwin's Sacred Cause: How a Hatred of Slavery Shaped Darwin's Views on Human Evolution . New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

^ Eddy, Matthew Daniel (2017).

"The Politics of Cognition: Liberalism and the Evolutionary Origins of Victorian Education" .

British Journal for the History of Science .

50 (4): 677– 699.

doi : 10.1017/S0007087417000863 .

PMID 29019300 .

^ Claeys, Gregory (2000). "The 'Survival of the Fittest' and the Origins of Social Darwinism".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

61 (2): 223– 240.

doi : 10.1353/jhi.2000.0014 .

S2CID 146267804 .

^ Benjamin Kidd , Social Evolution , Kessinger Publishing, LLC, 2007, 400 pages, ISBN 978-0548805237 , p. 47.

^ King, D. (1999).

In the name of liberalism: illiberal social policy in Britain and the United States (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

^ Spencer, Herbert. 1860. 'The Social Organism', originally published in The Westminster Review . Reprinted in Spencer's (1892) Essays: Scientific, Political and Speculative . London and New York.

^ Paul, Diane B. (2003).

The Cambridge Companion to Darwin . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 227.

ISBN 978-0521771979 .

^ Paul, Diane (2006).

"Darwin, social Darwinism and eugenics" (PDF) . In Hodge, Jonathan; Radick, Gregory (eds.).

The Cambridge companion to Darwin . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 230.

ISBN 978-0511998690 .

^ Barbara Stiegler, Nietzsche et la biologie , PUF , 2001, p. 90.

ISBN 2130507425 . See, for ex., Genealogy of Morals , III, 13 here [1] Archived 5 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Friedrich Nietzsche , Human, All Too Human , §224 ^ Scott F. Gilbert (2006).

"Ernst Haeckel and the Biogenetic Law" .

Developmental Biology, 8th edition . Sinauer Associates. Archived from the original on 3 February 2008 . Retrieved 3 May 2008 .

Eventually, the Biogenetic Law had become scientifically untenable.

^ Bowler, Peter (15 September 2006). "Malthus, Darwin, and Social Darwinism".

Encyclopedia of Life Sciences .

doi : 10.1002/9780470015902.a0005882 .

ISBN 978-0-470-01617-6 . Retrieved 19 March 2025 .

^ Schmidt, Oscar (March 1879). "Science and Socialism".

Popular Science Monthly .

14 . Translated by Fitzgerald, J.: 577– 591.

ISSN 0161-7370 .

Darwinism is the scientific establishment of inequality ^ but see Wells, D. Collin (1907).

"Social Darwinism" .

American Journal of Sociology .

12 (5): 695– 716.

doi : 10.1086/211544 .

JSTOR 2762378 .

^ Descent of Man, chapter 4 ISBN 1573921769 ^ "The Extermination of Ottoman Armenians by the Young Turk Regime (1915–1916) | Sciences Po Mass Violence and Resistance – Research Network" .

Extermination-ottoman-armenians-young-turk-regime-1915-1916.HTML . 25 January 2016.

the subsciption of the Young Turks to Social Darwinism (the theory of the application to humans of the survival-of-the-fittest in the animal world) had convinced them that the construction of the Turkish nation would be realized through the elimination of the Armenians ^ Kurt, Umit; Gurpinar, Dogan (2016). "The Young Turk Historical Imagination in the Pursuit of Mythical Turkishness and its Lost Grandeur (1911–1914)".

British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies .

43 (4): 560– 574.

doi : 10.1080/13530194.2016.1139443 .

S2CID 159857101 .

^ Kieser, Hans-Lukas (2010).

"Germany and the Armenian genocide of 1915–17" . In Friedman, Jonathan C. (ed.).

The Routledge History of the Holocaust . Taylor & Francis.

doi : 10.4324/9780203837443.ch3 .

ISBN 978-1136870606 .

^ Suny, Ronald Grigor (2015).

"They Can Live in the Desert but Nowhere Else": A History of the Armenian Genocide . Princeton University Press. pp. 149, 245.

ISBN 978-1400865581 .

Lay summary in: Ronald Grigor Suny (26 May 2015).

"Armenian Genocide" .

1914–1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War .

^ Kieser, Hans-Lukas (2018).

Talaat Pasha: Father of Modern Turkey, Architect of Genocide . Princeton University Press. pp. 7, 61, 85, 264– 265, passim .

ISBN 978-1400889631 .

[Talat's] belief in social Darwinism and a total war—jihad made the annihilation of civilians, including women and children, acceptable for him.

Lay summary in: Kieser, Hans-Lukas. "Pasha, Talat".

1914–1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War .

^ Ter-Matevosyan, Vahram (2015). "Turkish Experience with Totalitarianism and Fascism: Tracing the Intellectual Origins".

Iran and the Caucasus . Vol. 19. pp.

387– 401.

doi : 10.1163/1573384X-20150408 .

^ Bloxham, Donald (2005).

The Great Game of Genocide: Imperialism, Nationalism, and the Destruction of the Ottoman Armenians .

Oxford University Press . p. 111.

ISBN 978-0199226887 .

^ "The Nazis: A Warning from History" . 10 September 1997 – via IMDb.

^ "T4 Program | Definition and History" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 26 August 2020 .

^ E.g. Weingart, P., J. Kroll, and K. Bayertz, Rasse, Blut, und Gene. Geschichte der Eugenik und Rassenhygiene in Deutschland (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1988).

^ Arendt, H.: Elements of Totalitarianism , Harcourt Brace Jovanovich: New York 1951. pp. 178–179 ^ Weikart, Richard (2002).

"Evolutionäre Aufklärung"? Zur Geschichte des Monistenbundes . Wissenschaft, Politik und Öffentlichkeit: von der Wiener Moderne bis zur Gegenwart. Wien: WUV-Universitätsverlag. pp.

131– 148.

ISBN 3851146646 .

^ a b "BRIA 19 2 b Social Darwinism and American Laissez-faire Capitalism" .

Constitutional Rights Foundation . Retrieved 27 June 2020 .

Captains of industry like John D. Rockefeller and Andrew Carnegie made fortunes. They also preached "survival of the fittest" in business.

^ Reich, Robert (20 November 2005).

"The Two Darwinisms" .

The American Prospect . Retrieved 27 June 2020 .

^ Felix, Elving.

"Research Guides: John D. Rockefeller: Topics in Chronicling America: Introduction" .

guides.loc.gov . Retrieved 27 June 2020 .

^ Reich, Robert B. (2005).

Reason: Why Liberals Will Win the Battle for America . Vintage Books.

ISBN 978-1400076604 .

^ Reich, Robert (20 November 2005).

"The Two Darwinisms" .

The American Prospect . Retrieved 30 September 2021 .

Scientists who are legitimized by peer review and published research are unanimous in their view that evolution is a fact, not a theory. Social Darwinism, meanwhile, is hogwash. Social scientists have long understood that one's economic status in society is not a function of one's moral worth. It depends largely on the economic status of one's parents, the models of success available while growing up, and educational opportunities along the way.

^ The Project Gutenberg eBook of What Social Classes Owe To Each Other, by William Graham Sumner . 16 June 2006 . Retrieved 15 April 2018 – via www.gutenberg.org.

^ " A careful reading of the theories of Sumner and Spencer exonerates them from the century-old charge of social Darwinism in the strict sense of the word. They did not themselves advocate the application of Darwin's theory of natural selection.

" The Social Meaning of Modern Biology: From Social Darwinism to Sociobiology ^ "At least a part—and sometimes a generous part" of the great fortunes went back to the community through many kinds of philanthropic endeavor, says Bremner, Robert H. (1988).

American Philanthropy (2nd ed.). University of Chicago Press. p. 86.

ISBN 978-0226073248 .

^ Wyllie, Irvin G. (1959).

"Social Darwinism and the Businessman" .

Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society .

103 (5): 629– 635.

ISSN 0003-049X .

JSTOR 985421 . Retrieved 14 May 2024 .

^ Leonard, Thomas C. (July 2009).

"Origins of the myth of social Darwinism: The ambiguous legacy of Richard Hofstadter's Social Darwinism in American Thought" .

Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization .

71 (1): 37– 51.

doi : 10.1016/j.jebo.2007.11.004 . Retrieved 14 May 2024 .

^ Page, Michael R. (2012). " 'Dim Outlines on a Desolate Beach': H.G. Wells".

The Literary Imagination from Erasmus Darwin to H.G. Wells: Science, Evolution, and Ecology . London: Routledge (published 2016). p. 162.

ISBN 978-1317025276 . Retrieved 30 September 2021 .

The Traveller's conjectures allow Wells to make a startling critique of social Darwinism [...] and to suggest an alternative evolutionary trajectory that moves beyond the desire for utopia: in the end, human evolution will reverse itself and witness an inevitable decline; progress itself must inevitably result in degeneration.

^ " Borrowing from Charles Darwin's theory of evolution, social Darwinists believed that societies, as do organisms evolve over time. Nature then determined that the strong survive and the weak perish. In Jack London's case, he thought that certain favored races were destined for survival, mainly those that could preserve themselves while supplanting others, as in the case of the White race.

" The philosophy of Jack London Archived 27 October 2005 at the Wayback Machine ^ Herr, Michael (2000).

Kubrick . Grove Press. p.

11 .

ISBN 978-0802138187 . Retrieved 20 February 2016 .

He was just an old-fashioned social Darwinist (seemingly) [...].

^ Vengrow, Jeffrey; Voehl, Frank (2020). "Value Stream Quality System". In Stein, Martin; Voehl, Frank (eds.).

Macrologistics Management: A Catalyst for Organizational Change (reprint ed.). CRC Press.

ISBN 978-1000162240 . Retrieved 30 September 2021 .

In the global marketplace, commercial Darwinism is alive and well. Survival of the fittest in this sense has little to do with genetics, but it has everything to do with developing a competitive advantage. [...] Survival is often associated with adaptation and change.

^ Otsubo, S.; Bartholomew, J. R. (1998). "Eugenics in Japan: some ironies of modernity, 1883–1945".

Sci Context .

11 ( 3– 4): 545– 565.

doi : 10.1017/S0269889700003203 .

PMID 15168677 .

S2CID 840243 .

^ Jonathan D. Spence .

The Search for Modern China .

W.W. Norton , 1990, p. 301 .

^ Jin, Xiaoxing (2019). "Translation and transmutation: The Origin of Species in China".

The British Journal for the History of Science .

52 (1): 117– 141.

doi : 10.1017/S0007087418000808 .

PMID 30587253 .

S2CID 58605626 .

^ Spence (1990), p 301 ^ Spence (1990), pp. 414–415.

^ a b Rocha, Leon Antonio (2010).

Sex, Eugenics, Aesthetics, Utopia in the Life and Work of Zhang Jingsheng (1888–1970) (PhD thesis).

University of Cambridge .

^ Leary, Charles Leland (1993). "Intellectual Orthodoxy, the Economy of Knowledge and the Debate Over Zhang Jingsheng's Sex Histories ".

Republican China .

18 (2): 99– 13.

doi : 10.1080/08932344.1993.11720223 .

^ Chiang, Howard (2010). "Epistemic Modernity and the Emergence of Homosexuality in China".

Gender & History .

22 (3): 629– 657.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0424.2010.01612.x .

^ a b Richards, R. J. (2013).

Was Hitler a Darwinian?: Disputed Questions in the History of Evolutionary Theory . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0226058931 .

^ Aronoff, Mark (2017). "Darwinism tested by the science of language". In Bowern; Horn; Zanuttini (eds.).

On Looking into Words (and Beyond): Structures, Relations, Analyses . SUNY Press. pp.

443– 456.

ISBN 978-3946234920 . Retrieved 3 March 2020 .

^ a b Puschner, Uwe (2014).

Sozialdarwinismus als wissenschaftliches Konzept und politisches Programm, in: Gangolf Hübinger (ed.), Europäische Wissenschaftskulturen und politische Ordnungen in der Moderne (1890–1970) (= Schriften des Historischen Kollegs, Kolloquien 77), München 2014, pp. 99–121 (in German). Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG.

ISBN 978-3110446784 .

^ Baum, Bruce David (2006).

The Rise and Fall of the Caucasian Race: A Political History of Racial Identity . New York City/London: New York University Press. p. 156.

^ Barkai, Avaraham 1990.

Nazi Economics: Ideology, Theory and Policy.

Oxford Berg Publisher.

^ Hayes, Peter. 1987 Industry and Ideology IG Farben in the Nazi Era.

Cambridge University Press.

^ Evans, Richard J.

(2005).

The Third Reich in Power . New York: Penguin Books . pp.

483–484 .

ISBN 978-0143037903 .

^ McLean, Iain (2009).

The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics . Oxford University: Oxford University Press. p. 490.

ISBN 978-0199207800 .

^ Leonard, Thomas C. (2005) Mistaking Eugenics for Social Darwinism: Why Eugenics is Missing from the History of American Economics History of Political Economy, Vol. 37 supplement: 200–233 ^ a b c d Perry, Marvin; Chase, Myrna; Jacob, Margaret; Jacob, James; Daly, Jonathan W.; Von Laue, Theodore H. (2014).

Western Civilization: Ideas, Politics, and Society . Vol. II: Since 1600 (11th ed.). Boston, MA: Cengage Learning . pp.

634– 635.

ISBN 978-1305091429 .

LCCN 2014943347 .

OCLC 898154349 . Retrieved 1 February 2016 .

The most extreme ideological expression of nationalism and imperialism was Social Darwinism. In the popular mind, the concepts of evolution justified the exploitation by the 'superior races' of 'lesser breeds without the law.' This language of race and conflict, of superior and inferior people, had wide currency in the Western nations. Social Darwinists vigorously advocated empires, saying that strong nations—by definition, those that were successful at expanding industry and empire—would survive and others would not. To these elitists, all white peoples were more fit than nonwhites to prevail in the struggle for dominance. Even among Europeans, some nations were deemed more fit than others for the competition. Usually, Social Darwinists thought their own nation the best, an attitude that sparked their competitive enthusiasm. ... In the 19th century, in contrast to the 17th and 18th centuries, Europeans, except for missionaries, rarely adopted the customs or learned the languages of local people. They had little sense that other cultures and other peoples deserved respect. Many Westerners believed that it was their Christian duty to set an example and to educate others. Missionaries were the first to meet and learn about many peoples and the first to develop writing for those without a written language. Christian missionaries were ardently opposed to slavery.

^ Kropotkin, kniaz' Petr Alekseevich.

" Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution " .

^ Shaw, Christopher (1987).

"Eliminating the Yahoo Eugenics, Social Darwinism and Five Fabians" .

History of Political Thought .

8 (3): 521– 544.

ISSN 0143-781X .

JSTOR 26213235 .

PMID 11620187 .

Primary sources [ edit ] Robinson, Daniel N., ed. (1977), Darwinism: Critical Reviews from Dublin Review, Edinburgh Review, Quarterly Review , University Publications of America, ISBN 9780890931738 . (reprints 19th-century reviews and essays) Darwin, Charles (1859), On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life , London: John Murray .

Darwin, Charles (1882), The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex (2nd ed.), London: John Murray .

Fisher, Joseph (1877), "The History of Landholding in Ireland" , Transactions of the Royal Historical Society , V , London: 228– 326, doi : 10.2307/3677953 , JSTOR 3677953 , S2CID 145423812 .

Fiske, John (1900), Darwinism and Other Essays , Houghton, Mifflin, and Co .

Secondary sources [ edit ] Bannister, Robert C. (1989), Social Darwinism: Science and Myth in Anglo-American Social Thought , ISBN 9780877225669 .

Bannister, Robert C. (1987), Sociology and Scientism: The American Quest for Objectivity, 1880–1940 , ISBN 9780807817339 .

Bernardini, J.-M. (1997), Le darwinisme social en France (1859–1918). Fascination et rejet d'une idéologie , CNRS Edition, ISBN 9782271054838 .

Boller, Paul F., Jr. (1969), American Thought in Transition: The Impact of Evolutionary Naturalism, 1865–1900 , OCLC 12715 , archived from the original on 4 June 2011 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) .

Bowler, Peter J. (2003), Evolution: The History of an Idea (3rd ed.), University of California Press , ISBN 978-0520236936 .

Crook, Paul (1994), Darwinism, War and History : The Debate over the Biology of War from the 'Origin of Species' to the First World War , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 9780521444651 .

Crook, Paul (1997), Social Darwinism in European and American Thought, 1860–1945 , doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511558481 , ISBN 9780511558481 , archived from the original on 4 June 2011 .

Crook, Paul (2007), Darwin's Coat-Tails: Essays on Social Darwinism , Peter Lang, ISBN 9780820481388 .

Degler, Carl N. (1992), In Search of Human Nature: The Decline and Revival of Darwinism in American Social Thought , Oxford University Press, ISBN 9780195063806 .

Desmond, Adrian ; Moore, James (1991), Darwin , London: Michael Joseph, Penguin Group, ISBN 9780718134303 .

Dickens, Peter (2000), Social Darwinism: Linking Evolutionary Thought to Social Theory , Open University Press , ISBN 9780335202195 .

Gossett, Thomas F. (1999), Race: The History of an Idea in America , Southern Methodist University Press, ISBN 9780870740657 , archived from the original on 4 June 2011 .

Hawkins, Mike (1997), Social Darwinism in European and American Thought 1860–1945: Nature and Model and Nature as Threat , London: Cambridge University Press , ISBN 978-0521574341 .

Hodge, Jonathan; Radick, Gregory (2003), The Cambridge Companion to Darwin , ISBN 9780521771979 , archived from the original on 20 October 2011 .

Hodgson, Geoffrey M.

(December 2004), "Social Darwinism in Anglophone Academic Journals: A Contribution to the History of the Term" , Journal of Historical Sociology , 17 (4): 428– 463, CiteSeerX 10.1.1.524.4248 , doi : 10.1111/j.1467-6443.2004.00239.x , hdl : 2299/406 , retrieved 17 February 2010 , Social Darwinism, as almost everyone knows, is a Bad Thing .

Hofstadter, Richard (1992) [1944], Social Darwinism in American Thought (new introduction ed.), Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, ISBN 9780807055038 .

Jones, Leslie (August 1998), "Social Darwinism Revisited" , History Today , 48 (8): 6– 8, ISSN 0018-2753 , archived from the original on 4 June 2011 .

Kaye, Howard L. (1997), The Social Meaning of Modern Biology: From Social Darwinism to Sociobiology , Transaction Publishers, ISBN 9781560009146 .

Sammut-Bonnici, T.; Wensley, R. (2002), "Darwinism, Probability and Complexity: Transformation and Change Explained through the Theories of Evolution" , International Journal of Management Reviews , 4 (3): 291– 315, doi : 10.1111/1468-2370.00088 .

Smith, George H.

(2008), "Social Darwinism" , in Hamowy, Ronald (ed.), The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism , Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute , pp.

472– 474, doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n289 , ISBN 978-1412965804 , OCLC 750831024 Versen, Christopher R. (2009), "What's Wrong with a Little Social Darwinism (In Our Historiography)", The History Teacher , 42 (4): 403– 423, JSTOR 40543493 .

External links [ edit ] Social Darwinism on ThinkQuest Archived 24 June 2005 at the Wayback Machine In the name of Darwin – criticism of social Darwinism Links to related articles v t e Charles Darwin Life Darwin–Wedgwood family Erasmus Darwin Josiah Wedgwood Education Voyage on HMS Beagle Inception of theory Development of theory Publication of theory Reactions to On the Origin of Species Orchids to Variation Descent of Man to Emotions Insectivorous Plants to Worms Religious views Health Women Portraits of Darwin ( caricatures ) Writings Extracts from Letters to Henslow (1835) The Voyage of the Beagle (1839) The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs (1842) Zoology of the Voyage of H.M.S. Beagle (1838–1843) Geological Observations on the Volcanic Islands (1844) Geological Observations on South America (1846) " On the Tendency of Species to form Varieties " (1858) On the Origin of Species (1859) Fertilisation of Orchids (1862) The Variation of Animals and Plants Under Domestication (1868) Natural Selection The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex (1871) The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals (1872) Insectivorous Plants (1875) On the Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants (1875) The Effects of Cross and Self Fertilisation in the Vegetable Kingdom (1876) The Different Forms of Flowers on Plants of the Same Species (1877) The Power of Movement in Plants (1880) The Formation of Vegetable Mould Through the Action of Worms (1881) The Autobiography of Charles Darwin (1887) Correspondence The Life and Letters of Charles Darwin , 1887 More Letters of Charles Darwin , 1903 List of described taxa Related Eugenics Dysgenics Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection (1930) History of evolutionary thought Pangenesis Darwin Industry Commemoration things named for Darwin Darwinism Neural Quantum Social Universal Alternatives to Eclipse of HMS Beagle Darwin Medal Darwin Awards Huxley family Linnean Society of London Darwin–Wallace Medal v t e Fascism Themes Core tenets Actual idealism Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-materialism Anti-pacifism Authoritarianism Chauvinism Class collaboration Conspiracism Corporatism Cult of personality Dictatorship Direct action Dirigisme Economic interventionism Eugenics Heroic capitalism Heroic realism Heroism Imperialism Indoctrination Irrationalism Machismo Masculinity Militarism National syndicalism Nationalism Integral Palingenetic Ultra New Man One-party state Perpetual war Populism Proletarian nation Propaganda Racism Reactionary modernism Social Darwinism Social interventionism Social order State capitalism Statolatry Supercapitalism Syncretism Third Position Totalitarianism Topics Definitions Economics Fascism and ideology Fascism worldwide Symbolism Variants Arab Argentine Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Austrian Banderism Brazilian British Christian Christian Identity Mexican synarchism Clerical Crypto Eco English Falangism French Doriotism Pétainism Neo-Pétainism Jeune Nation L'Œuvre Française Valoisism Hindutva Hungarism Hutu Irish Islamic Ziaism Italian Intransigent Japanese Emperor-system Statism Restoration Ultra Jewish/Israeli Kahanism Revisionist Maximalism Korean Ilminism Nyulaiteu Latvian Mystical Nazism Austrian Esoteric Hitlerism Neo-Nazism Russian Strasserism Swedish Neo Finnish NRx Pan-Turkic Rexism Polish Romanian Legionarism Neo-Legionarism Romanianism/Stelism Russian Neo-Eurasianism Syndicalist Syrian Social Nationalism Techno Third Positionism National-anarchism National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism Uruguayan Marzism Revisionism Sosism Ustašism Movements Africa Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging Coalition for the Defence of the Republic Greyshirts Muslim Association of the Lictor National Revolutionary Movement for Development Ossewabrandwag Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines Republican Democratic Movement Young Egypt Party (1933) Asia Abhinav Bharat Al-Muthanna Club Aria Party Azerbaijan National Democrat Party Azure Party Black Dragon Society Brit HaBirionim Concordia Association Grey Wolves Golden Square Hindu Mahasabha Iran-e-No Party Jewish National Front Kach Kataeb Party Kenkokukai Kokumin Dōmei Korea Nationalist Party Korean National Youth Association Lehi Liberal Party (South Korea) Nasyonal Aktivite ve Zinde İnkişaf National Socialism Association National Socialist Japanese Workers' Party Nationalist Movement Party Nationalist Task Party National Will Party Nation Party of Iran Otzma Yehudit Pan-Iranist Party Palestine Arab Party Patrol 36 Progress Party (Iran) Philippine Falange Rastakhiz Party Rastriya Prajatantra Party Reform bureaucrats Religious Zionist Party Sakurakai Sangh Parivar Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad Bharatiya Gau Raksha Dal Bharatiya Janata Party Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha Bharatiya Jana Sangh Bharatiya Kisan Sangh Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh Bharat Vikas Parishad Ekal Vidyalaya Hindu Makkal Katchi Hindu Munnani Hindu Swayamsevak Sangh Jammu Praja Parishad Muslim Rashtriya Manch Ram Janmabhoomi Nyas Rashtra Sevika Samiti Rashtriya Sikh Sangat Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh Akhil Bharatiya Itihas Sankalan Yojana Seva Bharati Vidya Bharati Vanavasi Kalyan Ashram Vishva Hindu Parishad Bajrang Dal Durga Vahini SUMKA Syrian Social Nationalist Party Tōhōkai Tsagaan Khas Turkish Union Party Wang Jingwei Kuomintang Northern / Northwestern Europe Academic Karelia Society Ailtirí na hAiséirghe Autonome Nationalisten Bases Autónomas Black Front (Netherlands) Blood & Honour Blueshirts Breton Social-National Workers' Movement British Democratic Party British Fascists Britain First British League of Ex-Servicemen and Women British Movement British National Party (1960) British National Party British People's Party (1939) British People's Party (2005) British Union of Fascists The Britons La Cagoule Casuals United Centre Party '86 Clerical People's Party Dutch Defence League Dutch Fascist Union English Defence League European Defence League English National Association European Liberation Front Le Faisceau Fédération d'action nationale et européenne Finnish National Socialist Labor Organisation Finnish People's Organisation Finnish-Socialist Workers' Party Flemish National Union French National-Collectivist Party French Nationalist Party French Popular Party General Dutch Fascist League Greater Britain Movement Groupe Collaboration Heathen Front Imperial Fascist League International Third Position Jeune Nation Lalli Alliance of Finland Lapua Movement League of Saint George Les Identitaires Mouvement d'Action Civique Mouvement Franciste Nasjonal Samling National Action (UK) National Alliance (Sweden) National Corporate Party National Fascisti National Front (UK) National League of Sweden Nationalist Party National Popular Rally National Rally National Socialist Bloc National Socialist Dutch Workers Party National Socialist Front National Socialist League National Socialist Movement (UK, 1962) National Socialist Movement (United Kingdom) National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands National Socialist Movement of Norway National Socialist Union of Finland National Socialist Workers' Party (Sweden) National Socialist Workers' Party of Denmark National Socialists of Finland National Syndicalists National Union (Netherlands) National Union (Portugal) New Party Nipsters Nordic League The Nordic Realm Party Nordic Resistance Movement Northern League Norwegian Defence League Nouvelle Droite GRECE L'Œuvre Française Official National Front Order of Flemish Militants Order of Nine Angles Organisation of National Socialists Parti Communautaire National-Européen Party of Finnish Labor Party of the Swedes Patriotic Alternative Patriotic People's Movement Patriotic People's Movement (1993) Pērkonkrusts Phalange Française Ragnarock Rebelles Européens Rexist Party Rising Finland Scottish Democratic Fascist Party Scottish Protestant League Skrewdriver Skullhead Stormers Terre et Peuple Third Way (France) Third Way (UK) Union Movement Verdinaso Vigrid White Aryan Resistance World Union of National Socialists Central Europe Action Front of National Socialists/National Activists Arrow Cross Party Artgemeinschaft Austrian Nazism Black Front (Germany) Bund Deutscher Osten Christian National Socialist Front Deutsche Reichspartei Eidgenössische Sammlung Falanga Free German Workers' Party German Faith Movement German National Movement in Liechtenstein German National Socialist Workers' Party (Czechoslovakia) German Party (Slovakia) German Social Union Honor Hungarian National Front Hungarian National Socialist Agricultural Labourers' and Workers' Party Hungarian National Socialist Party Combat League of German Socialists Kotlebists – People's Party Our Slovakia Landser Liechtenstein Homeland Service National Democratic Party (Austria) National Democratic Party of Germany National Fascist Community National Front (Hungary) National Front (Switzerland) National Movement of Switzerland National Radical Camp National Radical Camp (1993) National Revival of Poland National Union (Switzerland) Nationalist Front (Germany) Nazi Party Greater German People's Community Nazi Germany National Socialist Freedom Movement National Socialist Working Association New Order Nipsters No Colours Records PC Records Positive Christianity German Christians Republic Movement The Right (Germany) Rock-O-Rama Records Shield and Sword Slovak People's Party Socialist Reich Party Stahlgewitter Sudeten German Party The Third Path United Hungarian National Socialist Party Vlajka Volksdeutsche Bewegung Volkssozialistische Bewegung Deutschlands/Partei der Arbeit Wiking-Jugend Southern Europe ADÑ–Spanish Identity Albanian Fascist Party Balli Kombëtar Brothers of Italy CEDADE Democratic Fascist Party European Nation State Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Fasci Italiani di Combattimento Fascio d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Falange Sección Femenina La Falange (1999) Falange Auténtica Falange Española Falange Española Auténtica Falange Española de las JONS Falange Española de las JONS (1976) Falange Española Independiente Falangist Movement of Spain Freethinkers' Party Imperium Europa Italian fascism National Fascist Party (Italy) Italian Social Republic Republican Fascist Party Italian Social Movement Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-Sindicalista Juntas Españolas National Alliance (Spain) National Alliance July 18 National Democracy (Italy) National Democracy (Spain) National Front (Spain, 1986) National Front (Spain, 2006) National Union (Italy, 1923) National Union (Spain) New Force (Italy) New Force (Spain) Republican Social Movement The Right (Italy) Sammarinese Fascist Party Spanish Military Union Struggle of the People Student Action Terza Posizione Tricolour Flame Unidad Falangista Montañesa Youth Front Eastern and Southeastern Europe Autochthonous Croatian Party of Rights Bosnian Movement of National Pride Bulgarian National Socialist Workers Party Croatian Liberation Movement Croatian National Resistance Croatian Party of Rights Crusade of Romanianism Ethnic National Union Eurasia Movement Eurasia Party Format18 For the Native Language!

Front of National Revolutionary Action German Party German People's Party Golden Dawn Greek National Socialist Party Hosank Iron Guard Kolovrat LEPEN Liberal Democratic Party of Russia Lithuanian Nationalist Union National Agrarian Party National Bolshevik Front National Bolshevik Party National-Christian Defense League National Christian Party National Fascist Movement National Italo-Romanian Cultural and Economic Movement National Party – Greeks National Socialist Patriotic Organisation National Socialist Society National Social Movement National Romanian Fascio National Renaissance Front National Salvation Front Nokturnal Mortum National Socialism / White Power Obraz Occupy Pedophilia Order of Nine Angles Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists The Other Russia of E. V. Limonov Pamyat Patriotic Alliance People's Party Progressive Socialist Party of Ukraine Ratniks (Bulgaria) Romanian Front Russian Imperial Movement Russian Fascist Party Russian National Unity Russian Women's Fascist Movement Serbian Action Serbian Radical Party Steel Shield Svoboda Union of Bulgarian National Legions Ustaše Ustaše in Australia Croatian Revolutionary Brotherhood Yugoslav Radical Union ZBOR North America Fascism in Canada Aryan Guard Aryan Nations Canadian Association for Free Expression Canadian Union of Fascists Citizens for Foreign Aid Reform Heritage Front Parti national social chrétien Fascism in the United States American Front American Nazi Party Betar US Creativity Fascist League of North America German American Bund Goyim Defense League Hammerskins Identity Evropa League of the South National Alliance (United States) National Renaissance Party Nationalist Social Club-131 National Socialist Legion National Socialist Liberation Front National Socialist Movement National States' Rights Party National Vanguard Nationalist Front (United States) Patriot Front Proud Boys Rise Above Movement Silver Legion of America Christian Party (United States, 1930s) Traditionalist Worker Party Vanguard America Volksfront White Aryan Resistance Wotansvolk Revolutionary Mexicanist Action Mexican Democratic Party Mexican Fascist Party National Pro Patria Party National Synarchist Union Nationalist Front of Mexico Order of Nine Angles Oceania Action Zealandia Antipodean Resistance Australia First Movement Australia First Party Australian Defence League Australian National Socialist Party Centre Party Lads Society National Action (Australia) National Socialist Network National Socialist Party of Australia Progressive Nationalist Party Reclaim Australia True Blue Crew United Patriots Front South America Agrarian Labor Party Argentine Anticommunist Alliance Argentine Fascist Party Argentine Nationalist Action Argentine Patriotic League Bolivian Socialist Falange Brazilian Integralism Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Integralist Front Falangism in Latin America Female Peronist Party Iron Guard (Argentina) Nacionalismo National Fascist Party (Argentina) National Fascist Union Nationalist Liberation Alliance National Liberation Movement National Socialist Movement of Chile National Universitary Concentration New Triumph Party Patriot Front (Argentina) Popular Dignity Popular Freedom Alliance Popular Representation Party Popular Socialist Vanguard Republican League La Resistencia Dios, Patria y Familia Revolutionary Union Tacuara Nationalist Movement People Australia Campbell (Eric) Campbell (Graeme) Cottrell Groot Mills Saleam Austria Dollfuss Miklas Pfrimer Planetta Schuschnigg Seyss-Inquart Starhemberg Belgium Daye Declercq Degrelle Denis Elias Eriksson Hermans Lagrou Poulet Severen Streel van de Wiele Croatia Boban Francetić Kraljević Kvaternik Luburić Pavelić Pavičić Rover Servatzy Finland Helanen Isotalo Kalsta Konkka Kosola Orko Simojoki Somersalo Törni Varjonen France Augier Bardèche Benoist-Méchin Béraud Brasillach Bucard Châteaubriant Déat Déroulède Dior Doriot La Rochelle Lagardelle Laval Pétain Rebatet Valois Vial Germany Abetz Andrae Baeumler Berchtold Berger Best Brunner Bühler Darré Falkenhausen Hocke Feder Forster Frank Franz V Gesche Goebbels Göring Graf Greiser Günther Hanke Heiden Hess Heydrich Himmler Hitler Klintzsch Kuhn Ludendorff Maurice Müller Niekisch Ploetz Rahn Reitsch Renthe-Fink Ribbentrop Rieger Rosenberg Schmitt Schreck Skorzeny Strasser (Gregor) Strasser (Otto) Streicher Terboven Thadden Krosigk Zündel Greece Dragoumis Kasidiaris Koryzis Lagos Michaloliakos Papadopoulos India Adityanath Advani Bose Godse Golwalkar Hedgewar Modi Mukherjee Savarkar Thakur Vajpayee Iran Forouhar Kashani Monshizadeh Pezeshkpour Teymourtash Israel Ahimeir Ben-Ari Ben-Gvir Eldad Eliyahu Goldstein Gopstein Greenberg Ha'ivri Heruti Kahane Marzel Natan-Zada Stern Yeivin Italy Acerbo Alfieri Ambris D'Annunzio Azara Badoglio Balbo Torrente Ballester Bastianini Bianchi Boni Bono Boselli Bottai Ciano (Costanzo) Ciano (Galeazzo) Cogni Corradini Freda Gentile Giuriati Gozi Grandi Graziani Guidi Malaparte Marinetti Michels Morgagni Mussolini Olivetti Panunzio Papini Pavolini Rauti Ricci Ridruejo Rocco Rossoni Sarfatti Soffici Spirito Volpi Japan Akao Araki Chō Hashimoto Honjō Kita Kodama Matsuoka Nonaka Ōkawa Sasakawa Romania Antonescu Bacaloglu Codreanu Crainic Cuza Gigurtu Goga Manoilescu Moța Ogoranu Sima Russia Astroŭski Borovikov Ilyin Kaminski Martsinkevich Milchakov Oktan Prilepin Prokhanov Rodzaevsky Spain Arrese Bau Nolla Bilbao Eguía Carrero Blanco Fernández-Cuesta Franco Franco y Polo Giménez Caballero Primo de Rivera Ramos Sánchez Mazas Serrano Suñer Ukraine Bandera Biletsky Dontsov Gubarev Klyachkivsky Lebed Rebet Samchuk Shukhevych Stetsko Tyahnybok Vitrenko United Kingdom Beckett Chamberlain Chesterton Lake Leese Mosley (Diana) Mosley (Oswald) Pankhurst Pearson Ramsay Robinson Southgate Tyndall Wellesley United States Auernheimer Collins Fuentes Joyce Pelley Pound Yockey Other Burdi Celmiņš Martínez Quisling Ramírez Riva-Agüero y Osma Šešelj Szálasi Works Literature 1776 Returns La Conquista del Estado The Culture of Critique Defiance Did Six Million Really Die?

The Doctrine of Fascism Essentials of Hindutva Fascist Manifesto For My Legionaries The Foundations of Geopolitics: The Geopolitical Future of Russia The Fourth Political Theory Hitlers Zweites Buch Hutu Ten Commandments Imperium: The Philosophy of History and Politics An Investigation of Global Policy with the Yamato Race as Nucleus Kokutairon and Pure Socialism The Last Will of a Russian Fascist Manifesto of Race Manifesto of the Fascist Intellectuals Mein Kampf My Autobiography My Life The Myth of the Twentieth Century OPROP!

Our Race Will Rule Undisputed Over The World Protestantische Rompilger A Racial Program for the Twentieth Century Uncomfortable Questions for Comfortable Jews A Warning to the Hindus Who Are the Mind Benders?

Periodicals Action Ajan Suunta L'Alba El Alcázar The American Review Der Angriff Arriba The Blackshirt La Conquista del Estado The Daily Stormer Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung Das Deutsche Mädel La Difesa della Razza Eleftheros Kosmos The European Fashist Fashizmi La France au travail Fritt Folk Fronten Gândirea Gioventù Fascista Golden Dawn Hamaas Hrvatski Domobran Je suis partout Kangura Kansallissosialisti Limonka Masada2000 Münchener Beobachter Nash Put' Nástup Nation Europa Neue Anthropologie Neues Volk Het Nieuwe Volk Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift Novopress Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift Organiser Panchjanya Panzerbär Parole der Woche Le Pays Réel Der Pimpf Il Popolo d'Italia Das Reich Revue d'histoire du fascisme Das Schwarze Korps Sfarmă-Piatră Signal Siniristi Spearhead Der Stürmer Türkische Post Der Umbruch Vairas Vlajka Volk en Staat Völkischer Beobachter Die Wehrmacht Wochenspruch der NSDAP Film L'Armata Azzurra Bengasi Condottieri The Daughter of the Samurai Erbkrank Europa: The Last Battle The Great Appeal The Old Guard Raza Scipio Africanus: The Defeat of Hannibal Der Sieg des Glaubens The Siege of the Alcazar Lo squadrone bianco Tag der Freiheit: Unsere Wehrmacht Triumph of the Will Music Fashwave Hindutva pop National Socialist black metal Nazi punk Rock Against Communism White power music Other Allach StoneToss Related topics Art of the Third Reich Fascist architecture Heroic realism Nazi architecture Nazism and cinema Organizations Institutional Ahnenerbe Chamber of Fasces and Corporations Grand Council of Fascism Imperial Way Faction Italian Nationalist Association National Socialist League of the Reich for Physical Exercise Quadrumvirs Activist Adelaide Institute Agrarian Trade Union Federation The Britons Casuals United DeVlag European Social Movement Finnish Realm Union Francisco Franco National Foundation Friends of New Germany German American Bund GRECE The Link Mladorossi National Party of Europe National Policy Institute National Popular Consciousness Panzerfaust Records Popular Force Party Right Club Russian Fascist Organization Youth Adler und Falke Albanian Lictor Youth Arab Lictor Youth Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha Blue-and-Blacks Ethiopian Lictor Youth Fascist Union of Youth Frente de Juventudes Al-Futuwwa Gioventù Italiana del Littorio Great Japan Youth Party Hitler Youth Faith and Beauty Society Deutsches Jungvolk Jungmädelbund League of German Girls Jeunesse Populaire Française Juventudes de Acción Popular Korean National Youth Association Levente Mocidade Portuguesa Nationale Jeugdstorm National League of Sweden National Socialist Liberation Front National Youth (Sweden) National Youth (Italy) National Youth Alliance National Youth Organisation (Greece) Opera Nazionale Balilla Österreichisches Jungvolk Patriotic/Eureka Youth League Union of Fascist Little Ones Union of Young Fascists – Vanguard (boys) Union of Young Fascists – Vanguard (girls) Ustaše Youth Wiking-Jugend Youth Front Paramilitary and terrorist Abhinav Bharat Albanian Fascist Militia Atomwaffen Division Azov Brigade Bajrang Dal Black Brigades Black Legion Blackshirts Blueshirts (Canada) Blueshirts (Ireland) Column 88 Combat Terrorist Organization Confederation of the Nation Corpul Muncitoresc Legionar Croatian Defence Forces Croatian National Resistance Croatian Revolutionary Brotherhood Bugojno group Einsatzgruppen Fasci di Azione Rivoluzionaria Falange Armata Falange Militia Flemish Guard Flemish Legion Frontbann Goldshirts Greenshirts Hilfspolizei Hitler Youth Greyshirts Heimwehr Hirden Hlinka Guard Hungarian National Defence Association Impuzamugambi Interbrigades Interahamwe Iron Wolf Jewish Defense League Jewish Defense Organization Kataeb Regulatory Forces Lăncieri Legion Wasa Lehava Lehi Levente Makapili Mano Blanca Misanthropic Division National Republican Guard New Guard Ostmärkische Sturmscharen Rodobrana Russian Imperial Movement Russian National Unity (2000) S14 Schutzstaffel Serbian Volunteer Corps Sicarii Sich Battalion Silver Shirts Sturmabteilung Sudetendeutsches Freikorps Terror Against Terror Third Klan Ukrainian Insurgent Army Ukrainian People's Militsiya Ustaše Militia Volkssport Walloon Guard Walloon Legion Waffen-SS Wagner Group Rusich Group Weerbaarheidsafdeling Werwolf Westland New Post Yokusan Sonendan Youth Front Student Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad Avanguardia Giovanile Fascista Frente de Estudiantes Sindicalistas German Student Union National Socialist German Students' League Sindicato Español Universitario Student Action International Axis powers NSDAP/AO ODESSA History 1900s Herero and Nama genocide and the Holocaust 1910s Arditi Fascio Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Armenian genocide and the Holocaust 1920s March on Rome Corfu incident Acerbo Law Beer Hall Putsch Aventine Secession Italian economic battles Le Faisceau 28 May 1926 coup d'état Libyan genocide 1930s March of the Iron Will November 1932 German federal election March 1933 German federal election Enabling Act Austrian Civil War July Putsch 1934 Montreux Fascist conference Romani Holocaust 4th of August Regime Anti-Comintern Pact Spanish Civil War 1940s World War II Nazi crimes against the Polish nation The Holocaust Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia End in Italy Nuremberg Trials Tokyo Trials Lists Anti-fascists Books about Hitler British fascist parties Fascist movements by country ( A-F G-M N-T U-Z ) Nazi ideologues Nazi leaders Secretaries of Italian fascist parties Speeches by Hitler SS personnel Related topics Authoritarian conservatism Chiangism Francoism Khomeinism Maurrassisme Pinochetism Putinism Ziaism Alt-right Alt-lite Alt-right pipeline Alt-tech Identitarian movement Anti-fascism Bahutu Manifesto Berlusconism Conservative Revolution Criticism of fascism Europe a Nation Fascist (epithet) Fascist mysticism Feudal fascism F-scale (personality test) Garveyism Germanisation of Poles during the Partitions Italianization of South Tyrol Japanization Morenazi Neosocialism Para-/semi-fascism Post-fascism Proto-fascism Red fascism Red–green–brown alliance Roman salute Saffronisation Sansepolcrismo Scientific racism Aryanism Nordicism Social fascism Sorelianism Synarchism Szeged Idea Trumpism Donald Trump and fascism Völkisch movement Women in Nazi Germany Category v t e Jim Crow Era Participants Federal government Presidents Grover Cleveland Benjamin Harrison William McKinley Theodore Roosevelt William Howard Taft Woodrow Wilson Warren G. Harding Calvin Coolidge Herbert Hoover Franklin D. Roosevelt Harry S. Truman Dwight D. Eisenhower John F. Kennedy Lyndon B. Johnson Congress African-American senators African-American representatives Henry Cabot Lodge William E. Chandler George F. Hoar John J. Ingalls Henry W. Blair Benjamin Harrison John Sherman James G. Blaine Joseph B. Foraker US Supreme Court Waite Court (1874–88) Fuller Court (1888–1910) White Court (1910–21) Taft Court (1921–30) Hughes Court (1930–41) Stone Court (1941–46) Vinson Court (1946–53) Warren Court (1953-1969) Federal bureaucracy Home Owners' Loan Corporation National Labor Relations Board Fair Employment Practice Committee State governments Southern United States Alabama Joseph F. Johnston John B. Knox Stouten H. Dent William C. Oates George P. Harrison Frank S. White Arkansas J.E. Williams John N. Tillman Ambrose H. Sevier, Jr.

Florida Georgia Thomas E. Watson M. Hoke Smith Kentucky Carl Day James Hargis Louisiana Murphy J. Foster Ernest Kruttschnitt Maryland Mississippi James Z. George James K. Vardaman Horatio F. Simrall North Carolina Marion Butler Furnifold Simmons Oklahoma South Carolina Benjamin Tillman Robert Smalls Coleman Blease Tennessee Robert Love Taylor Thomas R. Myers Josiah H. Dortch Benjamin J. Lea J.C. Myers Texas Alexander W. Terrell Virginia Alfred P. Thom Allen Caperton Braxton Others African Americans Ku Klux Klan Democratic Party Republican Party Farmers' Alliance Greenback Party Bourbon Democrat Grange Agricultural Wheel Union Labor Party of Arkansas Timeline Prelude Reconstruction Era Civil rights movement (1865–1896) Disenfranchisement after the Reconstruction Era Nadir of American race relations Arkansas Civil Rights Act of 1868 Tennessee State Constitution of 1870 Blyew v. United States (1871) Chicot County massacre of 1871 Illinois School Laws of 1872 Arkansas Civil Rights Act of 1873 Illinois School Laws of 1874 Vagrancy Law (Mississippi) (1876) Pig Law (Mississippi) (1876) Ex parte Siebold (1879) Exodusters 1880–1889 Strauder v. West Virginia (1880) Virginia v. Rives (1880) Ex parte Virginia (1880) Neal v. Delaware (1881) Civil Rights Cases (1883) United States v. Harris (1883) Danville Massacre (1883) Pace v. Alabama (1883) Ohio Public Accommodations Law of 1884 Iowa Civil Rights Act of 1884 Ex parte Yarbrough (1884) Illinois Civil Rights Act of 1885 Yick Wo v. Hopkins (1887) Thibodaux massacre (1887) Assassination of John M. Clayton (1888) Paragould race riots (1888–1908) Myers Law (Tennessee) (1889) Lea Law (Tennessee) (1889) Dortch Law (Tennessee) (1889) Tennessee implements poll tax (state constitution 1870) (1889) 1890–1899 Louisville, New Orleans, and Texas Railroad v. Mississippi (1890) Lodge Bill (1890) Sevier Law (Arkansas) (1890) Ferguson v. Gies (1890) (Michigan) Lodge Bill (1891) Tillman Act (Arkansas) (1891) Separate Coach Law of 1891 (Arkansas) Southern Horrors (1892) Hampton race riot of 1892 Baltimore Afro-American (1892) Sayre Law (Alabama) (1893) Lea Law (Tennessee) (1893) Dodson v. State (1894)  (Arkansas) Ohio Civil Rights Act of 1894 Mills v. Green (1895) Atlanta Exposition Speech (1895) The Red Record (1895) Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) Gibson v. Mississippi (1896) Smith v. Mississippi (1896) Canfield race riot of 1896 Polk County race riot of 1896 Ohio Anti-Mob Violence Act of 1896 Atkins race riot of 1897 Nevada County race riot of 1897 Williams v. Mississippi (1898) Wilmington insurrection of 1898 Cumming v. Richmond County Board of Education (1899) Imperium in Imperio (1899) Little River County race riot of 1899 1900–1909 Carter v. Texas (1900) Robert Charles riots of 1900 Alabama Constitutional Convention of 1901 Up from Slavery (1901) Omaha race riot of 1901 Booker T. Washington dinner at the White House (1901) Louisiana State Penitentiary (1901) The Leopard's Spots (1902) Giles v. Harris (1903) The Souls of Black Folk (1903) Tarrance v. Florida (1903) Brownfield v. South Carolina (1903) Streetcar Segregation Act of 1903 (Arkansas) Bonanza race  riot of 1904 Rogers v. Alabama (1904) Mississippi State Penitentiary (1904) Day Law (Kentucky) (1904) Springfield race riot of 1904 Watkinsville lynching (1905) Niagara Movement (1905) The Clansman (1905) Clyatt v. United States (1905) The Chicago Defender (1905) Springfield race riot of 1906 Chattanooga riot of 1906 Greensburg race riot of 1906 1906 Atlanta race massacre Brownsville Affair (1906) Hodges v. United States (1906) Berea College v. Kentucky (1908) Springfield race riot of 1908 Twining v. New Jersey (1908) National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (1909) 1910–1919 Great Migration (1910) Jack Johnson race riots of 1910 Slocum massacre of 1910 Franklin v. South Carolina (1910) El Dorado race riot of 1910 Pittsburgh Courier (1910) Crumpacker Bill (1911) Universal Negro Improvement Association (1914) United States v. Reynolds (1914) National Urban League (1911) Bailey v. Alabama (1911) Walnut Ridge race riot of 1912 The Birth of a Nation (1915) Guinn v. United States (1915) Association for the Study of African American Life and History (1915) Lynching of Jesse Washington (1916) The Passing of the Great Race (1916) Buchanan v. Warley (1917) Houston riot of 1917 East St. Louis riot of 1917 Philadelphia race riot of 1918 Chester race riot of 1918 Negro World (1918) Red Summer Charleston race riot of 1919 Omaha race riot of 1919 Bisbee riot of 1919 Longview race riot of 1919 Chicago race riot of 1919 Knoxville riot of 1919 Elaine race riot of 1919 Washington, D.C. riot of 1919 "If We Must Die" poem (1919) Thirty Years of Lynching in the United States 1889-1918 (1919) 1920–1929 Harlem Renaissance 1920 Duluth lynchings Ocoee massacre of 1920 Nineteenth Amendment (1920) North Carolina repeals poll tax (1920) Dyer Anti-Lynching Bill (1921) Newberry v. United States (1921) Tulsa race riot of 1921 Rosewood massacre of 1923 Catcher race riot of 1923 Moore v. Dempsey (1923) Racial Integrity Act of 1924 (Virginia) Love v. Griffith (1924) Chandler v. Neff (1924) Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters (1925) Corrigan v. Buckley (1926) Nixon v. Herndon (1927) Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 Rope and Faggot (1929) Jessie De Priest tea at the White House (1929) 1930–1939 Lynching of Thomas Shipp and Abram Smith (1930) Sainte Genevieve race riot of 1930 Scottsboro Boys (1931) Federal Home Loan Bank Board (1932) Nixon v. Condon (1932) Powell v. Alabama (1932) Highlander Folk School Hocutt v. Wilson (1933) (North Carolina) Home Owners' Loan Corporation (1933) National Housing Act of 1934 Costigan-Wagner antilynching bill (1934) Louisiana repeals poll tax (1934) National Labor Relations Board (1935) National Council of Negro Women (1935) Grovey v. Townsend (1935) Norris v. Alabama (1935) Patterson v. Alabama (1935) Harlem riot of 1935 Brown v. Mississippi (1936) Garner v. Mississippi Light & Power (1937) University v. Murray (1936) (Maryland) Breedlove v. Suttles (1937) Florida repeals poll tax (1937) Missouri ex rel. Gaines v. Canada (1938) New Negro Alliance v. Sanitary Grocery Co.

(1938) Hale v. Kentucky (1938) Arkansas referendum on poll tax (1938) Alexandria Library sit-in (1939) Lane v. Wilson (1939) Gone with the Wind (1939) Mills v. Board of Education of Anne Arundel County (1939) 1940–1949 Wagner-Gavagan antilynching bill (1940) Chambers v. Florida (1940) Smith v. Texas (1940) Alston v. School Board of the City of Norfolk, Virginia (1940) Hasqett v. Werner (1941) United States v. Classic (1941) Fair Employment Practice Committee (1941) Executive Order 8802 (1942) Hill v. Texas (1942) "Double V" campaign Congress of Racial Equality Beaumont race riot of 1943 Detroit race riot of 1943 Harlem riot of 1943 Agana race riot of 1944 Smith v. Allwright (1944) Pollock v. Williams (1944) An American Dilemma (1944) Hedgepeth and Williams v. Board of Education (1944) Georgia repeals poll tax (1945) Executive Order 9908 (1946) Civil Rights Congress (1946) Morgan v. Virginia (1946) Boswell Amendment 1946 Georgia lynching President's Committee on Civil Rights (1946) Airport Homes race riots (1946) Columbia race riot of 1946 Mendez v. Westminster (1947) Journey of Reconciliation (1947) Fernwood Park race riot (1947) Patton v. Mississippi (1947) Elmore v. Rice (1947) Southern Conference Educational Fund Levi Pearson v. Clarendon County Board of Education (1947) To Secure These Rights (1947) Executive Order 9980 (1948) Executive Order 9981 (1948) Shelley v. Kraemer (1948) Sipuel v. Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma (1948) Perez v. Sharp (1948) Elmore v. Rice (1948) Rosana Aubert v. Orleans Parish School Board (1948) Peekskill riots of 1949 Virginia referendum on poll tax (1949) Texas referendum on poll tax (1949) Davis v. Schnell (1949) State of Iowa v. Katz (1949) Englewood race riot (1949) Aftermath Counterculture of the 1960s Civil Rights Movement Black Power movement Aspects General Civil rights movement (1896–1954) Loophole clauses Character clause Grandfather clause Understanding clause Literacy test Poll tax Cumulative poll tax Property qualifications Voting devices Direct primary White primaries Multiple box ballot Eight-box law Secret ballot At-large voting Gerrymandering Moving polling stations Historiography Bibliography of Jim Crow Walter C. Hamm " The Three Phases of Colored Suffrage " (1899) William Alexander Mabry The Disfranchisement of the Negro in the South (1933) V. O. Key, Jr.

Southern Politics in State and Nation (1949) C. Vann Woodward Origins of the New South, 1877-1913 (1951) The Strange Career of Jim Crow (1955) J. Morgan Kousser The Shaping of Southern Politics (1974) Michael Perman Struggle for Mastery (2001) Memory Legacy Great Migration Harlem Renaissance Other topics Sproule v. Fredericks (Tennessee) Lynching Anti-miscegenation laws List of Jim Crow law examples by state Racism Social Darwinism White supremacy Color line Disfranchisement Voter suppression in the United States Historical race concepts Judicial aspects of race in the United States Segregation Racial segregation Miscegenation Military segregation Residential segregation School segregation Housing segregation Public housing Jim Crow Museum of Racist Memorabilia Stereotypes of African Americans The New Jim Crow (2010) Sundown town All-white jury Sharecropping Convict lease Chain gang Category:History of racial segregation in the United States v t e LaVeyan Satanism High Priest Anton LaVey (1966–1997) Peter H. Gilmore (2001–present) High Priestess Diane Hegarty (1966–1985) Zeena LaVey (1985–1990) Karla LaVey (1990–1999) Blanche Barton (1997–2002) Peggy Nadramia (2002–present) Organizations Church of Satan First Satanic Church (see also The Black House , Grotto ) Literature The Satanic Bible The Satanic Witch The Satanic Rituals The Secret Life of a Satanist We Are Satanists The Devil's Notebook Satan Speaks!

Letters from the Devil The Satanic Scriptures Other media The Satanic Mass Satanis: The Devil's Mass Speak of the Devil: The Canon of Anton LaVey The Black Flame Satan Takes a Holiday Strange Music Death Scenes Ideas and concepts Amorality Blasphemy Carnivalesque Elitism Epicureanism Egoism Eugenics Individualism Materialism Naturalism Pragmatism Psychic vampire Self-preservation Social Darwinism Social stratification Related topics Sigil of Baphomet Baphomet Satanic panic Hellfire Club Hail Satan v t e Nazism Organisation Ahnenerbe Artaman League Geheime Staatspolizei Deutscher Fichte-Bund Deutsches Jungvolk Franz Eher Nachfolger Hitler Youth League of German Girls Organisation Todt NSDÄB NSDStB NSRL NSFK NSKK NSF Nazi media organizations Nationalsozialistische Monatshefte Neues Volk NS-Frauen-Warte Das Reich Das Schwarze Korps Nazi Party Sicherheitsdienst (SD) Sturmabteilung (SA) Schutzstaffel (SS) SS Gefolge Waffen-SS History Early timeline National Socialist Program Hitler's rise to power Machtergreifung Gleichschaltung German rearmament Nazi Germany Kirchenkampf Hitler's personality cult Enabling Act of 1933 Night of the Long Knives Nuremberg rallies Nuremberg Laws Anti-Comintern Pact Kristallnacht Anschluss World War II The Holocaust 1938–1939 German expedition to Tibet Tripartite Pact Denazification Nuremberg trials Final solution Concentration camps Deportations Doctors' Trial Extermination camps Genocide Ghettos Human experimentation Labour camps Pogroms Racial segregation Ideology Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-liberalism Anti-pacifism Blood and soil Chauvinism Class collaboration Conspiracism Dolchstoßlegende International Jewry Judeo-Bolshevism Corporatism Counter-Enlightenment Cult of personality Dictatorship Führerprinzip Direct action Economic interventionism Eugenics Geopolitik Heimat Imperialism Greater Germanic Reich Heim ins Reich Lebensraum Pan-Germanism Militarism Morality Nationalism Ethno Racial Palingenetic Revolutionary Ultra New Man New Order One-party state Populism Propaganda Prussianism Racism Antisemitism Anti-Slavic sentiment Aryan race Aryanism Master race Nordicism Nordic Indo-Germanic people Renordification Rassenschande Untermenschen Völkisch equality Völkisch movement Reactionary modernism Romanticism Social Darwinism Social interventionism Social order State capitalism Syncretism Totalitarianism Volksgemeinschaft Volk ohne Raum Volkskörper Politicians Bloem Bormann Daluege Dönitz Drexler Eichmann Esser Fischer Frank Frick Hess Heydrich Himmler Hitler Goebbels Göring Keller Lammers Lutze Mitford von Neurath Quisling von Ribbentrop Röhm Schacht von Schirach Scholtz-Klink Seldte Seyss-Inquart Speer Strasser (Gregor) Strasser (Otto) Streicher Thierack Ideologues Pre- Machtergreifung Arndt Burnouf Chamberlain Drumont Eckart Fritsch de Gobineau Grant von Liebenfels von List Löns Lueger Marr Nietzsche (contentious) Ratzel Riehl Ruskin Wagner Post- Machtergreifung Anacker Baeumler Bergmann Berndt Darré Eggers Eichrodt Feder Ford Grimm Günther Hauer Haushofer Heidegger (contentious) Hentschel Hoche al-Husseini Jung Krannhals Kriek Lindbergh Müller Plenge Rahn Rosenberg Saadeh Schäfer Schmalenbach Schmitt (contentious) von Sebottendorf Schwarz Stapel Wirsing Zimmermann Atrocities and war crimes Action T4 Nazi concentration camps Extermination camp Final Solution Human experimentation Romani genocide Outside Germany Americas Brazil Chile Mexico Europe Greece Sweden Parties Arrow Cross Party Frontist movement German American Bund German National Movement in Liechtenstein Nasjonal Samling National Socialist Movement (Netherlands) National Socialist Movement of Chile National Socialist Workers' Party of Denmark Ossewabrandwag Lists Doctors Last surviving war crime suspects Nazi Party members Nicknames and pseudonyms NSDAP leaders and officials Publishers SS personnel Role and impact in German society The Wehrmacht Economy Nobility Related topics Analogies Art Architecture Cinema Atsızism " Beefsteak Nazi " Economy Denordification Renordification Glossary Drang nach Osten Generalplan Ost German American Bund Horst-Wessel-Lied Hitler's political views Propaganda and the UK Racial theories Strasserism Women Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐wpkw6
Cached time: 20250814214843
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.361 seconds
Real time usage: 2.698 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10698/1000000
Revision size: 73307/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1058887/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 240197/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 381824/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.471/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20583508/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1978.414      1 -total
 28.00%  553.987      1 Template:Reflist
 25.29%  500.252      1 Template:Navboxes
 21.94%  433.999     14 Template:Navbox
 18.01%  356.244      1 Template:Nazism
 17.23%  340.966      8 Template:Excerpt
 17.21%  340.392      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.96%  315.737      1 Template:Nazism_sidebar
 12.85%  254.146     26 Template:Cite_book
 10.54%  208.434     71 Template:Lang Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:45541:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814214843 and revision id 1304867577. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Social_Darwinism&oldid=1304867577 " Categories : Social Darwinism 1870s neologisms Eponymous political ideologies Darwinism Fascism Herbert Spencer Liberalism Political theories Pseudoscience Social ethics Social theories Sociological theories Theories of history Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Citation overkill Articles tagged with the inline citation overkill template from March 2025 Articles containing German-language text Articles with unsourced statements from June 2012 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles containing French-language text Articles with excerpts Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 17:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Social Darwinism 54 languages Add topic

