Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Property rights 3 Policy proposals 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Geolibertarianism 16 languages العربية Dansk فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political and economic ideology integrating libertarianism with Georgism This article is part of a series on Libertarianism in the United States Schools Agorism Anarcho-capitalism Austro Authoritarian Autarchism Bleeding-heart Christian Conservative Consequentialist Feminist Fusionism Geo Green Market anarchism Minarchism Natural-rights Neo Paleo Panarchism Paternalist Propertarianism Socialist Techno Transhumanist Voluntaryism Principles Anti-imperialism Civil libertarianism Constitutionalism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Economic freedom Evictionism Free banking Free market Free-market environmentalism Free migration Free trade Free will Freedom of association Freedom of contract Freedom of speech Homestead principle Individuality Individualism Liberty Limited government Localism Marriage privatization Natural rights and legal rights Non-aggression principle Non-interventionism Non-politics Non-voting Open border Polycentric law Private defense agency Private property Public choice theory Restorative justice Right to bear arms Right to privacy Rugged Individualism Self-ownership Single tax Small government Spoiled ballot Spontaneous order Stateless society Tax resistance Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntary association Voluntary society History Age of Enlightenment Abolitionism in the United States Classical liberalism Anti-Federalists Transcendentalism Individualist anarchism in the United States Old Right New Left New Right Freedom School Economics Austrian School Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Georgism Laissez-faire Neoliberalism Supply-side economics Intellectuals Andrews Barnett Block Boudreaux Brennan Caplan Carson Chamberlain Chartier Chodorov Cowen Ebeling Epstein Franklin D. Friedman M. Friedman P. Friedman R. Friedman Galambos Garrett George Griffin Gordon Harper Hazlitt Heinlein Hess Hoppe Hospers Huemer Jefferson Kinsella Konkin R. Lane Liggio LeFevre Machan Mencken Menger Mises Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Raico Read Robertson Rockwell Rothbard Samuels Schulman Sciabarra Scott Skousen Smith Spooner Somin Sowell Sumner Sutton Stephenson Szasz Taleb Thoreau Tuccille Tucker Volokh Wilder Williams Wilson (Clyde) Wilson (Robert) Politicians Amash Barr Brakey Burt Chafee Cleveland Flake Goldwater Jacobs Johnson Jorgensen Lee Massie McAfee Nolan Oliver Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Polis Sanford Sarwark Sununu Ventura Weld Wu Commentators Chamberlain Gillespie Gutfeld Jones Kauffman McElroy Miller Napolitano Postrel Pugsley Rogan Smith Soave Stone Stossel Welch Will Woods Activists Ben Garrison Jillette Koch (Charles) Koch (David) Reitman Kubrick Smith Prince Teller Thiel Literature The Anarchist Cookbook Anarchy, State, and Utopia The Betrayal of the American Right The Case Against Education Civil Disobedience Conceived in Liberty The Creature from Jekyll Island Defending the Undefendable The Discovery of Freedom End the Fed The Ethics of Liberty For a New Liberty Free to Choose The Future and Its Enemies The God of the Machine It Usually Begins with Ayn Rand Liberty The Machinery of Freedom Man, Economy and State The Moon is a Harsh Mistress The Mainspring of Human Progress The Market for Liberty The Myth of the Rational Voter No, They Can't No Treason New Libertarian Manifesto Our Enemy, the State The Problem of Political Authority Progress and Poverty Protection or Free Trade Radicals for Capitalism Seeing Like a State To Serve and Protect The Unconstitutionality of Slavery Issues Abortion Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political parties Politics State Theories of law Symbols Come and take it Gadsden flag Idols Ron Swanson Patrick Bateman Walter White Organizations Cato Institute Federalist Society Free State Project Foundation for Economic Education International Alliance of Libertarian Parties Libertarian Party Liberty International Mises Institute Reason Foundation Reason (magazine) Students for a Democratic Society Students for Liberty Young Americans for Liberty Movements American militia movement Boogaloo movement Dark Enlightenment Objectivist movement Objectivism Sovereign citizen movement Comparable Libertarianism in Hong Kong Libertarianism in the United Kingdom ( England ) Related Conservatism in the United States Left-libertarianism Liberalism in the United States Libertarian Democrat Libertarian Republican Libertarian science fiction On Democracy in America Outline of libertarianism Right-libertarianism Liberalism portal Conservatism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Geolibertarianism is a political and economic ideology that integrates libertarianism with Georgism . It favors a taxation system based (as in Georgism) on income derived from land and natural resources instead of on labor, coupled with a minimalist model of government, as in libertarianism. The term was coined by the late economist Fred Foldvary in 1981.

[ 1 ] Geolibertarians recognize the right to private ownership of land, but only if fair recompense is paid to the community for the loss of access to that land. Some geolibertarians broaden out the tax base to include resource depletion, environmental damage, and other ancillaries to land use.

A succinct summary of this philosophy can be found in Thomas Paine 's 1797 pamphlet Agrarian Justice : "Men did not make the earth. It is the value of the improvements only, and not the earth itself, that is individual property. Every proprietor owes to the community a ground rent for the land which he holds".

Overview [ edit ] Geolibertarians maintain that geographical space and raw natural resources —any assets that qualify as land by economic definition—are rivalrous goods to be considered common property , or more accurately unowned , which all individuals share an equal human right to access, not capital wealth to be privatized fully and absolutely. Therefore, landholders ought to pay compensation according to the rental value set by the free market , absent any improvements, to the community for the civil right of usufruct (that is, legally recognized exclusive possession with restrictions on property abuse) or otherwise fee simple title with no such restrictions. Ideally, the taxing of a site would be administered only after it has been determined that the privately captured economic rent from the land exceeds the title-holder's equal share of total land value in the jurisdiction.

[ 2 ] On this proposal, rent is collected not for the mere occupancy or use of land, as neither the community nor the state rightfully owns the commons, but rather as an objectively assessed indemnity due for the legal right to exclude others from that land. Some geolibertarians also support Pigovian taxes on pollution and severance taxes to regulate natural resource depletion and compensatory fees with ancillary positive environmental effects on activities which negatively impact land values. They take the standard right-libertarian position that each individual is naturally entitled to the fruits of their labor as exclusive private property as opposed to produced goods being owned collectively by society or by the government acting to represent society, and that a person's "labor, wages, and the products of labor" should not be taxed. Along with non-Georgists in the libertarian movement, they also advocate the law of equal liberty , supporting "full civil liberties, with no crimes unless there are victims who have been invaded." [ 3 ] Geolibertarians are generally influenced by the Georgist single tax movement of the late-19th and early-20th centuries, but the ideas behind it pre-date Henry George and can be found in different forms in the political writings of John Locke , the early agrarian socialism of English True Levellers or Diggers such as Gerrard Winstanley , the French Physiocrats (especially Quesnay and Turgot ), British classical economists Adam Smith and David Ricardo , French liberal economists Jean-Baptiste Say and Frédéric Bastiat , American Revolutionary writers Thomas Jefferson and Thomas Paine , English Radical land reformer Thomas Spence , American individualist anarchists Lysander Spooner and Benjamin Tucker , as well as British classical liberal philosophers John Stuart Mill and Herbert Spencer . Prominent geolibertarians since George have included Old Right social critics Albert Jay Nock and Frank Chodorov . Other libertarians who have expressed support for the land value tax as an incremental reform include Milton Friedman , Karl Hess , John Hospers and United States Libertarian Party co-founder David Nolan .

[ 4 ] Property rights [ edit ] Thomas Paine inspired the citizen's dividend and stated: "Every proprietor owes to the community a ground rent for the land which he holds." [ 5 ] In continuity with the classical economic and liberal traditions, geolibertarians contend that land is an independent factor of production , that it is the common inheritance of all humanity and that the justice of private property is derived from an individual's right to the fruits of his or her labor. Since land by economic definition is not the product of human labor, its ownership cannot be justified by appealing to natural human rights.

[ 6 ] Geolibertarians recognize the individual civil right to secure exclusive possession of land only on the condition that if the land has accrued economic rent, its full rental value be paid to the community deprived of equal access. This non-distortionary system of taxation, it is argued, has the effects of returning the value that belongs to all members of society and encouraging landholders to use only as much land as they need, leaving unneeded land for others to occupy, use and develop.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] A succinct summary of the geolibertarian philosophy is Thomas Paine 's assertion in his 1797 pamphlet Agrarian Justice : "Men did not make the earth. It is the value of the improvements only, and not the earth itself, that is individual property. Every proprietor owes to the community a ground rent for the land which he holds".  On the other hand, John Locke wrote that private land ownership should be praised as long as its product was not left to spoil and there was "enough, and as good left in common for others". When this Lockean proviso is violated, the land earns rental value. Some geolibertarians argue that "enough, and as good left" is a practical impossibility in a city setting where location is paramount. This implies that in any urban social environment Locke's proviso requires the collection and equal distribution of ground rent. Geolibertarians sometimes dispute the received interpretation of Locke's homestead principle outlined in his Second Treatise of Government as concerning the justice of initial acquisition of property in land, opting instead for a view ostensibly more compatible with the proviso which considers Locke to be describing the process by which property is created from land through the application of labor.

This strict definition of private property as the fruit of a person's labor leads geolibertarians to advocate free markets in capital goods, consumer goods, and services, in addition to the protection of workers' rights to their full earnings.

Policy proposals [ edit ] Geolibertarians generally support allocating land rent from private landholders to all community members by way of a land value tax as proposed by Henry George and others before him.

[ 9 ] Geolibertarians desire to see the revenue from land value capture cover only necessary administrative costs and fund only those public services which are essential for a governing body to secure and enforce rights to life, liberty and estate—civic protections which increase the aggregate land rent within the jurisdiction and thereby serve to finance themselves —the surplus being equally distributed as an unconditional dividend to each citizen. Thus, the value of the land is returned to the residents who produce it, but who by practical necessity and legal privilege have been deprived of equal access while the poor and disadvantaged benefit from a reliable social safety net unencumbered by bureaucracy or intrusive means-testing . Some geolibertarians claim the reasoning behind taxing land values likewise justifies a complementary pollution tax for degrading the shared value of the natural commons. The common and inelastic character of the radio wave spectrum (which also falls under land as an economic category) is understood to justify the taxation of its exclusive use, as well.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] American economist and political philosopher Fred Foldvary coined the term geo-libertarianism in a so-titled article appearing in Land&Liberty .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] In the case of what Foldvary terms "geoanarchism", which he describes as the most radically decentralized and scrupulously voluntarist form of geolibertarianism, Foldvary theorizes that ground rents would be collected by private agencies and persons would have the opportunity to secede from associated geocommunities—thereby opting out of their protective and legal services—if desired.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Libertarianism portal Citizen's dividend Classical economics Classical liberalism Commons Free-market environmentalism Freiwirtschaft Georgism Green libertarianism Jeffersonian democracy Land law Land value tax Minarchism Natural and legal rights Neoclassical liberalism Poverty reduction Radical centrism Single tax Sustainable development Tax shift Tragedy of the anticommons Value capture References [ edit ] ^ Foldvary, Fred (2012-04-25).

"The Geolibertarian Ethics of Land Rent" .

Bleeding Heart Libertarians . Retrieved 2023-11-08 .

^ "Geo-Libertarianism: A Peaceful Way To Resolve Territory Disputes At Sea | John McCone : Philosophy For The Future" . 2018-12-28 . Retrieved 2023-11-08 .

^ "Foldvary, Fred E. Geoism and Libertarianism. The Progress Report" . Progress.org. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012 . Retrieved 2013-03-26 .

^ "Learned Libertarians Lean Toward Land Dues" . progress.org. 2015-12-19 . Retrieved 2017-10-04 .

^ * Agrarian Justice – via Wikisource .

^ "10 Different Types of Libertarianism" .

ThoughtCo . Retrieved 2023-11-08 .

^ Liam (2011-06-12).

"Geolibertarianism – The Social Contract Fallacy" . British-neolibertarian.blogspot.com . Retrieved 2013-03-26 .

^ "Socialism, Capitalism, Geoism" .

Henry George's Remedy . Retrieved 2023-11-08 .

^ www.libertarianism.org https://www.libertarianism.org/columns/review-posner-weyls-radical-markets . Retrieved 2023-11-08 .

{{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ "Basis of Taxation" .

Canned Platypus . Pl.atyp.us. 2005-08-12. Archived from the original on 2016-04-03 . Retrieved 2013-03-26 .

^ "Geo-Libertarianism Gets Criticized, by Fred Foldvary, Ph.D. | Progress.org" .

www.progress.org . Retrieved 2023-11-08 .

^ Abel, Janos (1981).

"Land & Liberty – 1980 & 1981 – 87 & 88 Years" (PDF) .

henrygeorgefoundation.org .

^ Sims, Emily (February 2018).

"The Monthly Discussion" .

Prosper Australia . Archived from the original on 2019-03-24 . Retrieved 2018-08-29 .

^ Foldvary, Fred E.

(2001-07-15).

"Geoanarchism" . anti-state.com . Retrieved 2009-04-15 .

External links [ edit ] "A Landlord is a Government – The Libertarian Basis for Land Rights" "Geo-Rent: A Plea to public economists" Archived 2023-07-14 at the Wayback Machine by Fred E. Foldvary "Between State and Anarchy: A Model of Governance" Archived 2021-03-10 at the Wayback Machine by Fred E. Foldvary "Really Natural Rights" Geoism in American Quaker John Woolman's "Plea for the Poor" "Murray Rothbard and Henry George" – a critical review of Georgism and geolibertarianism from an Austrian School perspective v t e Libertarianism Origins Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Schools Libertarian capitalism ( Right-libertarianism ) Anarcho-capitalism Autarchism Fusionism Libertarianism bleeding-heart christian consequentialist conservative feminism geo green natural-rights neo paleo paternalism techno crypto transhumanism Libertarian authoritarianism neo-reactionary Minarchism Neo-classical liberalism Objectivism Propertarianism Voluntaryism Libertarian socialism ( Left-libertarianism ) Anarchism black collectivist communist feminism free-market agorism green individualist egoist insurrectionary libertarian communism mutualism pacifist philosophical queer social syndicalist Autonomism Communalism Guild socialism Libertarian Marxism communization mao-spontex Syndicalism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Philosophers Left-wing Bakunin Bookchin Camus Chomsky Cleyre Déjacque Fourier Godwin Goldman Guérin Hodgskin Kropotkin Marcuse Öcalan Proudhon Warren Tucker Right-wing Bastiat Block Brennan Emerson D. Friedman M. Friedman R. Friedman Goldwater Hayek Herbert Hoppe Jillette Kinsella Korwin-Mikke Lane Locke von Mises de Molinari Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Read Rothbard Simon Spencer Stossel Other George Hess Konkin de La Boétie McElroy Paine Spooner Stirner Szasz Thoreau Politicians Cleveland Coolidge Farage Gandhi Johnson Jorgensen Korwin-Mikke Milei Paul Sarwark Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Works Atlas Shrugged (1957) The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto (1973) Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973–1979) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974) Free to Choose (1980) Related Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Outline of libertarianism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geolibertarianism&oldid=1306235364 " Categories : Georgism Left-libertarianism Populism Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing title CS1 errors: bare URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 17:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geolibertarianism 16 languages Add topic

