Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 References 4 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta 5 languages العربية Italiano עברית مصرى Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medieval Jewish physician and poet Not to be confused with Joseph ben Judah ibn Aknin , born c.

1150 at Barcelona, died c.

1220 at Fez.  The two are often conflated, especially in earlier literature.

Joseph ben Judah ( Hebrew : יוסף בן יהודה Yosef ben Yehuda ) of Ceuta ( c.

1160–1226) was a Jewish physician and poet, and disciple of Maimonides . Maimonides wrote his work, The Guide for the Perplexed , for Joseph.

Life [ edit ] For the first 25 years of his life ben Judah lived with his father, who was an artisan at Ceuta then part of the Almohad Caliphate .

He left the Maghreb when he was about twenty-five years old, and was already engaged in the practice of medicine.

[ 1 ] When not occupied with professional work he wrote Hebrew poems, which were known to Yehuda Alharizi , who speaks highly of them in his "Taḥkemoni".

[ 2 ] Maimonides, to whom Joseph sent his poems together with other compositions from Alexandria, was not so lavish with his praise. He appreciated only the great longing for higher studies which found expression in Joseph's poems.

Joseph went from Alexandria to Fustat (now in Cairo ) and studied logic, mathematics, and astronomy under Maimonides. Maimonides likewise expounded the writings of the Prophets, because Joseph seemed perplexed as to the possibility of reconciling the teachings of the Prophets with the results of metaphysical research. Maimonides advised patience and systematic study; but the disciple left before Maimonides had completed his course of lectures on the Prophets.

[ 3 ] His stay with Maimonides was short: [ 4 ] less than two years.

Joseph went further east and settled in Aleppo . Here he established himself as a medical practitioner, married, and made a successful commercial journey which enabled him to live henceforth independently and free from care. It was probably in the course of this journey that he witnessed at Baghdad the burning of the works of the philosopher Izz al-Din ibn 'Abd al-Salam (1192).

After Joseph's departure from Fusṭaṭ, the intercourse between master and student was continued in writing. Maimonides's The Guide for the Perplexed was written for Joseph and for those like him who found it difficult to harmonize the results of philosophical research with the teachings of the Prophets. Joseph, however, was not convinced; for he writes allegorically to his master as follows: Thy daughter Kimah [i.e., Maimonides' method of reconciling theology and philosophy: the most difficult point in his theory seems to have been the explanation of prophecy], whom I loved and married according to law and custom, in the presence of two witnesses, 'Abd Allah and Ibn Rushd , turned her face from me to follow other men. There must be something wrong in her education. Restore the wife to her husband, for he is a prophet.

[ citation needed ] Maimonides replies in the same style, declaring the innocence of his daughter and the guilt of the husband; and he advises his disciple to have faith in God, and to be more modest and more careful in his utterances lest he bring evil upon himself.

Joseph remained, however, a true disciple of his master. He abandoned his other pursuits and wished to open a school. Maimonides dissuaded him from the undertaking, unless he should do it without seeking material profit from his teaching. When, thirty years later, al-Ḥarizi visited Aleppo (1217) he found Joseph in the zenith of his glory. He praised him as the "Western light", and applied to him the words of Scripture, "and Joseph was ruler over the whole land; he supplied food for all".

[ 5 ] He must indeed have had great authority when he defended his master and silenced the opposition expressed by some rabbis in Baghdad against the works of Maimonides.  Maimonides exhorted Joseph to moderation, begging him, being young in years, not to oppose an old rabbi whose authority was recognized in the congregation.

[ 6 ] Joseph was twice married: by the first wife he had two daughters; by the second, several sons.

Works [ edit ] Part of a series on Jewish philosophy Hellenistic Positions: Hasmonean Sadducean Pharisee Boethusian People: Aristobulus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Medieval Influenced by: Brethren of Purity ibn Bajjah (Avempace) Ismaili philosophy Jewish Kalam Kabbalah Rabbinic Judaism Spanish and European: Hasdai ibn Shaprut Ibn Gabirol Abraham bar Hiyya Bahya ibn Paquda Judah Halevi Abraham ibn Daud Joseph ibn Tzaddik Abraham ibn Ezra Maimonides Nachmanides Samuel ibn Tibbon Joseph ben Judah Shem-Tov ibn Falaquera Gersonides Moses of Narbonne Isaac ben Sheshet Hasdai Crescas Joseph Albo Elia del Medigo Judah Minz Isaac Abarbanel Judah Leon Abravanel Yemenite: Natan'el al-Fayyumi Mansur ibn Sulayman al-Ghamari Other: Isaac Israeli Saadia Gaon al-Muqqamaṣ Hibatullah ibn Malka Ibn Kammuna Positions: Maimonidean / Anti-Maimonidean Kabbalist Karaism Talmudic Tosafist Modern Positions: Orthodox Sephardic Chabad Chassidic Conservative Reform Existentialist Reconstructionist Holocaust Renewal Neo-Hasidic Mussar Rambamist People: Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa Baruch Spinoza Salomon Maimon Joseph Solomon Delmedigo Elijah Ba'al Shem of Chelm Eliezer ben Elijah Ashkenazi Tzvi Ashkenazi Jacob Emden Samuel Hirsch Shneur Zalman of Liadi Simcha Bunim of Peshischa Samson Raphael Hirsch Jacob Abendana Isaac Cardoso David Nieto Isaac Orobio de Castro Moses Mendelssohn Samuel David Luzzatto Elijah Benamozegh Moses Hess Eliezer Berkovits Eliyahu Dessler Monsieur Chouchani Emmanuel Levinas Martin Buber Gershom Scholem Abraham Isaac Kook Joseph Soloveitchik Menachem Mendel Schneerson Topics Anger Chosen people Cosmology Eschatology Ethics Faith God Happiness Holiness Holocaust Messiah Microcosm–macrocosm Righteousness v t e Joseph's poems are all lost except one in praise of Maimonides, [ 7 ] and the beginning of another preserved by al-Ḥarizi.

[ 8 ] His only other surviving work is a dissertation in Arabic on the problem of Creation. This appears (but is not certain) to have been written before his contact with Maimonides—the opinions attributed to philosophy are those of Avicenna .

It is entitled Ma'amar bimehuyav ha-metsiut ve'eykhut sidur ha-devarim mimenu vehidush ha'olam ( A Treatise as to (1) Necessary Existence (2) The Procedure of Things from the Necessary Existence and (3) The Creation of the World ).

[ 9 ] In it, as summarised by Colette Sirat , "the necessity of God's existence is first demonstrated by Avicenna's proof of contingency , but this demonstration is, as the author says, that of the philosophers, and seems to him less convincing than that proposed by the theologians—the mutakallimūn , who affirm not only the existence of a necessary being, but the temporal creation of the world, which cannot be deduced by philosophical demonstration.  In effect, only divine choice and will can explain the multiplicity evident in the world, for out of an absolutely One and Only God only unity can necessarily proceed; the multiplicity that exists in fact is therefore an act of will and not the consequence of a necessary cause".

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ Salomon Munk , "Notice sur Joseph b. Jehudah", in "Jour. Asiatique", 1842, p. 14 ^ Taḥkemoni 18 ^ Maimonides, "Moreh Nebukhim", Introduction ^ Munk, l.c. p. 34 ^ "Taḥkemoni", 46, 50 ^ See "Birkat Abraham", Lyck, 1859; "Zikhronot", ii.: a letter written by Maimonides in 1192 ^ Maimonides, "Ḳobeẓ", ed. A. Lichtenberg, ii. 29, Leipsic, 1859 ^ Taḥkemoni , xviii.; Munk, l.c. p. 49 ^ מאמר ר׳ יוסף אבן עקנין: במחויב המציאות ואיכות סדור הדברים ממנו וחידוש העולם (Hebrew and English ed.). 1904.

Aknin, Joseph Ibn (1879).

Drei Abhandlungen: 1. Ueber den Nothwendig-exis-tirenden.--2. Ueber den Modus des Hervorgehns der Dinge aus ihm.--3. Ueber die Schöpfung der Welt (Hebrew and German ed.).

^ Colette Sirat, A History of Jewish Philosophy in the Middle Ages , p. 206. Cambridge University Press, 1990.

ISBN 0-521-39727-8 Bibliography [ edit ] Moritz Steinschneider , in Ersch and Gruber , Encyc. section ii., part 31, pp. 45 et seq.; Adolf Neubauer , in Monatsschrift , 1870, pp. 348 et seq.; Michael Friedländer , Guide of the Perplexed of Maimonides , part i., note 1.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Singer, Isidore ; et al., eds. (1901–1906).

"JOSEPH BEN JUDAH IBN 'AḲNIN" .

The Jewish Encyclopedia . New York: Funk & Wagnalls.

v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐pc4w6
Cached time: 20250815041617
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.409 seconds
Real time usage: 0.513 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1717/1000000
Revision size: 7712/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 104518/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 22086/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 87797/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.271/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16762587/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  430.002      1 -total
 21.05%   90.533      1 Template:Jewish_philosophy
 20.52%   88.241      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 20.46%   87.958      1 Template:Reflist
 17.22%   74.056      1 Template:Langx
 17.07%   73.419      2 Template:Cite_book
 11.68%   50.244      1 Template:Short_description
  8.33%   35.807      9 Template:Longitem
  7.92%   34.039     10 Template:Hlist
  7.74%   33.280      1 Template:Blockquote Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:11410402:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815041617 and revision id 1284089050. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Joseph_ben_Judah_of_Ceuta&oldid=1284089050 " Categories : Medieval Jewish poets Medieval Jewish physicians of Egypt 13th-century Egyptian physicians 12th-century Egyptian physicians 1160s births 1226 deaths People from Ceuta 13th-century Jews People from the Almohad Caliphate Poets from the Almohad Caliphate Physicians from the Ayyubid Sultanate Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Hebrew-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia This page was last edited on 5 April 2025, at 14:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta 5 languages Add topic

