Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Fahrenholz's rule 2 Parasitic cospeciation 3 Symbiotic cospeciation 4 False incongruence Toggle False incongruence subsection 4.1 Host switching 4.2 Independent speciation 4.3 Extinction 4.4 "Missing the boat" 5 References Toggle the table of contents Cospeciation 4 languages فارسی Magyar Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of coevolution in which the speciation of one species dictates speciation of another species Cospeciation and host-parasite associations. From top to bottom: Cospeciation: host and parasite speciate concurrently Host switching: speciation as parasite switches hosts and evolves in reproductive isolation Independent speciation: parasite speciates on same host, reasons unrelated to host Extinction: parasite goes extinct on host Missing the boat: host speciates but parasite does not end up reproductively isolated Cospeciation is a form of coevolution in which the speciation of one species dictates speciation of another species and is most commonly studied in host- parasite relationships. In the case of a host-parasite relationship, if two hosts of the same species get within close proximity of each other, parasites of the same species from each host are able to move between individuals and mate with the parasites on the other host.

[ 1 ] However, if a speciation event occurs in the host species, the parasites will no longer be able to "cross over" because the two new host species no longer mate and, if the speciation event is due to a geographic separation, it is very unlikely the two hosts will interact at all with each other. The lack of proximity between the hosts ultimately prevents the populations of parasites from interacting and mating. This can ultimately lead to speciation within the parasite.

[ 2 ] According to Fahrenholz's rule , first proposed by Heinrich Fahrenholz in 1913, when host-parasite cospeciation has occurred, the phylogenies of the host and parasite come to mirror each other. In host-parasite phylogenies, and all species phylogenies for that matter, perfect mirroring is rare. Host-parasite phylogenies can be altered by host switching, extinction, independent speciation, and other ecological events, making cospeciation harder to detect.

[ 3 ] However, cospeciation is not limited to parasitism, but has been documented in symbiotic relationships like those of gut microbes in primates.

[ 4 ] Fahrenholz's rule [ edit ] In 1913, Heinrich Fahrenholz proposed that the phylogenies of both the host and parasite will eventually become congruent, or mirror each other when cospeciation occurs.

[ 5 ] More specifically, more closely related parasite species will be found on closely related species of host. Thus, to determine if cospeciation has occurred within a host-parasite relationship, scientists have used comparative analyses on the host and parasite phylogenies.

In 1968, Daniel Janzen proposed an opposing theory to Fahrenholz's rule. Studying cospeciation within plant-insect relationships, he proposed that species have a physiological range of conditions and environments. Over time, conserved traits within a parasitic species allows for survival in a range of conditions or environments. "Ecological fitting", as it is known, means more closely related parasites will share similar traits that pertain to surviving on a particular host. This provides explanation for the congruence of the host-parasite phylogenies.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Parasitic cospeciation [ edit ] Fahrenholz's rule appears to be observed in the parasitic cospeciation of pocket gophers and chewing lice .

[ 7 ] It is seen, too, between Poaceae grasses and Anguininae nematodes , [ 8 ] and between some plants and Phyllonorycter leaf-mining moths .

[ 9 ] Symbiotic cospeciation [ edit ] Black smokers provide energy and nutrients to chemoautotrophic bacteria, which in turn have symbiotically cospeciated with deep sea clams.

Among animals, symbiotic cospeciation is seen between Uroleucon (aphids) and Buchnera (plants in the Orobanchaceae ), [ 10 ] between deep sea clams and chemoautotrophic bacteria , [ 11 ] and between Dendroctonus bark beetles and certain fungi.

[ 12 ] Symbiotic cospeciation is found between Crematogaster ants and Macaranga plants, [ 13 ] between Ficus fig trees and fig wasps , [ 14 ] and between the Poaceae grasses and Epichloe fungi.

[ 15 ] False incongruence [ edit ] The two main hurdles to determining cospeciation using Fahrenholz's rule are instances of false congruence and false incongruence. False congruence occurs when parasite and host phylogenies mirror each other but not due to cospeciation, for instance, if the parasites were to colonize the hosts after the host species had diverged and congruent phylogenies resulted by chance, but this is unlikely.

[ 16 ] False incongruence, when cospeciation has occurred, but the phylogenies do not mirror each other, is more common, and can be caused by a number of factors; it might also appear to be present if parasites that are present on a host are not detected by the experimenter.

[ 16 ] Host switching [ edit ] Though parasites have been thought to be specialized to a certain host species, it is common for a parasite to colonize a different host that was not previous colonized by the parasite species. If a " host switch " occurs after a cospeciation event, the presence of the parasite on other host species will disrupt any potential congruence in the two phylogenies. Coupled with extinction or independent speciation, phylogenetic comparisons can become complicated and entirely mask the cospeciation event.

[ 17 ] Independent speciation [ edit ] Typically independent speciation does not significantly alter the phylogenetic analysis used to measure cospeciation. However, in combination with extinction, independent speciation can become very problematic when trying to sort out host and parasite phylogenies. Independent speciation occurs when a single population on a single host undergoes speciation resulting in two sister lineages of parasite on a particular host. In other words, the parasite lineage speciates while the host lineage does not. This becomes complicated when the two lineages of parasites then undergo cospeciation with the host. If one of the two parasite lineages goes extinct from the new host lineage, the phylogenies of the host and parasite will begin to break apart. Even though the parasite and host cospeciated together, the phylogenies will not be congruent.

[ 3 ] Extinction [ edit ] After cospeciation, it is possible for a parasite (or symbiont) to become extinct while its host survives. This can happen if, for example, the host species adapts to a new habitat.

[ 3 ] "Missing the boat" [ edit ] Prior to speciation of the hosts, if the distribution of the parasite population among the host population is sporadic, it is possible that when host speciation occurs, it will occur with hosts that do not have the parasite population. This phenomenon is known as "missing the boat". The parasites could potentially cospeciate with their host down the line, however, the parasites could potentially be absent from some host lineages. Like extinction and independent speciation, "missing the boat" alone will probably have a minimal effect on mapping phylogenies, however, in conjunction with independent speciation, parasite and host phylogenies can begin to break apart.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Cospeciation" .

evolution.berkeley.edu . Retrieved 2017-03-10 .

^ BioLogos.

"Evolution Basics: Parasitism, Mutualism and Cospeciation" .

BioLogos . Archived from the original on 2017-04-27 . Retrieved 2017-03-10 .

^ a b c d Page, Roderic DM (2001-01-01). "Cospeciation".

eLS . John Wiley & Sons.

doi : 10.1038/npg.els.0004124 .

ISBN 9780470015902 .

^ Moeller, Andrew H.; Caro-Quintero, Alejandro; Mjungu, Deus; Georgiev, Alexander V.; Lonsdorf, Elizabeth V.; Muller, Martin N.; Pusey, Anne E.; Peeters, Martine; Hahn, Beatrice H. (2016-07-22).

"Cospeciation of gut microbiota with hominids" .

Science .

353 (6297): 380– 382.

Bibcode : 2016Sci...353..380M .

doi : 10.1126/science.aaf3951 .

PMC 4995445 .

PMID 27463672 .

^ a b "Cospeciation of Lice and Their Hosts" .

tolweb.org . Retrieved 2017-03-10 .

^ "The historical biogeography of co-evolution: Emerging infectious diseases are evolutionary accidents waiting to happen (PDF Download Available)" . Retrieved 2017-04-13 .

^ Demastes, James W.; Hafner, Mark S. (1993-01-01). "Cospeciation of Pocket Gophers (Geomys) and Their Chewing Lice (Geomydoecus)".

Journal of Mammalogy .

74 (3): 521– 530.

doi : 10.2307/1382271 .

JSTOR 1382271 .

^ Subbotin, Sergei A.; Krall, Eino L.; Riley, Ian T.; Chizhov, Vladimir N.; Staelens, Ariane; De Loose, Marc; Moens, Maurice (2004-01-01). "Evolution of the gall-forming plant parasitic nematodes (Tylenchida: Anguinidae) and their relationships with hosts as inferred from Internal Transcribed Spacer sequences of nuclear ribosomal DNA".

Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution .

30 (1): 226– 235.

Bibcode : 2004MolPE..30..226S .

doi : 10.1016/S1055-7903(03)00188-X .

PMID 15022772 .

^ Lopez-Vaamonde, Carlos; Godfray, H. Charles J.; Cook, James M.; Nason, J. (2003-08-01). "Evolutionary dynamics of host-plant use in a genus of leaf-mining moths".

Evolution .

57 (8): 1804– 1821.

doi : 10.1554/02-470 .

PMID 14503622 .

S2CID 35725228 .

^ Clark, Marta A.; Moran, Nancy A.; Baumann, Paul; Wernegreen, Jennifer J. (2000-04-01). "Cospeciation between bacterial endosymbionts (Buchnera) and a recent radiation of aphids (Uroleucon) and pitfalls of testing for phylogenetic congruence".

Evolution .

54 (2): 517– 525.

doi : 10.1554/0014-3820(2000)054[0517:CBBEBA]2.0.CO;2 .

PMID 10937228 .

^ Peek, Andrew S.; Feldman, Robert A.; Lutz, Richard A.; Vrijenhoek, Robert C. (1998-08-18).

"Cospeciation of chemoautotrophic bacteria and deep sea clams" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

95 (17): 9962– 9966.

Bibcode : 1998PNAS...95.9962P .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.95.17.9962 .

PMC 21444 .

PMID 9707583 .

^ Bracewell, Ryan (2015-01-01).

"Coevolution and cospeciation in a bark-beetle fungal symbiosis" .

Graduate Student Theses, Dissertations, & Professional Papers . Retrieved 2024-10-13 .

^ Itino, Takao; Davies, Stuart J.; Tada, Hideko; Hieda, Yoshihiro; Inoguchi, Mika; Itioka, Takao; Yamane, Seiki; Inoue, Tamiji (2001-12-01). "Cospeciation of ants and plants".

Ecological Research .

16 (4): 787– 793.

Bibcode : 2001EcoR...16..787I .

doi : 10.1046/j.1440-1703.2001.00442.x .

S2CID 23535375 .

^ Jousselin, Emmanuelle; van Noort, Simon; Berry, Vincent; Rasplus, Jean-Yves; Rønsted, Nina; Erasmus, J. Christoff; Greeff, Jaco M. (2008-01-01).

"One Fig to Bind Them All: Host Conservatism in a Fig Wasp Community Unraveled by Cospeciation Analyses among Pollinating and Nonpollinating Fig Wasps" (PDF) .

Evolution .

62 (7): 1777– 1797.

doi : 10.1111/j.1558-5646.2008.00406.x .

JSTOR 25150785 .

PMID 18419750 .

^ Schardl, Christopher; Leuchtmann, Adrian; Chung, Kuang-Ren; Penny, David; Siegel, Malcolm (1997).

"Coevolution by common descent of fungal symbionts (Epichloe spp.) and grass hosts" .

Molecular Biology and Evolution .

14 (2): 133– 143.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a025746 .

^ a b Paterson, Adrian; Gray, Russell (1997).

Host - Parasite Evolution: General Principles & Avian Models . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

236– 250.

^ de Vienne, D. M.; Refrégier, G.; López-Villavicencio, M.; Tellier, A.; Hood, M. E.; Giraud, T. (2013-04-01).

"Cospeciation vs host-shift speciation: methods for testing, evidence from natural associations and relation to coevolution" .

New Phytologist .

198 (2): 347– 385.

doi : 10.1111/nph.12150 .

PMID 23437795 .

v t e Speciation Introduction History Laboratory experiments Glossary Basic concepts Species ( Species complex ) Reproductive isolation Anagenesis Cladogenesis Cospeciation Evidence of evolution Geographic modes Allopatric ( Peripatric · Quantum · Centrifugal · Founder effect ) Parapatric ( Clines · Ring species ) Sympatric Isolating factors Adaptation Natural selection Sexual selection Ecological speciation ( Parallel speciation · Allochrony ) Nonecological speciation Assortative mating Haldane's rule Hybrid concepts Hybrid speciation ( Polyploidy · Klepton · Recombination ) Reinforcement ( evidence ) Secondary contact Character displacement Speciation in taxa Birds Fish Insects Plants Fossils ( Paleopolyploidy · Punctuated equilibrium · Macroevolution · Chronospecies ) Category Commons Evolutionary biology Portal WikiProject v t e Evolutionary biology Introduction Outline Timeline of evolution History of life Index Evolution Abiogenesis Adaptation Adaptive radiation Altruism Cheating Reciprocal Baldwin effect Cladistics Coevolution Mutualism Common descent Convergence Divergence Earliest known life forms Evidence of evolution Evolutionary arms race Evolutionary pressure Exaptation Extinction Event Homology Last universal common ancestor Macroevolution Microevolution Mismatch Non-adaptive radiation Origin of life Panspermia Parallel evolution Signalling theory Handicap principle Speciation Species Species complex Taxonomy Unit of selection Gene-centered view of evolution Population genetics Artificial selection Biodiversity Evolutionarily stable strategy Fisher's principle Fitness Inclusive Gene flow Genetic drift Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mutation Population Natural selection Sexual dimorphism Sexual selection Flowering plants Fungi Mate choice Social selection Trivers–Willard hypothesis Variation Development Canalisation Evolutionary developmental biology Genetic assimilation Inversion Modularity Phenotypic plasticity Of taxa Bacteria Birds origin Brachiopods Molluscs Cephalopods Dinosaurs Fish Fungi Insects butterflies Life Mammals cats canids wolves dogs hyenas dolphins and whales horses Kangaroos primates humans lemurs sea cows Plants pollinator-mediated Reptiles Spiders Tetrapods Viruses Of organs Cell DNA Flagella Eukaryotes symbiogenesis chromosome endomembrane system mitochondria nucleus plastids In animals eye hair auditory ossicle nervous system brain Of processes Aging Death Programmed cell death Avian flight Biological complexity Cooperation Color vision in primates Emotion Empathy Ethics Eusociality Immune system Metabolism Monogamy Morality Mosaic evolution Multicellularity Sexual reproduction Gamete differentiation/sexes Life cycles/nuclear phases Mating types Meiosis Sex-determination Snake venom Tempo and modes Gradualism / Punctuated equilibrium / Saltationism Micromutation / Macromutation Uniformitarianism / Catastrophism Speciation Allopatric Anagenesis Catagenesis Cladogenesis Cospeciation Ecological Hybrid Non-ecological Parapatric Peripatric Reinforcement Sympatric History Renaissance and Enlightenment Transmutation of species David Hume Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion Charles Darwin On the Origin of Species History of paleontology Transitional fossil Blending inheritance Mendelian inheritance The eclipse of Darwinism Neo-Darwinism Modern synthesis History of molecular evolution Extended evolutionary synthesis Philosophy Darwinism Alternatives Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Saltationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Teleology in biology Related Biogeography Ecological genetics Evolutionary medicine Group selection Cultural evolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Hologenome theory of evolution Missing heritability problem Molecular evolution Astrobiology Phylogenetics Tree Polymorphism Protocell Systematics Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Category Portal v t e Biological rules Rules Allen's rule Shorter appendages in colder climates Bateson's rule Extra limbs mirror their neighbours Bergmann's rule Larger bodies in colder climates Cope's rule Bodies get larger over time Deep-sea gigantism Larger bodies in deep-sea animals Dollo's law Loss of complex traits is irreversible Eichler's rule Parasites co-vary with their hosts Emery's rule Insect social parasites are often in same genus as their hosts Fahrenholz's rule Host and parasite phylogenies become congruent Foster's rule ( Insular gigantism , Insular dwarfism ) Small species get larger, large species smaller, after colonizing islands Gause's law Complete competitors cannot coexist Gloger's rule Lighter coloration in colder, drier climates Haldane's rule Hybrid sexes that are absent, rare, or sterile, are heterogamic Harrison's rule Parasites co-vary in size with their hosts Hamilton's rule Genes increase in frequency when relatedness of recipient to actor times benefit to recipient exceeds reproductive cost to actor Kleiber's law An animals metabolic rate decreases with its size Hennig's progression rule In cladistics, the most primitive species are found in earliest, central, part of group's area Jarman–Bell principle The correlation between the size of an animal and its diet quality; larger animals can consume lower quality diet Jordan's rule Inverse relationship between water temperature and no. of fin rays, vertebrae Lack's principle Birds lay only as many eggs as they can provide food for Rapoport's rule Latitudinal range increases with latitude Rensch's rule Sexual size dimorphism increases with size when males are larger, decreases with size when females are larger Rosa's rule Groups evolve from character variation in primitive species to a fixed character state in advanced ones Schmalhausen's law A population at limit of tolerance in one aspect is vulnerable to small differences in any other aspect Thayer's law The top of an animals coloration is darker than the bottom Thorson's rule No. of eggs of benthic marine invertebrates decreases with latitude Van Valen's law Probability of extinction of a group is constant over time von Baer's laws Embryos start from a common form and develop into increasingly specialised forms Williston's law Parts in an organism become reduced in number and specialized in function Related Countergradient variation Where genetics opposes environment as a factor Gigantothermy Large ectothermic animals more easily maintain constant body temperature Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cospeciation&oldid=1262190946 " Categories : Speciation Biological rules Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 December 2024, at 02:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cospeciation 4 languages Add topic

