Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Types Toggle Types subsection 2.1 2D CAD 2.2 3D CAD 2.2.1 Freeform CAD 3 Technology 4 Software Toggle Software subsection 4.1 License management software 5 List of software packages Toggle List of software packages subsection 5.1 Commercial software 5.2 Open-source software 5.3 Freeware 5.4 CAD kernels 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Computer-aided design 57 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Latviešu Lingála Magyar മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Gagana Samoa Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Computer-aided geometric design ) Constructing a product by means of computer "CAD" and "CADD" redirect here. For the currency, see Canadian dollar . For other uses, see Cad (disambiguation) and CADD (disambiguation) .

A 2D CAD drawing A 3D CAD model Computer-aided design ( CAD ) is the use of computers (or workstations ) to aid in the creation, modification, analysis, or optimization of a design .

[ 1 ] : 3 This software is used to increase the productivity of the designer, improve the quality of design, improve communications through documentation, and to create a database for manufacturing.

[ 1 ] : 4 Designs made through CAD software help protect products and inventions when used in patent applications. CAD output is often in the form of electronic files for print, machining , or other manufacturing operations. The terms computer-aided drafting ( CAD ) and computer-aided design and drafting ( CADD ) are also used.

[ 2 ] Its use in designing electronic systems is known as electronic design automation ( EDA ). In mechanical design it is known as mechanical design automation ( MDA ), which includes the process of creating a technical drawing with the use of computer software .

[ 3 ] CAD software for mechanical design uses either vector-based graphics to depict the objects of traditional drafting, or may also produce raster graphics showing the overall appearance of designed objects. However, it involves more than just shapes. As in the manual drafting of technical and engineering drawings , the output of CAD must convey information, such as materials , processes , dimensions , and tolerances , according to application-specific conventions.

CAD may be used to design curves and figures in two-dimensional (2D) space; or curves, surfaces , and solids in three-dimensional (3D) space.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] : 71, 106 CAD is an important industrial art extensively used in many applications, including automotive , shipbuilding , and aerospace industries, industrial and architectural design ( building information modeling ), prosthetics , and many more. CAD is also widely used to produce computer animation for special effects in movies, advertising and technical manuals, often called DCC digital content creation . The modern ubiquity and power of computers means that even perfume bottles and shampoo dispensers are designed using techniques unheard of by engineers of the 1960s. Because of its enormous economic importance, CAD has been a major driving force for research in computational geometry , computer graphics (both hardware and software), and discrete differential geometry .

[ 6 ] The design of geometric models for object shapes, in particular, is occasionally called computer-aided geometric design ( CAGD ).

[ 7 ] Overview Computer-aided design is one of the many tools used by engineers and designers and is used in many ways depending on the profession of the user and the type of software in question.

CAD is one part of the whole digital product development (DPD) activity within the product lifecycle management (PLM) processes, and as such is used together with other tools, which are either integrated modules or stand-alone products, such as: Computer-aided engineering (CAE) and finite element analysis (FEA, FEM) Computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) including instructions to computer numerical control (CNC) machines Photorealistic rendering and motion simulation Document management and revision control using product data management (PDM) CAD is also used for the accurate creation of photo simulations that are often required in the preparation of environmental impact reports, in which computer-aided designs of intended buildings are superimposed into photographs of existing environments to represent what that locale will be like, where the proposed facilities are allowed to be built. Potential blockage of view corridors and shadow studies are also frequently analyzed through the use of CAD.

[ 8 ] Types See also: Comparison of computer-aided design software A simple procedure of recreating a solid model out of 2D sketches There are several different types of CAD, [ 9 ] each requiring the operator to think differently about how to use them and design their virtual components in a different manner. Virtually all of CAD tools rely on constraint concepts that are used to define geometric or non-geometric elements of a model.

2D CAD There are many producers of the lower-end 2D sketching systems, including a number of free and open-source programs. These provide an approach to the drawing process where scale and placement on the drawing sheet can easily be adjusted in the final draft as required, unlike in hand drafting.

3D CAD 3D wireframe is an extension of 2D drafting into a three-dimensional space . Each line has to be manually inserted into the drawing. The final product has no mass properties associated with it and cannot have features directly added to it, such as holes. The operator approaches these in a similar fashion to the 2D systems, although many 3D systems allow using the wireframe model to make the final engineering drawing views.

3D "dumb" solids are created in a way analogous to manipulations of real-world objects. Basic three-dimensional geometric forms (e.g., prisms, cylinders, spheres, or rectangles) have solid volumes added or subtracted from them as if assembling or cutting real-world objects. Two-dimensional projected views can easily be generated from the models. Basic 3D solids do not usually include tools to easily allow the motion of the components, set their limits to their motion, or identify interference between components.

There are several types of 3D solid modeling Parametric modeling allows the operator to use what is referred to as "design intent". The objects and features are created modifiable. Any future modifications can be made by changing on how the original part was created. If a feature was intended to be located from the center of the part, the operator should locate it from the center of the model. The feature could be located using any geometric object already available in the part, but this random placement would defeat the design intent. If the operator designs the part as it functions, the parametric modeler is able to make changes to the part while maintaining geometric and functional relationships.

Direct or explicit modeling provide the ability to edit geometry without a history tree. With direct modeling, once a sketch is used to create geometry it is incorporated into the new geometry, and the designer only has to modify the geometry afterward without needing the original sketch. As with parametric modeling, direct modeling has the ability to include the relationships between selected geometry (e.g., tangency, concentricity).

Assembly modelling is a process which incorporates results of the previous single-part modelling into a final product containing several parts. Assemblies can be hierarchical, depending on the specific CAD software vendor, and highly complex models can be achieved (e.g. in building engineering by using computer-aided architectural design software) [ 10 ] : 539 Freeform CAD Further information: Surface-to-surface intersection problem Top-end CAD systems offer the capability to incorporate more organic, aesthetic and ergonomic features into the designs.

Freeform surface modeling is often combined with solids to allow the designer to create products that fit the human form and visual requirements as well as they interface with the machine.

Technology This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A CAD model of a computer mouse Originally software for CAD systems was developed with computer languages such as Fortran , ALGOL but with the advancement of object-oriented programming methods this has radically changed. Typical modern parametric feature-based modeler and freeform surface systems are built around a number of key C modules with their own APIs . A CAD system can be seen as built up from the interaction of a graphical user interface (GUI) with NURBS geometry or boundary representation (B-rep) data via a geometric modeling kernel . A geometry constraint engine may also be employed to manage the associative relationships between geometry, such as wireframe geometry in a sketch or components in an assembly.

Unexpected capabilities of these associative relationships have led to a new form of prototyping called digital prototyping . In contrast to physical prototypes, which entail manufacturing time in the design. That said, CAD models can be generated by a computer after the physical prototype has been scanned using an industrial CT scanning machine. Depending on the nature of the business, digital or physical prototypes can be initially chosen according to specific needs.

Today, CAD systems exist for all the major platforms ( Windows , Linux , UNIX and Mac OS X ); some packages support multiple platforms.

[ 11 ] Currently, no special hardware is required for most CAD software. However, some CAD systems can do graphically and computationally intensive tasks, so a modern graphics card , high speed (and possibly multiple) CPUs and large amounts of RAM may be recommended.

The human-machine interface is generally via a computer mouse but can also be via a pen and digitizing graphics tablet . Manipulation of the view of the model on the screen is also sometimes done with the use of a Spacemouse/SpaceBall . Some systems also support stereoscopic glasses for viewing the 3D model . Technologies that in the past were limited to larger installations or specialist applications have become available to a wide group of users. These include the CAVE or HMDs and interactive devices like motion-sensing technology Software Drafter at work with CAD. (1992) See also: History of CAD software Starting with the IBM Drafting System in the mid-1960s, computer-aided design systems began to provide more capabilities than just an ability to reproduce manual drafting with electronic drafting, and the cost-benefit for companies to switch to CAD became apparent. The software automated many tasks that are taken for granted from computer systems today, such as automated generation of bills of materials , auto layout in integrated circuits , interference checking, and many others. Eventually, CAD provided the designer with the ability to perform engineering calculations.

[ 5 ] During this transition, calculations were still performed either by hand or by those individuals who could run computer programs. CAD was a revolutionary change in the engineering industry, where draftsman, designer, and engineer roles that had previously been separate began to merge. CAD is an example of the pervasive effect computers were beginning to have on the industry.
Current computer-aided design software packages range from 2D vector -based drafting systems to 3D solid and surface modelers . Modern CAD packages can also frequently allow rotations in three dimensions, allowing viewing of a designed object from any desired angle, even from the inside looking out.

[ 5 ] Some CAD software is capable of dynamic mathematical modeling.

[ 5 ] CAD technology is used in the design of tools and machinery and in the drafting and design of all types of buildings, from small residential types (houses) to the largest commercial and industrial structures (hospitals and factories).

[ 12 ] CAD is mainly used for detailed design of 3D models or 2D drawings of physical components, but it is also used throughout the engineering process from conceptual design and layout of products, through strength and dynamic analysis of assemblies to definition of manufacturing methods of components. It can also be used to design objects such as jewelry, furniture, appliances, etc. Furthermore, many CAD applications now offer advanced rendering and animation capabilities so engineers can better visualize their product designs.

4D BIM is a type of virtual construction engineering simulation incorporating time or schedule-related information for project management.

CAD has become an especially important technology within the scope of computer-aided technologies , with benefits such as lower product development costs and a greatly shortened design cycle . CAD enables designers to layout and develop work on screen, print it out and save it for future editing, saving time on their drawings.

License management software In the 2000s, some CAD system software vendors shipped their distributions with a dedicated license manager software that controlled how often or how many users can utilize the CAD system.

[ 5 ] : 166 It could run either on a local machine (by loading from a local storage device) or a local network fileserver and was usually tied to a specific IP address in latter case.

[ 5 ] : 166 List of software packages See also: List of 3D modeling software CAD software enables engineers and architects to design, inspect and manage engineering projects within an integrated graphical user interface (GUI) on a personal computer system. Most applications support solid modeling with boundary representation (B-Rep) and NURBS geometry, and enable the same to be published in a variety of formats.

[ citation needed ] Based on market statistics, commercial software from Autodesk , Dassault Systems , Siemens PLM Software , and PTC dominate the CAD industry.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The following is a list of major CAD applications, grouped by usage statistics.

[ 15 ] Commercial software ABViewer AC3D Alibre Design ArchiCAD ( Graphisoft ) AutoCAD ( Autodesk ) AutoTURN AxSTREAM BricsCAD CATIA ( Dassault Systèmes ) Cobalt CorelCAD EAGLE Fusion 360 ( Autodesk ) IntelliCAD Inventor ( Autodesk ) IRONCAD KeyCreator (Kubotek) Landscape Express MEDUSA4 MicroStation ( Bentley Systems ) Modelur (AgiliCity) Onshape ( PTC ) NX ( Siemens Digital Industries Software ) PTC Creo (successor to Pro/ENGINEER ) ( PTC ) PunchCAD Remo 3D Revit ( Autodesk ) Rhinoceros 3D SketchUp Solid Edge ( Siemens Digital Industries Software ) SOLIDWORKS ( Dassault Systèmes ) SpaceClaim T-FLEX CAD TranslateCAD TurboCAD Vectorworks ( Nemetschek ) Open-source software Blender BRL-CAD FreeCAD LibreCAD LeoCAD OpenSCAD QCAD Salome (software) SolveSpace Freeware BricsCAD Shape Tinkercad (successor to Autodesk 123D ) CAD kernels ACIS by ( Spatial Corp owned by Dassault Systèmes ) C3D Toolkit by C3D Labs Open CASCADE Open Source Parasolid by ( Siemens Digital Industries Software ) ShapeManager by ( Autodesk ) See also 3D computer graphics – Graphics that use a three-dimensional representation of geometric data 3D printing – Additive process used to make a 3D object Additive Manufacturing File Format – Open standard for describing objects for additive manufacturing processes such as 3D printing Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Algorithmic art – Art genre CAD standards – Guidelines for the appearance of computer-aided design drawings CAD library - cloud based repository of 3D models or parts Coarse space (numerical analysis) Comparison of 3D computer graphics software Comparison of CAD, CAM, and CAE file viewers Comparison of computer-aided design software Comparison of EDA software (electronic design automation) Computer-aided industrial design – Subset of computer-aided design Digital architecture – Architecture using digital technology Digital twin – Digital replica of a living or non-living physical entity Electronic design automation – Software for designing electronic systems Engineering optimization – Techniques for optimization Finite element method – Numerical method for solving physical or engineering problems Free-form select – Printmaking and design technique ISO 128 – International standard about the graphical representation of objects on technical drawings ISO 10303 – ISO standard (STEP) List of computer-aided engineering software Model-based definition – Annotating computer-aided design models Molecular design software Open-source hardware – Hardware from the open-design movement Rapid prototyping – Group of techniques to quickly construct physical objects Responsive computer-aided design – Approach to computer-aided design Space mapping – Design optimization methodology Surrogate model – Engineering model System integration – Bringing together component sub-systems into one system Virtual prototyping – Computer-simulated prototype development Virtual reality – Computer-simulated experience References ^ a b Narayan, K. Lalit (2008).

Computer Aided Design and Manufacturing . New Delhi: Prentice Hall of India.

ISBN 978-8120333420 .

^ Duggal, Vijay (2000).

Cadd Primer: A General Guide to Computer Aided Design and Drafting-Cadd, CAD . Mailmax Pub.

ISBN 978-0962916595 .

^ Madsen, David A. (2012).

Engineering Drawing & Design . Clifton Park, New York: Delmar. p. 10.

ISBN 978-1111309572 .

^ Farin, Gerald; Hoschek, Josef; Kim, Myung-Soo (2002).

Handbook of computer aided geometric design [electronic resource] . Elsevier.

ISBN 978-0-444-51104-1 .

^ a b c d e f Schoonmaker, Stephen J. (2003).

The CAD guidebook : a basic manual for understanding and improving computer-aided design . New York: Marcel Dekker.

ISBN 0-8247-0871-7 .

OCLC 50868192 .

^ Pottmann, H.; Brell-Cokcan, S. and Wallner, J. (2007) "Discrete surfaces for architectural design" Archived 2009-08-12 at the Wayback Machine , pp. 213–234 in Curve and Surface Design , Patrick Chenin, Tom Lyche and Larry L. Schumaker (eds.), Nashboro Press, ISBN 978-0-9728482-7-5 .

^ Farin, Gerald (2002) Curves and Surfaces for CAGD: A Practical Guide , Morgan-Kaufmann, ISBN 1-55860-737-4 .

^ "Computer-Aided Design (CAD) and Computer-Aided Manufacturing (CAM)" .

Inc.com . Retrieved 2020-04-30 .

^ "3D Feature-based, Parametric Solid Modeling" .

EngineersHandbook.com . Archived from the original on 2012-11-18 . Retrieved 2012-03-01 .

^ Stroud, Ian; Nagy, Hildegarde (2011).

Solid modelling and CAD systems: how to survive a CAD system . London New York: Springer.

ISBN 978-0-85729-259-9 .

^ "What is a CAD Workstation? Definition, Uses and More" .

Computer Tech Reviews . 2019-11-21 . Retrieved 2020-04-30 .

^ Jennifer Herron (2010).

"3D Model-Based Design: Setting the Definitions Straight" . MCADCafe.

^ The Big 6 in CAD/CAE/PLM software industry (2011) , CAEWatch, September 12, 2011 ^ van Kooten, Michel (2011-08-23).

"GLOBAL SOFTWARE TOP 100 – EDITION 2011" .

Software Top 100 .

^ List of mechanical CAD softwares Archived 2020-07-28 at the Wayback Machine , BeyondMech External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Computer-aided design .

Look up computer-aided design in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

MIT 1982 CAD lab Learning materials related to Computer-aided design at Wikiversity Learning materials related to Computer-aided Geometric Design at Wikiversity v t e Computer-aided design (CAD) software Free and open-source Mechanical BRL-CAD FreeCAD HeeksCAD LibreCAD Open Cascade Technology OpenSCAD OpenVSP QCAD rattleCAD Salome SolveSpace Electrical Electric FreePCB Fritzing gEDA Horizon EDA KiCad kTechLab Magic ngspice Oregano pcb-rnd QUCS SPICE XCircuit Proprietary Mechanical ABViewer Alibre Design Archicad AutoCAD Autodesk Alias Autodesk Inventor Autodesk Revit AutoTURN BricsCAD CATIA Cimatron Cobalt Creo Elements/Direct Drafting , Creo Parametric DesignSpark Mechanical FastCAD (EasyCAD) FINE FORAN Fusion 360 GstarCAD IRONCAD KeyCreator ( CADKEY ) MEDUSA4 MicroStation NX Onshape PDMS Pro/DESKTOP Rhinoceros 3D Grasshopper 3D rattleCAD 4.0 Shapr3D Solid Edge SolidWorks Sonata ( RUCAPS ) SpaceClaim T-FLEX CAD Tinkercad TurboCAD VariCAD ZWCAD Electrical Allegro ( OrCAD ) Altium Designer ( Protel ( Autotrax ( Easytrax , Tango PCB )), P-CAD ) AutoCAD Electrical BoardStation, IntegraStation, PADS, Xpedition CADSTAR CircuitMaker CR-2000, CR-3000 , CR-5000 , CR-8000 DesignSpark PCB DipTrace EAGLE EasyEDA LTspice Micro-Cap Multisim PCB Proteus Pulsonix SolidWorks Electrical TARGET TopoR ( Delta Design , FreeStyle ) Ultiboard Upverter File formats 3MF ACIS AMF C3D CKD DSN DWF DWFX DWG DXF IGES OBJ OpenDWG PLY PSpice SES STEP STL Modeling kernels ACIS C3D Digital Geometric Kernel ( KernelCAD ) IntelliCAD Open Cascade Technology Open Design Alliance ( Teigha ) Romulus ( Parasolid ) RGK ShapeManager SMLib Historic DAC-1 (1963) Sketchpad (1963) UNISURF (1968) Italics = discontinued Computer-aided industrial design • Comparison • History v t e Building information modeling (BIM) Software Current Allplan Archicad AutoCAD Autodesk Revit BricsCAD cadwork CodeBook Digital Project FINE MEP FreeCAD ° MicroStation Navisworks OpenStudio RFEM Tekla BIMsight Tekla Structures Trimble SketchUp Vectorworks VisualARQ Historic Gable CAD Reflex RUCAPS Sonata Companies Autodesk Bentley Systems BuildingSMART Cadwork informatik AG Glodon GRAITEC Nemetschek Graphisoft Vectorworks Open Design Alliance Trimble Tekla Related topics 3D BIM 4D BIM 5D BIM 6D BIM BIM Task Group Centre for Digital Built Britain Computer-aided design COBie Geometric modeling kernel Industry Foundation Classes BIM Collaboration Format Raster image processor Italics = discontinued • ° = Open-source software List: software • Category v t e Design Outline Designer Disciplines Communication design Advertising Book design Brand design Exhibit design Film title design Graphic design Motion Postage stamp design Print design Illustration Information design Instructional design News design Photography Retail design Signage / Traffic sign design Typography / Type design Video design Visual merchandising Environmental design Architecture Architectural lighting design Building design Passive solar Ecological design Environmental impact design Garden design Computer-aided Healthy community design Hotel design Interior architecture Interior design EID Keyline design Landscape architecture Sustainable Landscape design Spatial design Urban design Industrial design Automotive design Automotive suspension design CMF design Corrugated box design Electric guitar design Furniture design Sustainable Hardware interface design Motorcycle design Packaging and labeling Photographic lens design Product design Production design Sensory design Service design Interaction design Experience design EED Game design Level design Video game design Hardware interface design Icon design Immersive design Information design Interactive design Sonic interaction design User experience design User interface design Web design Other applied arts Public art design Ceramic / glass design Fashion design Costume design Jewellery design Floral design Game art design Property design Scenic design Sound design Stage/set lighting design Textile design Other design & engineering Algorithm design Behavioural design Boiler design Database design Drug design Electrical system design Experimental design Filter design Geometric design Work design Integrated circuit design Circuit design Physical design Power network design Mechanism design Nuclear weapon design Nucleic acid design Organization design Process design Processor design Protein design Research design Social design Software design Spacecraft design Strategic design Systems design Test design Approaches Active Activity-centered Adaptive web Affective Brainstorming By committee By contract C-K theory Closure Configuration Contextual Continuous Cradle-to-cradle Creative problem-solving Creativity techniques Critical Design fiction Defensive Design–bid–build Design–build architect-led Diffuse Domain-driven Ecological design Energy neutral Engineering design process Probabilistic design Ergonomic Error-tolerant Evidence-based Fault-tolerant Feminist For assembly For behaviour change For manufacturability For Six Sigma For testing For the environment For X Framework-oriented Functional Generative Geodesign HCD High-level Hostile Inclusive Integrated Integrated topside Intelligence-based Iterative KISS principle Low-level Metadesign Mind mapping Modular New Wave Object-oriented Open Over Parametric Participatory Platform-based Policy-based Prevention through Process-centered Public interest Opinion poll Public opinion Rational Regenerative Reliability engineering Research-based Responsibility-driven RWD Safe-life Speculative Sustainable Systemic SOD Tableless web Theory of constraints Top-down and bottom-up Transformation Transgenerational TRIZ Universal Design for All Usage-centered Use-centered User-centered Empathic User innovation Value-driven Value sensitive Privacy by Quality by Secure by Design choice computing controls culture flow justice leadership management marker methods pattern research science sprint strategy theory thinking Tools Intellectual property Organizations Awards Tools AAD Architectural model Blueprint Comprehensive layout CAD CAID Virtual home design software CAutoD Design quality indicator Electronic design automation Flowchart Mockup Design specification Design system Prototype Sketch Storyboard Technical drawing HTML editor Website wireframe Intellectual property Clean-room design Community design Design around Design infringement Design patent Fashion design copyright Geschmacksmuster Industrial design rights European Union Organizations American Institute of Graphic Arts Chartered Society of Designers Design and Industries Association Design Council International Forum Design Design Research Society Awards European Design Award German Design Award Good Design Award (Museum of Modern Art) Good Design Award (Chicago Athenaeum) Graphex IF Product Design Award James Dyson Award Prince Philip Designers Prize Related topics Agile Concept art Conceptual design Creative industries Cultural icon .design Dominant design Enterprise architecture Form factor Futures studies Indie design Innovation management Intelligent design Lean startup New product development OODA loop Philosophy of design Process simulation Reference design Slow design STEAM fields Unintelligent design Visualization Wicked problem Design attributes brief change classic competition architectural student director education elements engineer firm history knowledge language life load museum optimization paradigm principles rationale review specification studies studio technology Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐c8nd4
Cached time: 20250818080455
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.741 seconds
Real time usage: 1.011 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8605/1000000
Revision size: 22401/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 152634/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3493/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 87123/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.452/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21948051/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  839.276      1 -total
 29.68%  249.058     29 Template:Annotated_link
 16.81%  141.041      1 Template:Reflist
 11.16%   93.651      6 Template:Cite_book
  9.97%   83.717      7 Template:Navbox
  7.90%   66.305      1 Template:CAD_software
  6.93%   58.183      2 Template:Sister_project
  6.93%   58.165      1 Template:Commons_category
  6.77%   56.854      2 Template:Side_box
  6.01%   50.465      1 Template:Unreferenced_section Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:37315:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818080455 and revision id 1305703991. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Computer-aided_design&oldid=1305703991 " Categories : Computer-aided design Computer-aided design software Design engineering Engineering-related lists Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2020 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2023 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 16:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Computer-aided design 57 languages Add topic

