Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Watt six-bar linkage 2 Stephenson six-bar linkage 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Six-bar linkage 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1-DoF mechanism with 6 links and 7 joints This article is about the mechanism with six rigid links and seven joints. For the tensegrity structure with six struts and 24 cables, see Jessen's icosahedron .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Six-bar linkage" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Six-bar linkage from Kinematics of Machinery , 1876 In mechanics , a six-bar linkage is a mechanism with one degree of freedom that is constructed from six links and seven joints .

[ 1 ] An example is the Klann linkage used to drive the legs of a walking machine.

In general, each joint of a linkage connects two links, and a binary link supports two joints.  If we consider a hexagon constructed from six binary links with six of the seven joints forming its vertices, then the seventh joint can be added to connect two sides of the hexagon to form a six-bar linkage with two ternary links connected by one joint. This type of six-bar linkage is said to have the Watt topology .

[ 2 ] A six-bar linkage can also be constructed by first assembling five binary links into a pentagon , which uses five of the seven joints, and then completing the linkage by adding a binary link that connects two sides of the pentagon.  This again creates two ternary links that are now separated by one or more binary links.  This type of six-bar linkage is said to have the Stephenson topology .

The Klann linkage has the Stephenson topology.

Watt six-bar linkage [ edit ] Watt's parallel motion generator consists of the four-bar linkage that has a coupler curve that traces an approximately straight line trajectory, combined with a parallelogram linkage that copies this straight line movement to a desired location.  This configuration of six bars and seven joints has two four-bar loops.

A six-bar linkage with a rectilinear moving link.  Click to enlarge.

Stephenson six-bar linkage [ edit ] The six-bars and seven joints of the Stephenson linkage comprise one four-bar loop and one five-bar loop.  It has two ternary links that are separated by a binary link.  This means the two ternary links are not connected to each other by a joint as in the case of the Watt topology.

The Stephenson has three forms depending on the link that is selected as the frame, which are denoted Stephenson I, II and III.

See also [ edit ] Mechanism (engineering) Linkage (mechanical) Five-bar linkage References [ edit ] ^ J. M. McCarthy and G. S. Soh, Geometric Design of Linkages, 2nd Edition, Springer 2010 ^ An animation of a six-bar linkage with the Watt topology.

External links [ edit ] A six-bar straight-line linkage in the collection of Reuleaux models at Cornell University Mechanism animations including the Klann linkage Example of a six-bar function generator that compute the angle for a given range.

Animations of six-bar linkage for a bicycle suspension.

A variety of six-bar linkage designs.

Lecture on the design of six-bar and eight-bar linkages Article about patents and six-bar linkages v t e Linkages Four-bar Chebyshev linkage ( Chebyshev lambda linkage ) Evans "Grasshopper" linkage Hoeckens linkage Horse-head Linkage Pantograph Roberts linkage Watt's linkage Six-bar Klann linkage Parallel motion Hart's First Inversor / Hart's Antiparallelogram / Hart's W-frame Eight-bar Jansen's linkage Peaucellier–Lipkin linkage Hart's Second Inversor / Hart's A-frame Other Burmester's theory Leg mechanism Scott Russell linkage Whippletree Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Six-bar_linkage&oldid=1147450956 " Category : Linkages (mechanical) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2019 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 31 March 2023, at 01:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Six-bar linkage 1 language Add topic

