Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Etymology 3 Usage 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Panchangam 10 languages भोजपुरी ગુજરાતી हिन्दी മലയാളം मराठी Português संस्कृतम् தமிழ் తెలుగు ತುಳು Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Traditional Hindu calendar This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: Not written like an encyclopaedia.

Please help improve this article if you can.

( September 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Hinduism Hindus Mythology Origins Historical History Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic religion Dravidian folk religion Śramaṇa Tribal religions in India Traditional Itihasa-Purana Epic-Puranic royal genealogies Epic-Puranic chronology Sampradaya (traditions) Major Sampradaya (traditions) Vaishnavism Pancharatra Shaivism Kapalika Pashupata Pratyabhijña Shaktism Smartism Other Sampradaya (traditions) Deities Absolute Reality / Unifying Force Brahman Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Other major Devas / Devis Vedic Deities: Tridasha Adityas Rudras Vasus Ashvins Mahadevi Other Vedic Deities Post-Vedic: Avatar Dashavatara Durga Navadurga Mahavidya Kartikeya Ganesha Hanuman Radha Shakti Sita Devatas Vishvakarma Kubera Concepts Worldview Cosmology Mythology Ontology Tattvas Subtle elements Panchikarana Gross elements Guṇas Purusha Prakṛti Supreme reality Brahman Nirguna Saguna Om Saccidānanda God Ishvara Devas / Devi Devatas God in Hinduism God and gender Puruṣārtha (meaning of life) Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Āśrama (stages of life) Brahmacharya Gṛhastha Vānaprastha Sannyasa Three paths to liberation Bhakti yoga Jnana yoga Karma yoga Liberation Mokṣa-related topics: Paramātman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Mind Ātman (self) Anātman (non-self) Sūkṣma śarīra (subtle body) Antaḥkaraṇa (mental organs) Prajña (wisdom) Ānanda (happiness) Viveka (discernment) Vairagya (dispassion) Sama (equanimity) Dama (temperance) Uparati (self-settledness) Titiksha (forbearance) Shraddha (faith) Samadhana (concentration) Arishadvargas (six enemies) Ahamkara (attachment) Ethics Niti śastra Yamas Niyama Ahimsa Achourya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Damah Dayā Akrodha Arjava Santosha Tapas Svādhyāya Shaucha Mitahara Dāna Sources of dharma Epistemology Pratyakṣa (perception) Anumāṇa (inference) Upamāṇa (comparison, analogy) Arthāpatti (postulation, presumption) Anupalabdi (non-perception, negation) Śabda (word, testimony) Practices Worship , sacrifice, and charity Puja Ārtī Prarthana Śrauta Temple Murti Bhakti Japa Bhajana Kīrtana Yajna Homa Tarpana Vrata Prāyaścitta Tirtha Yatra Tirthadana Matha Nritta-Nritya Dāna Sevā Yoga Exorcism Meditation Tapas Dhyana Samādhāna Nididhyāsana Yoga Sadhu Yogi Yogini Asana Sādhanā Hatha yoga Jnana yoga Bhakti yoga Karma yoga Rāja yoga Kundalini yoga Arts Bharatanatyam Kathak Kathakali Kuchipudi Manipuri Mohiniyattam Odissi Sattriya Bhagavata Mela Yakshagana Dandiya Raas Carnatic music Pandav Lila Kalaripayattu Silambam Adimurai Rites of passage Garbhadhana Pumsavana Pumsavana Simantonayana Simantonnayana Jatakarma Nāmakaraṇa Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyāraṃbhaṃ Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyesti Festivals Diwali Holi Maha Shivaratri Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami-Dussehra Raksha Bandhan Ganesh Chaturthi Vasant Panchami Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Makar Sankranti Kumbh Mela Pongal Ugadi Vaisakhi Bihu Puthandu Vishu Ratha Yatra Philosophical schools Six Astika schools Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Advaita Dvaita Vishishtadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Shuddhadvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Akshar Purushottam Darshan Other schools Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Charvaka Gurus, Rishi, philosophers Ancient Saptarshi Vashistha Kashyapa Atri Jamadagni Gotama Vishvamitra Bharadwaja Agastya Angiras Aruni Ashtavakra Jaimini Kanada Kapila Patanjali Pāṇini Prashastapada Raikva Satyakama Jabala Valmiki Vyasa Yajnavalkya Medieval Abhinavagupta Adi Shankara Akka Mahadevi Allama Prabhu Alvars Basava Chaitanya Ramdas Kathiababa Chakradhara Chāngadeva Dadu Dayal Eknath Gangesha Upadhyaya Gaudapada Gorakshanatha Haridasa Thakur Harivansh Jagannatha Dasa Jayanta Bhatta Jayatīrtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvar Kabir Kanaka Dasa Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Madhusūdana Madhva Matsyendranatha Morya Gosavi Mukundarāja Namadeva Narahari Tirtha Narasimha Saraswati Nayanars Nimbarkacharya Srinivasacharya Prabhākara Purandara Dasa Raghavendra Swami Raghunatha Siromani Raghuttama Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ramprasad Sen Ravidas Rupa Goswami Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Satyanatha Tirtha Siddheshwar Sripada Srivallabha Sripadaraja Surdas Swaminarayan Śyāma Śastri Tukaram Tulsidas Tyagaraja Vācaspati Miśra Vadiraja Tirtha Vallabha Valluvar Vedanta Desika Vidyaranya Vyasaraja Modern Aurobindo Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Bhaktivinoda Thakur Chandrashekarendra Saraswati Chinmayananda Dayananda Saraswati Jaggi Vasudev Krishnananda Saraswati Mahavatar Babaji Mahesh Yogi Narayana Guru Nigamananda Nisargadatta Maharaj Prabhupada Radhakrishnan R. D. Ranade Ramakrishna Rama Tirtha Ramana Maharshi Ravi Shankar Ramdas Samarth Sathya Sai Baba Shirdi Sai Baba Shraddhanand Satyadhyana Tirtha Siddharameshwar Maharaj Sivananda Trailanga U. G. Krishnamurti Upasni Maharaj Vethathiri Maharishi Vivekananda Yogananda Texts Sources and classification of scripture Śruti Smṛti Ācāra Ātmatuṣṭi Scriptures Timeline of Hindu texts Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Upanishads Principal Upanishads Rigveda: Aitareya Kaushitaki Yajurveda: Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Shvetashvatara Maitri Samaveda: Chandogya Kena Atharvaveda: Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Vedangas Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama s (Hinduism) Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Vishnu Purana Bhagavata Purana Devi Bhagavata Purana Naradiya Purana Vāmana Purana Matsya Purana Garuda Purana Brahma Purana Brahmanda Purana Brahma Vaivarta Purana Bhavishya Purana Padma Purana Agni Purana Shiva Purana Linga Purana Kūrma Purana Skanda Purana Varaha Purana Markandeya Purana Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Gandharvaveda Sthapatyaveda Shastras , sutras , and samhitas Dharma Shastra Artha Śastra Shilpa Shastras Kama Sutra Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Charaka Samhita Sushruta Samhita Natya Shastra Panchatantra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Ramcharitmanas Yoga Vasistha Swara yoga Panchadasi Stotras , stutis and Bhashya Kanakadhara Stotra Shiva Stuti Vayu Stuti Tamil literature Tirumurai Naalayira  Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Tiruppukal Kural Kamba Ramayanam/Ramavataram Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Other texts Hindu culture & society Society Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Kayastha Vaishya Shudra Dalit Jāti Gotra Dvija Dasa Hindu art Hindu art Hindu iconography Shilpa Shastras Rasa (aesthetics) Indian aesthetics Yantra Hindu architecture Hindu architecture Hindu temple architecture Vastu shastra Talamana Hindu music Hindu music Shruti (music) Svara Alankāra Tala (music) Raga Rasa (aesthetics) Sangita Vadya Natya Shastra Food & diet customs Ahimsa Diet in Hinduism Sattvic diet Mitahara Jhatka Vrata Time keeping practices Hindu units of time Hindu calendar Panchangam Vikram Samvat Shaka era Hindu pilgrimage Pilgrimage sites Other society-related topics Discrimination Persecution Nationalism Hindutva Organisations Reform movements Other topics Hinduism by country Greater India Balinese Hinduism Caribbean Shaktism Template:Hindu scriptures and texts Hinduism & other religions Hinduism and Jainism / and Buddhism / and Sikhism / and Judaism / and Christianity / and Islam Other related links (templates) Hindu scriptures & texts Hindu philosphy Sampradayas (traditions) Shaivism Vaishnavism Shaktism Glossary Outline Hinduism portal v t e Panchaanga in Kannada Tamil Vakya Panchangam A panchāngam ( Sanskrit : पञ्चाङ्गम् ; IAST : pañcāṅgam ) is a Hindu calendar and almanac , which follows traditional units of Hindu timekeeping, and presents important dates and their calculations in a tabulated form.  It is sometimes spelled Panchāngamu, Pancanga , Panchanga , Panchaanga , or Panchānga , and is often pronounced Panchāng . Panchangas are used in Jyotisha ( Jyotiṣa ) (Indian astrology).

[ 1 ] In Nepal and Eastern India, including Assam , Bengal and Odisha , the Panchangam is referred to as Panjika , and in the Mithila region, it is known as Maithili Panchang or Patra.

Overview [ edit ] Panchāngams are published in India by many authors, societies, academies, and universities. Different publications differ only minutely, at least for a casual or not yet trained reader. They forecast celestial phenomena such as solar eclipses , forecasting weather (rain, dry spells) as well as more mundane occurrences.

The study of Panchāngams involves understanding Rasi phala (also pronounced 'Rashi phala'), the impact of the signs of the zodiac on the individual. Astrologers consult the Panchāngam to set auspicious dates for weddings , corporate mergers, and other activities as per their religion.

The casting of a Panchāngam involves elaborate mathematical work involving high level of spherical geometry and sound understanding of astronomical phenomena, such as sidereal movements of celestial bodies. However, in practice the tabulation is done on the basis of short-cut formulations as propounded by ancient Vedic sages and scholars.

A typical Panchāngam may state tabulations of positions of Sun , Moon , and other planets for every day of the year on a fixed place (longitude, latitude) and time of day (in 24-hour format IST). The users calculate the remaining data using their relative difference from this fixed place and time.

There are several panchāngas that contain information for more than one year.  There is one, Vishvavijaya Panchāngam , that covers 100 years.

The theories propounded in the two scriptures, Surya Siddhanta and Grahalaghava formed the basis for the myriad calendars or Panchāngas in the past in different regions of India.

The Grahalaghava was compiled about 600 years ago and Surya Siddhanta was available long before that. These had become outdated and did not tally with actual astronomical events and did not tally with each other. Hence, a committee was appointed by the Government of India with experts in the field drawn from various parts of the country who were involved with preparation of Panchāngam in local languages to draw up a reliable Panchāngam in which the mathematical calculations provides the positions of grahas (the planets ) and nakshatras ( constellations ) in the sky as they are observed.

Thus, the Government of India has prepared the National Panchānga or the Indian national calendar in 1957 (was proposed by Meghnad Saha and Lahiri in 1952), which is used in predictive astrology .

[ citation needed ] The Lahiris Ephemeris published annually is the most widely used English almanac in Vedic astrology, many Panchāngas are published in local languages, which are mostly based on the National Panchānga. The[Bangalore press publishes Mallige Panchanga Darshini calendar every year [ 2 ] Etymology [ edit ] Accuracy of attributes depending upon the Moon's motions were considered most crucial for the reliability of a panchāngam, because the Moon is the fastest among all heavenly entities shown in traditional panchāngas. Tithi, Nakshatra, Rāśi, Yoga, and Karana depend upon Moon's motions, which are five in number.

Panchānga is a Sanskrit word, literally meaning "having five limbs". If these five limbs, for example, the five attributes depending upon Moon, are accurate, an almanac is held to be reliable, because other elements are not so difficult to compute due to their slow rates of change.

There are three popular meanings of panchāngam: In Vedic astrology , meaning "five attributes" of the day.  They are: Tithi - Ending Moment (EM) of elongation of the Moon, the lunar day, the angular relationship between Sun and Moon ( Apparent Moon minus Apparent Sun). One Tithi equals 12 degree difference between Moon and Sun.

Nakshatram - EM of asterism of the day, that is, the stellar mansion in which Moon is located for an observer at the center of the Earth. One Nakshatra equals 13 degrees:20 minutes. There are 27 Nakshatra in 360 degrees.

Yoga - EM of the angular relationship between Sun and Moon( Apparent Moon plus Apparent Sun). One Yoga equals 13 degrees:20 minutes. There are 27 Yogas in 360 degrees.

Karana - EM of half of a Tithi. One Karaṇa equals 6 degree difference between Moon and Sun.

Vāra , weekday, the seven weekdays.

Monier-Williams gives "solar day" instead of Rāśi as the fifth limb. Some people enumerate Vāra (days of the week) instead.

Vāra or solar days do not involve intricate computations, unlike EM of Rāśi; however, in the Hindu system the five elements only constitute the five limbs of the Panchāngam.

An almanac that contains the astronomical / astrological daily details also came to be called a panchāngam because of the importance of five attributes.

Panchānga-pūjan, which is a part of Ganesh-Ambika-pūjan.

In Vedic astrology, the basic tenet of astrology was integrated with celestial events and thus was born various branches of Vedic astrology and the Panchānga. In simple terms, "Panchānga" means the Day, Nakshatra (Star), tithi, Yoga and  Karana  every day. It is a mirror of the sky. The document used as Panchāngam has evolved over the last 5000 years. The theories propounded in the two scriptures, Surya Siddhanta and Grahalaghava formed the basis for the plethora of calendars or Panchāngas  in the past in different regions of the country - a culturally complex system.

The five Angas or parts of Panchāngam are elaborated in the following paragraphs but before that the composition of the Samvatsara OR Years (60 Years cycle), Varsha or Year and Masa or month are first explained, as these important calendar events are part of every Panchānga. All the components of Panchangam are relevant in Predictive Astrology, Prasna Shastra (electional astrology), etc.

All followers and practitioners of Vedic astrology must know how to read a Panchāngam and in this context it is necessary to know the terminology used in the Panchāngam for different time slots of the day.  Panchāngas are also published in English as Ephemeris - The Lahiris Ephemeris is most widely used, which gives all the details as contained in a traditional Panchāngam published in Sanskrit or Hindi and all the regional languages of the country.

There are several forms of reckoning the varsha or year based on solar entry (solar ingress), lunar entry , Jupiter entry in a sign or the Julian calendar of starting the year from the first of January, but the most widely accepted practice in India is the Samvatsara, a 60 years cycle based on solar entry. Each zodiacal sign is represented by five years starting from Pramadi and the sixty years are equally distributed in successive order among the twelve signs (Rasis) starting from Mesha (Aries) and ending in Meena (Pisces).

Varsha or the year, used in astrological context refers to the solar calendar of year and months, which starts with Sun entering Aries (Mesha Rasi) and completing a full circle of the zodiac in a period of twelve months.

There are two kinds of lunar months followed in India - the new moon ending called the Amanta or Sukladi system and the full moon ending (covering one full moon to the next) called the Purnimanta system. But it is the lunar months (full moon reckoned), which are reckoned in predictive astrology, and each represents the name of the star on full moon day of the solar months. The twelve lunar months starting from Chaitra along with the names of the solar months are given below.

No.

Lunar month Solar month 1 Chitta Chaitra 2 Visaka Vyshaka 3 Jyeshta Jyeshta 4 Poorvashada Ashada 5 Sravana Shravana 6 Poorvabhadra Bhadrapadha 7 Aswini Asweyuja 8 Kartika Kartika 9 Mrigashira Margashira 10 Pushyami Pushya 11 Makha Magha 12 Uttaraphalguni Phalguna In Vedic astrology, the basic tenets of astrology were integrated with celestial events with vara or weekday and thus was born the Muhurtha astrology or electional astrology.

Tithi or Lunar day is an important concept in Hindu astrology. It means lunation.  There are thirty tithis in a Lunar month distributed in the 360 degrees of the Zodiac and each tithi is completed when the longitude of the Moon gains exactly twelve degrees or its multiple on that of the Sun.  By name there are only 15 tithis repeating in the two halves of the month – Shukla 1 to Shukla 15 (known as Poornima or Full Moon) and Krishna 1 to 15 (known as Amavasya or New Moon).  In astrological parlance tithi has great significance in the fact that each tithi from 1 to 14 in both Pakshas has what are called daghda rasis or burnt rasis – two rasis for each tithi except Chaturdasiwhich has four daghda rasis. But new moon and full moon have no dagdha rasis.  The tithis are divided into five groups as under.

Nanda (Ananda or Joyous) tithi - Prathipada (1st), Shasti (6th) and Ekadashi (11th); Bhadra (Arogya or Mangala or Healthy) tithis on – Dvitiya (2nd), Saptami (7th) and Dvadashi (12th); Jaya (Victory) tithi –Tuesday-  Tritiya (3rd), Ashtami (8th ) and Trayodashi (13th); Rikktha (Loss or Nashta) tithis – Saturday - Chathurthi (4th)  Navami (9th) and Chaturdashi (14th); Purna (Sampurna - Full Moon or New Moon) tithis –Thursday Panchami (5th), Dashami (10th) and  Amavasya (New Moon) or Purnima.

A unique Vedic system is followed in Muhurtha astrology, Horary astrology and predictive astrology, which envisages grouping of Nakshtaras (stars) into nine sub-groups.  Each sub-group covers three stars and has a specific name of ‘Tara’ proceeded by a word defining benefic or malefic nature. These are found to be extremely useful in Vedic astrology which is widely practiced in India.

The nine taras (star groups) by their individual names are listed below.

Janma (Birth/Ascendant/Lagna) Tara – The Janma (Birth Star/Ascendant Star also known as Lagna Nakshatra) Nakshatra, the 10th from Janma nakshatra also known as Karna nakshatra and the 19th from Janma nakshatra known as Adhana nakshatra constitute this tara.

Sampat Tara – The 2nd the 11th and the 20th Nakshatras counted from Janma nakshatra constitute this tara.

Vipat Tara – The 3rd, the 12th and the 21st stars counted from Janma nakshatra constitute this tara.

Kshema Tara – The 4th, the 13th and the 22nd Nakshatras counted from the janama nakshatra constitute this tara.

Pratyaka Tara – The 5t, the 14th, and the 23rd nakshatras from Janma nakshatra constitute this tara.

Sadhaka Tara – The 6th, the 15th, and the 24th nakshatras from Janma nakshatra constitute this tara.

Nidhana Tara – The 7th, the 16th, and the 25th nakshatras from the Janma nakshatra constitute this tara.

Mitra Tara – The 8th, the 17th and the 26th nakshatras from Janma nakshatra constitute this tara.

Ati or Parama Mitra Tara – The 9th, the 18th and the 27th nakshatras from Janma nakshatra constitute this tara.

Usage [ edit ] The basic purpose of Hindu Panchāngam is to check various Hindu festivals and auspicious time (election- Muhurta). In the Hindu system of election, various element of Panchāngam constitute auspicious and inauspicious moments (Yogas) by combination of weekday-Tithi, weekday-constellation, weekdays-Tithis-constellations. In addition, individual weekdays, Tithis, constellations, Yoga and Karanas have been prescribed for specific activities which fructify during their currency.

For selecting an auspicious moment Panchāngam Shuddhi (purified-time) is fundamental. In addition favourable transits, purified ascendant, absence of malefic yogas, favourable Dasha (Hindu progression), name of doer, propitiations, chanting of Mantras, place of activity, social customs, omens, mode of breathing are also examined.

See also [ edit ] Candravakyas Drigganita Electional astrology Hindu calendar Kanippayyur Shankaran Namboodiripad Karana Nityayoga Panjika Parahita Telugu years References [ edit ] ^ Personal Panchānga and the Five Sources of Light , by Komilla Sutton, The Wessex Astrologer, England, ISBN 978-1-902405-26-1 ^ "MALLIGE PANCHANGA DARSHINI" . Bangalore Press . Retrieved 27 March 2024 .

v t e Hindu astrology Nakshatras Ashvinī Bharanī Kṛttikā Rohinī Mrigashīrsha Punarvasu Pushya Āshleshā Maghā Pūrva Phalgunī Uttara Phalgunī Hasta Chitrā Svātī Vishākhā Anurādhā Jyeshtha Mūla Pūrva Ashādhā Uttara Ashādhā Shravana Dhanishta Shatabhisha Pūrva Bhādrapadā Uttara Bhādrapadā Revatī Rāśi Meṣa Vṛṣabha Mithuna Karkaṭa Siṃha Kanyā Tulā Vṛścika Dhanus Makara Kumbha Mīna Navagraha Surya Chandra Mangala Budha Brihaspati Shukra Shani Rahu Ketu Other concepts Astrological aspects Avastha Atmakaraka Ayanamsa Bhāva Choghadiya Daśās Drekkana Karmasthana Kuṇḍali Lagna Maraka Muntha Navamsa Nadi astrology Panchangam Panjika Planetary dispositors Rashmi Science and Astrology Sarvatobhadra Chakra Trikonasthanas Upachayasthanas Vyatipāta Yoga-karakas Vakri grahas Yogas Adhi yoga Akhanda Samrajya yoga Balarishta Chamara yoga Dainya yoga Daridra yoga Dhana yoga Kahala yoga Nabhasa yoga Neechabhanga Raja yoga Panch Mahapurusha yoga Parajata yoga Preshya yoga Raja yoga Sanyasa yoga Viparita Raja yoga Yoga Scriptures Brihat Jataka Bhavartha Ratnakara Dasadhyayi Garga Hora Hora Ratna Hora Sara Jataka Parijata Jaimini Sutras Jatakalankara Jataka Parijata Jataka Tattva Laghu Parashari Mansagari Prashna Tantra Prasna Marga Phaladeepika Sanketa Nidhi Sarvartha Chintamani Tajika Neelakanthi Ancient Rishis/Astrologers Bhrigu Jaimini Mantreswara Nilakantha Parasara Vaidyanatha Dikshita Varahamihira v t e Indian astronomy Astronomers Apastamba Aryabhata I Aryabhata II Vainu Bappu Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Baudhayana Brahmagupta Sandip Chakrabarti Radhagobinda Chandra Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar Amil Kumar Das P. Devadas Gautama Siddha M. K. Das Gupta Jyesthadeva Kamalakara Katyayana Lagadha Lalla Madhava of Sangamagrama Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Mahavira Manava Jayant Narlikar Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Venkatraman Radhakrishnan J. J. Rawal Megh Nad Saha Jagannatha Samrat Bapudeva Sastri Jai Singh II of Amber Nilakantha Somayaji Sripati Mahendra Suri Govind Swarup Utpala Varahamihira Shankara Variyar Vasistha Yajnavalkya Pathani Samanta Works Aryabhatiya Brahmanas Aitareya Brahmana Shatapatha Brahmana Bṛhat Saṃhitā Ganitagannadi Jyotirmimamsa Shulba Sutras Panchangam Khandakhadyaka Mahādevī Makarandasarini Siddhantas Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Maha-Siddhanta Pancha-Siddhantika Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Rājamṛgāṅka (astronomy book) Romaka Siddhanta Surya Siddhanta Vasishtha Siddhanta Tantrasangraha Treatise on Astrology of the Kaiyuan Era Vākyakaraṇa Vedanga Jyotisha Vedas Atharvaveda Rigveda Yavanajataka Zij Instruments Armillary sphere Astrolabe Celestial globe Compass Cross-staff Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorial sundial Globe Gnomon Mural instrument Quadrant Sextant Sundial Triquetrum Water clock Yantraraja Concepts Axial tilt Azimuth Cardinal direction Celestial equator Celestial sphere Celestial spheres Center of mass Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Geocentrism Geoheliocentrism Globe Gravity Heliocentrism Hindu units of time Jyotiṣa Kali ahargaṇa Kalpa Karana Manvantara Moonlight Nakshatra Nityayoga Parallax Precession Ritu Spherical Earth Sunlight Tithi Vāra Yuga Zodiacal sign Centres Jantar Mantar Jaipur New Delhi Ujjain Varanasi Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Other regions Babylonian astronomy Ancient Greek astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Islamic astronomy Chinese astronomy European astronomy Months of the Vedic calendar Chaitra Vaisakha Jyeshta Aashaadha Shraavana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartik Margashirsha Pausha Maagha Phalguna Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Panchangam&oldid=1274331521 " Categories : Hindu astronomy Hindu cosmology Hindu calendar Technical factors of Hindu astrology Panchangam Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from September 2021 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from September 2021 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from September 2021 Use dmy dates from August 2019 Articles containing Sanskrit-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 This page was last edited on 6 February 2025, at 18:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Panchangam 10 languages Add topic

