Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Birth, childhood, and early education 1.2 Navy 1.3 Marriages 1.4 California 1.5 Author 1.6 Later life and death 2 Written works Toggle Written works subsection 2.1 Early work, 1939–1958 2.2 1959–1960 2.3 Middle period work, 1961–1973 2.4 Later work, 1980–1987 2.5 Posthumous publications 3 Movies 4 Influences 5 Views Toggle Views subsection 5.1 Politics 5.2 Race 5.3 Individualism and self-determination 5.4 The Competent Man 5.5 Sexuality 5.6 Philosophy 5.6.1 Pay it forward 6 Influence and legacy Toggle Influence and legacy subsection 6.1 Honorifics 6.2 Writing style 6.2.1 Rules of writing 6.3 Influence among writers 6.4 Words and phrases coined 6.5 Inspiring culture and technology 6.6 Heinlein Society 7 Honors 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Citations 10 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 10.1 Critical 10.2 Biographical 11 External links Toggle External links subsection 11.1 Biography and criticism 11.2 Bibliography and works Toggle the table of contents Robert A. Heinlein 71 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kernowek Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American author and aeronautical engineer (1907–1988) Robert A. Heinlein Heinlein in 1976 Born Robert Anson Heinlein ( 1907-07-07 ) July 7, 1907 Butler, Missouri , U.S.

Died May 8, 1988 (1988-05-08) (aged 80) Carmel-by-the-Sea, California , U.S.

Pen name Anson MacDonald Lyle Monroe John Riverside Caleb Saunders Simon York Occupation Author aeronautical engineer lieutenant USN [ 1 ] Alma mater United States Naval Academy University of California, Los Angeles (incomplete) Period 1939–1988 Genre Science fiction , fantasy Notable works Stranger in a Strange Land The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress Starship Troopers Time Enough for Love Spouse Elinor Curry ​ ​ ( m.

1929; div.

1930) ​ Leslyn MacDonald ​ ​ ( m.

1932; div.

1947) ​ Virginia Gerstenfeld ​ ​ ( m.

1948) ​ Signature Robert Anson Heinlein ( / ˈ h aɪ n l aɪ n / HYNE -lyne ; [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] July 7, 1907 – May 8, 1988) was an American science fiction author, aeronautical engineer , and naval officer . Sometimes called the "dean of science fiction writers", [ 5 ] he was among the first to emphasize scientific accuracy in his fiction, and was thus a pioneer of the subgenre of hard science fiction . His published works, both fiction and non-fiction, express admiration for competence and emphasize the value of critical thinking .

[ 6 ] His plots often posed provocative situations which challenged conventional social mores .

[ 7 ] His work continues to have an influence on the science-fiction genre, and on modern culture more generally.

Heinlein became one of the first American science-fiction writers to break into mainstream magazines such as The Saturday Evening Post in the late 1940s. He was one of the best-selling science-fiction novelists for many decades, and he, Isaac Asimov , and Arthur C. Clarke are often considered the "Big Three" of English-language science fiction authors.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Notable Heinlein works include Stranger in a Strange Land , [ 11 ] Starship Troopers (which helped mold the space marine and mecha archetypes) and The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress .

[ 12 ] His work sometimes had controversial aspects, such as plural marriage in The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress , militarism in Starship Troopers and technologically competent women characters who were formidable, [ 13 ] yet often stereotypically feminine—such as Friday .

Heinlein used his science fiction as a way to explore provocative social and political ideas and to speculate how progress in science and engineering might shape the future of politics, race, religion, and sex.
Within the framework of his science-fiction stories, Heinlein repeatedly addressed certain social themes: the importance of individual liberty and self-reliance , the nature of sexual relationships, the obligation individuals owe to their societies, the influence of organized religion on culture and government, and the tendency of society to repress nonconformist thought. He also speculated on the influence of space travel on human cultural practices.

Heinlein was heavily influenced by the visionary writers and philosophers of his day. William H. Patterson Jr., writing in Robert A. Heinlein: In Dialogue with His Century , states that by 1930, Heinlein was a progressive liberal who had spent some time in the open sexuality climate of New York 's Jazz Age Greenwich Village . Heinlein believed that some level of socialism was inevitable and was already occurring in America. He was absorbing the social concepts of writers such as H. G. Wells and Upton Sinclair . He adopted many of the progressive social beliefs of his day and projected them forward.

[ 14 ] In later years, he began to espouse conservative views and to believe that a strong world government was the only way to avoid mutual nuclear annihilation .

[ 15 ] Heinlein was named the first Science Fiction Writers Grand Master in 1974.

[ 16 ] Four of his novels won Hugo Awards . In addition, fifty years after publication, seven of his works were awarded " Retro Hugos "—awards given retrospectively for works that were published before the Hugo Awards came into existence.

[ 17 ] In his fiction, Heinlein coined terms that have become part of the English language, including grok , waldo and speculative fiction , as well as popularizing existing terms like " TANSTAAFL ", " pay it forward ", and " space marine ". He also anticipated mechanical computer-aided design with "Drafting Dan" in his novel The Door into Summer and described a modern version of a waterbed in his novel Stranger in a Strange Land .

Life [ edit ] Midshipman Heinlein, from the 1929 U.S. Naval Academy yearbook Birth, childhood, and early education [ edit ] Heinlein, born on July 7, 1907, to Rex Ivar Heinlein (an accountant) and Bam Lyle Heinlein, in Butler, Missouri , was the third of seven children. He was a sixth-generation German-American ; a family tradition had it that Heinleins fought in every American war, starting with the War of Independence .

[ 18 ] He spent his childhood in Kansas City, Missouri .

[ 19 ] The outlook and values of this time and place (in his own words, "The Bible Belt ") had an influence on his fiction, especially in his later works, as he drew heavily upon his childhood in establishing the setting and cultural atmosphere in works like Time Enough for Love and To Sail Beyond the Sunset . The 1910 return of Halley's Comet inspired the young child's life-long interest in astronomy.

[ 20 ] In January 1924, the sixteen-year-old Heinlein lied about his age to enlist in Company C, 110th Engineer Regiment , of the Missouri National Guard , in Kansas City. His family could not afford to send Heinlein to college, so he sought an appointment to a military academy.

[ 21 ] When Heinlein graduated from Kansas City Central High School in 1924, he was initially prevented from attending the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis because his older brother Rex was a student there, and at the time, regulations discouraged multiple family members from attending the academy simultaneously. He instead matriculated at Kansas City Community College and began vigorously petitioning Missouri Senator James A. Reed for an appointment to the Naval Academy. In part due to the influence of the Pendergast machine , the Naval Academy admitted him in June 1925.

[ 12 ] Heinlein received his discharge from the Missouri National Guard as a staff sergeant. Reed later told Heinlein that he had received 100 letters of recommendation for nomination to the Naval Academy, 50 for other candidates and 50 for Heinlein.

[ 21 ] Navy [ edit ] Heinlein's experience in the U.S. Navy exerted a strong influence on his character and writing. In 1929, he graduated from the Naval Academy with the equivalent of a bachelor of arts in engineering.

[ 22 ] (At that time, the Academy did not confer degrees.) He ranked fifth in his class academically but with a class standing of 20th of 243 due to disciplinary demerits. The U.S. Navy commissioned him as an ensign shortly after his graduation. He advanced to lieutenant junior grade in 1931 while serving aboard the new aircraft carrier USS Lexington , where he worked in radio communications —a technology then still in its earlier stages. The captain of this carrier, Ernest J. King , later served as the Chief of Naval Operations and Commander-in-Chief, U.S. Fleet during World War II . Military historians frequently [ quantify ] interviewed Heinlein during his later years and asked him about Captain King and his service as the commander of the U.S. Navy's first modern aircraft carrier. Heinlein also served as gunnery officer aboard the destroyer USS Roper in 1933 and 1934, reaching the rank of lieutenant.

[ 23 ] His brother, Lawrence Heinlein, served in the U.S. Army, the U.S. Air Force, and the Missouri National Guard , reaching the rank of major general in the National Guard.

[ 24 ] Marriages [ edit ] In 1929, Heinlein married Elinor Curry of Kansas City.

[ 25 ] However, their marriage lasted only about one year.

[ 3 ] His second marriage, to Leslyn MacDonald (1904–1981) in 1932, lasted 15 years. MacDonald was, according to the testimony of Heinlein's Navy friend, Rear Admiral Cal Laning , "astonishingly intelligent, widely read, and extremely liberal, though a registered Republican ", [ 26 ] while Isaac Asimov later recalled that Heinlein was, at the time, "a flaming liberal ".

[ 27 ] (See section: Politics of Robert Heinlein .) Virginia and Robert Heinlein in a 1952 Popular Mechanics article, titled "A House to Make Life Easy". The Heinleins, both engineers, designed the house for themselves with many innovative features.

At the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard , Heinlein met and befriended a chemical engineer named Virginia "Ginny" Gerstenfeld . After the war, her engagement having fallen through, she attended UCLA for doctoral studies in chemistry , and while there reconnected with Heinlein. As his second wife's alcoholism gradually spun out of control, [ 28 ] Heinlein moved out and the couple filed for divorce. Heinlein's friendship with Virginia turned into a relationship and on October 21, 1948—shortly after the decree nisi came through—they married in the town of Raton, New Mexico . Soon thereafter, they set up housekeeping in the Broadmoor district of Colorado Springs, Colorado , in a house that Heinlein and his wife designed. As the area was newly developed, they were allowed to choose their own house number, 1776 Mesa Avenue.

[ 29 ] The design of the house was featured in Popular Mechanics .

[ 30 ] They remained married until Heinlein's death. In 1965, after various chronic health problems of Virginia's were traced back to altitude sickness , they moved to Santa Cruz, California , which is at sea level . Robert and Virginia designed and built a new residence, circular in shape, in the adjacent village of Bonny Doon .

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Robert and Virginia Heinlein in Tahiti , 1980 Ginny undoubtedly served as a model for many of his intelligent, fiercely independent female characters.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] She was a chemist and rocket test engineer , and held a higher rank in the Navy than Heinlein himself. She was also an accomplished college athlete, earning four varsity letters .

[ 1 ] In 1953–1954, the Heinleins voyaged around the world (mostly via ocean liners and cargo liners , as Ginny detested flying), which Heinlein described in Tramp Royale .

The trip provided background material for science fiction novels set aboard spaceships on long voyages, such as Podkayne of Mars , Friday and Job: A Comedy of Justice , the latter initially being set on a cruise much as detailed in Tramp Royale . Ginny acted as the first reader of his manuscripts . Isaac Asimov believed that Heinlein made a swing to the right politically at the same time he married Ginny.

California [ edit ] In 1934, Heinlein was discharged from the Navy, owing to pulmonary tuberculosis . During a lengthy hospitalization, and inspired by his own experience while bed-ridden, he developed a design for a waterbed .

[ 35 ] After his discharge, Heinlein attended a few weeks of graduate classes in mathematics and physics at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), but he soon quit, either because of his ill-health or because of a desire to enter politics.

[ 36 ] Heinlein supported himself at several occupations, including real estate sales and silver mining , but for some years found money in short supply. Heinlein was active in Upton Sinclair 's socialist End Poverty in California movement (EPIC) in the early 1930s. He was deputy publisher of the EPIC News , which Heinlein noted "recalled a mayor, kicked out a district attorney, replaced the governor with one of our choice." [ 37 ] When Sinclair gained the Democratic nomination for Governor of California in 1934, Heinlein worked actively in the campaign. Heinlein himself ran for the California State Assembly in 1938, but was unsuccessful. Heinlein was running as a left-wing Democrat in a conservative district, and he never made it past the Democratic primary.

[ 38 ] Author [ edit ] Robert A. Heinlein, L. Sprague de Camp , and Isaac Asimov , Philadelphia Navy Yard , 1944 While not destitute after the campaign—he had a small disability pension from the Navy—Heinlein turned to writing to pay off his mortgage. His first published story, " Life-Line ", was printed in the August 1939 issue of Astounding Science Fiction .

[ 39 ] Originally written for a contest, it sold to Astounding for significantly more than the contest's first-prize payoff. Another Future History story, "Misfit", followed in November.

[ 39 ] Some saw Heinlein's talent and stardom from his first story, [ 40 ] and he was quickly acknowledged as a leader of the new movement toward "social" science fiction . In California he hosted the Mañana Literary Society , a 1940–41 series of informal gatherings of new authors.

[ 41 ] He was the guest of honor at Denvention, the 1941 Worldcon , held in Denver. During World War II , Heinlein was employed by the Navy as a civilian aeronautical engineer at the Navy Aircraft Materials Center at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard in Pennsylvania .

[ 42 ] Heinlein recruited Isaac Asimov and L. Sprague de Camp to also work there.

[ 35 ] While at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyards, Asimov, Heinlein, and de Camp brainstormed unconventional approaches to kamikaze attacks, such as using sound to detect approaching planes.

[ 43 ] As the war wound down in 1945, Heinlein began to re-evaluate his career. The atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki , along with the outbreak of the Cold War , galvanized him to write nonfiction on political topics. In addition, he wanted to break into better-paying markets. He published four influential short stories for The Saturday Evening Post magazine, leading off, in February 1947, with " The Green Hills of Earth ". That made him the first science fiction writer to break out of the " pulp ghetto ". In 1950, the movie Destination Moon —the documentary-like film for which he had written the story and scenario, co-written the script, and invented many of the effects—won an Academy Award for special effects .

Heinlein created SF stories with social commentary about relationships. In The Puppet Masters , a 1951 alien invasion novel, the point of view character Sam persuades fellow operative Mary to marry him. When they go to the county clerk, they are offered a variety of marriage possibilities; "Term, renewable or lifetime", as short as six months or as long as forever.

[ 44 ] Also, he embarked on a series of juvenile novels for the Charles Scribner's Sons publishing company that went from 1947 through 1959, at the rate of one book each autumn, in time for Christmas presents to teenagers. He also wrote for Boys' Life in 1952.

Heinlein used topical materials throughout his juvenile series beginning in 1947, but in 1958 he interrupted work on The Heretic (the working title of Stranger in a Strange Land ) to write and publish a book exploring ideas of civic virtue, initially serialized as Starship Soldiers . In 1959, his novel (now entitled Starship Troopers ) was considered by the editors and owners of Scribner's to be too controversial for one of its prestige lines, and it was rejected.

[ 45 ] Heinlein found another publisher ( Putnam ), feeling himself released from the constraints of writing novels for children. He had told an interviewer that he did not want to do stories that merely added to categories defined by other works. Rather he wanted to do his own work, stating that: "I want to do my own stuff, my own way".

[ 46 ] He wrote a series of challenging books that redrew the boundaries of science fiction, including Stranger in a Strange Land (1961) and The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress (1966).

Later life and death [ edit ] Beginning in 1970, Heinlein had a series of health crises, broken by strenuous periods of activity in his hobby of stonemasonry : in a private correspondence, he referred to that as his "usual and favorite occupation between books".

[ 47 ] The decade began with a life-threatening attack of peritonitis , recovery from which required more than two years, and treatment of which required multiple transfusions of Heinlein's rare blood type, A2 negative .

[ citation needed ] As soon as he was well enough to write again, he began work on Time Enough for Love (1973), which introduced many of the themes found in his later fiction.

In the mid-1970s, Heinlein wrote two articles for the Britannica Compton Yearbook .

[ 48 ] He and Ginny crisscrossed the country helping to reorganize blood donation in the United States in an effort to assist the system which had saved his life.

[ citation needed ] At science fiction conventions to receive his autograph, fans would be asked to co-sign with Heinlein a beautifully embellished pledge form he supplied stating that the recipient agrees that they will donate blood . He was the guest of honor at the Worldcon in 1976 for the third time at MidAmeriCon in Kansas City, Missouri . At that Worldcon, Heinlein hosted a blood drive and donors' reception to thank all those who had helped save lives.

Beginning in 1977, and including an episode while vacationing in Tahiti in early 1978, he had episodes of reversible neurologic dysfunction due to transient ischemic attacks .

[ 49 ] Over the next few months, he became more and more exhausted, and his health again began to decline. The problem was determined to be a blocked carotid artery , and he had one of the earliest known carotid bypass operations to correct it.

In 1980, Robert Heinlein was a member of the Citizen's Advisory Council on National Space Policy , chaired by Jerry Pournelle , which met at the home of SF writer Larry Niven to write space policy papers for the incoming Reagan administration . Members included such aerospace industry leaders as former astronaut Buzz Aldrin , General Daniel O. Graham , aerospace engineer Max Hunter and North American Rockwell VP for Space Shuttle development George Merrick. Policy recommendations from the Council included ballistic missile defense concepts which were later transformed into what was called the Strategic Defense Initiative . Heinlein assisted with Council contribution to the Reagan SDI spring 1983 speech. Asked to appear before a Joint Committee of the United States Congress that year, he testified on his belief that spin-offs from space technology were benefiting the infirm and the elderly.

Heinlein's surgical treatment re-energized him, and he wrote five novels from 1980 until he died in his sleep from emphysema and heart failure on May 8, 1988.

In 1995, Spider Robinson wrote the novel Variable Star based on an outline and notes created by Heinlein.

[ 50 ] Heinlein's posthumously published nonfiction includes a selection of correspondence and notes edited into a somewhat autobiographical examination of his career, published in 1989 under the title Grumbles from the Grave by his wife, Virginia; his book on practical politics written in 1946 and published as Take Back Your Government in 1992; and a travelogue of their first around-the-world tour in 1954, Tramp Royale . The novel Podkayne of Mars, which had been edited against Heinlein's wishes in their original release, was reissued with the original ending.

Stranger In a Strange Land was originally published in a shorter form, but both the long and short versions are now simultaneously available in print.

Heinlein's archive is housed by the Special Collections department of McHenry Library at the University of California at Santa Cruz . The collection includes manuscript drafts, correspondence, photographs and artifacts. A substantial portion of the archive has been digitized and it is available online through the Robert A. and Virginia Heinlein Archives.

[ 51 ] Written works [ edit ] Main article: Robert A. Heinlein bibliography Heinlein published 32 novels, 59 short stories, and 16 collections during his lifetime. Nine films, two television series, several episodes of a radio series, and a board game have been derived more or less directly from his work. He wrote a screenplay for one of the films. Heinlein edited an anthology of other writers' SF short stories.

Three nonfiction books and two poems have been published posthumously.

For Us, the Living: A Comedy of Customs was published posthumously in 2003; [ 52 ] Variable Star , written by Spider Robinson based on an extensive outline by Heinlein, was published in September 2006. Four collections have been published posthumously.

[ 39 ] Early work, 1939–1958 [ edit ] Heinlein began his career as a writer of stories for Astounding Science Fiction magazine, which was edited by John Campbell. The science fiction writer Frederik Pohl has described Heinlein as "that greatest of Campbell-era sf writers".

[ 53 ] Isaac Asimov said that, from the time of his first story, the science fiction world accepted that Heinlein was the best science fiction writer in existence, adding that he would hold this title through his lifetime.

[ 54 ] Alexei and Cory Panshin noted that Heinlein's impact was immediately felt. In 1940, the year after selling 'Life-Line' to Campbell, he wrote three short novels, four novelettes, and seven short stories. They went on to say that "No one ever dominated the science fiction field as Bob did in the first few years of his career." [ 55 ] Alexei expresses awe in Heinlein's ability to show readers a world so drastically different from the one we live in now, yet have so many similarities. He says that "We find ourselves not only in a world other than our own, but identifying with a living, breathing individual who is operating within its context, and thinking and acting according to its terms." [ 56 ] Heinlein's 1942 novel Beyond This Horizon was reprinted in Two Complete Science-Adventure Books in 1952, appearing under the "Anson McDonald" byline even though the book edition had been published under Heinlein's own name four years earlier.

The opening installment of The Puppet Masters took the cover of the September 1951 issue of Galaxy Science Fiction .

The first novel that Heinlein wrote, For Us, the Living: A Comedy of Customs (1939), did not see print during his lifetime, but Robert James tracked down the manuscript and it was published in 2003. Though some regard it as a failure as a novel, [ 19 ] considering it little more than a disguised lecture on Heinlein's social theories , some readers took a very different view. In a review of it, John Clute wrote: I'm not about to suggest that if Heinlein had been able to publish [such works] openly in the pages of Astounding in 1939, SF would have gotten the future right; I would suggest, however, that if Heinlein, and his colleagues, had been able to publish adult SF in Astounding and its fellow journals, then SF might not have done such a grotesquely poor job of prefiguring something of the flavor of actually living here at the onset of 2004.

[ 57 ] For Us, the Living was intriguing as a window into the development of Heinlein's radical ideas about man as a social animal , including his interest in free love . The root of many themes found in his later stories can be found in this book. It also contained a large amount of material that could be considered background for his other novels. This included a detailed description of the protagonist's treatment to avoid being banished to Coventry (a lawless land in the Heinlein mythos where unrepentant law-breakers are exiled).

[ 58 ] Heinlein as depicted in Amazing Stories in 1953 It appears that Heinlein at least attempted to live in a manner consistent with these ideals, even in the 1930s, and had an open relationship in his marriage to his second wife, Leslyn. He was also a nudist ; [ 3 ] nudism and body taboos are frequently discussed in his work. At the height of the Cold War , he built a bomb shelter under his house, like the one featured in Farnham's Freehold .

[ 3 ] After For Us, the Living , Heinlein began selling (to magazines) first short stories, then novels, set in a Future History , complete with a time line of significant political, cultural, and technological changes. A chart of the future history was published in the May 1941 issue of Astounding . Over time, Heinlein wrote many novels and short stories that deviated freely from the Future History on some points, while maintaining consistency in some other areas. The Future History was eventually overtaken by actual events. These discrepancies were explained, after a fashion, in his later World as Myth stories.

Heinlein's first novel published as a book, Rocket Ship Galileo , was initially rejected because going to the Moon was considered too far-fetched, but he soon found a publisher, Scribner's , that began publishing a Heinlein juvenile once a year for the Christmas season.

[ 59 ] Eight of these books were illustrated by Clifford Geary in a distinctive white-on-black scratchboard style.

[ 60 ] Some representative novels of this type are Have Space Suit—Will Travel , Farmer in the Sky , and Starman Jones . Many of these were first published in serial form under other titles, e.g., Farmer in the Sky was published as Satellite Scout in the Boy Scout magazine Boys' Life . There has been speculation that Heinlein's intense obsession with his privacy was due at least in part to the apparent contradiction between his unconventional private life [ clarification needed ] and his career as an author of books for children. However, For Us, the Living explicitly discusses the political importance Heinlein attached to privacy as a matter of principle.

[ 63 ] The novels that Heinlein wrote for a young audience are commonly called "the Heinlein juveniles", and they feature a mixture of adolescent and adult themes. Many of the issues that he takes on in these books have to do with the kinds of problems that adolescents experience. His protagonists are usually intelligent teenagers who have to make their way in the adult society they see around them. On the surface, they are simple tales of adventure, achievement, and dealing with stupid teachers and jealous peers. Heinlein was a vocal proponent of the notion that juvenile readers were far more sophisticated and able to handle more complex or difficult themes than most people realized. His juvenile stories often had a maturity to them that made them readable for adults.

Red Planet , for example, portrays some subversive themes, including a revolution in which young students are involved; his editor demanded substantial changes in this book's discussion of topics such as the use of weapons by children and the misidentified sex of the Martian character. Heinlein was always aware of the editorial limitations put in place by the editors of his novels and stories, and while he observed those restrictions on the surface, was often successful in introducing ideas not often seen in other authors' juvenile SF.

In 1957, James Blish wrote that one reason for Heinlein's success "has been the high grade of machinery which goes, today as always, into his story-telling. Heinlein seems to have known from the beginning, as if instinctively, technical lessons about fiction which other writers must learn the hard way (or often enough, never learn). He does not always operate the machinery to the best advantage, but he always seems to be aware of it." [ 64 ] 1959–1960 [ edit ] Heinlein decisively ended his juvenile novels with Starship Troopers (1959), a controversial work and his personal riposte to leftists calling for President Dwight D. Eisenhower to stop nuclear testing in 1958. "The 'Patrick Henry' ad shocked 'em", he wrote many years later of the campaign. " Starship Troopers outraged 'em." [ 65 ] Starship Troopers is a coming-of-age story about duty, citizenship, and the role of the military in society.

[ 66 ] The book portrays a society in which suffrage is earned by demonstrated willingness to place society's interests before one's own, at least for a short time and often under onerous circumstances, in government service; in the case of the protagonist, this was military service.

Later, in Expanded Universe , Heinlein said that it was his intention in the novel that service could include positions outside strictly military functions such as teachers, police officers, and other government positions. This is presented in the novel as an outgrowth of the failure of unearned suffrage government and as a very successful arrangement. In addition, the franchise was only awarded after leaving the assigned service; thus those serving their terms—in the military, or any other service—were excluded from exercising any franchise. Career military were completely disenfranchised until retirement.

Middle period work, 1961–1973 [ edit ] Heinlein's novel Podkayne of Mars was serialized in If , with a cover by Virgil Finlay .

From about 1961 ( Stranger in a Strange Land ) to 1973 ( Time Enough for Love ), Heinlein explored some of his most important themes, such as individualism , libertarianism , and free expression of physical and emotional love. Three novels from this period, Stranger in a Strange Land , The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress , and Time Enough for Love , won the Libertarian Futurist Society 's Prometheus Hall of Fame Award , designed to honor classic libertarian fiction.

[ 67 ] Jeff Riggenbach described The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress as "unquestionably one of the three or four most influential libertarian novels of the last century".

[ 68 ] Heinlein did not publish Stranger in a Strange Land until some time after it was written, and the themes of free love and radical individualism are prominently featured in his long-unpublished first novel, For Us, the Living: A Comedy of Customs .

The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress tells of a war of independence waged by the Lunar penal colonies, with significant comments from a major character, Professor La Paz, regarding the threat posed by government to individual freedom.

Although Heinlein had previously written a few short stories in the fantasy genre, during this period he wrote his first fantasy novel, Glory Road . In Stranger in a Strange Land and I Will Fear No Evil , he began to mix hard science with fantasy, mysticism, and satire of organized religion. Critics William H. Patterson, Jr., and Andrew Thornton believe that this is simply an expression of Heinlein's longstanding philosophical opposition to positivism .

[ 69 ] Heinlein stated that he was influenced by James Branch Cabell in taking this new literary direction. The penultimate novel of this period, I Will Fear No Evil , is according to critic James Gifford "almost universally regarded as a literary failure" [ 70 ] and he attributes its shortcomings to Heinlein's near-death from peritonitis .

Later work, 1980–1987 [ edit ] After a seven-year hiatus brought on by poor health, Heinlein produced five new novels in the period from 1980 ( The Number of the Beast ) to 1987 ( To Sail Beyond the Sunset ). These books have a thread of common characters and time and place. They most explicitly communicated Heinlein's philosophies and beliefs, and many long, didactic passages of dialog and exposition deal with government, sex, and religion. These novels are controversial among his readers and one critic, David Langford , has written about them very negatively.

[ 71 ] Heinlein's four Hugo awards were all for books written before this period.

Most of the novels from this period are recognized by critics as forming an offshoot from the Future History series and are referred to by the term World as Myth .

[ 72 ] The tendency toward authorial self-reference begun in Stranger in a Strange Land and Time Enough for Love becomes even more evident in novels such as The Cat Who Walks Through Walls , whose first-person protagonist is a disabled military veteran who becomes a writer, and finds love with a female character.

[ 73 ] The 1982 novel Friday , a more conventional adventure story (borrowing a character and backstory from the earlier short story Gulf , also containing suggestions of connection to The Puppet Masters ) continued a Heinlein theme of expecting what he saw as the continued disintegration of Earth's society, to the point where the title character is strongly encouraged to seek a new life off-planet. It concludes with a traditional Heinlein note, as in The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress or Time Enough for Love , that freedom is to be found on the frontiers.

The 1984 novel Job: A Comedy of Justice is a sharp satire of organized religion. Heinlein himself was agnostic.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] Posthumous publications [ edit ] Several Heinlein works have been published since his death, including the aforementioned For Us, the Living as well as 1989's Grumbles from the Grave , a collection of letters between Heinlein and his editors and agent; 1992's Tramp Royale , a travelogue of a southern hemisphere tour the Heinleins took in the 1950s; Take Back Your Government , a how-to book about participatory democracy written in 1946 and reflecting his experience as an organizer with the EPIC campaign of 1934 and the movement's aftermath as an important factor in California politics before the Second World War; and a tribute volume called Requiem: Collected Works and Tributes to the Grand Master , containing some additional short works previously unpublished in book form.

Off the Main Sequence , published in 2005, includes three short stories never before collected in any Heinlein book (Heinlein called them "stinkeroos").

Spider Robinson , a colleague, friend, and admirer of Heinlein, [ 76 ] wrote Variable Star , based on an outline and notes for a novel that Heinlein prepared in 1955. The novel was published as a collaboration, with Heinlein's name above Robinson's on the cover, in 2006.

A complete collection of Heinlein's published work has been published [ 77 ] by the Heinlein Prize Trust as the "Virginia Edition", after his wife. See the Complete Works section of Robert A. Heinlein bibliography for details.

On February 1, 2019, Phoenix Pick announced that through a collaboration with the Heinlein Prize Trust, a reconstruction of the full text of an unpublished Heinlein novel had been produced. It was published in March 2020. The reconstructed novel, entitled The Pursuit of the Pankera: A Parallel Novel about Parallel Universes , [ 78 ] is an alternative version of The Number of the Beast , with the first one-third of The Pursuit of the Pankera mostly the same as the first one-third of The Number of the Beast but the remainder of The Pursuit of the Pankera deviating entirely from The Number of the Beast , with a completely different story-line. The newly reconstructed novel pays homage to Edgar Rice Burroughs and E. E. "Doc" Smith . It was edited by Patrick Lobrutto . Some reviewers describe the newly reconstructed novel as more in line with the style of a traditional Heinlein novel than was The Number of the Beast .

[ 79 ] The Pursuit of the Pankera was considered superior to the original version of The Number of the Beast by some reviewers.

[ 80 ] Both The Pursuit of the Pankera and a new edition of The Number of the Beast [ 81 ] were published in March 2020. The new edition of the latter shares the subtitle of The Pursuit of the Pankera , hence entitled The Number of the Beast: A Parallel Novel about Parallel Universes .

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] Movies [ edit ] Main article: Robert A. Heinlein bibliography Heinlein contributed to the final draft of the script for Destination Moon (1950) and served as a technical adviser for the film.

[ 84 ] Heinlein also shared screenwriting credit for Project Moonbase (1953).

Influences [ edit ] The primary influence on Heinlein's writing style may have been Rudyard Kipling . Kipling is the first known modern example of " indirect exposition ", a writing technique for which Heinlein later became famous.

[ 85 ] In his famous text on " On the Writing of Speculative Fiction ", Heinlein quotes Kipling: There are nine-and-sixty ways Of constructing tribal lays And every single one of them is right Stranger in a Strange Land originated as a modernized version of Kipling's The Jungle Book . His wife suggested that the child be raised by Martians instead of wolves. Likewise, Citizen of the Galaxy can be seen as a reboot of Kipling's novel Kim .

[ 86 ] The Starship Troopers idea of needing to serve in the military in order to vote can be found in Kipling's " The Army of a Dream ": But as a little detail we never mention, if we don't volunteer in some corps or other—as combatants if we're fit, as non-combatants if we ain't—till we're thirty-five—we don't vote, and we don't get poor-relief, and the women don't love us.

Poul Anderson once said of Kipling's science fiction story " As Easy as A.B.C.

", "a wonderful science fiction yarn, showing the same eye for detail that would later distinguish the work of Robert Heinlein".

Heinlein described himself as also being influenced by George Bernard Shaw , having read most of his plays.

[ 87 ] Shaw is an example of an earlier author who used the competent man , a favorite Heinlein archetype.

[ 88 ] He denied, though, any direct influence of Back to Methuselah on Methuselah's Children .

Views [ edit ] Heinlein c.

1953 Heinlein's books probe a range of ideas about a range of topics such as sexuality, race, politics, and the military. Many were seen as radical or as ahead of their time in their social criticism. His books have inspired considerable debate about the specifics, and the evolution, of Heinlein's own opinions, and have earned him both lavish praise and a degree of criticism. He has also been accused of contradicting himself on various philosophical questions.

[ 89 ] Brian Doherty cites William Patterson, saying that the best way to gain an understanding of Heinlein is as a "full-service iconoclast, the unique individual who decides that things do not have to be, and won't continue, as they are". He says this vision is "at the heart of Heinlein, science fiction, libertarianism, and America. Heinlein imagined how everything about the human world, from our sexual mores to our religion to our automobiles to our government to our plans for cultural survival, might be flawed, even fatally so." [ 90 ] The critic Elizabeth Anne Hull , for her part, has praised Heinlein for his interest in exploring fundamental life questions, especially questions about "political power—our responsibilities to one another" and about "personal freedom, particularly sexual freedom".

[ 91 ] Edward R. Murrow hosted a series on CBS Radio called This I Believe , which solicited an entry from Heinlein in 1952. Titled " Our Noble, Essential Decency ". In it, Heinlein broke with the normal trends, stating that he believed in his neighbors (some of whom he named and described), community, and towns across America that share the same sense of good will and intentions as his own, going on to apply this same philosophy to the US, and humanity in general.

I believe in my fellow citizens. Our headlines are splashed with crime. Yet for every criminal, there are ten thousand honest, decent, kindly men. If it were not so, no child would live to grow up. Business could not go on from day to day. Decency is not news. It is buried in the obituaries, but it is a force stronger than crime.

Politics [ edit ] Heinlein's political positions shifted throughout his life. Heinlein's early political leanings were liberal .

[ 92 ] In 1934, he worked actively for the Democratic campaign of Upton Sinclair for Governor of California . After Sinclair lost, Heinlein became an anti-communist Democratic activist. He made an unsuccessful bid for a California State Assembly seat in 1938.

[ 92 ] Heinlein's first novel, For Us, the Living (written 1939), consists largely of speeches advocating the Social Credit philosophy, and the early story " Misfit " (1939) deals with an organization—"The Cosmic Construction Corps"—that seems to be Franklin D. Roosevelt 's Civilian Conservation Corps translated into outer space.

[ 93 ] Of this time in his life, Heinlein later said: At the time I wrote Methuselah's Children I was still politically quite naïve and still had hopes that various libertarian notions could be put over by political processes... It [now] seems to me that every time we manage to establish one freedom, they take another one away. Maybe two. And that seems to me characteristic of a society as it gets older, and more crowded, and higher taxes, and more laws.

[ 87 ] Heinlein's fiction of the 1940s and 1950s, however, began to espouse conservative views. After 1945, he came to believe that a strong world government was the only way to avoid mutual nuclear annihilation .

[ 94 ] His 1949 novel Space Cadet describes a future scenario where a military-controlled global government enforces world peace. Heinlein ceased considering himself a Democrat in 1954.

[ 92 ] The Heinleins formed the Patrick Henry League in 1958, and they worked in the 1964 Barry Goldwater presidential campaign.

[ 27 ] When Robert A. Heinlein opened his Colorado Springs newspaper on April 5, 1958, he read a full-page ad demanding that the Eisenhower Administration stop testing nuclear weapons. The science fiction author was flabbergasted. He called for the formation of the Patrick Henry League and spent the next several weeks writing and publishing his own polemic that lambasted "Communist-line goals concealed in idealistic-sounding nonsense" and urged Americans not to become "soft-headed".

[ 65 ] Heinlein's response ad was entitled " Who Are the Heirs of Patrick Henry?

". It started with the famous Henry quotation: "Is life so dear, or peace so sweet, as to be purchased at the price of chains and slavery? Forbid it, Almighty God! I know not what course others may take, but as for me, give me liberty, or give me death!!" It then went on to admit that there was some risk to nuclear testing (albeit less than the "willfully distorted" claims of the test ban advocates), and risk of nuclear war, but that "The alternative is surrender. We accept the risks." Heinlein was among those who in 1968 signed a pro– Vietnam War ad in Galaxy Science Fiction .

[ 95 ] Heinlein always considered himself a libertarian; in a letter to Judith Merril in 1967 (never sent) he said, "As for libertarian, I've been one all my life, a radical one. You might use the term ' philosophical anarchist ' or ' autarchist ' about me, but 'libertarian' is easier to define and fits well enough." [ 96 ] Stranger in a Strange Land was embraced by the 1960s counterculture , and libertarians have found inspiration in The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress . Both groups found resonance with his themes of personal freedom in both thought and action.

[ 68 ] Race [ edit ] Heinlein grew up in the era of racial segregation in the United States and wrote some of his most influential fiction at the height of the Civil Rights Movement . He explicitly made the case for using his fiction not only to predict the future but also to educate his readers about the value of racial equality and the importance of racial tolerance.

[ 97 ] His early novels were ahead of their time both in their explicit rejection of racism and in their inclusion of protagonists of color. In the context of science fiction before the 1960s, the mere existence of characters of color was a remarkable novelty, with green occurring more often than brown.

[ 98 ] For example, his 1948 novel Space Cadet explicitly uses aliens as a metaphor for minorities. The 1947 story " Jerry Was a Man " uses enslaved genetically modified chimpanzees as a symbol for Black Americans fighting for civil rights.

[ 99 ] In his novel The Star Beast , the de facto foreign minister of the Terran government is an undersecretary, a Mr. Kiku, who is from Africa.

[ 100 ] Heinlein explicitly states his skin is "ebony black" and that Kiku is in an arranged marriage that is happy.

[ 101 ] In a number of his stories, Heinlein challenges his readers' possible racial preconceptions by introducing a strong, sympathetic character, only to reveal much later that he or she is of African or other ancestry. In several cases, the covers of the books show characters as being light-skinned when the text states or at least implies that they are dark-skinned or of African ancestry.

[ 104 ] Heinlein repeatedly denounced racism in his nonfiction works, including numerous examples in Expanded Universe .

Heinlein reveals in Starship Troopers that the novel's protagonist and narrator, Johnny Rico , the formerly disaffected scion of a wealthy family, is Filipino , actually named "Juan Rico" and speaks Tagalog in addition to English.

Race was a central theme in some of Heinlein's fiction. The most prominent example is Farnham's Freehold , which casts a white family into a future in which white people are the slaves of cannibalistic black rulers. In the 1941 novel Sixth Column (also known as The Day After Tomorrow ), a white resistance movement in the United States defends itself against an invasion by an Asian fascist state (the "Pan-Asians") using a "super-science" technology that allows ray weapons to be tuned to specific races. The idea for the story was pushed on Heinlein by editor John W. Campbell and the story itself was based on a then-unpublished story by Campbell, and Heinlein wrote later that he had "had to re-slant it to remove racist aspects of the original story line" and that he did not "consider it to be an artistic success".

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] However, the novel prompted a heated debate in the scientific community regarding the plausibility of developing ethnic bioweapons .

[ 107 ] John Hickman, writing in the European Journal of American Studies , identifies examples of anti–East Asian racism in some of Heinlein's works, particularly Sixth Column .

[ 108 ] Heinlein summed up his attitude toward people of any race in his essay " Our Noble, Essential Decency " thus: And finally, I believe in my whole race—yellow, white, black, red, brown—in the honesty, courage, intelligence, durability, and goodness of the overwhelming majority of my brothers and sisters everywhere on this planet. I am proud to be a human being.

Individualism and self-determination [ edit ] In keeping with his belief in individualism , his work for adults—and sometimes even his work for juveniles—often portrays both the oppressors and the oppressed with considerable ambiguity. Heinlein believed that individualism was incompatible with ignorance. He believed that an appropriate level of adult competence was achieved through a wide-ranging education, whether this occurred in a classroom or not. In his juvenile novels, more than once a character looks with disdain at a student's choice of classwork, saying, "Why didn't you study something useful?" [ 109 ] In Time Enough for Love , Lazarus Long gives a long list of capabilities that anyone should have, concluding, "Specialization is for insects." The ability of the individual to create himself is explored in stories such as I Will Fear No Evil , " ' —All You Zombies— ' ", and " By His Bootstraps ".

Heinlein claimed to have written Starship Troopers in response to "calls for the unilateral ending of nuclear testing by the United States".

[ 110 ] Heinlein suggests in the book that the Bugs are a good example of Communism being something that humans cannot successfully adhere to, since humans are strongly defined individuals, whereas the Bugs, being a collective, can all contribute to the whole without consideration of individual desire.

[ 111 ] The Competent Man [ edit ] A common theme in Heinlein's writing is his frequent use of the "competent man", a stock character who exhibits a very wide range of abilities and knowledge, making him a form of polymath . This trope was notably common in 1950s U.S. science fiction.

[ 112 ] While Heinlein was not the first to use such a character type, the heroes and heroines of his fiction (with Jubal Harshaw being a prime example) generally have a wide range of abilities, and one of Heinlein's characters, Lazarus Long , gives a wide summary of requirements: A human being should be able to change a diaper, plan an invasion, butcher a hog, conn a ship, design a building, write a sonnet, balance accounts, build a wall, set a bone, comfort the dying, take orders, give orders, cooperate, act alone, solve equations, analyze a new problem, pitch manure, program a computer, cook a tasty meal, fight efficiently, die gallantly. Specialization is for insects.

— Robert Heinlein, Time Enough for Love [ 113 ] [ 114 ] Predecessors of Heinlein's competent heroes include the protagonists of George Bernard Shaw , like Henry Higgins in Pygmalion and Caesar in Caesar and Cleopatra , as well as the citizen soldiers in Rudyard Kipling 's " The Army of a Dream ".

Sexuality [ edit ] For Heinlein, personal liberation included sexual liberation , and free love was a major subject of his writing starting in 1939, with For Us, the Living . During his early period, Heinlein's writing for younger readers needed to take account of both editorial perceptions of sexuality in his novels, and potential perceptions among the buying public; as critic William H. Patterson has put it, his dilemma was "to sort out what was really objectionable from what was only excessive over-sensitivity to imaginary librarians".

[ 115 ] By his middle period, sexual freedom and the elimination of sexual jealousy became a major theme; for instance, in Stranger in a Strange Land (1961), the progressively minded but sexually conservative reporter, Ben Caxton, acts as a dramatic foil for the less parochial characters, Jubal Harshaw and Valentine Michael Smith (Mike). Another of the main characters, Jill, is homophobic, and says that "nine times out of ten, if a girl gets raped it's partly her own fault." [ 116 ] According to Gary Westfahl, Heinlein is a problematic case for feminists; on the one hand, his works often feature strong female characters and vigorous statements that women are equal to or even superior to men; but these characters and statements often reflect hopelessly stereotypical attitudes about typical female attributes. It is disconcerting, for example, that in Expanded Universe Heinlein calls for a society where all lawyers and politicians are women, essentially on the grounds that they possess a mysterious feminine practicality that men cannot duplicate.

[ 117 ] In books written as early as 1956, Heinlein dealt with incest and the sexual nature of children. Many of his books including Time for the Stars , Glory Road , Time Enough for Love , and The Number of the Beast dealt explicitly or implicitly with incest, sexual feelings and relations between adults, children, or both.

[ 118 ] The treatment of these themes include the romantic relationship and eventual marriage of two characters in The Door into Summer who met when one was a 30-year-old engineer and the other was an 11-year-old girl, and who eventually married when time-travel rendered the girl an adult while the engineer aged minimally, or the more overt intra-familial incest in To Sail Beyond the Sunset and Time Enough for Love . Heinlein often posed situations where the nominal purpose of sexual taboos was irrelevant to a particular situation, due to future advances in technology. For example, in Time Enough for Love Heinlein describes a brother and sister (Joe and Llita) who were mirror twins, being complementary diploids with entirely disjoint genomes, and thus not at increased risk for unfavorable gene duplication due to consanguinity . In this instance, Llita and Joe were props used to explore the concept of incest, where the usual objection to incest—heightened risk of genetic defect in their children—was not a consideration.

[ 119 ] Peers such as L. Sprague de Camp and Damon Knight have commented critically on Heinlein's portrayal of incest and pedophilia in a lighthearted and even approving manner.

[ 118 ] Diane Parkin-Speer suggests that Heinlein's intent seems more to provoke the reader and to question sexual norms than to promote any particular sexual agenda.

[ 120 ] Philosophy [ edit ] In To Sail Beyond the Sunset , Heinlein has the main character, Maureen , state that the purpose of metaphysics is to ask questions: "Why are we here?" "Where are we going after we die?" (and so on); and that you are not allowed to answer the questions.

Asking the questions is the point of metaphysics, but answering them is not, because once you answer this kind of question, you cross the line into religion. Maureen does not state a reason for this; she simply remarks that such questions are "beautiful" but lack answers. Maureen's son/lover Lazarus Long makes a related remark in Time Enough for Love . In order for us to answer the "big questions" about the universe, Lazarus states at one point, it would be necessary to stand outside the universe.

During the 1930s and 1940s, Heinlein was deeply interested in Alfred Korzybski 's general semantics and attended a number of seminars on the subject. His views on epistemology seem to have flowed from that interest, and his fictional characters continue to express Korzybskian views to the very end of his writing career. Many of his stories, such as Gulf , If This Goes On— , and Stranger in a Strange Land , depend strongly on the premise, related to the well-known Sapir–Whorf hypothesis , that by using a correctly designed language , one can change or improve oneself mentally, or even realize untapped potential (as in the case of Joe in Gulf —whose last name may be Greene, Gilead or Briggs).

[ 121 ] When Ayn Rand 's novel The Fountainhead was published, Heinlein was very favorably impressed, as quoted in "Grumbles ..." and mentioned John Galt—the hero in Rand's Atlas Shrugged —as a heroic archetype in The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress . He was also strongly affected by the religious philosopher P. D. Ouspensky .

[ 19 ] Freudianism and psychoanalysis were at the height of their influence during the peak of Heinlein's career, and stories such as Time for the Stars indulged in psychological theorizing.

However, he was skeptical about Freudianism, especially after a struggle with an editor who insisted on reading Freudian sexual symbolism into his juvenile novels . Heinlein was fascinated by the social credit movement in the 1930s. This is shown in Beyond This Horizon and in his 1938 novel For Us, the Living: A Comedy of Customs , which was finally published in 2003, long after his death.

Pay it forward [ edit ] On that theme, the phrase " pay it forward ", though it was already in occasional use as a quotation, was popularized by Robert A. Heinlein in his book Between Planets , [ 122 ] published in 1951: The banker reached into the folds of his gown, pulled out a single credit note. "But eat first—a full belly steadies the judgment. Do me the honor of accepting this as our welcome to the newcomer." His pride said no; his stomach said YES! Don took it and said, "Uh, thanks! That's awfully kind of you. I'll pay it back, first chance." "Instead, pay it forward to some other brother who needs it." He referred to this in a number of other stories, although sometimes just saying to pay a debt back by helping others, as in one of his last works, Job, a Comedy of Justice .

Heinlein was a mentor to Ray Bradbury , giving him help and quite possibly passing on the concept, made famous by the publication of a letter from him to Heinlein thanking him.

[ 123 ] In Bradbury's novel Dandelion Wine , published in 1957, when the main character Douglas Spaulding is reflecting on his life being saved by Mr. Jonas, the Junkman: How do I thank Mr. Jonas, he wondered, for what he's done? How do I thank him, how pay him back? No way, no way at all. You just can't pay. What then? What? Pass it on somehow, he thought, pass it on to someone else. Keep the chain moving. Look around, find someone, and pass it on. That was the only way...

Bradbury has also advised that writers he has helped thank him by helping other writers.

[ 124 ] Heinlein both preached and practiced this philosophy; now the Heinlein Society , a humanitarian organization founded in his name, does so, attributing the philosophy to its various efforts, including Heinlein for Heroes, the Heinlein Society Scholarship Program, and Heinlein Society blood drives.

[ 125 ] Author Spider Robinson made repeated reference to the doctrine, attributing it to his spiritual mentor Heinlein.

[ 126 ] Influence and legacy [ edit ] Honorifics [ edit ] Heinlein is usually identified, along with Isaac Asimov and Arthur C. Clarke , as one of the three masters of science fiction to arise in the so-called Golden Age of science fiction , associated with John W. Campbell and his magazine Astounding .

[ 127 ] In the 1950s he was a leader in bringing science fiction out of the low-paying and less prestigious " pulp ghetto". Most of his works, including short stories, have been continuously in print in many languages since their initial appearance and are still available as new paperbacks decades after his death.

Heinlein crater on Mars He was at the top of his form during, and himself helped to initiate, the trend toward social science fiction , which went along with a general maturing of the genre away from space opera to a more literary approach touching on such adult issues as politics and human sexuality . In reaction to this trend, hard science fiction began to be distinguished as a separate subgenre, but paradoxically Heinlein is also considered a seminal figure in hard science fiction, due to his extensive knowledge of engineering and the careful scientific research demonstrated in his stories. Heinlein himself stated—with obvious pride—that in the days before pocket calculators, he and his wife Virginia once worked for several days on a mathematical equation describing an Earth–Mars rocket orbit, which was then subsumed in a single sentence of the novel Space Cadet .

Writing style [ edit ] Heinlein is often credited with bringing serious writing techniques to the genre of science fiction. For example, when writing about fictional worlds, previous authors were often limited by the reader's existing knowledge of a typical "space opera" setting, leading to a relatively low creativity level: The same starships, death rays, and horrifying rubbery aliens becoming ubiquitous.

[ citation needed ] This was necessary unless the author was willing to go into long expositions about the setting of the story, at a time when the word count was at a premium in SF.

[ citation needed ] But Heinlein utilized a technique called " indirect exposition ", perhaps first introduced by Rudyard Kipling in his own science fiction venture, the Aerial Board of Control stories. Kipling had picked this up during his time in India , using it to avoid bogging down his stories set in India with explanations for his English readers.

[ 128 ] This technique—mentioning details in a way that lets the reader infer more about the universe than is actually spelled out [ 129 ] —became a trademark rhetorical technique of both Heinlein and writers influenced by him. Heinlein was significantly influenced by Kipling beyond this, for example quoting him in " On the Writing of Speculative Fiction ".

[ 130 ] Likewise, Heinlein's name is often associated with the competent hero , a character archetype who, though he or she may have flaws and limitations, is a strong, accomplished person able to overcome any soluble problem set in their path. They tend to feel confident overall, have a broad life experience and set of skills, and not give up when the going gets tough. This style influenced not only the writing style of a generation of authors, but even their personal character.

Harlan Ellison once said, "Very early in life when I read Robert Heinlein I got the thread that runs through his stories—the notion of the competent man ... I've always held that as my ideal. I've tried to be a very competent man." [ 131 ] Rules of writing [ edit ] See also: On the Writing of Speculative Fiction When fellow writers, or fans, wrote Heinlein asking for writing advice, he famously gave out his own list of rules for becoming a successful writer: You must write.

Finish what you start.

You must refrain from rewriting, except to editorial order.

You must put your story on the market.

You must keep it on the market until it has sold.

About which he said: The above five rules really have more to do with how to write speculative fiction than anything said above them. But they are amazingly hard to follow—which is why there are so few professional writers and so many aspirants, and which is why I am not afraid to give away the racket!

[ 132 ] Heinlein later published an entire article, " On the Writing of Speculative Fiction ", which included his rules, and from which the above quote is taken. When he says "anything said above them", he refers to his other guidelines. For example, he describes most stories as fitting into one of a handful of basic categories: The gadget story The human interest story Boy meets girl The Little Tailor The man-who-learned-better In the article, Heinlein proposes that most stories fit into either the gadget story or the human interest story, which is itself subdivided into the three latter categories. He also credits L. Ron Hubbard as having identified "The Man-Who-Learned-Better".

Influence among writers [ edit ] Heinlein has had a pervasive influence on other science fiction writers. In a 1953 poll of leading science fiction authors, he was cited more frequently as an influence than any other modern writer.

[ 133 ] Critic James Gifford writes that Although many other writers have exceeded Heinlein's output, few can claim to match his broad and seminal influence. Scores of science fiction writers from the prewar Golden Age through the present day loudly and enthusiastically credit Heinlein for blazing the trails of their own careers, and shaping their styles and stories.

— Robert A. Heinlein, A Reader's Companion , p. xiii Heinlein gave Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle extensive advice on a draft manuscript of The Mote in God's Eye .

[ 134 ] He contributed a cover blurb "Possibly the finest science fiction novel I have ever read." In their novel Footfall , Niven and Pournelle included Robert A. Heinlein as a character under the name "Bob Anson." Anson in the novel is a respected and well-known science-fiction author. Writer David Gerrold , responsible for creating the tribbles in Star Trek , also credited Heinlein as the inspiration for his Dingilliad series of novels.

Gregory Benford refers to his novel Jupiter Project as a Heinlein tribute. Similarly, Charles Stross says his Hugo Award-nominated novel Saturn's Children is "a space opera and late-period Robert A. Heinlein tribute", [ 135 ] referring to Heinlein's Friday .

[ 136 ] The theme and plot of Kameron Hurley's novel, The Light Brigade clearly echo those of Heinlein's Starship Troopers .

[ 137 ] Words and phrases coined [ edit ] Even outside the science fiction community, several words and phrases coined or adopted by Heinlein have passed into common English usage: Waldo , protagonist in the eponymous short story " Waldo ", whose name came to mean mechanical or robot arms in the real world that are akin to the ones used by the character in the story.

Moonbat [ 138 ] used in United States politics as a pejorative political epithet referring to progressives or leftists , was originally the name of a space ship in his story " Space Jockey ".

Grok , a Martian word for understanding a thing so fully as to become one with it, from Stranger in a Strange Land , whose root meaning in Martian is "to drink".

Space marine , an existing term popularized by Heinlein in short stories, the concept then being made famous by Starship Troopers , though the term "space marine" is not used in that novel.

Speculative fiction , a term Heinlein used for the separation of serious, consistent science fiction writing, from the pop "sci fi" of the day.

Inspiring culture and technology [ edit ] In 1962, Oberon Zell-Ravenheart (then still using his birth name, Tim Zell) founded the Church of All Worlds , a Neopagan religious organization modeled in many ways (including its name) after the treatment of religion in the novel Stranger in a Strange Land . This spiritual path included several ideas from the book, including non-mainstream family structures, social libertarianism, water-sharing rituals, an acceptance of all religious paths by a single tradition, and the use of several terms such as "grok", "Thou art God", and "Never Thirst". Though Heinlein was neither a member nor a promoter of the Church, there was a frequent exchange of correspondence between Zell and Heinlein, and he was a paid subscriber to their magazine, Green Egg . This Church still exists as a 501(C)(3) religious organization incorporated in California, with membership worldwide, and it remains an active part of the neopagan community today.

[ 139 ] Zell-Ravenheart's wife, Morning Glory coined the term polyamory in 1990, [ 140 ] another movement that includes Heinlein concepts among its roots.

Heinlein was influential in making space exploration seem to the public more like a practical possibility. His stories in publications such as The Saturday Evening Post took a matter-of-fact approach to their outer-space setting, rather than the "gee whiz" tone that had previously been common. The documentary-like film Destination Moon advocated a Space Race with an unspecified foreign power almost a decade before such an idea became commonplace, and was promoted by an unprecedented publicity campaign in print publications. Many of the astronauts and others working in the U.S. space program grew up on a diet of the Heinlein juveniles , [ original research?

] best evidenced by the naming of a crater on Mars after him, and a tribute interspersed by the Apollo 15 astronauts into their radio conversations while on the moon.

[ 141 ] Heinlein was also a guest commentator (along with fellow SF author Arthur C. Clarke ) for Walter Cronkite 's coverage of the Apollo 11 Moon landing.

[ 142 ] He remarked to Cronkite during the landing that, "This is the greatest event in human history, up to this time. This is—today is New Year's Day of the Year One." [ 143 ] Heinlein has inspired many transformational figures in business and technology including Lee Felsenstein , the designer of the first mass-produced portable computer, [ 144 ] Marc Andreessen , [ 145 ] co-author of the first widely-used web browser, and Elon Musk , CEO of Tesla and founder of SpaceX .

[ 146 ] Heinlein Society [ edit ] Main article: Heinlein Society The Heinlein Society was founded by Virginia Heinlein on behalf of her husband, to " pay forward " the legacy of the writer to future generations of "Heinlein's Children". The foundation has programs to: "Promote Heinlein blood drives." "Provide educational materials to educators." "Promote scholarly research and overall discussion of the works and ideas of Robert Anson Heinlein." The Heinlein society also established the Robert A. Heinlein Award in 2003 "for outstanding published works in science fiction and technical writings to inspire the human exploration of space".

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] Honors [ edit ] Orbital path of Robert Heinlein's eponymous asteroid In his lifetime, Heinlein received four Hugo Awards , for Double Star , Starship Troopers , Stranger in a Strange Land , and The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress , and was nominated for four Nebula Awards , for The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress , Friday , Time Enough for Love , and Job: A Comedy of Justice .

[ 149 ] He was also given seven Retro-Hugos: two for best novel: Beyond This Horizon and Farmer in the Sky ; three for best novella: If This Goes On...

, Waldo , and The Man Who Sold the Moon ; one for best novelette: "The Roads Must Roll"; and one for best dramatic presentation: "Destination Moon".

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] [ 152 ] Heinlein was also nominated for six Hugo Awards for the works Have Space Suit: Will Travel , Glory Road , Time Enough for Love , Friday , Job: A Comedy of Justice and Grumbles from the Grave , as well as six Retro Hugo Awards for Magic, Inc.

, "Requiem", "Coventry", "Blowups Happen", "Goldfish Bowl", and "The Unpleasant Profession of Jonathan Hoag".

Heinlein won the Locus Award for "All-Time Favorite Author" in 1973, and for "All-Time Best Author" in 1988.

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] The Science Fiction Writers of America named Heinlein its first Grand Master in 1974, presented 1975. Officers and past presidents of the Association select a living writer for lifetime achievement (now annually and including fantasy literature).

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] In 1977, Heinlein  was awarded the Inkpot Award , [ 155 ] and in 1985, he was awarded the Eisner Awards "Bob Clampett Humanitarian Award".

[ 156 ] Main-belt asteroid 6312 Robheinlein (1990 RH4), discovered on September 14, 1990, by H. E. Holt at Palomar, was named after him.

[ 157 ] In 1994 the International Astronomical Union named Heinlein crater on Mars in his honor.

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] The Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted Heinlein in 1998.

[ 160 ] In 2001 the United States Naval Academy created the Robert A. Heinlein Chair in Aerospace Engineering.

[ 161 ] Heinlein was the Ghost of Honor at the 2008 World Science Fiction Convention in Denver, Colorado, which held several panels on his works. Nearly seventy years earlier, he had been a Guest of Honor at the same convention.

[ 162 ] In 2016, after an intensive online campaign to win a vote for the opening, Heinlein was inducted into the Hall of Famous Missourians .

[ 163 ] His bronze bust, created by Kansas City sculptor E. Spencer Schubert , is on permanent display in the Missouri State Capitol in Jefferson City .

[ 164 ] The Libertarian Futurist Society has honored eight of Heinlein's novels and two short stories with their Hall of Fame award.

[ 165 ] The first two were given during his lifetime for The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress and Stranger in a Strange Land . Five more were awarded posthumously for Red Planet , Methuselah's Children , Time Enough for Love , and the short stories "Requiem" and "Coventry".

See also [ edit ] Biography portal Science fiction portal Children and Young Adult Literature portal Libertarianism portal Robert A. Heinlein bibliography Heinlein Society Robert A. Heinlein Award Heinlein Prize for Advances in Space Commercialization Heinlein Centennial Convention List of Robert A. Heinlein characters " The Return of William Proxmire " References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b Woo, Elaine (January 26, 2003).

"Virginia Heinlein, 86; Wife, Muse and Literary Guardian of Celebrated Science Fiction Writer" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2016 . Retrieved June 25, 2017 .

Also reproduced at The Heinlein Society Archived December 18, 2019, at the Wayback Machine ^ Wells, John C.

(2008).

Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.). Longman.

^ a b c d Houdek, D. A. (2003).

"FAQ: Frequently Asked Questions about Robert A. Heinlein, the person" . The Heinlein Society. Archived from the original on April 3, 2012 . Retrieved January 23, 2007 .

^ "Say How? A Pronunciation Guide to Names of Public Figures" . Library of Congress, National Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped (NLS). September 21, 2006.

Archived from the original on October 6, 2019 . Retrieved January 23, 2007 .

^ Booker, M. Keith; Thomas, Anne-Marie (2009).

The Science Fiction Handbook . Blackwell Guides to Literature Series. John Wiley & Sons. p. 155.

ISBN 978-1405162050 .

Archived from the original on July 5, 2019 . Retrieved June 27, 2018 .

Sometimes called the 'dean of science fiction writers,' Robert A. Heinlein was one of the leading figures of science fiction's Golden Age and one of the authors most responsible for establishing the science fiction novel as a publishing category.

^ Mendlesohn, Farah (2019).

The Pleasant Profession of Robert A. Heinlein . London: Unbound Publishing.

ISBN 978-1783526789 .

^ "Robert Heinlein's softer side" .

The Guardian . January 12, 2009.

Archived from the original on January 25, 2021 . Retrieved June 5, 2021 .

^ "The Big Three—Asimov—Clarke—Heinlein—A Bibliography" . SFandFantasy.co.uk.

Archived from the original on September 1, 2016 . Retrieved August 28, 2016 .

Isaac Asimov, Arthur C. Clarke and Robert Heinlein are informally known as the 'Big Three'—the best known members of the group of authors who brought science fiction into a Golden Age in the middle years of the twentieth century ^ Parrinder, Patrick (2001).

Learning from Other Worlds: Estrangement, Cognition, and the Politics of Science Fiction and Utopia . Duke University Press. p. 81.

ISBN 978-0822327738 .

This short discussion of Asimov, Clarke and Heinlein—the so-called Big Three, who largely dominated American (and, to a lesser extent, Anglo-American) science fiction during the 1940s, the 1950s and well into the 1960s—should serve to suggest the particularly complex affinity between science fiction and critical theory in its Blochian version.

^ "Science Fiction Writer Robert J. Sawyer: The Death of Science Fiction" .

SF writer .

Archived from the original on May 2, 2012 . Retrieved November 26, 2017 .

And yet, the publishers do whatever they can to continue to milk the big three: Asimov, Clarke, and Heinlein ^ "15 Things You Might Not Know About Stranger in a Strange Land " .

Mental floss . July 14, 2015.

Archived from the original on April 14, 2017 . Retrieved November 26, 2017 .

^ a b "Was Robert A. Heinlein a Libertarian?" . Mises Institute. May 18, 2010.

Archived from the original on December 11, 2019 . Retrieved May 5, 2017 .

^ Lord, M. G. (October 2, 2005).

"Heinlein's Female Troubles" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 13, 2019 . Retrieved February 26, 2019 .

^ Patterson, William H. Jr. (2010).

Robert A. Heinlein: In Dialogue with His Century . Vol. 1 (1st ed.). New York: Tor Books. pp.

122– 125.

ISBN 978-0765319609 .

^ "Heinlein's Conservatism" .

National Review . October 25, 2010 . Retrieved July 13, 2024 .

^ a b "Damon Knight Memorial Grand Master" Archived July 1, 2011, at the Wayback Machine . Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America (SFWA). Retrieved March 23, 2013.

^ a b "Robert A. Heinlein Awards" .

Science Fiction Awards Database . Locus Science Fiction Foundation.

Archived from the original on December 18, 2019 . Retrieved December 18, 2019 .

^ Patterson, William (2010).

"Appendix 2" .

Robert A. Heinlein: 1907–1948, learning curve . New York: Tom Doherty Associates.

ISBN 978-0765319609 . Retrieved June 29, 2014 .

^ a b c William H. Patterson Jr. (1999).

"Robert A. Heinlein, a Biographical Sketch" .

The Heinlein Journal .

1999 (5): 7– 36. Archived from the original on March 21, 2008 . Retrieved March 21, 2008 .

Also available at. Retrieved July 6, 2007.

^ "3".

Sci-fi Literature Genius Guide . Imagine Publishing. 2012.

ISBN 978-1908222183 .

^ a b Suplee, Curt (September 5, 1984).

"In the Strange Land Of Robert Heinlein" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved July 29, 2021 .

^ Keatley, J.H. (ed.).  Written at Annapolis, MD.

The Lucky Bag of Nineteen Twenty Nine, The Annual of the Regiment of Midshipmen, Published at The United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, MD, by The Class of 1929 . Rochester, NY: The Dubois Press. p. 319.

^ "Robert A. and Virginia G. Heinlein Papers" .

Online Archive of California .

Archived from the original on April 25, 2019 . Retrieved February 26, 2019 .

^ James Gunn, "Grand Master Award Remarks" Archived September 29, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ; "Credit Col. Earp and Gen. Heinlein with the Reactivation of Nevada's Camp Clark", The Nevada Daily Mail , June 27, 1966 .

^ "Social Affairs of the Army and Navy", Los Angeles Times ; September 1, 1929; p. B8.

^ Patterson, William H.

Robert A. Heinlein: In Dialogue with His Century, Vol. 1 — Learning Curve (1907–1948) , Tor Books, 2010, ISBN 978-0765319609 ^ a b Isaac Asimov, I, Asimov .

^ Patterson, William (2010).

"Chapter 27" .

Robert A. Heinlein: 1907–1948, learning curve . New York: Tom Doherty Associates.

ISBN 978-0765319609 . Retrieved April 12, 2011 .

^ "Colorado Voices: The festival of history" . May 31, 2011.

Archived from the original on December 2, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2020 .

^ "site: Robert A. Heinlein – Archives – PM 6/52 Article" .

www.nitrosyncretic.com .

Archived from the original on October 13, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2020 .

^ "Heinlein Society Photo Tour of Bonny Doon" .

Archived from the original on August 6, 2020 . Retrieved April 15, 2020 .

^ Heinlein, Robert A.

Grumbles from the Grave , ch. VII.  1989.

^ " The Rolling Stone " . Heinleinsociety.org. May 24, 2003. Archived from the original on February 18, 2012 . Retrieved May 16, 2012 .

^ "Heinlein's Women, by G. E. Rule" . Heinleinsociety.org. May 24, 2003. Archived from the original on August 2, 2012 . Retrieved May 16, 2012 .

^ a b Expanded Universe ^ Afterword to For Us, the Living: A Comedy of Customs , 2004 edition, p. 245.

^ Robert A. Heinlein (2005). "Foreword by Michael Cassutt".

Off the Main Sequence . Science Fiction Book Club. p. xiii.

ISBN 1582881847 .

^ (afterword to For Us, the Living: A Comedy of Customs , 2004 edition, p. 247, and the story " A Bathroom of Her Own "). Also, an unfortunate juxtaposition of events had a Konrad Henlein making headlines in the Sudetenlands .

^ a b c Robert A. Heinlein at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database ( ISFDB ). Retrieved April 4, 2013.

^ Asimov, Isaac (1972).

The early Asimov; or, Eleven years of trying . Garden City, NY: Doubleday. pp.

79– 82.

^ Williamson, Jack "Who Was Robert Heinlein?" in Requiem: new collected works by Robert A. Heinlein and tributes to the grand master NY 1992 pp. 333–34 ISBN 0312855230 ^ Patterson, William (2001).

The Martian named Smith : critical perspectives on Robert A. Heinlein's Stranger in a strange land . Sacramento, Calif: Nitrosyncretic Press.

ISBN 0967987423 .

^ Latham, Rob (October 10, 2018).

"Beyond pulp: trailblazers of science fiction's golden age" .

Nature .

562 (7726): 189– 190.

Bibcode : 2018Natur.562..189L .

doi : 10.1038/d41586-018-06943-8 .

^ Olson, Glen W. (January 1, 2024).

"Heinlein's Influence on Dating and Marriage Patterns in America, a Perspective" .

The Heinlein Journal .

^ Causo, Roberto de Sousa.

"Citizenship at War" . Archived from the original on March 15, 2006 . Retrieved March 4, 2006 .

^ Patterson, William H. Jr. (2014).

Robert A. Heinlein: In Dialogue with His Century: Volume 2, 1948–1988 The Man Who Learned Better . Macmillan. p. 207.

ISBN 978-1429987967 .

Archived from the original on January 1, 2017 . Retrieved August 28, 2016 .

^ Virginia Heinlein to Michael A. Banks, 1988 ^ On Paul Dirac and antimatter, and on blood chemistry. A version of the former, titled Paul Dirac, Antimatter, and You , was published in the anthology Expanded Universe , and it demonstrates both Heinlein's skill as a popularizer and his lack of depth in physics. An afterword gives a normalization equation and presents it, incorrectly, as being the Dirac equation .

^ "FAQ: Frequently Asked Questions about Robert A. Heinlein, the person" .

The Heinlein Society .

Archived from the original on February 13, 2019 . Retrieved February 26, 2019 .

^ Society, National Space (October 25, 2006).

"Book Review: Variable Star – National Space Society" .

^ "The Heinlein Archives" . The Robert A. and Virginia Heinlein Archives.

Archived from the original on December 7, 2008 . Retrieved October 21, 2008 .

^ Gussow, Mel (March 10, 2004).

"Heinlein's Prophetic First Novel, Lost and Found" .

The New York Times .

^ "Working with Robert A. Heinlein" .

Thewaythefutureblogs.com . Archived from the original on August 16, 2010 . Retrieved November 26, 2017 .

^ Asimov, Isaac (2009).

I, Asimov: A Memoir . Random House Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0307573537 .

Archived from the original on January 1, 2017 . Retrieved August 28, 2016 .

^ Panshin, Alexei and Cory.

"The Death of Science Fiction: A Dream, Part 1" .

Panshin.com .

Archived from the original on July 30, 2016 . Retrieved August 28, 2016 .

^ Panshin, Alexei.

"Heinlein and the Golden Age, 1" .

Panshin.com .

Archived from the original on March 25, 2016 . Retrieved August 28, 2016 .

^ "Electrolite: 'He was the train we did not catch.' " . nielsenhayden.com.

Archived from the original on October 29, 2012 . Retrieved August 28, 2016 .

^ Robert A., Heinlein (2004).

For Us, the Living: A Comedy of Customs . Simon and Schuster. p. 133.

ISBN 978-0743261579 .

^ Robert A. Heinlein, Expanded Universe , foreword to "Free Men", p. 207 of Ace paperback edition.

^ Alexei Panshin.

"Heinlein in Dimension, Chapter 3, Part 1" . Enter.net.

Archived from the original on July 31, 2002 . Retrieved May 16, 2012 .

^ Panshin, Alexei.

"The Story of Heinlein in Dimension, 6" .

Panshin.com .

Archived from the original on December 24, 2013 . Retrieved December 17, 2023 .

^ a b Perry, Thomas.

"Ham and Eggs and Heinlein, 1" .

Panshin.com .

Archived from the original on December 24, 2013 . Retrieved December 17, 2023 .

^ The importance Heinlein attached to privacy was made clear in his fiction, e.g.

, For Us, the Living , but also in several well-known examples from his life. He had a falling out with Alexei Panshin , who wrote an important book analyzing Heinlein's fiction; Heinlein stopped cooperating with Panshin because he accused Panshin of "[attempting to] pry into his affairs and to violate his privacy". Heinlein wrote to Panshin's publisher threatening to sue, and stating, "You are warned that only the barest facts of my private life are public knowledge ...".

[ 61 ] Heinlein was a nudist, and built a fence around his house in Santa Cruz to keep out the counterculture types who had learned of his ideas through Stranger in a Strange Land . In his later life, Heinlein studiously avoided revealing his early involvement in left-wing politics, [ 62 ] and made strenuous efforts to block publication of information he had revealed to prospective biographer Sam Moskowitz.

[ 62 ] ^ James Blish , The Issues at Hand , p. 52.

^ a b John J. Miller.

"In A Strange Land" . National Review Online Books Arts and Manners. Archived from the original on July 17, 2011 . Retrieved November 27, 2009 .

^ Centenary a modern sci-fi giant Archived July 8, 2012, at archive.today The Free Lance Star, June 30, 2007.

^ "Libertarian Futurist Society" .

Lfs.org .

Archived from the original on June 28, 2011 . Retrieved November 26, 2017 .

^ a b Riggenbach, Jeff (June 2, 2010).

"Was Robert A. Heinlein a Libertarian?" .

Mises Daily .

Ludwig von Mises Institute .

Archived from the original on September 14, 2014 . Retrieved September 13, 2014 .

^ Patterson, William H.; Thornton, Andrew (2001).

The Martian Named Smith: Critical Perspectives on Robert A. Heinlein's Stranger in a Strange Land . Nitrosyncretic Press. p. 129.

ISBN 978-0967987422 .

^ Gifford, James.

Robert A. Heinlein: A Reader's Companion , Nitrosyncretic Press, Sacramento, California, 2000, p. 102.

^ See, e.g., Langford, David.

"Vulgarity and Nullity. Robert A. Heinlein 'The Number of the Beast' " .

Ansible.uk . Archived from the original on January 20, 2013 . Retrieved December 29, 2022 .

^ Patterson, William H., Jr., and Thornton, Andrew., The Martian Named Smith: Critical Perspectives on Robert A. Heinlein's Stranger in a Strange Land, p. 128: "His books written after about 1980 ... belong to a series called by one of the central characters World as Myth ." The term Multiverse also occurs in the print literature, e.g., Robert A. Heinlein: A Reader's Companion, James Gifford, Nitrosyncretic Press, Sacramento, California, 2000. The term World as Myth occurs for the first time in Heinlein's novel The Cat Who Walks Through Walls .

^ "Robert A. Heinlein, 1907–1988" .

Biography of Robert A. Heinlein . University of California Santa Cruz.

Archived from the original on April 18, 2015 . Retrieved November 27, 2009 .

^ J. Neil Schulman (1999). "Job: A Comedy of Justice Reviewed by J. Neil Schulman".

Robert Heinlein Interview: And Other Heinleiniana . Pulpless.Com. p. 62.

ISBN 978-1584450153 .

Lewis converted me from atheism to Christianity—Rand converted me back to atheism, with Heinlein standing on the sidelines rooting for agnosticism.

^ Carole M. Cusack (2010).

Invented Religions: Imagination, Fiction and Faith . Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. p. 57.

ISBN 978-0754693604 .

Heinlein, like Robert Anton Wilson, was a lifelong agnostic, believing that to affirm that there is no God was as silly and unsupported as to affirm that there was a God.

^ "Heinleinsociety.org" . Heinleinsociety.org. Archived from the original on January 15, 2013 . Retrieved May 16, 2012 .

^ "heinleinbooks.com" . Heinleinsociety.org.

Archived from the original on December 27, 2014 . Retrieved January 17, 2015 .

^ Heinlein, Robert (2020).

The pursuit of the Pankera : a parallel novel about parallel universes . Rockville, MD: CAEZIK SF & Fantasy, an imprint of Arc Manor Publishers.

ISBN 978-1647100018 .

^ "Unseen Robert A Heinlein novel reworks 'awful' The Number of the Beast" .

The Guardian . February 8, 2019.

Archived from the original on November 8, 2020 . Retrieved February 13, 2021 .

^ Brown, Alan (April 9, 2020).

"Long-Lost Treasure: The Pursuit of the Pankera vs. The Number of the Beast by Robert A. Heinlein" .

Tor.com .

Archived from the original on April 12, 2020 . Retrieved May 1, 2020 .

^ Heinlein, Robert (2020).

The number of the beast : a parallel novel about parallel universes . Rockville, NY: CAEZIK SF & Fantasy, an imprint of Arc Manor Publishers.

ISBN 978-1647100032 .

^ "six-six-six" .

Arc Manor Magazines . Archived from the original on February 4, 2019 . Retrieved February 26, 2019 .

^ "Pixel Scroll 6/20/19 Mamas, Don't Let Your Pixels Grow up to be Scrollers" . June 21, 2019.

Archived from the original on June 23, 2019 . Retrieved June 23, 2019 .

^ "Destination Moon: A 70th Anniversary Appreciation" .

www.centauri-dreams.org .

^ Raymond, Eric (December 2, 2005).

"Rudyard Kipling Invented SF!" .

ibiblio.org .

Archived from the original on April 1, 2017 . Retrieved February 26, 2019 .

^ a b Lerner, Fred (June 21, 2021).

"A Master of our Art. Rudyard Kipling considered as a Science Fiction writer" .

The Kipling Society . Archived from the original on October 30, 2017 . Retrieved December 29, 2022 .

But the best way to understand why Kipling has exerted so great an influence over modern science fiction is to read his own work. Begin with Kim , the most successful evocation of an alien world ever produced in English. Follow the Grand Trunk Road toward the Northwest Frontier, and watch the parade of cultures that young Kimball O'Hara encounters. Place yourself in his position, that of a half-assimilated stranger in a strange land; and observe carefully the uneven effects of an ancient society's encounter with a technologically advanced culture. SF writers have found Kim so appealing that several have told their own versions of the story: Robert Heinlein's Citizen of the Galaxy and Poul Anderson's The Game of Empire are two of the best.

^ a b J. Neil Schulman, The Robert Heinlein Interview, and other Heinleiniana (1973) [ page needed ] ^ Clareson, Thomas D.; Sanders, Joe (2013).

The Heritage of Heinlein: A Critical Reading of the Fiction . McFarland.

ISBN 978-0786474981 .

Archived from the original on June 5, 2021 . Retrieved February 26, 2019 – via Google Books.

^ Sturgis, Amy (2008).

"Heinlein, Robert (1907–1988)" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

223– 24.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n134 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Archived from the original on September 30, 2020 . Retrieved February 16, 2016 .

^ "Robert Heinlein at 100" .

Reason.com . July 9, 2007.

Archived from the original on July 12, 2012 . Retrieved November 26, 2017 .

^ Cusack, Carole.

"Science Fiction as Scripture: Robert A. Heinlein's Stranger in a Strange Land and the Church of All Worlds" .

Reprinted in Lawrence J. Trudeau (Ed.), Twentieth Century Literary Criticism, Vol. 337, Detroit: Gale, Cengage, 2016, Pp. 282–293 .

Archived from the original on June 5, 2021 . Retrieved November 26, 2017 .

^ a b c Wooster, Martin Morse (October 25, 2010).

"Heinlein's Conservatism" .

National Review Online . Retrieved December 29, 2022 .

(a review of William Patterson's Learning Curve: 1907–1948 , the first volume of his authorized biography, Robert A. Heinlein: In Dialogue with His Century ).

^ Cowan, M. E. (2004).

"A Heinlein Concordance" .

www.heinleinsociety.org . Archived from the original on May 11, 2019 . Retrieved April 20, 2019 .

^ "Heinlein's Conservatism" .

National Review . October 25, 2010 . Retrieved July 13, 2024 .

^ "Paid Advertisement".

Galaxy Science Fiction . June 1968. pp.

4– 11.

^ Patterson, William (2014).

Robert A. Heinlein: 1948–1988, The Man Who Learned Better . New York: Tom Doherty Associates. p. 389.

ISBN 978-0765319616 .

^ Erisman, Fred (1988). "Robert Heinlein's Case for Racial Tolerance, 1954–1956".

Extrapolation .

29 (3): 216– 226.

^ Pearson, Wendy (2005). "Race relations".

The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy: Themes, Works, and Wonders, Volume 2 .

Greenwood Publishing Group . pp.

648– 50.

^ Greeley, Henry T. (October 17, 2012).

"BioSci Fi: "Jerry Was a Man", Robert A. Heinlein, 1947" .

Stanford Law School . Retrieved April 8, 2025 .

^ Heinlein, Robert A. (1954).

The Star Beast . Charles Schribner's Sons. p.

31 .

^ Heinlein, Robert A. (1954).

The Star Beast . Charles Schribner's Sons. p.

249 .

^ "FAQ: Heinlein's Works" . Heinleinsociety.org. Archived from the original on April 22, 2019 . Retrieved May 16, 2012 .

^ J. Daniel Gifford (2000).

Robert A. Heinlein: a reader's companion . Nitrosyncretic Press. p. 201.

ISBN 978-0967987415 .

Archived from the original on January 1, 2017 . Retrieved February 16, 2016 .

^ The reference in Tunnel in the Sky is subtle and ambiguous, but at least one college instructor who teaches the book reports that some students always ask, "Is he black ?" (see [ 102 ] ).

The Heinlein scholar and critic James Gifford (see bibliography) states: "A very subtle point in the book, one found only by the most careful reading and confirmed by Virginia Heinlein, is that Rod Walker is black. The most telling clues are Rod's comments about Caroline Mshiyeni being similar to his sister, and the 'obvious' (to all of the other characters) pairing of Rod and Caroline." [ 103 ] ^ Robert A. Heinlein, Expanded Universe , foreword to Solution Unsatisfactory , p. 93 of Ace paperback edition.

^ Citations at Sixth Column .

^ Appel, J. M. (July 1, 2009).

"Is all fair in biological warfare? The controversy over genetically engineered biological weapons" .

Journal of Medical Ethics .

35 (7): 429– 432.

doi : 10.1136/jme.2008.028944 .

ISSN 0306-6800 .

PMID 19567692 .

S2CID 1643086 .

^ Hickman, John (Spring 2021).

"Yellow Perils of Robert Heinlein" .

European Journal of American Studies .

16 (1).

doi : 10.4000/ejas.16749 .

^ For example, recruitment officer Mr Weiss, in Starship Troopers (p. 37, New English Library: London, 1977 edition.) ^ Robert A. Heinlein, Expanded Universe , p. 396 of Ace paperback edition.

^ Robert A. Heinlein, Starship Troopers , p. 121 of Berkley Medallion paperback edition.

^ Ellen Weil and Gary K. Wolfe, Harlan Ellison: The Edge of Forever , Ohio State University Press, 2002, p. 53.

ISBN 978-0814208922 ^ Heinlein, Robert A., Time Enough for Love , Ace Books (paperback edition, 1988). p. 248.

ISBN 978-0441810765 ^ Heinlein, Robert A., The Notebooks of Lazarus Long , G.P. Putnam's Sons. (paperback edition, 1978).

ISBN 0399122427 ^ William H Patterson jnr's Introduction to The Rolling Stones , Baen: New York, 2009 edition., p. 3.

^ Jordison, Sam (January 12, 2009).

"Robert Heinlein's softer side" .

The Guardian . London. Books Blog.

Archived from the original on July 14, 2014 . Retrieved July 30, 2014 .

^ Gary Westfahl, "Superladies in Waiting: How the Female Hero Almost Emerges in Science Fiction", Foundation , vol. 58, 1993, pp. 42–62.

^ a b "The Heinlein Society" . The Heinlein Society. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012 . Retrieved May 16, 2012 .

^ Bright, Robin. "Self Begetting Ourobouros: The Science Fiction of Robert A. Heinlein". p. 167. Harvard ^ Parkin-Speer, Diane. "Robert A. Heinlein: The Novelist as Preacher".

Extrapolation 20, no. 3 (1979): 214–222.

^ "Gulf—Heinlein Concordance" .

www.heinleinsociety.org .

Archived from the original on February 24, 2021 . Retrieved May 22, 2019 .

^ "Pay It Forward" . The Heinlein Society.

Archived from the original on March 18, 2019 . Retrieved February 26, 2019 .

^ Anders, Charlie Jane (September 14, 2011).

"Amazingly Touching 1976 Letter from Ray Bradbury to Robert Heinlein: 'Your influence on us all cannot be measured.' " .

io9 .

Archived from the original on September 27, 2019 . Retrieved May 22, 2019 .

^ Moss, Tyler (August 26, 2016).

"Writers Helping Writers: Interview With Jonathan Maberry" .

Writer's Digest .

Archived from the original on September 5, 2019 . Retrieved September 5, 2019 .

^ "Pay It Forward" . The Heinlein Society.

Archived from the original on December 22, 2017 . Retrieved November 26, 2017 .

^ "Centennial reader" . Heinlein society. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015 . Retrieved November 26, 2017 .

^ Freedman, Carl (2000).

Critical Theory and Science Fiction (1st ed.). Wesleyan University Press. p. 71.

ISBN 978-0819563996 .

^ Kipling had learned this trick in India. His original Anglo-Indian readership knew the customs and institutions and landscapes of British India at first hand. But when he began writing for a wider British and American audience, he had to provide his new readers with enough information for them to understand what was going on. In his earliest stories and verse he made liberal use of footnotes, but he evolved more subtle methods as his talent matured. A combination of outright exposition, sparingly used, and contextual clues, generously sprinkled through the narrative, offered the needed background. In Kim and other stories of India he uses King James English to indicate that characters are speaking in Hindustani; this is never explained, but it gets the message across subliminally., [ 86 ] quoted in esr (December 2, 2005).

"Rudyard Kipling Invented SF!" .

Armed and Dangerous .

Archived from the original on April 1, 2017 . Retrieved December 29, 2022 .

^ The Writer's Writing Guide: Exposition Archived December 3, 2016, at the Wayback Machine With indirect exposition, the writer gives the reader the data in subtle but clear ways, thereby allowing the reader to be a partner when it comes to laying the foundation of the story. For instance, the narrator of Mona Simpson's story "Lawns" begins by telling us: "I steal. I've stolen books and money and even letters. Letters are great. I can't tell you the feeling walking down the street with 20 dollars in my purse, stolen earrings in my pocket." With this opening, we learn about the narrator's obsession with theft but, equally important, we learn the narrator's gender. This is done indirectly, by referring to the narrator's purse and the desire for stolen earrings.

^ "On the Writing of Speculative Fiction—Robert A. Heinlein—Science Fiction—Science" . Scribd.

Archived from the original on June 25, 2019 . Retrieved February 26, 2019 .

^ Weil, Ellen; Wolfe, Gary K. (2017).

Harlan Ellison: The Edge of Forever . Ohio State University Press.

ISBN 978-0814208922 .

Archived from the original on June 5, 2021 . Retrieved November 26, 2017 – via Google Books.

^ "Heinlein's Rules: Introduction" .

Deanwesleysmith.com .

Archived from the original on November 20, 2017 . Retrieved November 26, 2017 .

^ Panshin, p. 3, describing de Camp's Science Fiction Handbook ^ Heinlein, Robert A. (July 1, 2013).

"Letter to Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle about The Mote in God's Eye " (PDF) .

The Virginia Edition: A Sample of the Series . Archived from the original (PDF) on July 1, 2013 . Retrieved December 29, 2022 .

^ "The Charles Stross FAQ" .

Antipope.org .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2021 . Retrieved November 26, 2017 .

^ "Interview—Charlie's Diary" . Antipope.org. August 27, 2010.

Archived from the original on November 2, 2012 . Retrieved August 23, 2012 .

^ Liptak, Andrew (March 28, 2019).

"The Light Brigade is a worthy successor to Starship Troopers" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on April 17, 2019 . Retrieved April 17, 2019 .

^ The New York Times Magazine , "On Language", by William Safire , September 3, 2006 ^ "Church Of All Worlds" .

Original.caw.org . Archived from the original on November 1, 2010 . Retrieved November 26, 2017 .

^ "Polyamory in the News: "Polyamory" enters the Oxford English Dictionary, and tracking the word's origins" .

Archived from the original on June 5, 2021 . Retrieved June 28, 2020 .

^ "The Hammer and the Feather. Corrected transcript and commentary" .

Apollo 15 Lunar Surface Journal . NASA.

Archived from the original on July 21, 2019 . Retrieved December 29, 2022 .

^ "CBS News – Robert Heinlein and Arthur C. Clarke interview with Walter Cronkite—Apollo 11" . CBS News. October 6, 2016.

Archived from the original on July 1, 2020 . Retrieved June 17, 2020 .

^ Patterson, William (2010).

Robert A. Heinlein: 1907–1948, learning curve . New York: Tom Doherty Associates. p. 13.

ISBN 978-0765319609 .

Archived from the original on June 5, 2021 . Retrieved April 12, 2011 .

^ Levy, Steven (1984).

Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution . Anchor Press/Doubleday. p. 159.

ISBN 0385191952 .

^ Cowen, Tyler (June 15, 2022).

"Marc Andreessen on Learning to Love the Humanities (Ep. 152) The real challenge to building on the frontier? Figuring out human behavior" .

Conversations with Tyler . The Mercatus Center at George Mason University . Retrieved June 28, 2022 .

I'm one of the few people I know who thinks that late Robert Heinlein was better than early Robert Heinlein. That had a really big effect on me.

^ Boog, Jason (March 19, 2003).

"Science Fiction Books That Inspired Elon Musk" .

Media Bistro: GalleyCat . Archived from the original on May 16, 2013.

^ "BSFS's Robert A. Heinlein Award Page [Version DA-3]" .

Baltimore Science Fiction Society . September 19, 2011.

Archived from the original on September 24, 2011 . Retrieved September 21, 2011 .

^ "The Locus Index to SF Awards: About the Robert A. Heinlein Award" .

Locus Online . Archived from the original on October 25, 2012 . Retrieved May 19, 2013 .

^ " The Locus Index to SF Awards: Nebula Award Nominees" . Archived from the original on April 24, 2012.

^ "1941 Retro-Hugo Awards" .

The Hugo Awards . December 29, 2015.

Archived from the original on August 14, 2017 . Retrieved April 4, 2020 .

^ "1943 Retro-Hugo Awards" .

The Hugo Awards . March 30, 2018.

Archived from the original on May 7, 2011 . Retrieved April 4, 2020 .

^ "1951 Retro-Hugo Awards" .

The Hugo Awards . July 26, 2007.

Archived from the original on May 7, 2011 . Retrieved April 4, 2020 .

^ "Award Category: All-Time Favorite Author (Locus Poll Award)" .

^ "Award Category: 1988 All-Time Best Author (Locus Poll Award)" .

^ Inkpot Award ^ "Bob Clampett Humanitarian Award – 1985" .

Comic-Con International . December 4, 2024 . Retrieved March 22, 2025 .

^ Chamberlin, Alan.

"SSD.jpl.nasa.gov" . SSD.jpl.nasa.gov.

Archived from the original on March 10, 2012 . Retrieved May 16, 2012 .

^ "site: Robert A. Heinlein—Archives—Heinlein Crater (Mars)" . www.nitrosyncretic.com.

Archived from the original on February 26, 2019 . Retrieved February 26, 2019 .

^ "Heinlein Crater" .

Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature .

Archived from the original on December 1, 2017 . Retrieved November 30, 2017 .

^ "Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame" Archived May 21, 2013, at the Wayback Machine . Mid American Science Fiction and Fantasy Conventions, Inc. Retrieved March 23, 2013. This was the official website of the hall of fame to 2004.

^ "The Robert A. Heinlein Endowed Chair in Aerospace Engineering" . SFWA News. May 2, 2015. Archived from the original on May 2, 2015 . Retrieved November 26, 2017 .

^ Radford, Bill (July 26, 2008).

"Sci-fi writers, fans gear up for Worldcon" .

The Colorado Springs Gazette .

^ "Robert Heinlein to be inducted into Hall of Famous Missourians" .

Missouri House of Representatives .

Archived from the original on February 18, 2019 . Retrieved February 17, 2019 .

^ "Hall of Famous Missourians" .

Missouri House of Representatives .

Archived from the original on November 21, 2017 . Retrieved November 30, 2017 .

^ "Libertarian Futurist Society: Prometheus Awards" .

Lfs.org .

Archived from the original on May 1, 2013 . Retrieved November 26, 2017 .

Further reading [ edit ] Critical [ edit ] Bellagamba, Ugo and Picholle, Eric. 2008.

Solutions Non Satisfaisantes, une Anatomie de Robert A. Heinlein (in French) . Lyon, France: Les Moutons Electriques.

ISBN 978-2915793376 .

James Blish , writing as William Atheling, Jr. 1970.

More Issues at Hand . Chicago: Advent.

H. Bruce Franklin . 1980.

Robert A. Heinlein: America as Science Fiction . Oxford: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 0195027469 .

A critique of Heinlein from a Marxist perspective. Includes a biographical chapter, which incorporates some original research on Heinlein's family background.

James Gifford. 2000.

Robert A. Heinlein: A Reader's Companion . Sacramento: Nitrosyncretic Press .

ISBN 0967987415 (hardcover), ISBN 0967987407 (trade paperback).

A comprehensive bibliography, with roughly one page of commentary on each of Heinlein's works.

Farah Mendlesohn (2019).

Pleasant Profession of Robert A. Heinlein .

ISBN 978-1783526789 .

Alexei Panshin . 1968.

Heinlein in Dimension . Advent.

ISBN 978-0911682014 .

OCLC 7535112 .

Patterson, William H., Jr., and Thornton, Andrew. 2001.

The Martian Named Smith: Critical Perspectives on Robert A. Heinlein's Stranger in a Strange Land . Sacramento: Nitrosyncretic Press.

ISBN 0967987423 .

Powell, Jim. 2000.

The Triumph of Liberty . New York: Free Press. See profile of Heinlein in the chapter "Out of this World".

Tom Shippey . 2000. "Starship Troopers, Galactic Heroes, Mercenary Princes: Ihe Military and Its Discontents in Science Fiction", in Alan Sandison and Robert Dingley, eds., Histories of the Future: Studies in Fact, Fantasy and Science Fiction . New York: Palgrave.

ISBN 0312236042 .

Slusser, George Edgar (1977).

Robert A. Heinlein: Stranger in His Own Land . The Milford Series, Vol. 1. San Bernardino, CA: Borgo Press.

ISBN 978-0893702106 .

OCLC 2910839 .

Slusser, George Edgar (1977).

The Classic Years of Robert A. Heinlein . The Milford Series, Vol. 11. San Bernardino, CA: Borgo Press.

ISBN 978-0893702168 .

OCLC 3186521 .

Biographical [ edit ] Heinlein, Robert A. 1980.

Expanded Universe . New York: Ace.

ISBN 0441218881 .

Autobiographical notes are interspersed between the pieces in the anthology.

Reprinted by Baen, hardcover 2003, ISBN 0743471598 .

Reprinted by Baen, paperback 2005, ISBN 0743499158 .

Heinlein, Robert A. 1989.

Grumbles from the Grave . New York: Del Rey.

Incorporates a substantial biographical sketch by Virginia Heinlein, which hews closely to his earlier official bios, omitting the same facts (the first of his three marriages, his early left-wing political activities) and repeating the same fictional anecdotes (the short story contest).

Heinlein, Robert A. 2004.

For Us, the Living . New York: Scribner.

ISBN 074325998X .

Includes an introduction by Spider Robinson, an afterword by Robert E. James with a long biography, and a shorter biographical sketch.

The Heinlein Society ( Archived March 27, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ) and their FAQ ( Archived April 22, 2019, at the Wayback Machine ). Retrieved May 30, 2005.

Contains a shorter version of the Patterson bio.

Patterson, William H. Jr. (1999). "Robert Heinlein—A Biographical Sketch]".

The Heinlein Journal .

1999 (5): 7– 36.

Also available at " 'Robert A. Heinlein': A Biographical Sketch " ( Archived August 14, 2001, at the Wayback Machine ). Retrieved June 1, 2005.

A lengthy essay that treats Heinlein's own autobiographical statements with skepticism.

Patterson, William H. Jr. 2010.

Robert A. Heinlein in Dialogue with His Century: 1907–1948: Learning Curve. An Authorized Biography, Volume I . Tom Doherty Associates.

ISBN 0765319608 .

Patterson, William H. Jr. 2014.

Robert A. Heinlein in Dialogue with His Century: 1948–1988: The Man Who Learned Better. An Authorized Biography, Volume II . Tom Doherty Associates.

ISBN 0765319616 .

Stover, Leon E. 1987.

Robert A. Heinlein . Boston: Twayne Publishers.

ISBN 9780805775099 .

OCLC 15860299 .

Vicary, Elizabeth Zoe. 2000. American National Biography Online article, "Heinlein, Robert Anson" (subscription required) .

doi : 10.1093/anb/9780198606697.article.1602915 Retrieved June 1, 2005.

Repeats many incorrect statements from Heinlein's fictionalized professional bio.

External links [ edit ] Robert A. Heinlein at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Library resources By Robert A. Heinlein Resources in your library Resources in other libraries The Heinlein Society site:RAH Heinlein Archives Robert & Virginia Heinlein Prize Centennial Celebration in Kansas City , July 7, 2007.

Heinlein Nexus Archived October 27, 2020, at the Wayback Machine , the community continuation of the Centennial effort.

1952 Popular Mechanics tour of Heinlein's Colorado house.

accessed June 3, 2005 Heinleinia.com, an interactive exploration of Heinlein's life and works Heinlein giving the Guest of Honor speech at the 34th World Science Fiction Convention , on YouTube Biography and criticism [ edit ] "Robert A. Heinlein biography" .

Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame .

Frederik Pohl on Working with Robert A. Heinlein Review & biographical essay on Heinlein by Lee Sandlin, The Wall Street Journal , June 27, 2014. "Heinlein was the best sci-fi writer of all time—and then mysteriously he became the worst." Bibliography and works [ edit ] Further information: Robert A. Heinlein bibliography Robert A. Heinlein at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database Robert A. Heinlein at the Internet Book List Works by Robert A. Heinlein at Open Library Works by or about Robert A. Heinlein at the Internet Archive Robert A. Heinlein at IMDb Finding aid for the Robert A. and Virginia G. Heinlein Papers v t e Robert A. Heinlein Bibliography Future History The Man Who Sold the Moon (1950) The Green Hills of Earth (1951) Revolt in 2100 (1953) Methuselah's Children (1958) Orphans of the Sky (1963) The Past Through Tomorrow (1967) Time Enough for Love (1973) The Notebooks of Lazarus Long (1978) World as Myth The Number of the Beast (1980) The Cat Who Walks Through Walls (1985) To Sail Beyond the Sunset (1987) The Pursuit of the Pankera (2020) Scribner's juveniles Rocket Ship Galileo (1947) Space Cadet (1948) Red Planet (1949) Farmer in the Sky (1950) Between Planets (1951) The Rolling Stones (1952) Starman Jones (1953) The Star Beast (1954) Tunnel in the Sky (1955) Time for the Stars (1956) Citizen of the Galaxy (1957) Have Space Suit—Will Travel (1958) Other novels For Us, the Living: A Comedy of Customs (1939/2003) Beyond This Horizon (1948) Sixth Column (1949) The Puppet Masters (1951) Variable Star (1955/2006) Double Star (1956) The Door into Summer (1957) Starship Troopers (1959) Stranger in a Strange Land (1961) Podkayne of Mars (1963) Glory Road (1963) Farnham's Freehold (1964) The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress (1966) I Will Fear No Evil (1970) Friday (1982) Job: A Comedy of Justice (1984) Collections The Robert Heinlein Omnibus (1958) The Unpleasant Profession of Jonathan Hoag (1959) The Worlds of Robert A. Heinlein (1966) Expanded Universe (1980) Requiem (1992) Nonfiction Take Back Your Government (1946/1992) Tramp Royale (1954/1992) Grumbles from the Grave (1989) Screenplays Destination Moon (1950) Project Moonbase (1953) Characters Delos D. Harriman Jubal Harshaw Maureen Johnson Andrew Jackson Libby Lazarus Long Hazel Stone Legacy Heinlein Centennial Heinlein Society Robert A. Heinlein Award Heinlein Prize for Advances in Space Commercialization Related Virginia Heinlein The Robert Heinlein Interview and Other Heinleiniana Tribbles Grok Film adaptations The Puppet Masters Starship Troopers Predestination v t e Damon Knight Memorial Grand Master Awards (SFWA Grand Masters) 1975–1999 Robert A. Heinlein (1975) Jack Williamson (1976) Clifford D. Simak (1977) L. Sprague de Camp (1979) Fritz Leiber (1981) Andre Norton (1984) Arthur C. Clarke (1986) Isaac Asimov (1987) Alfred Bester (1988) Ray Bradbury (1989) Lester del Rey (1991) Frederik Pohl (1993) Damon Knight (1995) A. E. van Vogt (1996) Jack Vance (1997) Poul Anderson (1998) Hal Clement (1999) 2000–present Brian Aldiss (2000) Philip José Farmer (2001) Ursula K. Le Guin (2003) Robert Silverberg (2004) Anne McCaffrey (2005) Harlan Ellison (2006) James Gunn (2007) Michael Moorcock (2008) Harry Harrison (2009) Joe Haldeman (2010) Connie Willis (2012) Gene Wolfe (2013) Samuel R. Delany (2014) Larry Niven (2015) C. J. Cherryh (2016) Jane Yolen (2017) Peter S. Beagle (2018) William Gibson (2019) Lois McMaster Bujold (2020) Nalo Hopkinson (2021) Mercedes Lackey (2022) Robin McKinley (2023) v t e Hugo Award for Best Novel Retro The Sword in the Stone by T. H. White (1939) Slan by A. E. van Vogt (1941) Beyond This Horizon by Anson MacDonald (1943) Conjure Wife by Fritz Leiber (1944) Shadow Over Mars by Leigh Brackett (1945) The Mule by Isaac Asimov (1946) Farmer in the Sky by Robert A. Heinlein (1951) Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury (1954) 1950s The Demolished Man by Alfred Bester (1953) They'd Rather Be Right (aka: The Forever Machine) by Mark Clifton and Frank Riley (1955) Double Star by Robert A. Heinlein (1956) The Big Time by Fritz Leiber (1958) A Case of Conscience by James Blish (1959) 1960s Starship Troopers by Robert A. Heinlein (1960) A Canticle for Leibowitz by Walter M. Miller, Jr.

(1961) Stranger in a Strange Land by Robert A. Heinlein (1962) The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick (1963) Here Gather the Stars (aka: Way Station ) by Clifford D. Simak (1964) The Wanderer by Fritz Leiber (1965) Dune by Frank Herbert / ...And Call Me Conrad (aka: This Immortal ) by Roger Zelazny (1966) The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress by Robert A. Heinlein (1967) Lord of Light by Roger Zelazny (1968) Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1969) 1970s The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1970) Ringworld by Larry Niven (1971) To Your Scattered Bodies Go by Philip José Farmer (1972) The Gods Themselves by Isaac Asimov (1973) Rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke (1974) The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin (1975) The Forever War by Joe Haldeman (1976) Where Late the Sweet Birds Sang by Kate Wilhelm (1977) Gateway by Frederik Pohl (1978) Dreamsnake by Vonda N. McIntyre (1979) 1980s The Fountains of Paradise by Arthur C. Clarke (1980) The Snow Queen by Joan D. Vinge (1981) Downbelow Station by C. J. Cherryh (1982) Foundation's Edge by Isaac Asimov (1983) Startide Rising by David Brin (1984) Neuromancer by William Gibson (1985) Ender's Game by Orson Scott Card (1986) Speaker for the Dead by Orson Scott Card (1987) The Uplift War by David Brin (1988) Cyteen by C. J. Cherryh (1989) 1990s Hyperion by Dan Simmons (1990) The Vor Game by Lois McMaster Bujold (1991) Barrayar by Lois McMaster Bujold (1992) A Fire Upon the Deep by Vernor Vinge / Doomsday Book by Connie Willis (1993) Green Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1994) Mirror Dance by Lois McMaster Bujold (1995) The Diamond Age by Neal Stephenson (1996) Blue Mars by Kim Stanley Robinson (1997) Forever Peace by Joe Haldeman (1998) To Say Nothing of the Dog by Connie Willis (1999) 2000s A Deepness in the Sky by Vernor Vinge (2000) Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire by J. K. Rowling (2001) American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2002) Hominids by Robert J. Sawyer (2003) Paladin of Souls by Lois McMaster Bujold (2004) Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell by Susanna Clarke (2005) Spin by Robert Charles Wilson (2006) Rainbows End by Vernor Vinge (2007) The Yiddish Policemen's Union by Michael Chabon (2008) The Graveyard Book by Neil Gaiman (2009) 2010s The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi / The City & the City by China Miéville (2010) Blackout/All Clear by Connie Willis (2011) Among Others by Jo Walton (2012) Redshirts by John Scalzi (2013) Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie (2014) The Three-Body Problem by Cixin Liu , translated by Ken Liu (2015) The Fifth Season by N. K. Jemisin (2016) The Obelisk Gate by N. K. Jemisin (2017) The Stone Sky by N. K. Jemisin (2018) The Calculating Stars by Mary Robinette Kowal (2019) 2020s A Memory Called Empire by Arkady Martine (2020) Network Effect by Martha Wells (2021) A Desolation Called Peace by Arkady Martine (2022) Nettle & Bone by T. Kingfisher (2023) Some Desperate Glory by Emily Tesh (2024) The Tainted Cup by Robert Jackson Bennett (2025) v t e Hugo Award for Best Novella Retro Hugos Who Goes There?

by Don A. Stuart (1939) "If This Goes On—" by Robert A. Heinlein (1941) Waldo by Robert A. Heinlein (1943) The Little Prince by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry (1944) Killdozer!

by Theodore Sturgeon (1945) Animal Farm by George Orwell (1946) The Man Who Sold the Moon by Robert A. Heinlein (1951) A Case of Conscience by James Blish (1954) 1968–1980 Riders of the Purple Wage by Philip José Farmer / Weyr Search by Anne McCaffrey (1968) Nightwings by Robert Silverberg (1969) Ship of Shadows by Fritz Leiber (1970) Ill Met in Lankhmar by Fritz Leiber (1971) The Queen of Air and Darkness by Poul Anderson (1972) The Word for World Is Forest by Ursula K. Le Guin (1973) The Girl Who Was Plugged In by James Tiptree Jr.

(1974) A Song for Lya by George R. R. Martin (1975) Home Is the Hangman by Roger Zelazny (1976) By Any Other Name by Spider Robinson / Houston, Houston, Do You Read?

by James Tiptree Jr.

(1977) Stardance by Spider Robinson and Jeanne Robinson (1978) The Persistence of Vision by John Varley (1979) Enemy Mine by Barry B. Longyear (1980) 1981–1990 Lost Dorsai by Gordon R. Dickson (1981) The Saturn Game by Poul Anderson (1982) Souls by Joanna Russ (1983) Cascade Point by Timothy Zahn (1984) Press Enter by John Varley (1985) 24 Views of Mt. Fuji, by Hokusai by Roger Zelazny (1986) Gilgamesh in the Outback by Robert Silverberg (1987) Eye for Eye by Orson Scott Card (1988) The Last of the Winnebagos by Connie Willis (1989) The Mountains of Mourning by Lois McMaster Bujold (1990) 1991–2000 The Hemingway Hoax by Joe Haldeman (1991) Beggars in Spain by Nancy Kress (1992) Barnacle Bill the Spacer by Lucius Shepard (1993) Down in the Bottomlands by Harry Turtledove (1994) Seven Views of Olduvai Gorge by Mike Resnick (1995) The Death of Captain Future by Allen Steele (1996) Blood of the Dragon by George R. R. Martin (1997) ...Where Angels Fear to Tread by Allen Steele (1998) Oceanic by Greg Egan (1999) The Winds of Marble Arch by Connie Willis (2000) 2001–2010 The Ultimate Earth by Jack Williamson (2001) Fast Times at Fairmont High by Vernor Vinge (2002) Coraline by Neil Gaiman (2003) The Cookie Monster by Vernor Vinge (2004) The Concrete Jungle by Charles Stross (2005) Inside Job by Connie Willis (2006) A Billion Eves by Robert Reed (2007) All Seated on the Ground by Connie Willis (2008) The Erdmann Nexus by Nancy Kress (2009) Palimpsest by Charles Stross (2010) 2011–2020 The Lifecycle of Software Objects by Ted Chiang (2011) The Man Who Bridged the Mist by Kij Johnson (2012) The Emperor's Soul by Brandon Sanderson (2013) Equoid by Charles Stross (2014) (No award given) (2015) Binti by Nnedi Okorafor (2016) Every Heart a Doorway by Seanan McGuire (2017) All Systems Red by Martha Wells (2018) Artificial Condition by Martha Wells (2019) This Is How You Lose the Time War by Amal El-Mohtar and Max Gladstone (2020) 2021–present The Empress of Salt and Fortune by Nghi Vo (2021) A Psalm for the Wild-Built by Becky Chambers (2022) Where the Drowned Girls Go by Seanan McGuire (2023) Thornhedge by T. Kingfisher (2024) The Tusks of Extinction by Ray Nayler (2025) v t e Hugo Award for Best Novelette Retro Hugos " Rule 18 " by Clifford D. Simak (1939) " The Roads Must Roll " by Robert A. Heinlein (1941) " Foundation " by Isaac Asimov (1943) " Mimsy Were the Borogoves " by Lewis Padgett (1944) " First Contact " by Murray Leinster (1946) " The Little Black Bag " by Cyril M. Kornbluth (1951) "Earthman, Come Home" by James Blish (1954) 1955–1960 " The Darfsteller " by Walter M. Miller Jr.

(1955) " Exploration Team " by Murray Leinster (1956) " The Big Time " by Fritz Leiber (1958) " The Big Front Yard " by Clifford D. Simak (1959) 1967–1980 " The Last Castle " by Jack Vance (1967) " Gonna Roll the Bones " by Fritz Leiber (1968) " The Sharing of Flesh " by Poul Anderson (1969) " Goat Song " by Poul Anderson (1973) " The Deathbird " by Harlan Ellison (1974) " Adrift Just Off the Islets of Langerhans: Latitude 38° 54' N, Longitude 77° 00' 13" W " by Harlan Ellison (1975) " The Borderland of Sol " by Larry Niven (1976) " The Bicentennial Man " by Isaac Asimov (1977) " Eyes of Amber " by Joan D. Vinge (1978) "Hunter's Moon" by Poul Anderson (1979) " Sandkings " by George R. R. Martin (1980) 1981–1990 " The Cloak and the Staff " by Gordon R. Dickson (1981) " Unicorn Variation " by Roger Zelazny (1982) " Fire Watch " by Connie Willis (1983) " Blood Music " by Greg Bear (1984) " Bloodchild " by Octavia E. Butler (1985) "Paladin of the Lost Hour" by Harlan Ellison (1986) " Permafrost " by Roger Zelazny (1987) " Buffalo Gals, Won't You Come Out Tonight " by Ursula K. Le Guin (1988) " Schrödinger's Kitten " by George Alec Effinger (1989) " Enter a Soldier. Later: Enter Another " by Robert Silverberg (1990) 1991–2000 " The Manamouki " by Mike Resnick (1991) " Gold " by Isaac Asimov (1992) " The Nutcracker Coup " by Janet Kagan (1993) " Georgia on My Mind " by Charles Sheffield (1994) " The Martian Child " by David Gerrold (1995) " Think Like a Dinosaur " by James Patrick Kelly (1996) " Bicycle Repairman " by Bruce Sterling (1997) "We Will Drink a Fish Together..." by Bill Johnson (1998) " Taklamakan " by Bruce Sterling (1999) " 10 16 to 1 " by James Patrick Kelly (2000) 2001–2010 "Millennium Babies" by Kristine Kathryn Rusch (2001) " Hell Is the Absence of God " by Ted Chiang (2002) " Slow Life " by Michael Swanwick (2003) " Legions in Time " by Michael Swanwick (2004) " The Faery Handbag " by Kelly Link (2005) " Two Hearts " by Peter S. Beagle (2006) " The Djinn's Wife " by Ian McDonald (2007) " The Merchant and the Alchemist's Gate " by Ted Chiang (2008) " Shoggoths in Bloom " by Elizabeth Bear (2009) "The Island" by Peter Watts (2010) 2011–2020 "The Emperor of Mars" by Allen Steele (2011) " Six Months, Three Days " by Charlie Jane Anders (2012) " The Girl-Thing Who Went Out for Sushi " by Pat Cadigan (2013) " The Lady Astronaut of Mars ", by Mary Robinette Kowal (2014) " The Day the World Turned Upside Down " by Thomas Olde Heuvelt , translated by Lia Belt (2015) " Folding Beijing " by Hao Jingfang , translated by Ken Liu (2016) " The Tomato Thief " by Ursula Vernon (2017) " The Secret Life of Bots " by Suzanne Palmer (2018) " If at First You Don't Succeed, Try, Try Again " by Zen Cho (2019) " Emergency Skin " by N. K. Jemisin (2020) 2021–present "Two Truths and a Lie" by Sarah Pinsker (2021) "Bots of the Lost Ark" by Suzanne Palmer (2022) "The Space-Time Painter" by Hai Ya (2023) " The Year Without Sunshine " by Naomi Kritzer (2024) "The Four Sisters Overlooking the Sea" by Naomi Kritzer (2025) v t e Inkpot Award (1970s) 1974 Forrest J. Ackerman Ray Bradbury Kirk Alyn Milton Caniff Frank Capra Bob Clampett June Foray Eric Hoffman Chuck Jones Jack Kirby Stan Lee William R. "Bill" Lund Russ Manning Russell Myers Charles M. Schulz Phil Seuling Roy Thomas Bjo Trimble 1975 Barry Alfonso Brad Anderson Robert Bloch Vaughn Bodé Edgar Rice Burroughs Daws Butler Richard Butner Shel Dorf Will Eisner Mark Evanier Gil Kane Alan Light Dick Moores George Pal Rod Serling Joe Shuster Jerry Siegel Barry Windsor-Smith Jim Starlin Jim Steranko Theodore Sturgeon Larry Vincent 1976 Neal Adams Sergio Aragonés Mel Blanc Frank Brunner Rick Griffin Johnny Hart George Clayton Johnson Vicky Kelso Mel Lazarus Sheldon Mayer Dale Messick Alex Niño Don Rico Don Thompson Maggie Thompson 1977 Alfredo Alcala Carl Barks C. C. Beck Howard Chaykin Lester Dent Jackie Estrada Hal Foster Walter "The Shadow" Gibson Jim Harmon Robert A. Heinlein Gene Henderson Michael Kaluta Joe Kubert Harvey Kurtzman George Lucas Stan Lynde Byron Preiss Trina Robbins Stanley Ralph Ross Bill Scott David Scroggy Jay Ward Len Wein 1978 John Buscema Al Capp Gene Colan Gill Fox Tom French Steve Gerber Chester Gould Burne Hogarth Bob Kane Ken Krueger Bernie Lansky Gray Morrow Clarence Nash Grim Natwick Bill Rotsler Mike Royer Gilbert Shelton Dave Sheridan Bill Stout Frank Thorne Boris Vallejo Mort Weisinger Elmer Woggon 1979 Craig Anderson Steve Englehart Dale Enzenbacher Kelly Freas Virginia French H. R. Giger Gene Hazelton Carl Macek Victor Moscoso Larry Niven Dan O'Neill Virgil Partch Jerry Pournelle Nestor Redondo Marshall Rogers John Romita Sr.

Bill Spicer Mort Walker Marv Wolfman Complete list 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s 2010s v t e Robert A. Heinlein 's Future History Collections The Man Who Sold the Moon (1950) The Green Hills of Earth (1951) Revolt in 2100 (1953) Orphans of the Sky (1963) The Past Through Tomorrow (1967) Novels Methuselah's Children (1958) The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress (1966) Time Enough for Love (1973) The Number of the Beast (1980) The Cat Who Walks Through Walls (1985) To Sail Beyond the Sunset (1987) The Pursuit of the Pankera (2020) Short stories and novellas " Life-Line " "Let There Be Light" " The Roads Must Roll " " Blowups Happen " " The Man Who Sold the Moon " " Delilah and the Space Rigger " " Space Jockey " " Requiem " " The Long Watch " " Gentlemen, Be Seated!

" " The Black Pits of Luna " " It's Great to Be Back!

" " —We Also Walk Dogs " " Searchlight " " Ordeal in Space " " The Green Hills of Earth " " Logic of Empire " " The Menace from Earth " " ' If This Goes On— ' " " Coventry " " Misfit " " Universe " " Common Sense " Characters Lazarus Long The Notebooks of Lazarus Long Delos D. Harriman Jubal Harshaw Competent man Maureen Johnson Andrew Jackson Libby Hazel Stone Related The Worlds of Robert A. Heinlein (1966) Expanded Universe (1980) v t e Robert A. Heinlein 's Starship Troopers Franchise Films Live-action Starship Troopers (1997) soundtrack special effects Starship Troopers 2: Hero of the Federation (2004) Starship Troopers 3: Marauder (2008) Animated Starship Troopers: Invasion (2012) Starship Troopers: Traitor of Mars (2017) Animated series Starship Troopers (OVA; 1988) Roughnecks: Starship Troopers Chronicles (1999–2000) Games Starship Troopers (board wargame) Starship Troopers (pinball) Starship Troopers: The Roleplaying Game Starship Troopers: The Miniatures Game Video games Starship Troopers: Terran Ascendancy Starship Troopers Starship Troopers: Terran Command Starship Troopers: Extermination v t e Social credit Movements Canada Abolitionist Party of Canada British Columbia Social Credit Party Canada Party Christian Credit Party Committee on Monetary and Economic Reform Les Démocrates Manitoba Social Credit Party New Democracy Pauper Party of Ontario Parti crédit social uni Pilgrims of Saint Michael Ralliement créditiste Ralliement créditiste du Québec Social Credit Board Alberta Social Credit Party Social Credit Party of Canada Social Credit Party of New Brunswick Social Credit Party of Ontario Social Credit Party of Saskatchewan Oceania Australian League of Rights Country Party (New Zealand) Democratic Labour Party (New Zealand) Douglas Credit Party Social Credit Party (New Zealand) Social Credit-NZ Solomon Islands Social Credit Party Europe British People's Party Irish Monetary Reform Association Social Credit Party of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Social Credit Party of Ireland People William Aberhart Lavern Ahlstrom Bruce Beetham W. A. C. Bennett John Horne Blackmore Eric Butler Réal Caouette Vernon Cracknell C. H. Douglas Louis Even A. N. Field Ron Gostick John Hargrave Robert A. Heinlein Norman Jaques Solon Earl Low Hugh MacDiarmid Ernest Manning Roly Marks Neil Morrison Al Overfield Ezra Pound Manasseh Sogavare Ken Sweigard John Turmel History 1937 Social Credit backbenchers' revolt Prosperity certificate Social Credit Party of Canada split, 1963 Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Poland Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hmxfn
Cached time: 20250817054217
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.806 seconds
Real time usage: 2.032 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14315/1000000
Revision size: 142724/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 491701/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 24733/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 24/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 632037/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.025/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21288248/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1646.094      1 -total
 42.36%  697.332      1 Template:Reflist
 26.30%  432.959     82 Template:Cite_web
 13.04%  214.668      1 Template:Infobox_author
 12.80%  210.702      1 Template:Infobox
  8.61%  141.685     31 Template:Cite_book
  6.04%   99.435     12 Template:Navbox
  4.96%   81.673      1 Template:In_lang
  4.54%   74.711      2 Template:Plainlist
  4.50%   74.118      3 Template:Marriage Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:25389:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817054217 and revision id 1304341783. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Robert_A._Heinlein&oldid=1304341783 " Categories : Robert A. Heinlein 1907 births 1988 deaths 20th-century American novelists 20th-century American short story writers American anti-communists American agnostics American futurologists American libertarians American male non-fiction writers American male novelists American male short story writers American naturists American people of German descent American satirical novelists American science fiction writers American science writers American social crediters American stonemasons Bob Clampett Humanitarian Award winners California Democrats Deaths from emphysema Hugo Award–winning writers Military science fiction writers Novelists from Missouri People from Butler, Missouri Writers from Carmel-by-the-Sea, California Pulp fiction writers Science Fiction Hall of Fame inductees SFWA Grand Masters United States Naval Academy alumni Futurist writers United States Navy personnel of World War II United States Navy civilians 20th-century American male writers 20th-century pseudonymous writers Inkpot Award winners Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 location test Webarchive template archiveis links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2018 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from April 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from November 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from October 2010 Articles with French-language sources (fr) Pages containing links to subscription-only content Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles with Open Library links Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 12:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Robert A. Heinlein 71 languages Add topic

