Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 1764-1818 2.2 1789-1818 3 Work 4 Selected publications 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Gaspard Monge 52 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French mathematician (1746–1818) "Monge" redirects here. For other uses, see Monge (disambiguation) .

Gaspard Monge Born ( 1746-05-09 ) 9 May 1746 Beaune , Côte-d'Or , Kingdom of France Died 28 July 1818 (1818-07-28) (aged 72) Paris , Kingdom of France Resting place Père Lachaise Cemetery Known for Descriptive geometry Transportation theory Scientific career Fields Mathematics engineering education Notable students Jean-Baptiste Biot [ 1 ] Charles Dupin Sylvestre François Lacroix Jean-Victor Poncelet [ 1 ] Signature Gaspard Monge, Comte de Péluse ( French: [ɡaspaʁ mɔ̃ʒ kɔ̃t də pelyz] ; 9 May 1746 [ 2 ] – 28 July 1818) [ 3 ] was a French mathematician, commonly presented as the inventor of descriptive geometry , [ 4 ] [ 5 ] (the mathematical basis of) technical drawing , and the father of differential geometry .

[ 6 ] During the French Revolution he served as the Minister of the Marine, and was involved in the reform of the French educational system, helping to found the École Polytechnique .

Early life [ edit ] Monge was born at Beaune , Côte-d'Or , the son of a merchant.  He was educated at the college of the Oratorians at Beaune .

[ 5 ] In 1762 he went to the Collège de la Trinité at Lyon , where, one year after he had begun studying, he was made a teacher of physics [ 5 ] at the age of seventeen.

[ 7 ] After finishing his education in 1764 he returned to Beaune, where he made a large-scale plan of the town, inventing the methods of observation and constructing the necessary instruments; the plan was presented to the town, and is still preserved in their library.

[ 5 ] An officer of engineers who saw it wrote to the commandant of the École Royale du Génie at Mézières , recommending Monge to him and he was given a job as a draftsman .

[ 5 ] L. T. C. Rolt , an engineer and historian of technology, credited Monge with the birth of engineering drawing .

[ 8 ] When in the Royal School, he became a member of a Freemasonry , initiated into ″L’Union parfaite″ lodge.

[ 9 ] Career [ edit ] 1764-1818 [ edit ] Those studying at the officer school were exclusively drawn from the aristocracy, so he was not allowed admission to the institution itself. His manual skill was highly regarded, but his mathematical skills were not made use of. Nevertheless, he worked on the development of his ideas in his spare time. At this time he came to contact with Charles Bossut , the professor of mathematics at the École Royale du Génie. "I was a thousand times tempted," he said long afterwards, "to tear up my drawings in disgust at the esteem in which they were held, as if I had been good for nothing better." [ 5 ] After a year at the École Royale, Monge was asked to produce a plan for a fortification in such a way as to optimise its defensive arrangement. There was an established method for doing this which involved lengthy calculations but Monge devised a way of solving the problems by using drawings. At first his solution was not accepted, since it had not taken the time judged to be necessary, but upon examination the value of the work was recognised, [ 5 ] and Monge's exceptional abilities were recognised.

After Bossut left the École Royale du Génie, Monge took his place in January 1769, and in 1770 he was also appointed instructor in experimental physics.

[ 7 ] In 1777, Monge married Cathérine Huart, who owned a forge . This led Monge to develop an interest in metallurgy . In 1780 he became a member of the French Academy of Sciences ; his friendship with chemist C. L. Berthollet began at this time.

[ 5 ] In 1783, after leaving Mézières, he was, on the death of É. Bézout , appointed examiner of naval candidates.

[ 5 ] Although pressed by the minister to prepare a complete course of mathematics, he declined to do so on the grounds that this would deprive Mme Bézout of her only income, that from the sale of the textbooks written by her late husband.

[ 5 ] In 1786 he wrote and published his Traité élémentaire de la statique .

[ 5 ] 1789-1818 [ edit ] Monge's bust in Le Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris The French Revolution completely changed the course of Monge's career. He was a strong supporter of the Revolution, and in 1792, on the creation by the Legislative Assembly of an executive council, Monge accepted the office of Minister of the Navy , [ 5 ] and held this office from 10 August 1792 to 10 April 1793, when he resigned.

[ 7 ] When the Committee of Public Safety made an appeal to the academics to assist in the defence of the republic, he applied himself wholly to these operations, and distinguished himself by his energy, writing the Description Le l'art de Fabriquer Les canons and Avis aux ouvriers en fer sur la fabrication de l'acier .

[ 5 ] He took a very active part in the measures for the establishment of the Ecole Normale (which existed only during the first four months of the year 1795), and of the school for public works, afterwards the École Polytechnique , and was at each of them professor for descriptive geometry.

[ 5 ] Géométrie descriptive. Leçons données aux écoles normales was published in 1799 from transcriptions of his lectures given in 1795. He later published Application de l'analyse à la géométrie , [ 5 ] which enlarged on the Lectures.

From May 1796 to October 1797 Monge was in Italy with C.L. Berthollet and some artists to select the paintings and sculptures being levied from the Italians.

[ 5 ] While there he became friendly with Napoleon . Upon his return to France, he was appointed as the Director of the École Polytechnique , but early in 1798 he was sent to Italy on a mission that ended in the establishment of the short-lived Roman Republic .

[ 5 ] From there Monge joined Napoleon's expedition to Egypt , taking part with Berthollet [ 5 ] in the scientific work of the Institut d'Égypte and the Egyptian Institute of Sciences and Arts . They accompanied Napoleon to Egypt , and returned with him in 1799 to France.

[ 5 ] Monge was appointed president of the Egyptian commission, and he resumed his connection with the École Polytechnique.

[ 5 ] His later mathematical papers are published (1794–1816) in the Journal and the Correspondence of the École Polytechnique. On the formation of the Sénat conservateur he was appointed a member of that body, with an ample provision and the title of count of Pelusium [ 5 ] (Comte de Péluse), and he became the Senate conservateur's president during 1806–7. Then on the fall of Napoleon he had all of his honours taken away, and he was even excluded from the list of members of the reconstituted Institute.

[ 5 ] Napoleon Bonaparte stated Monge was an atheist .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] His remains were first interred in a mausoleum in Le Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris and later transferred to the Panthéon in Paris .

A statue portraying him was erected in Beaune in 1849. Monge's name is one of the 72 names inscribed on the base of the Eiffel Tower .

Since 4 November 1992 the Marine Nationale operate the MRIS Monge , named after him.

Work [ edit ] Between 1770 and 1790 Monge contributed various papers on mathematics and physics to the Memoirs of the Academy of Turin , the Mémoires des savantes étrangers of the Academy of Paris, the Mémoires of the same Academy, and the Annales de chimie , including " Sur la théorie des déblais et des remblais " ["On the theory of cut and fill"] ( Mém. de l’acad. de Paris , 1781), [ 5 ] which is an elegant investigation of the problem with earthworks referred to in the title and establishes in connection with it his capital discovery of the curves of curvature of a surface.

[ 5 ] It is also noteworthy to mention that in his Mémoire sur quelques phénomènes de la vision Monge proposed an early implicit explanation of the color constancy phenomenon based on several known observations.

Leonhard Euler , in his 1760 paper on curvature in the Berlin Memoirs , had considered, not the normals of the surface, but the normals of the plane sections through a particular normal, so that the question of the intersection of successive normals of the surface had never presented itself to him.

[ 5 ] Monge's paper gives the ordinary differential equation of the curves of curvature, and establishes the general theory in a very satisfactory manner; the application to the interesting particular case of the ellipsoid was first made by him in a later paper in 1795.

[ 5 ] Monge's 1781 memoir is also the earliest known anticipation of linear optimization problems, in particular of the transportation problem . Related to that, the Monge soil-transport problem leads to a weak-topology definition of a distance between distributions rediscovered many times since by such as L. V. Kantorovich , Paul Lévy , Leonid Vaseršteĭn , and others; and bearing their names in various combinations in various contexts.

Another of his papers in the volume for 1783 relates to the production of water by the combustion of hydrogen . Monge's results had been anticipated by Henry Cavendish .

[ 5 ] It was also in this time, from 1783 - 1784, that Monge worked with (Jean-François, Jean-Baptiste-Paul-Antoine, or Abbé Pierre-Romain) Clouet to liquefy sulfur dioxide by passing a stream of the gas through a U-tube sunken in a refrigerant mixture of ice and salt.

[ 12 ] This made them the first to liquefy a pure gas.

[ 13 ] Selected publications [ edit ] 1781: Mémoire sur la théorie des déblais et des remblais De l'Imprimerie Royale.

1793: (with Alexandre-Théophile Vandermonde and Claude-Louis Berthollet ) Avis aux ouvriers en fer, sur la fabrication de l'acier. Tome 8 (Advice to ironworkers, on the manufacture of steel) 1794: Description de l'art de fabriquer des canons (Description of the art of making cannon) 1795: Application d'analyse à la géométrie 1799: Géométrie descriptive. Leçons données aux écoles normales (Descriptive Geometry) 1807: Application de l'analyse à la géométrie, à l'usage de l'Ecole impériale polytechnique .

1810: (with Jean Nicolas Pierre Hachette ) Traité élémentaire de statique, a l'usage des écoles de la Marine , chez Courcier, Imprimeur-libraire, pour les mathematiques, quai des Augustins, 1852 translation: An elementary treatise on statics .

See also [ edit ] History of the metre Monge array Monge cone Monge equation Monge patch Monge point Monge–Ampère equation Monge's theorem Clebsch representation Earth mover's distance Seconds pendulum Transportation theory References [ edit ] ^ a b Sooyoung Chang, Academic Genealogy of Mathematicians , World Scientific, 2010, p. 93.

^ "Registres paroissiaux et/ou d'état civil : 16 janvier 1745 – 1746" [Parish and/or civil registers: January 16, 1745 – 1746] (in French). Archives of the Department of Côte-d'Or. p. 174/281. FRAD021EC 57/044 . Retrieved 8 May 2018 .

^ "Monfredy (1845) to Mongé (1831)" , Fichiers de l'état civil reconstitué [ Reconstituted files of civil status ] (in French), Paris Archives, p. 44/51, V3E/D 1076 , retrieved 8 May 2018 ^ Albrecht Dürer and Guarino Guarini published works establishing the field before Monge.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa Arthur Cayley (1911).

"Monge, Gaspard" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 18 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

709– 710.

^ O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Gaspard Monge" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews ^ a b c J.J., O'Connor and; Robertson, E.F.

"Gaspard Monge" . School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews, Scotland . Retrieved 26 March 2012 .

^ Rolt, L.T.C.

(1957), Isambard Kingdom Brunel: A Biography , Longmans Green, LCCN 57003475 .

^ Alain Queruel, Les franc-maçons de l'Expédition d'Egypte (Editions du Cosmogone, 2012). Snezana Lawrence et Mark McCartney, Mathematicians and their Gods : Interactions between mathematics and religious beliefs (OUP Oxford, 2015). Emmanuel Pierrat et Laurent Kupferman, Le Paris des Francs-Maçons (Le Cherche Midi, 2013) ^ " Napoleon replies: "How comes it, then, that Laplace was an atheist? At the Institute neither he nor Monge , nor Berthollet , nor Lagrange believed in God. But they did not like to say so." Baron Gaspard Gourgaud , Talks of Napoleon at St. Helena with General Baron Gourgaud (1904), page 274.

^ Vincent Cronin (1983).

The view from planet Earth: man looks at the cosmos . Quill. p. 164.

ISBN 9780688014797 .

Yet, sailing to Egypt, he had lain on deck, asking his scientists whether the planets were inhabited, how old the Earth was, and whether it would perish by fire or by flood. Many, like his friend Gaspard Monge, the first man to liquefy a gas, were atheists.

^ Taton, Rene. “Some Details About The Chemist Clouet and Two of His Namesakes.” Review of the History of Sciences and Their Applications, vol. 5, no. 4, 1952, p. 359–67.

JSTOR 23905084 .

^ Wisniak, Jaime (2003).

"Louis Paul Cailletet—The liquefaction of the permanent gases" (PDF) .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Gaspard Monge at Wikimedia Commons O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Gaspard Monge" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews An Elementary Treatise on Statics with a Biographical Notice of the Author (Biddle, Philadelphia, 1851).

An elementary treatise on descriptive geometry, with a theory of shadows and of perspective (Weale, London, 1851).

Géométrie descriptive. Leçons données aux Écoles normales, l'an 3 de la République; Par Gaspard Monge, de l'Institut national (Baudouin, Paris, 1798) Portrait of Gaspard Monge from the Lick Observatory Records Digital Archive, UC Santa Cruz Library's Digital Collections Archived 6 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine Gaspard Monge (1789) "Mémoire sur quelques phenomenes de la vision." Archived 6 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine Annales de Chimie. Ser. 1, bk. 3 p. 131–147 – digital facsimile from the Linda Hall Library "Monge, Gaspard" .

New International Encyclopedia . 1905.

Political offices Preceded by François Joseph de Gratet, vicomte Dubouchage Minister of the Navy and the Colonies 10 August 1792 – 10 April 1793 Succeeded by Jean Dalbarade v t e Ministers of the French National Convention (10 August 1792 to 1 April 1794) Foreign Affairs Pierre Henri Hélène Marie Lebrun-Tondu François Louis Michel Chemin Deforgues War Joseph Marie Servan de Gerbey Jean-Nicolas Pache Pierre Riel de Beurnonville Jean Baptiste Noël Bouchotte Justice Georges Danton Dominique Joseph Garat Louis-Jérôme Gohier Interior Jean-Marie Roland, vicomte de la Platière Dominique Joseph Garat Jules-François Paré Finance Étienne Clavière Louis Grégoire Deschamps Destournelles Navy and Colonies Gaspard Monge Jean Dalbarade Preceded by Ministers of Louis XVI of France • Followed by French Directory v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet Artists ULAN Scientific illustrators People Sycomore Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gaspard_Monge&oldid=1301944595 " Categories : 1746 births 1818 deaths 18th-century French mathematicians 19th-century French mathematicians French atheists French Freemasons People from Beaune Commission des Sciences et des Arts members Differential geometers Burials at the Panthéon, Paris Burials at Père Lachaise Cemetery Members of the Sénat conservateur Members of the French Academy of Sciences Ministers of marine and the colonies Academic staff of the École Normale Supérieure 18th-century French inventors Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2021 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 14:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gaspard Monge 52 languages Add topic

