Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Related fields of systems art Toggle Related fields of systems art subsection 1.1 Anti-form movement 1.2 Cybernetic art 1.3 Generative systems 1.4 Process art 1.5 Systemic art 1.6 Systemic painting 1.7 Systems sculpture 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Systems art 4 languages فارسی Nederlands Română Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art influenced by cybernetics and systems theory Kenneth Noland , Trans West, 1965.

Systems art is art influenced by cybernetics and systems theory , reflecting on natural systems, social systems, and the social signs of the art world itself.

[ 1 ] Systems art emerged as part of the first wave of the conceptual art movement in the 1960s and 1970s. Closely related and overlapping terms include anti-form movement , cybernetic art , generative systems , process art , systems aesthetic , systemic art , systemic painting , and systems sculpture .

Related fields of systems art [ edit ] Anti-form movement [ edit ] By the early 1960s, minimalism had emerged as an abstract movement in art, with roots in geometric abstraction via Malevich , the Bauhaus , and Mondrian . This movement rejected the ideas of relational and subjective painting, the complexity of abstract expressionist surfaces, and the emotional zeitgeist and polemics present in action painting . Minimalism argued that extreme simplicity could capture all of the sublime representation needed in art. The term Systematic art was coined by Lawrence Alloway in 1966 to describe the method that artists such as Kenneth Noland , Al Held , and Frank Stella were using to compose abstract paintings .

[ 2 ] Associated with painters such as Frank Stella , minimalism in painting, as opposed to other areas, is a modernist movement. Depending on the context, minimalism might be construed as a precursor to the postmodern movement. Some writers classify it as a postmodern movement, noting that early minimalism began and succeeded as a modernist movement, producing advanced works but partially abandoning this project when some artists shifted towards the anti-form movement.

In the late 1960s, the term postminimalism was coined by Robert Pincus-Witten [ 3 ] to describe minimalist-derived art that incorporated content and contextual overtones that minimalism had rejected. This term was applied to the work of Eva Hesse , Keith Sonnier , Richard Serra , and new work by former minimalists such as Robert Smithson , Robert Morris , Bruce Nauman , Sol LeWitt , Barry Le Va, and others. Minimalists like Donald Judd , Dan Flavin , Carl Andre , Agnes Martin , John McCracken , and others continued to produce their late modernist paintings and sculptures for the remainder of their careers.

Cybernetic art [ edit ] Audio feedback , tape loops , sound synthesis , and computer-generated compositions reflect a cybernetic awareness of information, systems, and cycles. These techniques became widespread in the 1960s music industry. The visual effects of electronic feedback became a focus of artistic research in the late 1960s when video equipment first reached the consumer market. For example, Steina and Woody Vasulka used "all manner and combination of audio and video signals to generate electronic feedback in their respective media." [ 4 ] Related work by Edward Ihnatowicz , Wen-Ying Tsai , cybernetician Gordon Pask , and the animist kinetics of Robert Breer and Jean Tinguely contributed to a strain of cybernetic art in the 1960s that was concerned with the shared circuits within and between the living and the technological. During this period, a line of cybernetic art theory also emerged. Writers such as Jonathan Benthall and Gene Youngblood drew on cybernetics. Notable contributors include British artist and theorist Roy Ascott , with his essay "Behaviourist Art and the Cybernetic Vision" published in the journal Cybernetica (1966–67), and American critic and theorist Jack Burnham . In his 1968 work Beyond Modern Sculpture , Burnham develops a theory of cybernetic art that centers on art's drive to imitate and ultimately reproduce life.

[ 5 ] Additionally, in 1968, curator Jasia Reichardt organized the landmark exhibition Cybernetic Serendipity at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London.

Generative systems [ edit ] Main article: Generative art Installation view of Irrational Geometrics (2008) by Pascal Dombis Generative art is art that is created through algorithmic processes, using systems defined by computer software, algorithms, or similar mathematical, mechanical, or randomized autonomous methods.

Sonia Landy Sheridan established the Generative Systems program at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago in 1970 in response to social changes brought about in part by the computer-robot communications revolution.

[ 6 ] The program, which brought artists and scientists together, aimed to transform the artist's role from passive to active by exploring contemporary scientific and technological systems and their relation to art and life. Unlike copier art, which was a commercial spin-off, Generative Systems was involved in developing elegant and simple systems intended for creative use by the general public. Generative Systems artists sought to bridge the gap between elite and novice by facilitating communication between the two, thus disseminating first-generation information to a broader audience and bypassing traditional commercial routes.

[ 6 ] Process art [ edit ] Main article: Process art Maurizio Bolognini , Collective Intelligence Machines series (CIMs, from 2000). These are generative and interactive installations using the mobile phone network and participation technologies from e-democracy.

[ 7 ] Process art is an artistic movement and creative sentiment where the end product of art and craft is not the principal focus. The 'process' in process art refers to the act of creating art: the gathering, sorting, collating, associating, and patterning. Process art emphasizes the actual doing —art as a rite, ritual , and performance. It often involves inherent motivation, rationale, and intentionality . Thus, art is seen as a creative journey or process, rather than merely a final product.

In artistic discourse, the work of Jackson Pollock as a type of action painting is sometimes considered a precursor to process art. Process art, with its use of serendipity , shares similarities with Dada . Themes of change and transience are prominent in the process art movement. According to the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum , Robert Morris had a groundbreaking exhibition in 1968 that defined the movement. The museum's website notes that "Process artists were involved in issues attendant to the body, random occurrences, improvisation, and the liberating qualities of nontraditional materials such as wax , felt , and latex . Using these, they created eccentric forms in erratic or irregular arrangements produced by actions such as cutting, hanging, and dropping, or organic processes such as growth, condensation , freezing , or decomposition ".

[ 8 ] Systemic art [ edit ] According to Chilvers (2004), "earlier in 1966 the British art critic Lawrence Alloway had coined the term "Systemic art", to describe a type of abstract art characterized by the use of very simple standardized forms, usually geometric in character, either in a single concentrated image, or repeated in a system arranged according to a clearly visible principle of organization. He considered the chevron paintings of Kenneth Noland as examples of Systemic art, and considered this as a branch of Minimal art ".

[ 9 ] John G. Harries identified common ground in the ideas underlying developments in 20th-century art such as Serial art , Systems art, Constructivism , and Kinetic art . These forms of art often do not stem directly from observations of the external natural environment but from the observation of depicted shapes and their relationships.

[ 10 ] According to Harries, Systems art represents a deliberate attempt by artists to develop a more flexible frame of reference. Rather than being a cognitive system that leads to the institutionalization of an imposed model, it uses its frame of reference as a model to be emulated. However, transferring the meaning of a picture to its location within a systemic structure does not eliminate the need to define the constitutive elements of the system. Without these definitions, constructing the system becomes challenging.

[ 10 ] Newskool ASCII art Screenshot Systemic painting [ edit ] Systemic Painting, according to Auping (1989), "was the title of a highly influential exhibition at the Guggenheim Museum in 1966 assembled and introduction written by Lawrence Alloway as curator. The show contained numerous works that many critics today would consider part of the Minimal art ".

[ 11 ] In the catalogue, Alloway noted that "...paintings, such as those in this exhibition are not, as has been often claimed, impersonal. The personal is not expunged by using a neat technique: anonymity is not a consequence of highly finishing a painting".

[ 12 ] The term "Systemic Painting" later came to refer to artists who employ systems to make a number of aesthetic decisions before commencing to paint.

[ 13 ] Systems sculpture [ edit ] According to Feldman (1987), " serial art , serial painting, systems sculpture and ABC art , were art styles of the 1960s and 1970s in which simple geometric configurations are repeated with little or no variation. Sequences becomes important as in mathematics and linguistic context. These works rely on simple arrangements of basic volumes and voids, mechanically produced surfaces, and algebraic permutations of form. The impact on the viewer, however, is anything but simple".

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Algorithmic art Computer art Conceptual art Design Evolutionary art Fractal art Generative art Information art Interactive art Media art Participatory art Process music Software art Sustainable art Systems thinking Systems music Systems Group References [ edit ] ^ Systems art , Dutch Art & Architecture Thesaurus, retrieved March 2008.

^ Chilvers, Ian and Glaves-Smith, John, A Dictionary of Modern and Contemporary Art , second edition (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2009), p. 694.

ISBN 0199239665 .

^ Movers and Shakers, New York , "Leaving C&M", by Sarah Douglas, Art+Auction , March 2007, V.XXXNo7.

^ Edward A. Shanken , "From Cybernetics to Telematics: The Art, Pedagogy, and Theory of Roy Ascott," in Roy Ascott (2003, 2007), Telematic Embrace: Visionary Theories of Art, Technology, and Consciousness , University of California, ISBN 0-520-22294-6 .

^ Mitchell Whitelaw (2004), Metacreation: Art and Artificial Life , MIT Press, ISBN 0-262-23234-0 , pp. 17–18.

^ a b Sonia Landy Sheridan, "Generative Systems versus Copy Art: A Clarification of Terms and Ideas", in Leonardo , Vol. 16, No. 2 (Spring 1983), pp. 103–108.

doi : 10.2307/1574794 ^ Maurizio Bolognini , "De l'interaction à la démocratie. Vers un art génératif post-digital" / "From interactivity to democracy. Towards a post-digital generative art" , in Ethique, esthétique, communication technologique , Éditions L'Harmattan, Paris, 2011, pp. 229–239.

^ Source: "Guggenheim Collection - Glossary - Process art" . Archived from the original on 27 September 2007 . Retrieved 27 September 2007 .

^ "Systemic art." The Oxford Dictionary of Art. Ed. Ian Chilvers. Oxford University Press, 2004. eNotes.com. 2006. 19 Mar 2008 [1] ^ a b John G. Harries, "Personal Computers and Notated Visual Art," in: Leonardo , Vol. 14, No. 4 (Autumn 1981), pp. 299–301.

^ Michael Auping (1989), Abstraction, Geometry, Painting: Selected Geometric Abstract Painting , Albright-Knox Art Gallery, p. 72.

^ Lawrence Alloway, "Systemic Painting," in: Minimal Art: A Critical Anthology, edited by Gregory Battcock (1995), p. 19.

^ John Albert Walker (1973), Glossary of Art, Architecture, and Design Since 1945: Terms and Labels, p. 197.

^ Edmund Burke Feldman (1987), Composition (Art) , H.N. Abrams, ISBN 0-13-940602-6 .

Further reading [ edit ] Vladimir Bonacic (1989), "A Transcendental Concept for Cybernetic Art in the 21st Century", in: Leonardo , Vol. 22, No. 1, Art and the New Biology: Biological Forms and Patterns (1989), pp. 109–111.

Jack Burnham (1968), "Systems Esthetics" , in: Artforum (September 1968).

Karen Cham, Jeffrey Johnson (2007), "Complexity Theory: A Science of Cultural Systems?" , in: M/C journal , Volume 10 Issue 3 June 2007 Francis Halsall (2007), "Systems Aesthetics and the System as Medium" , Systems Art Symposium Whitechapel Art Gallery, 2007.

Pamela Lee, (2004), Chronophobia.

Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

Eddie Price (1974), Systems Art: An Enquiry , City of Birmingham Polytechnic, School of Art Education, ISBN 0-905017-00-5 Edward A. Shanken , " Cybernetics and Art: Cultural Convergence in the 1960s ," in Bruce Clarke and Linda Dalrymple Henderson , eds. From Energy to Information: Representation in Science, Technology, Art, and Literature. (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2002): 255–77.

Edward A. Shanken , " Art in the Information Age: Technology and Conceptual Art ," in SIGGRAPH 2001 Electronic Art and Animation Catalog, (New York: ACM SIGGRAPH, 2001): 8–15; expanded and reprinted in Art Inquiry 3: 12 (2001): 7–33 and Leonardo 35:3 (August 2002): 433–38.

Edward A. Shanken , " The House That Jack Built: Jack Burnham’s Concept of Software as a Metaphor for Art ," Leonardo Electronic Almanac 6:10 (November 1998). Reprinted in English and Spanish in a minima 12 (2005): 140–51.

Edward A. Shanken , " Reprogramming Systems Aesthetics: A Strategic Historiography ," in Simon Penny, et al., eds., Proceedings of the Digital Arts and Culture Conference 2009, DAC: 2009.

Edward A. Shanken , Systems . Whitechapel/MIT Press, 2015.

Luke Skrebowski (2008), "All Systems Go: Recovering Hans Haacke's Systems Art", in Grey Room , Winter 2008, No. 30, Pages 54–83.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Systems art .

Walker, John.

"Systems Art" .

Glossary of Art, Architecture & Design since 1945 , 3rd. ed.

Systems Art Symposium , in de Whitechapel Art Gallery in London in 2007.

Observing 'Systems-Art' from a Systems-Theoretical Perspective by Francis Halsall: summary of presentation on Chart 2005, 2005.

Saturation Point : The online editorial and curatorial project for systems, non-objective and reductive artists working in the UK.

v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category v t e Systems science System types Art Biological Complex Coupled human–environment Ecological Economic Information Multi-agent Nervous Recommender Social Concepts Doubling time Leverage points Limiting factor Negative feedback Positive feedback Theoretical fields Control theory Cybernetics Earth system science Living systems Sociotechnical system Systemics Urban metabolism World-systems theory Analysis Biology Dynamics Ecology Engineering Neuroscience Pharmacology Philosophy Psychology Theory ( Systems thinking ) Scientists Russell L. Ackoff Victor Aladjev William Ross Ashby Ruzena Bajcsy Béla H. Bánáthy Gregory Bateson Anthony Stafford Beer Richard E. Bellman Ludwig von Bertalanffy Margaret Boden Alexander Bogdanov Kenneth E. Boulding Murray Bowen Kathleen Carley Mary Cartwright C. West Churchman Manfred Clynes George Dantzig Edsger W. Dijkstra Fred Emery Heinz von Foerster Stephanie Forrest Jay Wright Forrester Barbara Grosz Charles A. S. Hall Mike Jackson Lydia Kavraki James J. Kay Faina M. Kirillova George Klir Allenna Leonard Edward Norton Lorenz Niklas Luhmann Humberto Maturana Margaret Mead Donella Meadows Mihajlo D. Mesarovic James Grier Miller Radhika Nagpal Howard T. Odum Talcott Parsons Ilya Prigogine Qian Xuesen Anatol Rapoport John Seddon Peter Senge Claude Shannon Katia Sycara Eric Trist Francisco Varela Manuela M. Veloso Kevin Warwick Norbert Wiener Jennifer Wilby Anthony Wilden Applications Systems theory in anthropology Systems theory in archaeology Systems theory in political science Organizations List Principia Cybernetica Category Portal Commons NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐6brhf
Cached time: 20250812014043
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.406 seconds
Real time usage: 0.499 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1239/1000000
Revision size: 16639/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 131101/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 985/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 44633/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.191/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4769597/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  326.224      1 -total
 32.80%  107.014      1 Template:Reflist
 29.60%   96.568      6 Template:Navbox
 26.01%   84.858      1 Template:Westernart
 18.72%   61.070      1 Template:Short_description
 18.67%   60.900      5 Template:ISBN
 10.19%   33.251      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.47%   27.633      1 Template:Cite_web
  6.62%   21.583      1 Template:Wikiquote
  6.18%   20.171      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:16280135:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014043 and revision id 1293724702. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Systems_art&oldid=1293724702 " Categories : 1966 neologisms 20th-century art movements Artistic techniques Conceptual art Systems Contemporary art movements Digital art Postmodern art Systems theory Systems science Cybernetics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 09:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Systems art 4 languages Add topic

