Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Related genres 2 Historic artists and fine artists 3 Twentieth century 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Fantastic art 10 languages Français Italiano Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Português Română کوردی ไทย Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of art that explores fantasy and imagination The Garden of Earthly Delights in the Museo del Prado in Madrid , c.

1495–1505 , by Hieronymus Bosch Fantastic art is a broad and loosely defined art genre .

[ 1 ] It is not restricted to a specific school of artists, geographical location or historical period. It can be characterised by subject matter—which portrays non-realistic, mystical, mythical or folkloric subjects or events—and style, which is representational and naturalistic, rather than abstract—or in the case of magazine illustrations and similar, in the style of graphic novel art such as manga .

[ citation needed ] Fantasy has been an integral part of art since its beginnings, [ 2 ] but has been particularly important in mannerism , magic realist painting, romantic art , symbolism , surrealism and lowbrow . In French, the genre is called le fantastique , in English it is sometimes referred to as visionary art , grotesque art or mannerist art . It has had a deep and circular interaction with fantasy literature .

[ citation needed ] The subject matter of fantastic art may resemble the product of hallucinations, and Fantastic artist Richard Dadd spent much of his life in mental institutions.

Salvador Dalí famously said: "the only difference between me and a madman is that I am not mad".

[ 3 ] Some recent fantastic art draws on the artist's experience, or purported experience, of hallucinogenic drugs .

The term fantasy art is closely related, and is applied primarily to recent art (typically 20th century on wards) inspired by, or illustrating fantasy literature.

[ citation needed ] Fantastic art has traditionally been largely confined to painting and illustration, but since the 1970s has increasingly been found also in photography. Fantastic art explores fantasy, imagination, the dream state, the grotesque , visions and the uncanny, [ 2 ] as well as so-called " Goth " and "Dark" art.

Related genres [ edit ] Genres which may also be considered as fantastic art include the Weltlandschaften or world landscapes of the Northern Renaissance, Symbolism of the Victorian era , Pre-Raphaelites , the Golden Age of Illustration , [ 4 ] and Surrealism .  Works based on classical mythology, which have been a staple of European art from the Renaissance period, also arguably meet the definition of fantastic art, as art based on modern mythology such as J.R.R. Tolkien 's Middle Earth mythos unquestionably does.

Religious art also depicts supernatural or miraculous subjects in a naturalistic way, but is not generally regarded as fantastic art.

[ citation needed ] Historic artists and fine artists [ edit ] Many artists have produced works which fit the definition of fantastic art.  Some, such as Nicholas Roerich , worked almost exclusively in the genre, others such as Hieronymus Bosch , who has been described as the first "fantastic" artist in the Western tradition, [ 2 ] produced works both with and without fantastic elements, and for artists such as Francisco de Goya , fantastic works were only a small part of their output.  Others again such as René Magritte are usually classed as Surrealists but use fantastic elements in their work.

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] Twentieth century [ edit ] Further information: Illustrating Tolkien Illustration for The boy and the trolls by John Bauer , 1915 The rise of fantasy and science fiction "pulp" magazines demanded artwork to illustrate stories and (via cover art) to promote sales.  This led to a movement of science fiction and fantasy artists prior to and during the Great Depression, as anthologised by Vincent Di Fate , himself a prolific SF and space artist.

[ 6 ] [ page needed ] In the United States in the 1930s, a group of Wisconsin artists inspired by the Surrealist movement of Europe created their own brand of fantastic art. They included Madison, Wisconsin -based artists Marshall Glasier, Dudley Huppler and John Wilde ; Karl Priebe of Milwaukee and Gertrude Abercrombie of Chicago . Their art combined macabre humor, mystery and irony [ 7 ] which was in direct and pointed contradiction to the American Regionalism then in vogue.

[ citation needed ] In postwar Chicago , the art movement Chicago Imagism produced many fantastic and grotesque paintings, which were little noted because they did not conform to New York abstract art fashions of the time.  Major imagists include Roger Brown , Gladys Nilsson , Jim Nutt , Ed Paschke , and Karl Wirsum .

[ 8 ] After 1970, modern western fantasy is influenced by illustrations from Conan the Barbarian and The Lord of the Rings , [ 9 ] as well as popular works of SF and fantasy like the role-playing game Advanced Dungeons & Dragons or the French Heavy Metal magazine.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Dream art Society for the Art of Imagination Surrealism Vienna School of Fantastic Realism References [ edit ] ^ a b "Jahsonic, a vocabulary of culture" .

Archived from the original on 16 November 2005 . Retrieved 4 August 2013 .

^ a b c Schurian, Walter (2005) Beyond Mere Understanding. In: Fantastic Art , Schurian, W. & Grosenick, U. (Ed.), Taschen , p.6-25.

ISBN 978-3-8228-2954-7 (English edition) ^ "thinkexist.com" . Archived from the original on 4 August 2013 . Retrieved 4 August 2013 .

^ "From the Pre-Raphaelites to the Comics: Illustrating the Imaginative | Fantasy – BnF" .

fantasy.bnf.fr . Retrieved 20 December 2020 .

^ Larkin, David, ed. (1973).

Fantastic Art . Pan Ballantine.

^ Di Fate, Vincent (1997).

Infinite Worlds: The Fantastic Visions of Science Fiction Art .

ISBN 0670872520 .

^ Krajewski, Sara (1998).

"Surreal Wisconsin: Surrealism and its Legacy of Wisconsin Art" . Madison Art Center. Archived from the original on 5 December 1999 . Retrieved 18 December 2020 .

^ Richard Vine, "Where the Wild Things Were", Art in America , May 1997, pp. 98–111.

^ "The History of Fantasy Art & Fantasy Artists" .

The Art History Archive . Retrieved 18 December 2020 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Álvaro Robles, G. (2016) "El Canto de Abraxas". Editorial Salón Arcano.

ISBN 978-987-42-2189-6 BeinArt collective (2007).

Metamorphosis .  beinArt.

ISBN 978-0-9803231-0-8 Coleman, A.D. (1977).

The Grotesque in Photography .  New York: Summit, Ridge Press.

Colombo, Attilio (1979).

Fantastic Photographs .  London: Gordon Fraser.

Clair, Jean (1995).

Lost Paradise: Symbolist Europe .  Montreal: Montreal Museum of Fine Arts.

Day, Holliday T. & Sturges, Hollister (1989).

Art of the Fantastic: Latin America, 1920–1987 .  Indianapolis: Indianapolis Museum of Art.

Elizabeth, S. (2023).

The Art of Fantasy: A visual sourcebook of all that is unreal .

Frances Lincoln .

ISBN 978-0-7112-7995-7 .

Johnson, Diana L. (1979).

Fantastic illustration and design in Britain, 1850–1930 .  Rhode Island School of Design.

Krichbaum, Jorg & Zondergeld. R.A. (Eds.) (1985).

Dictionary of Fantastic Art .  Barron's Educational Series.

Larkin, David, ed. (1973).

Fantastic Art .

Ballantine Books .

ISBN 978-0-3450-9797-2 .

Menton, Seymour (1983).

Magic Realism Rediscovered 1918–1981 .  Philadelphia, The Art Alliance Press.

Palumbo, Donald (Ed.) (1986).

Eros in the Mind's Eye: Sexuality and the Fantastic in Art and Film (Contributions to the Study of Science Fiction and Fantasy).  Greenwood Press.

Schurian, Prof. Dr. Walter (2005).

Fantastic Art . Taschen.

ISBN 978-3-8228-2954-7 (English edition) Stathatos, John (2001).

A Vindication of Tlon: Photography and the Fantastic .  Greece: Thessaloniki Museum of Photography Watney, Simon (1977).

Fantastic Painters .  London: Thames & Hudson.

v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Accidental travel Action-adventure Lost world Sword and sorcery Wuxia Alternate history Chuanyue Contemporary Children's fantasy Comedy Bangsian Dark fantasy Grimdark Fairy tale parodies Fairytale fantasy Fantastique Fantasy of manners Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai LitRPG Low fantasy Magical girl Mythic Mythpunk Mythopoeia Omegaverse Progression Romantic Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Shenmo Urban fantasy Occult detective fiction Paranormal romance Weird fiction New weird Weird West Fantasy Western Xianxia Media Film and television Anime Films highest-grossing S&S Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels A–H I–R S–Z List of story collections Publishers Magazines Fantastic Fantastic Adventures Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Other Dungeons & Dragons Féeries Podcasts Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Saturn Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Fandom Art Fanspeak Filk music Harry Potter fandom The Inklings Lovecraft fandom Mythopoeic Society Tolkien fandom Tolkien's influence Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Devils Ghouls Elementals Faeries Familiars Fire-breathing monsters Chimera Dragons Gargoyles Imps Jinn Nymphs Shapeshifters Werecats Werewolves Skin-walkers Spirits Talking animals Undead Death Ghosts Liches Mummies Skeletons Vampires Zombies Unicorns Yōkai Characters Barbarian Caveman Damsel in distress Dark lord Donor Dragonslayer Fairy godmother Heroes Magicians Occult detective list Wild man Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / neutral / light Ceremonial Love Moon Magic item Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Runes Wand Schools Alchemy Demonology Divination Egregore Evocation Incantation Necromancy Runecraft Shamanism Shapeshifting Thaumaturgy Theurgy Witchcraft Fantasy races Centaurs Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Kobolds Leprechauns Merfolk Mermaids Mermen Ogres Oni Orcs Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Maps Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Magic school Related Allegory Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Ghost stories Gothic fiction Horror fiction LGBT themes in speculative fiction Mecha Mythology Science fiction Supernatural fiction Superhero Tokusatsu Kaiju Urban legend Outline Category v t e Speculative fiction Science fiction Media Comics Films list Magazines list Television Creators list Authors Editors Studies Awards Definitions History Subgenres Alternate history Apocalyptic/post-apocalyptic Climate fiction Comic/comedy Cyberpunk ( derivatives ) Dying Earth Feminist Future history ( Speculative evolution ) Military Space opera Space Western Tech-noir Themes Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Aliens AI Parallel universes Time travel Utopia/dystopia Space pirates Subculture Community Gathering list Fantasy Media Anime Art Fantastic Comics Fantasy film Literature Magazines Television Creators Authors Studies High fantasy Tolkien's influence Literature Sources Subgenres Bangsian Comic Contemporary Dark Dying Earth Fairytale Folklore mythology (based) Gaslamp Hard High Historical Lost world Low Medieval Romantic Sword and sorcery Urban Supernatural fiction Tropes Fantasy races Fantasy worlds Legendary creatures Magic (fantasy) Magician (fantasy) Norse mythology Magic item Quest Occult detective Horror Media Comics Films list Magazines Television programs Video games Subgenres Body Goosebumps Lovecraftian Mass hysteria Psychological Splatterpunk Queer Urban legend Occult detective Tropes Gargoyle Vampires list Werewolves Zombie apocalypse General Authors of color Fictional species Gender Japanese authors Masquerade Sexuality Homosexuality Reproduction and pregnancy Women Related Science fantasy Superhero Western Noir Crime Pulps Technofantasy Fantastique Magic realism Slipstream Techno-thriller LitRPG Crossover Portal Category Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fantastic_art&oldid=1285099482 " Categories : Fantastic art Fantasy tropes Visual arts genres Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 This page was last edited on 11 April 2025, at 17:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fantastic art 10 languages Add topic

