Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 International conventions 2 Categories 3 History 4 Typefaces Toggle Typefaces subsection 4.1 Dispute of standard typefaces for North American traffic signs 5 Automatic traffic sign recognition 6 Image gallery 7 Rail traffic 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Traffic sign 80 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lombard Македонски Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русский Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Signboard displaying information for road users "Signpost" redirects here. For the English Wikipedia's newspaper, see The Signpost . For other uses, see Signpost (disambiguation) .

"Street sign" redirects here. For signs to identify named roads, see Street name sign .

A " route confirmation " sign on the Warrego Highway in Queensland , Australia, informing motorists of their distance (in kilometres ) from the places listed Fingerposts and other road signage in the English village of Sturminster Marshall , near Poole Traffic signs or road signs are signs erected at the side of or above roads to give instructions or provide information to road users. The earliest signs were simple wooden or stone milestones . Later, signs with directional arms were introduced, for example the fingerposts in the United Kingdom and their wooden counterparts in Saxony .

Traffic sign in London With traffic volumes increasing since the 1930s, many countries have adopted pictorial signs or otherwise simplified and standardized their signs to overcome language barriers, and enhance traffic safety. Such pictorial signs use symbols (often silhouettes) in place of words and are usually based on international protocols. Such signs were first developed in Europe, and have been adopted by most countries to varying degrees.

Road sign for roundabout leading to highways 1 , 2 and 3 in Mariehamn , Åland Sign in Australia reminding drivers to carry adequate supplies before entering remote areas International conventions [ edit ] International conventions such as Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals and Geneva Convention on Road Traffic have helped to achieve a degree of uniformity in traffic signing in various countries.

[ 1 ] Countries have also unilaterally (to some extent) followed other countries in order to avoid confusion.

Categories [ edit ] Sign warning of cattle crossing in a rural road of Madeira Island , Portugal Traffic signs can be grouped into several types. For example, Annexe 1 of the Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals (1968), which on 30 June 2004 had 52 signatory countries, defines eight categories of signs: A. Danger warning signs B.

Priority signs C.

Prohibitory or restrictive signs D.

Mandatory signs E.

Special regulation signs F. Information, facilities, or service signs G.

Direction, position, or indication signs H. Additional panels Five or more signs may be displayed on one post. Here a Canadian end-of-road marker appears together with a rural airport sign.

Speed limit traffic sign in Jordan In the United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand signs are categorized as follows: Regulatory signs Warning signs Guide signs Street name signs Route marker signs Expressway signs Freeway signs Welcome signs Informational signs Recreation and cultural interest signs Emergency management ( civil defense ) signs Temporary traffic control ( construction or work zone) signs School signs Railroad and light rail signs Bicycle signs In the United States, the categories, placement, and graphic standards for traffic signs and pavement markings are legally defined in the Federal Highway Administration 's Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices as the standard.

A rather informal distinction among the directional signs is the one between advance directional signs, interchange directional signs, and reassurance signs. Advance directional signs appear at a certain distance from the interchange, giving information for each direction. A number of countries do not give information for the road ahead (so-called "pull-through" signs), and only for the directions left and right. Advance directional signs enable drivers to take precautions for the exit (e.g., switch lanes, double check whether this is the correct exit, slow down).
They often do not appear on lesser roads, but are normally posted on expressways and motorways, as drivers would be missing exits without them. While each nation has its own system, the first approach sign for a motorway exit is mostly placed at least 1,000 metres (3,300 ft) from the actual interchange. After that sign, one or two additional advance directional signs typically follow before the actual interchange itself.

History [ edit ] An old road sign of the King's Road between Perniö and Ekenäs in Finland The earliest road signs were milestones , giving distance or direction; for example, the Romans erected stone columns throughout their empire giving the distance to Rome. According to Strabo, Mauryas erected signboards at distance of 10 stades to mark their roads.

[ 2 ] In the Middle Ages , multidirectional signs at intersections became common, giving directions to cities and towns.

In 1686, the first known Traffic Regulation Act in Europe was established by King Peter II of Portugal . This act foresaw the placement of priority signs in the narrowest streets of Lisbon , stating which traffic should back up to give way. One of these signs still exists at Salvador street, in the neighborhood of Alfama .

[ 3 ] The first modern road signs erected on a wide scale were designed for riders of high or "ordinary" bicycles in the late 1870s and early 1880s. These machines were fast, silent and their nature made them difficult to control, moreover their riders travelled considerable distances and often preferred to tour on unfamiliar roads. For such riders, cycling organizations began to erect signs that warned of potential hazards ahead (particularly steep hills), rather than merely giving distance or directions to places, thereby contributing the sign type that defines "modern" traffic signs.

The development of automobiles encouraged more complex signage systems using more than just text-based notices. One of the first modern-day road sign systems was devised by the Italian Touring Club in 1895. By 1900, a Congress of the International League of Touring Organizations in Paris was considering proposals for standardization of road signage. In 1903 the British government introduced four "national" signs based on shape, but the basic patterns of most traffic signs were set at the 1908 World Road Congress in Paris .

[ citation needed ] In 1909, nine European governments agreed on the use of four pictorial symbols, indicating "bump", "curve", "intersection", and "grade-level railroad crossing". The intensive work on international road signs that took place between 1926 and 1949 eventually led to the development of the European road sign system. Both Britain and the United States developed their own road signage systems, both of which were adopted or modified by many other nations in their respective spheres of influence. The UK adopted a version of the European road signs in 1964 and, over past decades, North American signage began using some symbols and graphics mixed in with English.

In the U.S., the first road signs were erected by the American Automobile Association (AAA). Starting in 1906, regional AAA clubs began paying for and installing wooden signs to help motorists find their way. In 1914, AAA started a cohesive transcontinental signage project, installing more than 4,000 signs in one stretch between Los Angeles and Kansas City alone.

[ 4 ] Over the years, change was gradual. Pre-industrial signs were stone or wood, but with the development of Darby's method of smelting iron using coke-painted cast iron became favoured in the late 18th and 19th centuries. Cast iron continued to be used until the mid-20th century, but it was gradually displaced by aluminium or other materials and processes, such as vitreous enamelled and/or pressed malleable iron, or (later) steel. Since 1945 most signs have been made from sheet aluminium with adhesive plastic coatings; these are normally retroreflective for nighttime and low-light visibility. Before the development of reflective plastics, reflectivity was provided by glass reflectors set into the lettering and symbols.

New generations of traffic signs based on electronic displays can also change their text (or, in some countries, symbols) to provide for "intelligent control" linked to automated traffic sensors or remote manual input. In over 20 countries, real-time Traffic Message Channel incident warnings are conveyed directly to vehicle navigation systems using inaudible signals carried via FM radio, 3G cellular data and satellite broadcasts. Finally, cars can pay tolls and trucks pass safety screening checks using video numberplate scanning, or RFID transponders in windshields linked to antennae over the road, in support of on-board signalling, toll collection, and travel time monitoring.

Yet another "medium" for transferring information ordinarily associated with visible signs is RIAS (Remote Infrared Audible Signage) , e.g., "talking signs" for print-handicapped (including blind/low-vision/illiterate) people. These are infra-red transmitters serving the same purpose as the usual graphic signs when received by an appropriate device such as a hand-held receiver or one built into a cell phone.

Then, finally, in 1914, the world's first electric traffic signal is put into place on the corner of Euclid Avenue and East 105th Street in Cleveland , Ohio, on August 5.

[ citation needed ] Roman milestone 17th century traffic sign in Salvador street, Lisbon , Portugal stating which traffic should back up to give way: Year of 1686.

His Majesty commands all coaches , carriages and litters coming from Salvador's entrance to back up to the same part Typefaces [ edit ] See also: Public signage typefaces and Traffic signs by country § Typefaces Typefaces used on traffic signs vary by location, with some typefaces being designed specifically for the purpose of being used on traffic signs and based on attributes that aid viewing from a distance. A typeface chosen for a traffic sign is selected based on its readability, which is essential for conveying information to drivers quickly and accurately at high speeds and long distances.

Factors such as clear letterforms, lines of copy, appropriate spacing, and simplicity contribute to readability. Increased X-height and counters specifically help with letter distinction and reduced halation , which especially affects aging drivers. In cases of halation, certain letters can blur and look like others, such as a lowercase "e" appearing as an "a", "c", or "o".

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Dispute of standard typefaces for North American traffic signs [ edit ] In 1997, a design team at T.D. Larson Transportation Institute began testing Clearview , a typeface designed to improve readability and halation issues with the FHWA Standard Alphabet, also known as Highway Gothic , which is the standard typeface for highway signs in the U.S.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The adoption of Clearview for traffic signs over Highway Gothic has been slow since its initial proposal. Country-wide adoption faced resistance from both local governments and the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), citing concerns about consistency and cost, along with doubts of the studies done on Clearview’s improved readability. As stated by the FHWA, "This process (of designing Clearview) did not result in a necessarily better set of letter styles for highway signing, but rather a different set of letter styles with increased letter height and different letter spacing that was not comparable to the Standard Alphabets." [ 9 ] The FHWA allowed use of Clearview to be approved on an interim basis as opposed to national change, where local governments could decide to submit a request to the FHWA for approval to update their signs with Clearview, but in 2016 they rescinded this approval, wanting to limit confusion and inconsistency that could come from a mix of two typefaces being used. In 2018, they again allowed interim approval of Clearview, with Highway Gothic remaining the standard.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Automatic traffic sign recognition [ edit ] Cars are beginning to feature cameras with automatic traffic sign recognition , beginning 2008 with the Opel Insignia . It mainly recognizes speed limits and no-overtaking areas.

[ 11 ] It also uses GPS and a database over speed limits, which is useful in the many countries which signpost city speed limits with a city name sign, not a speed limit sign.

Image gallery [ edit ] Road sign in Europe: no vehicles carrying explosives Sign north of Nome, Alaska , providing warning of the road, unpopulated area beyond Humorous Himank sign in Lahaul , India Pedestrian crossing sign in Finland A sign for wild animals such as deer . Germany, Poland, Latvia, Spain and Turkey use a very similar sign.

Romantic Road sign in southern Germany Pedestrian crossing Slow sign in Buting, Pasig, Philippines A Turkish motorway mileage sign Sign close to Chicana on the Mexican Federal Highway 186 , Campeche, Mexico The design specifications for a Taiwanese sign warning of double bends ahead. Translated directly, it means that there are winding roads for the next ten kilometres.

A group of green-coloured directional signs on the National Highway No. 1 in Kaohsiung , Taiwan Stop sign in Australia Traffic signal ahead sign in the United States A yield sign in Mexico A sign indicating speed limit enforcement ahead in the Czech Republic Grammar mistake on a road sign in Sofia , Bulgaria . The third word should be spelled 'целия' Three bilingual Irish-English directional fingerposts Rail traffic [ edit ] Rail traffic has often a lot of differences between countries and often not much similarity with road signs. Rail traffic has professional drivers who have much longer education than what's normal for road driving licenses. Differences between neighboring countries cause problems for cross border traffic and causes need for additional education for drivers.

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Road signs .

Look up signpost in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Road signs .

Button copy Exit number Fingerpost Gantry (transport) Glossary of road transport terms List of public signage typefaces Road surface marking Rules of the road Street sign theft Tourist sign Traffic light Traffic signs by country Traffic sign design Variable-message sign Warning sign References [ edit ] ^ Traffic Signs Manual Introduction 1982 ^ Prasad, Prakash Charan (1977).

Foreign Trade and Commerce in Ancient India . Abhinav Publications. p. 117.

ISBN 978-81-7017-053-2 .

^ Antanho), J. E. Fraga Aurélio (lisboa De (2016-02-21).

"Lisboa de Antigamente: Rua do Salvador" .

Lisboa de Antigamente . Retrieved 2025-02-22 .

^ "Where Did the First Road Signs Come From?" .

Your AAA Network . 2019-12-18 . Retrieved 2020-02-21 .

^ Yaffa, Joshua (2017-08-30).

"The Road to Clarity - The New York Times" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 2017-08-30 . Retrieved 2024-04-11 .

^ Texas A&M Transportation Institute  (2014), Technical Report Documentation (PDF) , State of California Department of Transportation , retrieved 11 April 2024 ^ Pund, D. (2019), Highway Gothic vs Clearview: Battle of the U.S. Road Sign Fonts ^ ClearviewHWY, Research ^ a b U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, Office of Transportation Operations (2018), Report on Highway Guide Sign Fonts (PDF) ^ FHWA (2018), Design and Use Policy for Clearview Alphabet ^ "Opel Insignia to feature traffic sign recognition system" . Archived from the original on 2010-10-26.

v t e Traffic signs Signs Advisory speed limit Bilingual sign Crossbuck Dead end sign Driver location signs Logo sign One-way traffic Regulatory sign Slow Children At Play Speed limit ( by country ) Tourist sign Variable-message sign Priority signs Priority to the right Stop sign ( all way ) Give Way / Yield sign Filter in turn Vienna Convention Groups Warning sign Priority signs Prohibitory traffic sign Mandatory sign Special regulation sign Information sign Direction, position, or indication sign By country Africa Angola Mauritius Morocco Rwanda SADC Botswana Eswatini Lesotho Malawi Mozambique Namibia South Africa Tanzania Zambia Zimbabwe Uganda Asia Armenia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Cambodia China Hong Kong Macau Cyprus Georgia India Indonesia Iran Israel Japan Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Laos Malaysia Mongolia Nepal Pakistan Philippines Saudi Arabia Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Europe Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Malta Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gaelic-speaking Scotland Wales North America Canada Cuba Jamaica Mexico United States Puerto Rico SIECA Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Oceania Australia New Zealand South America Argentina Buenos Aires Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Paraguay Former countries Soviet Union Traffic signs in post-Soviet states Lights Traffic light Variations in traffic light operation Traffic light control and coordination Typefaces Arial ASTRA-Frutiger Austria Caractères Clarendon Clearview DIN 1451 Helvetica Highway Gothic LLM Lettering Motorway NPS Rawlinson Roadway Panno Polish road signs typeface Rail Alphabet Rotis SNV Tern Trafikkalfabetet Transport Tratex International conventions Geneva Vienna Traffic Road signs National standards Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (US) Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions (UK) Comparisons Comparison of European road signs Comparison of MUTCD-influenced traffic signs Comparison of traffic signs in English-speaking territories Template:Road types Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic 2 Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐457f9
Cached time: 20250818095912
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.488 seconds
Real time usage: 0.686 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2309/1000000
Revision size: 19797/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 84881/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3207/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 75540/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.305/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9031269/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  583.252      1 -total
 39.21%  228.684      1 Template:Reflist
 26.11%  152.282      1 Template:Cite_book
 13.03%   75.974      3 Template:Navbox
 12.78%   74.558      1 Template:Traffic_signs
 10.97%   63.998      3 Template:Sister_project
 10.76%   62.738      3 Template:Side_box
  8.63%   50.316      1 Template:Commons_category
  8.44%   49.201      1 Template:Short_description
  6.14%   35.822      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:261002:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818095912 and revision id 1306546238. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Traffic_sign&oldid=1306546238 " Categories : Traffic signs Road safety Street furniture Symbols Hidden categories: CS1:Vancouver names with accept markup Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 09:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Traffic sign 80 languages Add topic

