Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 University of Cambridge 2.2 Trinity College Dublin 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Sizar Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of student in Dublin and Cambridge For the village in Iran, see Sizan .

Academics at Trinity College, Cambridge , in 1815: a pensioner sits at left, with two Masters of Arts (standing, in robes) and a sizar (the boy at centre).

At Trinity College Dublin and the University of Cambridge , a sizar / ˈ s aɪ z ər / is an undergraduate who receives some form of assistance such as meals, lower fees or lodging during their period of study, in some cases in return for doing a defined job.

Etymology [ edit ] The word is thought to derive from the "sizes" or "sizings" (in turn a shortened form of " assize "), which were the specified portions of food and drink made available at a fixed price at the college. One of the sizar's duties was, historically, to fetch the "sizes" for his colleagues.

History [ edit ] University of Cambridge [ edit ] At Cambridge, a sizar was originally an undergraduate student who financed his studies by undertaking more or less menial tasks within his college but, as time went on, was increasingly likely to receive small grants from the college.

[ 1 ] Certain colleges, including St John's and Trinity , distinguished between two categories of sizar: there were specific endowments for specific numbers of sizars who were called "proper sizars"; those who were not so endowed, but who were maintained by fellow-commoners and fellows were called subsizars.

Isaac Newton matriculated as subsizar at Trinity College.

[ 2 ] Richard S. Westfall noted that sizars were considerably more successful in gaining degrees than the gentlemen who entered Cambridge in the seventeenth century. Whereas only 30% of the latter (and 68% of the sons of professionals) continued to the degree, around 80% of the sons of tradesmen and yeomen , who made up most of the sizars, took their degree.

[ 3 ] Churchill College, Cambridge offers three sizarships per year, with the recipients being expected to promote music, theatre and the visual arts in the life of the college.

[ 4 ] Trinity College Dublin [ edit ] According to Alumni Dublinenses from 1935, [ 5 ] most students entered Trinity College Dublin as "pensioners"; in other words, they paid a fixed sum annually. The other two categories were "sizars" and "fellow commoners" ( Socii Comitates ). Sizars were "allowed free education in consideration of performing certain, at one time menial, duties"; fellow commoners paid double fees and enjoyed several privileges, including that of finishing the college course in three years instead of four; "sizars were sons of poor parents, frequently the clergy". According to William Howitt , writing in 1847 with reference to Oliver Goldsmith : Trinity College Dublin, is a noble structure; and, with its spacious courts and extensive gardens, more fittingly deserving the name of parks, one would think a place where the years of studentship might — especially in the heart of such a city — be very agreeably spent. But Goldsmith entered there under circumstances that were irksome to him, and to add to the matter, he met with a brute in his tutor. The family income did not allow him to occupy a higher rank than that of a sizer, or poor scholar, and this was mortifying to his sensitive mind. The sizer wears a black gown of coarse stuff without sleeves, a plain black cloth cap without a tassel, and dines at the fellows' table after they have retired. It was at that period far worse; they wore red caps to distinguish them, and were compelled to perform derogatory offices; to sweep the courts in the morning, carry up the dishes from the kitchen to the fellows' table, and wait in the hall till they had dined. No wonder that a mind like that of Goldsmith's writhed under the degradation! He has recorded his own feelings and opinions on this custom: "Sure pride itself has dictated to the fellows of our colleges the absurd fashion of being attended at meals, and on other public occasions, by those poor men who, willing to be scholars, come in upon some charitable foundation. It implies a contradiction, for men to be at once learning the liberal arts and at the same time treated as slaves; at once studying freedom and practising servitude." A spirited fellow at length caused the abolition of the practice of the sizers acting as waiters, and that, too, on grand occasions before the public, by flinging the dish he was carrying on Trinity Sunday , at the head of a citizen in the crowd, assembled to witness the scene, who made some jeering remarks on the office he had to perform.

[ 6 ] Sizarships are still awarded at Dublin, to new entrants of limited means who have shown merit in their school-leaving examinations. They receive their evening meal ( commons ) free of charge, normally for the first two years of an undergraduate course. The word sizarship is also still used elsewhere to refer to monetary awards made to members of a student body willing to take on defined jobs with responsibility; according to John Stillwell , "Sizars had to earn their keep as servants to the wealthier students [...]".

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Servitor ( University of Edinburgh ; historically, University of Oxford ) Batteler (historically, University of Oxford) Federal Work-Study Program References [ edit ] ^ "Glossary: sizar" .

janus.lib.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 10 January 2018 .

^ "Isaac Newton als Mathematiker" [Isaac Newton as a mathematician Markus Fierz].

Naturforschende Gesellschaft in Zürich (in German). Archived from the original on 6 September 2012 . Retrieved 20 December 2013 .

^ Westfall, Richard S.

(1980).

Never at Rest . Cambridge University Press. p.

75 .

ISBN 0-521-27435-4 .

^ "Sizarships" .

Churchill College . Retrieved 10 January 2018 .

^ Alumni Dublinenses, Dublin, Alex. Thom & Co. Ltd., 2 Crown Street, 1935 ^ William Howitt, "Oliver Goldsmith" Homes and Haunts of the Most Eminent British Poets (1847) 1:286–336.

^ Stillwell, John (2002) [1989].

"Calculus [sub-chapter 9.7 Biographical Notes: Wallis, Newton, and Leibniz]" . In S. Axler; F. W. Gehring; K. A. Ribet (eds.).

Mathematics and Its History .

Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics (2nd ed.). New York: Springer-Verlag New York. p. 163.

ISBN 0-387-95336-1 .

Sizars had to earn their keep as servants to wealthier students [...] External links [ edit ] Look up sizar in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

"Sizar" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 25 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 165.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sizar&oldid=1303687007 " Categories : Academic culture Terminology of the University of Cambridge Trinity College Dublin Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 13:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sizar Add languages Add topic

