Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Scope and indexing 3 Editorial processes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Annual Review of Virology Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic journal Annual Review of Virology Discipline Virology Language English Edited by Terence S. Dermody Publication details History 2014–present, 11 years old Publisher Annual Reviews (US) Frequency Annually Open access Subscribe to Open [ 1 ] Impact factor 8.3 [ 2 ] (2024) Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 Annu. Rev. Virol.

Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L ISSN 2327-056X (print) 2327-0578 (web) LCCN 2013200665 OCLC no.

834373301 Links Journal homepage The Annual Review of Virology is an annual peer-reviewed scientific journal published by Annual Reviews . The journal covers all aspects of virology . It was established in 2014 and led by editor Lynn W. Enquist until October 2023 when Terence S. Dermody succeeded him.  As of 2021, Annual Review of Virology was published as open access, under the Subscribe to Open model.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] History [ edit ] The Annual Review of Virology was first published in 2014 by nonprofit publisher Annual Reviews . By this time, Annual Reviews published over forty journal titles covering different disciplines; while more than half of the existing journal titles contained review articles relevant to virology , developments in the field were not routinely covered. Published articles on the study of viruses were not easy for readers to locate, as they were decentralized in the other discipline-specific journals.

Lynn W. Enquist ( Princeton University ) was the founding editor.

[ 4 ] As of October 2023, Terence S. Dermody became the editor of the journal.

[ 5 ] Though it was initially published in print, as of 2021 it is only published electronically.

[ 6 ] Scope and indexing [ edit ] It defines its scope as covering significant developments in the study of all viruses, including those of animals, plants, bacteria, archaea, fungi, and protozoa. Review articles cover general virology, the mechanisms of viral disease, host–pathogen interactions , and cellular and immune responses to viral infection.

[ 3 ] As of 2025, Journal Citation Reports lists the journal's 2024 impact factor as 8.3, ranking it second of 42 journal titles in the category "Virology".

[ 2 ] It is abstracted and indexed in Scopus , Science Citation Index Expanded , MEDLINE , and Embase , among others.

[ 7 ] Editorial processes [ edit ] The Annual Review of Virology is helmed by the editor or the co-editors. The editor is assisted by the editorial committee, which includes associate editors, regular members, and occasionally guest editors. Guest members participate at the invitation of the editor, and serve terms of one year. All other members of the editorial committee are appointed by the Annual Reviews board of directors and serve five-year terms. The editorial committee determines which topics should be included in each volume and solicits reviews from qualified authors.

[ 8 ] Unsolicited manuscripts are not accepted.

Peer review of accepted manuscripts is undertaken by the editorial committee.

[ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b "Subscribe to Open" .

Annual Reviews . Retrieved 24 May 2023 .

^ a b "Journal Impact Factors" .

Annual Reviews . Retrieved 9 July 2025 .

^ a b "Annual Review of Virology" .

Annual Reviews . Retrieved 10 March 2021 .

^ Enquist, Lynn W.; Dermody, Terence S.; Dimaio, Daniel (2014).

"Welcome to the Annual Review of Virology" .

Annual Review of Virology .

1 (1): v– vi.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-vi-1-091714-100001 .

PMID 29084491 .

^ "Annual Review of Virology, Current Editorial Committee" .

Annual Reviews Directory .

^ "Expected Publication Dates" .

Annual Reviews . 5 March 2021 . Retrieved 8 March 2021 .

^ "Annual Review of Virology" .

MIAR . Retrieved 10 March 2021 .

^ "Editorial Principles and Policies" .

Annual Reviews . Retrieved 2 March 2021 .

^ "Information for Unsolicited Authors and Reviewers" .

Annual Reviews . Retrieved 2 March 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Annual Reviews publications A journal may be of interest in more than one group.

Biomedical & life sciences journals Annual Review of: Analytical Chemistry Animal Biosciences Biochemistry Biomedical Data Science Biomedical Engineering Biophysics Cancer Biology Cell and Developmental Biology Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering Clinical Psychology Developmental Psychology Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics Entomology Environment and Resources Food Science and Technology Genetics Genomics and Human Genetics Immunology Marine Science Medicine Microbiology Neuroscience Nutrition Pathology: Mechanisms of Disease Pharmacology and Toxicology Physiology Phytopathology Plant Biology Psychology Public Health Statistics and Its Application Virology Vision Science Physical sciences journals Annual Review of: Analytical Chemistry Astronomy and Astrophysics Biomedical Engineering Biophysics Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering Condensed Matter Physics Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems Earth and Planetary Sciences Environment and Resources Fluid Mechanics Marine Science Materials Research Nuclear and Particle Science Physical Chemistry Statistics and Its Application Social sciences & economics journals Annual Review of: Anthropology Clinical Psychology Criminology Developmental Psychology Environment and Resources Law and Social Science Linguistics Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior Political Science Psychology Public Health Sociology Statistics and Its Application Economics Financial Economics Resource Economics Discontinued journals Annual Review of: Computer Science (1986–1990) Library science (quarterly) The Charleston Advisor Science journalism (weekly) Knowable Magazine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Annual_Review_of_Virology&oldid=1299669694 " Categories : Virology journals Annual Reviews (publisher) academic journals Annual journals Academic journals established in 2014 English-language journals Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Annual journals (infobox) Subscribe to Open journals (infobox) Articles with outdated impact factors from 2024 This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 18:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Annual Review of Virology Add languages Add topic

