Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Names 2 Unicode 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Reference mark 10 languages Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Македонски Nederlands 日本語 ไทย 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Typographical mark (※) ※ Reference mark In Unicode U+203B ※ REFERENCE MARK ( komejirushi , chamgopyo ) Different from Different from U+205C ⁜ DOTTED CROSS U+1360 ፠ ETHIOPIC SECTION MARK Related See also U+002A * ASTERISK ( &ast;, &midast; ) Handwritten notice in Japanese. Note the komejirushi at the bottom of each page, preceding the footnotes.

The reference mark or reference symbol " ※ " is a typographic mark or word used in Chinese , Japanese and Korean (CJK) writing.

The symbol was used historically to call attention to an important sentence or idea, such as a prologue or footnote.

[ 1 ] As an indicator of a note, the mark serves the same purpose as the asterisk in English. However, in Japanese usage, the note text is placed directly into the main text immediately after the reference mark, rather than at the bottom of the page or end of chapter as is the case in English writing.

Names [ edit ] The Japanese name, komejirushi ( Japanese : こめじるし ; 米印 , pronounced [komedʑiꜜɾɯɕi] , lit.

' rice symbol ' ), refers to the symbol's visual similarity to the kanji for "rice" ( 米 ).

[ 2 ] In Korean, the symbol's name, chamgopyo ( Korean : 참고표; 参考表 ), simply means "reference mark". Informally, the symbol is often called danggujangpyo ( 당구장표 ; lit.

' billiard hall mark ' ), as it is often used to indicate the presence of pool halls, due to its visual similarity to two crossed cue sticks and four billiard balls .

In Chinese, the symbol is called cānkǎo biāojì ( Chinese : 参考标记 ; lit.

'reference mark') or mǐ xīnghào ( Chinese : 米星号 ; lit.

'rice asterisk' due to its visual similarity to 米 "rice"). It is not often used in Chinese writing.

Unicode [ edit ] In Unicode , the symbol has code point U+203B ※ REFERENCE MARK .

See also [ edit ] Syncword – "Preamble" to communications message data after a header, also called reference signal or midamble in wireless communications.

Dagger (mark) – Typographical mark indicating footnotes References [ edit ] ^ Jan M. Ziolkowski (2018).

The Juggler of Notre Dame and the Medievalizing of Modernity . p. 47.

ISBN 978-1783744367 .

[…] The Japanese komejirushi ("rice symbol"), so called for its similarity to the kanji for kome ("rice") and used in Japanese writing to denote an important sentence or thought.

^ Millen, John (15 April 2008).

Japanese in a Flash . Vol. 2.

ISBN 9781462915385 .

v t e Common punctuation and other typographical symbols space , comma : colon ; semicolon ‐ hyphen ’ ' apostrophe ′ ″ ‴ prime .

full stop & ampersand @ at sign ^ caret / slash \ backslash … ellipsis * asterisk ※ Reference mark ⁂ asterism • • • dinkus - hyphen-minus ‒ – — dash ⹀ ⸗ double hyphen ?

question mark !

exclamation mark ‽ interrobang ¡ ¿ inverted ! and ?

⸮ irony punctuation # number sign № numero sign º ª ordinal indicator % percent sign ‰ per mille ‱ basis point ° degree symbol ⌀ diameter sign + − plus and minus signs × multiplication sign ÷ division sign ~ tilde ± plus–minus sign ∓ minus-plus sign √ radical symbol _ underscore ⁀ tie | ¦ ‖ vertical bar • bullet · interpunct © copyright symbol ℗ sound recording copyright ® registered trademark SM service mark symbol TM trademark symbol ‘ ’ “ ” ' ' " " quotation mark ‹ › « » guillemet ( ) [ ] { } ⟨ ⟩ bracket ” ditto mark † ‡ dagger ❧ fleuron (hedera, aldus) ☞ manicule ◊ ⌑ lozenge ¶ ⸿ pilcrow (paragraph mark) § section mark Version of this table as a sortable list Currency symbols Diacritics (accents) Logic symbols Math symbols Whitespace Chinese punctuation Hebrew punctuation Japanese punctuation Korean punctuation Vietnamese punctuation Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reference_mark&oldid=1257253006 " Categories : Symbols Japanese writing system Korean writing system Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing Korean-language text Pages with Japanese IPA Articles containing Chinese-language text This page was last edited on 14 November 2024, at 00:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reference mark 10 languages Add topic

