Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Career 3 Publications 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Amira Bennison 1 language مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Professor of Middle Eastern and Islamic Studies at Cambridge University Professor Amira K. Bennison Born Katherine Nicole Bennison Nationality British Occupation Historian Academic background Alma mater University of Cambridge Academic work Institutions Magdelene College , University of Cambridge Main interests Medieval Middle Eastern and Maghreb history Notable works Jihad and Its Interpretation in Pre-colonial Morocco: State-society Relations During the French Conquest of Algeria (2002) Cities in The pre-Modern Islamic World: the urban impact of religion, state and society (2007) The Great Caliphs: the golden age of the ‘Abbasid empire (2011) The Almoravid and Almohad Empires (2016) Amira K. Bennison is a professor of the history and culture of the Maghreb at the Faculty of Asian and Middle Eastern Studies of the University of Cambridge . She is a fellow of Magdalene College, Cambridge .

[ 1 ] Education [ edit ] Bennison studied history at Cambridge University , graduating in 1989 [ 2 ] before switching to Arabic. She then pursued graduate work, with an MA at Harvard in Middle Eastern Studies in 1992, and her PhD at SOAS in Moroccan History in 1996.

[ 2 ] Career [ edit ] Bennison began her career as a Leverhulme research fellow at the University of Manchester . She began lecturing at Cambridge University in 1997, [ 2 ] before going on to become a fully tenured member of the Faculty of Asian and Middle Eastern Studies.

[ 1 ] She has made several TV appearances to speak about the history of the Middle East and North Africa, and regularly contributes to BBC Radio 4 's In Our Time . She has also appeared on the BBC You're Dead to Me podcast.

[ 1 ] Bennison's 2009 book The Great Caliphs: the golden age of the ‘Abbasid empire was reviewed by Hugh N. Kennedy , who said she has "a lively and engaging style", and the book will be "the first port of call for anyone looking for an introduction to the 'golden age of Islam'." [ 3 ] In 2022, Bennison was elected chair of the Cambridge University Press academic committee.

[ 1 ] Publications [ edit ] Amira K. Bennison.

The Almoravid and Almohad Empires . The Edinburgh History of Islamic Empires.

Edinburgh University Press 2016.

ISBN 9780748646807 Amira K. Bennison.

The Great Caliphs: the golden age of the ‘Abbasid empire .

I.B.Tauris 2011.

ISBN 978-1-84885-976-0 Amira K. Bennison and Alison L. Gascoigne (editors).

Cities in The pre-Modern Islamic World: the urban impact of religion, state and society .

Routledge 2007.

ISBN 978-0-415-55381-0 Amira K. Bennison.

Jihad and Its Interpretation in Pre-colonial Morocco: State-society Relations During the French Conquest of Algeria . Routledge 2002.

ISBN 978-0-7007-1693-7 References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Comerford, Ruth (16 November 2022).

"Bennison made chair of CUP's academic committee" .

The Bookseller .

^ a b c University of Cambridge. Faculty of Asian and Middle Eastern Studies. [Bennison's home page "Faculty of Asian and Middle Eastern Studies | General Information | Teaching Staff | Middle Eastern & Islamic Studies Teaching Staff" . Archived from the original on 26 September 2011 . Retrieved 24 September 2011 .

] ^ Historyextra.com, The official website of BBC History Magazine. The Great Caliphs. Reviewed by Hugh Kennedy.

Book Review External links [ edit ] University of Cambridge. Faculty of Asian and Middle Eastern Studies.

Dr Amira K Bennison's home page Project Muse. An Interview with Amira Bennison Historically Speaking The Institute of Ismaili Studies. Conferences, Workshops Content. February 2008.

Video: Interview with Dr Amira Bennison Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Norway Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Amira_Bennison&oldid=1206250876 " Categories : Living people Alumni of SOAS University of London Historians of the Middle East Alumni of the University of Cambridge Fellows of Magdalene College, Cambridge Harvard University alumni British women historians British historians of Islam Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2016 Use British English from October 2016 Articles with hCards Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 11 February 2024, at 16:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Amira Bennison 1 language Add topic

