Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 First series (1930–1940) 2 Second series (1975–present) 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Erkenntnis 6 languages Deutsch Italiano Română Suomi Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic journal Erkenntnis Discipline Philosophy Language English German (until mid-1990s) Edited by Hannes Leitgeb Publication details History 1930–1940 (first series) 1975–present (second series) Publisher Springer (Netherlands) Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 Erkenntnis Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L CODEN ERKEDQ ISSN 0165-0106 (print) 1572-8420 (web) LCCN 75647016 JSTOR 01650106 OCLC no.

915460912 Links Journal homepage Online access Online archive Erkenntnis is a journal of philosophy that publishes papers in analytic philosophy . Its name is derived from the German word " Erkenntnis ", meaning "knowledge, recognition". The journal was also linked to organisation of conferences, such as the Second Conference on the Epistemology of the Exact Sciences , of which it published the papers and accounts of the discussions.

First series (1930–1940) [ edit ] When Hans Reichenbach and Rudolf Carnap took charge of Annalen der Philosophie und philosophischen Kritik [ 1 ] in 1930 they renamed it Erkenntnis , [ 2 ] under which name it was published 1930–1938. The journal was published by the Gesellschaft für Empirische Philosophie ,  or the Berlin Circle and the Verein Ernst Mach , Vienna . In the first issue Reichenbach noted that the editors hoped to gain a better understanding of the nature of all human knowledge through consideration of the procedures and results of a variety of scientific disciplines, whilst also hoping that philosophy need not remain a series of "systems" but could reach the state of being objective knowledge.

[ 3 ] The final issue of the first series, Volume 8, No. 1 was published in 1939 and retitled The Journal of Unified Science (Erkenntnis) (1939–1940) and included as associate editors Philipp Frank , Jørgen Jørgensen ( da:Jørgen Jørgensen_filosof ), Charles W. Morris , Otto Neurath , and Louis Rougier . The advent of World War II led to the cessation of publication.

[ 3 ] Second series (1975–present) [ edit ] In 1975 the journal was "refounded" by Wilhelm K. Essler , Carl G. Hempel and Wolfgang Stegmüller , and it has been published continuously ever since.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The journal's current editor-in-chief is Hannes Leitgeb ( Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich ), and the supervisory board is composed of Michael Friedman ( Stanford University ), Hans Rott ( University of Regensburg ), and Wolfgang Spohn ( Konstanz University ).

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] List of philosophy journals References [ edit ] ^ Annalen der Philosophie und philosophischen Kritik ^ Erkenntnis ^ a b c Hempel, C. G. (1975).

The Old and the New 'Erkenntnis' . Erkenntnis 9(1), 1-4 ^ idem , download ^ Editorial Board v t e Philosophy journals General American Philosophical Quarterly Analysis Australasian Journal of Philosophy Canadian Journal of Philosophy Erkenntnis European Journal of Philosophy Journal of the American Philosophical Association The Journal of Philosophy Mind The Monist Noûs Pacific Philosophical Quarterly The Philosophical Quarterly The Philosophical Review Philosophical Studies Philosophy and Phenomenological Research Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society Synthese Thought Moral , social , and political philosophy Ethics Journal of Moral Philosophy Journal of Social Ontology Journal of Social Philosophy International Journal of Applied Philosophy Philosophy & Public Affairs Res Publica The Journal of Ethics Philosophy of mind Journal of Consciousness Studies Mind & Language Logic Journal of Philosophical Logic Journal of Symbolic Logic Logical Analysis and History of Philosophy Philosophy of science British Journal for the Philosophy of Science Aesthetics British Journal of Aesthetics Rhetoric Philosophy & Rhetoric History of philosophy Ancient Philosophy Apeiron Archiv für Begriffsgeschichte Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie British Journal for the History of Philosophy Dionysius Epoché History of Philosophy Quarterly Isis Journal of the History of Ideas Journal of the History of Philosophy Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy Phronesis Revista Española de Filosofía Medieval Feminist philosophy Feminist Philosophy Quarterly Hypatia philoSOPHIA Public philosophy Philosophy Now The Philosophers' Magazine Think Philosophers Augustinian Studies Berkeley Studies Deleuze Studies Derrida Today Hegel-Studien Hegel Bulletin Heidegger Studies Hume Studies International Journal of Baudrillard Studies The Journal of Nietzsche Studies Kantian Review Kierkegaard Studies Yearbook The Leibniz Review New Nietzsche Studies New Vico Studies Sartre Studies International Categories and lists Category:Philosophy journals List of ethics journals List of philosophy journals Related The Philosopher's Index Philosophy Documentation Center PhilPapers Philosophy Research Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Erkenntnis&oldid=1293765748 " Categories : Epistemology journals Analytic philosophy literature Vienna Circle Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 15:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Erkenntnis 6 languages Add topic

