Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Selection of fungal species 2 Saprotrophic fungi 3 Beneficial fungal interactions 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Mycoforestry 3 languages فارسی Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Permaculture forest management system using fungi Amanita species are ectomycorrhizal with many trees.

Mycoforestry is an ecological forest management system implemented to enhance forest ecosystems and plant communities, by introducing the mycorrhizal and saprotrophic fungi . Mycoforestry is considered a type of permaculture [ 1 ] and can be implemented as a beneficial component of an agroforestry system. It can enhance the yields of tree crops and produce edible mushrooms , an economically valuable product. By integrating plant-fungal associations into a forestry management system, native forests can be preserved, wood waste can be recycled back into the ecosystem, carbon sequestration can be increased, planted restoration sites are enhanced, and the sustainability of forest ecosystems are improved.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Mycoforestry is an alternative to the practice of clearcutting , which removes dead wood from forests, thereby diminishing nutrient availability and reducing soil depth.

[ 4 ] Selection of fungal species [ edit ] According to Paul Stamets , the first principle for the creation of a mycoforestry system is to utilize native fungal species. Implementing a mycoforestry system provides the potential of improving restoration efforts and the possibility of economic gain through mushroom cropping and harvesting. However to utilize native fungal flora, first the relationships between present fungal species and growth substrate, and habitat need to be studied.

A simple way to introduce a mycoforestry system and enhance out-plantings for crops and forest restoration sites is to "use mycorrhizal spore inoculum when replanting forest lands." [ 2 ] For this process it is best to match native trees with native mycorrhizal fungi. This method keeps and will promote the functioning of the native ecosystem, and native biodiversity.

It is assumed in a functioning forest ecosystem an underground mycelial network persists even if no fruiting bodies are visible.

[ 5 ] A period of disappearance of mushrooms from an area should not cause alarm. In order to trigger the formation of fruiting bodies, many fungal species require specific environmental conditions. Most species of fungi do not fruit year round.

Mycoforestry is an emergent scientific field and practice.

[ 2 ] Until broadly standardized protocols are created and perfected, the collection of both current and historical ecological site conditions will improve the success of the project.

[ 2 ] Therefore, a survey of fungal relations at the site under both prime and poor conditions is beneficial to implementation of a mycoforestry system.

Saprotrophic fungi [ edit ] Edible oyster mushrooms ( Pleurotus sp.) fruiting from a stump The second principle is to promote saprotrophic fungi in the environment.

[ 2 ] Saprophytic fungi are crucial to mycoforestry systems because these are the primary composers breaking down wood and returning nutrients to the soil for use by the rest of the forest ecosystem. This can be accomplished through inoculation of wood debris at site. Spored oils (biodegradable oils containing fungal spores) can be used in chainsaws when problematic or invasive hardwood requires felling. This method is a simple means to inoculate a tree. Additionally plug spawn can be implemented and injected into wood mass again prompting colonization by the selected fungus. Eventually repeated colonization efforts should not be necessary as many fungal life forms are strong and will spread and sustain in the soil on their own.

[ 5 ] In management of the mycoforestry system, it is important that dead wood be in contact with the ground. This allows fungus to reach up from the soil and decompose fallen wood releasing nutrients at a much quicker rate then if the wood is left standing.

[ 2 ] Additionally, it is important to leave dead wood on site for decomposition back into the soil.

[ 2 ] This philosophy is similarly based to the fact that clearcutting of a forest reduces soil nutrients and thickness.

[ 4 ] Beneficial fungal interactions [ edit ] Armillaria , a parasitic fungus The third principle is to implement species known to benefit plant species.

[ 2 ] These are commonly mycorrhizal fungus that form long term associations with plants, often extending inside of plants roots, acting as an additional root system, and improving absorption of nutrients and water.

Utilizing mushroom species that attract insects could be a useful source of fish food. This practice makes the mycoforestry a larger system. Unlike most agriculture systems it helps the environment in a number of ways. It ties all biological aspects of the environment together, creating sustainable living and food production as well as sustainable fisheries similar to the ancient Hawaiian Ahupua'a , which utilized sustainable all portions of the land for environmental and food security .

[ 6 ] Additionally fungal species can be implemented that compete with disease-causing agents like Armillaria root rots , [ 2 ] to provide long term protection of the forestry system.

Additionally, the implementation of an agroforestry system performs mycoremediation and mycofiltration activities, cleaning up toxins and restoring the environment.

See also [ edit ] Trees portal Mycorestoration References [ edit ] ^ Friedman, Zev.

Digging In.

New Life Journal.

1 May 2009.

^ a b c d e f g h i Stamets, Paul (2005).

Mycelium running: how mushrooms can help save the world .

Ten Speed Press . p.

65 .

ISBN 1-58008-579-2 .

mycoforestry.

^ Thomas, Paul W.; Jump, Alistair S. (2023-03-21).

"Edible fungi crops through mycoforestry, potential for carbon negative food production and mitigation of food and forestry conflicts" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

120 (12): e2220079120.

Bibcode : 2023PNAS..12020079T .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2220079120 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 10041105 .

PMID 36913576 .

^ a b Dahlgren, R. A.; Driscoll, C. T.

The effects of whole-tree clear-cutting on soil processes at the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest, New Hampshire, USA.

Plant and Soil.

Volume 158, Number 2 / January 1994.

^ a b Frankland, Juliet C.

All you ever wanted to know about Mycelium.

NWFG Newsletter.

April 1997. (ISSN 1465-8054) Print.

^ Kagawa, Aurora; Vitousek, Peter (April 2012). "The Ahupua'a of Puanui: A Resource for Understanding Hawaiian Rain-Fed Agriculture".

Pacific Science .

66 (2): 161-172.

doi : 10.2984/66.2.6 .

External links [ edit ] Spinosa, Ron.

Fungi and Sustainability.

Fungi magazine.

Spring 2008.

Stamets, Paul.

Mycotechnology.

Fungi Perfecti.

v t e Permaculture Sciences Agroecology Ecosynthesis Mycoforestry Permaforestry Polyculture Synergistic gardening Techniques Companion planting Forest gardening Grassed waterway Holzer Permaculture Intercropping Keyline design Raised-bed gardening Sheet mulching Waru Waru Components Composting toilet Folkewall Leaf mold Mulch Spent mushroom compost Three Sisters (agriculture) Tree bog Organizations Beacon Food Forest Centre for Alternative Technology Permaculture Association Permaculture Action Network Permaculture College Australia Plants for a Future Pomona College Organic Farm Permaculturalists People in permaculture Bill Mollison Brad Lancaster David Blume David Holmgren Geoff Lawton Ianto Evans Patrick Whitefield Paul Stamets Paul Wheaton Robyn Francis Ruth Stout Sepp Holzer Category Commons Wiktionary v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mycoforestry&oldid=1238573321 " Categories : Forestry Mycology Agroforestry Sustainable forest management Habitat management equipment and methods Habitat Permaculture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 August 2024, at 16:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mycoforestry 3 languages Add topic

