Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Publication and organization 3 Alternative meanings Toggle Alternative meanings subsection 3.1 International law 3.2 Autonomy statute 4 Types 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Statute 90 languages العربية Aragonés Arpetan Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Aymar aru Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Čeština Corsu Dansk Deutsch Eesti Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Galego 한국어 Hausa हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Kabɩyɛ Kapampangan ქართული Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingála Lombard Magyar Malagasy მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Papiamentu پښتو Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла Sardu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Formal written document that creates law For other uses, see General Statutes (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Statue .

Statute of Grand Duchy of Lithuania , written in Polish A statute is a law or formal written enactment of a legislature .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Statutes typically declare, command or prohibit something.

[ 2 ] Statutes are distinguished from court law and unwritten law (also known as common law ) in that they are the expressed will of a legislative body, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] whether that be on the behalf of a country, state or province, county, municipality , or so on.

[ 2 ] They are also distinguished from secondary legislation , or regulations, that are issued by an executive body under authority granted by a statute. Depending on the legal system, a statute may also be referred to as an "act." [ 1 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Etymology [ edit ] The word appears in use in English as early as the 14th century.

[ 7 ] "Statute" and earlier English spellings were derived from the Old French words statut , estatut , estatu, meaning "(royal) promulgation, (legal) statute." These terms were in turn derived from the Late Latin statutum, meaning "a law, decree." [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Publication and organization [ edit ] In virtually all countries, newly enacted statutes are published and distributed so that everyone can look up the statutory law. This can be done in the form of a government gazette , which may include other kinds of legal notices released by the government, or in the form of a series of books whose content is limited to legislative acts.  In either form, statutes are traditionally published in chronological order based on date of enactment.

[ citation needed ] A universal problem encountered by lawmakers throughout human history is how to organize published statutes. Such publications have a habit of starting small but growing rapidly over time, as new statutes are enacted in response to the exigencies of the moment. Eventually, persons trying to find the law are forced to sort through an enormous number of statutes enacted at various points in time to determine which portions are still in effect.

[ citation needed ] The solution adopted in many countries is to organize existing statutory law in topical arrangements (or "codified" ) within publications called codes , then ensure that new statutes are consistently drafted so that they add, amend, repeal or move various code sections. In turn, in theory, the code will thenceforth reflect the current cumulative state of the statutory law in that jurisdiction.  In many nations statutory law is distinguished from and subordinate to constitutional law .

[ citation needed ] Alternative meanings [ edit ] International law [ edit ] The term "statute" is also used to refer to an International treaty that establishes an institution , such as the Statute of the European Central Bank , a protocol to the international courts as well, such as the Statute of the International Court of Justice and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court . "Statute" is also another word for law. The term was adapted from England in about the 18th century.

[ citation needed ] Autonomy statute [ edit ] In the autonomous communities of Spain , an autonomy statute is a legal document similar to the constitution of a federated state , save that it is enacted by the national legislature, rather than the autonomous community it governs. The autonomy statutes in Spain have the rank of ley orgánica (organic law), a category of special legislation reserved for the main institutions and issues and mentioned in the constitution (the highest ranking legal instrument in Spain).

Leyes orgánicas rank between the constitution and ordinary laws. The name was chosen, among others, to avoid confusion with the term constitution (i.e. the Spanish constitution of 1978).

[ citation needed ] Types [ edit ] Public and private bills Organic statute Super statute See also [ edit ] Statutory interpretation References [ edit ] ^ a b "statute" .

LII / Legal Information Institute .

Cornell Law School . Retrieved 2025-04-03 .

^ a b c d Black, Henry Campbell (1990).

Black's Law Dictionary: Definitions of the Terms and Phrases of American and English Jurisprudence, Ancient and Modern (6th ed.).

West Publishing . p.

1410 .

ISBN 0-314-76271-X .

^ Bavis, Barbara.

"Research Guides: American Women: Resources from the Law Library: Types of Law and Jurisdiction" .

guides.loc.gov . Retrieved 2025-04-04 .

^ Reference, Librarians.

"Highline College Library: Introduction to Law: Statutory Law" .

library.highline.edu . Retrieved 2025-04-04 .

^ "Statute" .

www.parliament.uk . Retrieved 2025-04-04 .

^ "What is a statute? :: Iowa People's Law Library" .

www.peopleslawiowa.org . Retrieved 2025-04-04 .

^ a b "Etymology of "statute" by etymonline" .

etymonline . Retrieved 2025-04-04 .

^ "Definition of statute" .

www.merriam-webster.com . 2025-03-26 . Retrieved 2025-04-04 .

External links [ edit ] Look up statute in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Statutes .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Statutes .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Statutory law .

Library resources about Statute Resources in your library v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Spain Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA 2 İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐lrkzn
Cached time: 20250812000703
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.381 seconds
Real time usage: 0.508 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2971/1000000
Revision size: 6752/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 71266/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5120/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 51712/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.242/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6207964/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  429.442      1 -total
 23.98%  102.981      1 Template:Reflist
 19.08%   81.938      7 Template:Cite_web
 19.06%   81.838      1 Template:Law
 18.70%   80.300      1 Template:Navbox
 14.59%   62.670      1 Template:Short_description
 13.80%   59.278      5 Template:Side_box
 13.70%   58.814      4 Template:Sister_project
 11.97%   51.383      5 Template:Citation_needed
  9.95%   42.732      5 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:26783:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000703 and revision id 1301368806. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Statute&oldid=1301368806 " Categories : Legal research Sources of law Statutory law Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 12:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Statute 90 languages Add topic

