Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins of paedology 2 Pedology in the Soviet Union 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Paedology 24 languages العربية Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Հայերեն Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Magyar 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Piemontèis Polski Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Svenska Tagalog Українська Winaray Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Pedology (children study) ) Study of children's behavior and development For the study of soils, see Pedology .

Part of a series on Human growth and development Stages Gamete Zygote Embryo Fetus Infant Toddler Child Preadolescent Adolescent Emerging and early adulthood Young adult Middle adult Old adult Dying Biological milestones Fertilization Pregnancy Childbirth Walking Language acquisition Puberty Menopause Ageing Death Development and psychology Pre- and perinatal Development Infant and child Nature versus nurture Adolescent Youth Young adult Adult Maturity Developmental stage theories Attachment Ecological Psychosocial Psychosexual development Moral Cognitive Cultural-historical Evolutionary Psychology portal v t e Paedology (also spelled pedology or paidology ) is the study of children's behavior and development. It may be considered distinct from pedagogy , the art or science of teaching, and pediatrics , the field of medicine relating to children. However, pedology is not commonly recognized as a distinct field of study; therefore, many people who would be described as pedologists are instead described as pedagogues , pediatricians , psychologists , etc. Another factor that contributes to paedology's lack of recognition as a distinct field of study is because one could make contributions to the field of pedology while also making contributions to other fields. For example, Jean Piaget made contributions to the study of pedology in his theories of the cognitive development of children; however, Piaget has more commonly been recognized as a developmental psychologist .

Origins of paedology [ edit ] The origins of this trend in psychology and pedagogy go back to the end of the 18th century with the separation of a branch of psychology that would form the basis of pedagogy, a pedagogic psychology or "experimental pedagogic psychology", " experimental pedagogy ", "experimental education".

G. Stanley Hall (1844–1924) fostered pedology as a separate study, and also became instrumental in the development of modern educational psychology .  An American researcher, Oscar Chrisman , proposed the term "pedology" in 1893. At the end of the 19th century, pedology as a comprehensive study of the child came to prominence in Europe as an attempt to create a study of children in the manner of natural sciences . In 1909 Professor Kazimierz Twardowski organized a Pedological Society in Lviv , Austro-Hungary (now Ukraine). In 1910 a similar society was organized in Kraków . In 1911 the first World Congress in Pedology took place in Brussels , Belgium , with attendants from 22 countries.

World War I (1914–1918) effectively put an end to the development of this study in Western Europe.

[ citation needed ] Since pedology as a branch of science never reached its maturity, there is no common established understanding as to the scope or instruments of pedology.

Bowie State University in Bowie, Maryland became the first university in the United States to offer a bachelor's degree in pedology.

[ 1 ] A 2014 document from the university refers to "the pedology major (now known as child and adolescent studies)".

[ 2 ] At many universities in the United States, pedological study is generally classified under the major "child development." Pedology in the Soviet Union [ edit ] In Russian Empire a prominent developer of the field was Aleksandr Petrovich Nechayev [ ru ] in St. Petersburg , who in 1901 created the laboratory of experimental pedagogical psychology. Soviet pedology is traditionally thought to be founded by the efforts of Vladimir Bekhterev ; in particular, in 1918 he founded the Institute of Pedology as part of psychological institutions united into the Institute for Study of Brain and Psychical Activity.

This science was intensively pursued in 1920s–1930s in the Soviet Union . A journal Pedologiya ("Педология") was issued.

Lev Vygotsky and Pavel Blonsky were among its prominent supporters.

While many works of pedologists were of considerable value, the approach was severely criticized for over-enthusiastic but poorly grounded approach of testing for predicting a child's mental development, in addition to estimating its status.

It was officially condemned in 1936 after a special decree of VKP(b) Central Committee "On Pedological Perversions in the System of Narkomproses " on July 4, 1936.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Pedology Major" . Archived from the original on 18 March 2008 . Retrieved 11 August 2017 .

^ "Faculty Spotlight: Behavioral, Health and Human Services" (PDF) .

Assessment Times . Bowie State University. August 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 October 2015 . Retrieved 11 August 2017 .

^ "Russian Federation" . Retrieved 4 June 2018 .

Depaepe, M. (1985). "Science, technology, and paedology: The concept of science at the Faculte Internationale de Pedologie in Brussels (1912–1914)." Scientia Paedogica Experimentalis , 1 , 14–28.

Depaepe, M. (1992). "Experimental Research in Education 1890–1940: historical processes behind the development of a discipline in western Europe and the United States." Aspects of Education , Journal of the Institute of Education , University of Hull , 42 , pp. 67–93.

Depaepe, M. (1993). "Zum Wohl des Kindes? Pädologie, pädagogische Psychologie und experimentelle Pädagogik in Europa und den USA, 1890–1940." Leuven: Universitaire Pers/Weinheim: Deutscher Studienverlag.

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: ru:Постановление ЦК ВКП(б) от 4.07.1936 о педологических извращениях в системе Наркомпросов P.Ya.Shvartsman, I.V.Kuznetsova, Pedology: A Repressed Science Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paedology&oldid=1262312745 " Categories : Social sciences Child development Pedagogical movements and theories Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015 Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 10 December 2024, at 19:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paedology 24 languages Add topic

