Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concept 2 Calvinist republics Toggle Calvinist republics subsection 2.1 Calvin's Geneva 2.2 Netherlands 2.3 English Commonwealth 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Citations 5.2 Sources Toggle the table of contents Christian republic 4 languages العربية فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Government that is both Christian and republican This article is about the concept of a Christian republic as a governmental system. For Adin Ballou 's social experiment that he called The Practical Christian Republic, see Hopedale Community . For the Mediæval concept of Christendom sometimes called the Christian Republic, see res publica christiana . For the Irish political party, see Poblacht Chríostúil .

Part of a series on Christian democracy Principles Catholic social teaching Christian corporatism Christian ethics Christian humanism Common good Communitarianism Conservatism Christian Compassionate Liberal Progressive Social Consistent life ethic Cultural mandate Culture of life Dignity of labor Distributism Economic progressivism Familialism Human dignity Just war theory Liberalism Christian Catholicism Conservative Ordo Social Mixed economy Multiculturalism Neo-Calvinism Neo-Thomism Option for the poor Pan-European identity Person Dignity Theory Popularism Public morality Religious liberty Friendly separation of church and state Religious pluralism Social Gospel Social justice Social market economy Solidarity Sphere sovereignty Stewardship Environmentalism Environmental protection Subsidiarity in Catholicism Welfare State Philosophers Arizmendiarrieta Baader Barth Belloc Benedict XV Berggrav Blond Bonhoeffer Brague Cardijn Chesterton Day Dooyeweerd Escrivá Gebhardt Gilson Görres Groen Guardini Habsburg John XXIII John Paul II Ketteler De Koninck Korfanty Lamennais Leo XIII Leo XIV Lewis Manning Maritain Merton Milani Mounier Müller-Armack Murray Nell-Breuning Newman Ozanam Paul VI Pesch Pieper Pius XI Pottier Röpke Sheen Spaemann Stein Stomma Sturzo Tawney Tischner Toniolo Vogelsang Weigel Williams Politicians Adenauer Andreotti Antall Aznar Bayrou Beel Bidault Biden Bondevik Busch Buzek Caldera Clerides Cosgrave Daul De Gasperi Dehaene Donnelly Dzurinda Erhard Erzberger Fenech Adami Field Frei Gemayel Groen Haller Joseph Juncker Kaas Ketteler Klausener Kohl Komorowski Korfanty Kramp-Karrenbauer Kurz Kuyper Lacalle Pou Laschet Letta Leuger Lipinski Lubbers Martens Mattarella Mazowiecki Merkel Merz Metsola Mikołajczyk Moro Nile Quadros Pastrana Peterle Pethrus Popiel Portas Pöttering Prodi Raab Schäffer Schuman Schüssel Seipel Söder Stegerwald Stomma Strauss Sturzo Tajani Tindemans Vogelsang von der Leyen Wałęsa Weber Werner Windthorst Parties American Solidarity Party Austrian People's Party Christian Democracy Christian Democratic Appeal Christian Democratic and Flemish Christian Democratic Party Christian Democratic Party of Uruguay Christian Democratic People's Party Christian-Democratic Rebirth Party Christian Democratic Union of Germany Christian Social People's Party Christian Social Union in Bavaria Christian Union Centre Party Centrists for Europe Civic Platform Croatian Democratic Union Democratic Rally Democrats Fianna Fáil Fine Gael Kataeb Party National Action Party National Party Nationalist Party New Democracy Patriotic Union People's Party Polish People's Party Popular Republican Movement Prohibition Party VMRO-DPMNE Organizations Catholic Action Centrist Democrat International Christian Democrat Organization of America European People's Party European Christian Political Party Konrad Adenauer Foundation Conservative Christian Fellowship Centre for European Studies European Ideas Network Schuman Foundation Center for Public Justice Paneuropean Union World Movement of Christian Workers SIPDIC Documents Rerum novarum Populorum progressio Graves de communi re Quadragesimo anno Laborem exercens Sollicitudo rei socialis Centesimus annus Laudato si' Related topics Catholic Church and politics Christian left Christian anarchism Christian communism Christian socialism Christian right Christian libertarianism Christian nationalism Theoconservatism Clerical philosophers Ethical socialism Integralism Illiberal democracy Progressive Christianity Religious democracy Buddhist Islamic Jewish Mormon Social democracy Traditionalist Catholicism Christianity portal Politics portal v t e Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e A Christian republic is a government that is both Christian and republican .

Concept [ edit ] In A Letter Concerning Toleration , Locke wrote that "there is absolutely no such thing, under the Gospel, as a Christian Commonwealth".  By this he meant that political authority cannot be validly founded upon Christianity.  Rousseau, in On the Social Contract (in book 4, chapter 8), echoed this, saying that "I am mistaken in saying 'a Christian republic'; the two words are mutually exclusive.".  However, Rousseau's point was subtly different, in that he was asserting that a civic identity cannot be moulded out of Christianity.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] David Walsh , founder of the National Institute on Media and the Family , acknowledges that there is a "genuine tension ... between Christianity and the political order" that Rousseau was acknowledging, arguing that "many Christians would, after all, agree with him that a 'Christian republic' is a contradiction in terms" and that the two live "in an uneasy relationship in actual states, and social cohesion has often been bought at the price of Christian universalism".

[ 3 ] Robert Neelly Bellah has observed that most of the great republican theorists of the Western world have shared Rousseau's concerns about the mutually exclusive nature of republicanism and Christianity, from Machiavelli (more on which later) to Alexis de Tocqueville .

[ 4 ] Rousseau's thesis is that the two are incompatible because they make different demands upon the virtuous man.  Christianity, according to Rousseau, demands submission (variously termed "servitude" or "slavery" by scholars of his work) to imposed authority and resignation, and requires focus upon the unworldly; whereas republicanism demands participation rather than submission, and requires focus upon the worldly.  Rousseau's position on Christianity is not universally held.  Indeed, it was refuted by, amongst others, his friend Antoine-Jacques Roustan in a reply to the Social Contract .

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Rousseau's thesis has a basis in the prior writings of Niccolò Machiavelli , [ 4 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] whom Rousseau called a "good citizen and an honest man" and who alongside Montesquieu was one of Rousseau's sources for republican philosophy.

[ 10 ] In his Discoursi Machiavelli observes that Christianity in practice has not met the ideals of its foundation, and that the resultant corruption leads, when mixed with secular political ideals, to something that is neither good religion nor good politics.

[ 9 ] [ 11 ] [ 10 ] Further, he argues, whilst Christianity does not preclude love for one's country, it does require citizens to endure damage to republican government, stating that the best civic virtue in regards to a republic is to show no mercy to the republic's enemies and to put to death or to enslave the inhabitants of an opposing city that has been defeated.

[ 11 ] Calvinist republics [ edit ] Calvin's Geneva [ edit ] Further information: History of Geneva § Reformation Cities in the Habsburg Netherlands where Calvinists seized control in 1577–8. Run by Committees of XVIII, the most prominent of these – Ghent , Antwerp and Brussels – are known as 'Calvinist republics' (1577–1585).

While the classical writers had been the primary ideological source for the republics of Italy, in Northern Europe, the Protestant Reformation would be used as justification for establishing new republics.

[ 12 ] Most important was Calvinist theology, which developed in Geneva (a city-state associated with the Old Swiss Confederacy – a powerful republic – since 1526 due to its anti-Savoy alliance treaty with Bern and Fribourg).

John Calvin did not call for the abolition of monarchy, but he advanced the doctrine that the faithful had the right to overthrow irreligious monarchs.

[ 13 ] During 1536–8 and 1541–64, Calvin and his allies turned Geneva into the first so-called Calvinist republic. Calvinism also espoused egalitarianism and an opposition to hierarchy.

[ dubious – discuss ] Advocacy for republics appeared in the writings of the Huguenots during the French Wars of Religion .

[ 14 ] Netherlands [ edit ] Calvinism played an important role in the republican revolts in England and the Netherlands. Like the city-states of Italy and the Hanseatic League, both were important trading centres, with a large merchant class prospering from the trade with the New World. Large parts of the population of both areas also embraced Calvinism. During the Dutch Revolt (beginning in 1566), the Dutch Republic emerged from rejection of Spanish Habsburg rule. However, the country did not adopt the republican form of government immediately: in the formal declaration of independence ( Act of Abjuration , 1581), the throne of king Philip , was only declared vacant, and the Dutch magistrates asked the Duke of Anjou , queen Elizabeth of England and prince William of Orange , one after another, to replace Philip. It took until 1588 before the Estates (the Staten , the representative assembly at the time) decided to vest the sovereignty of the country in itself. The Calvinist Dutch Reformed Church never became the official state church of the Dutch Republic, but it was publicly privileged over all other religions and churches, which did enjoy some level of tolerance, however.

Earlier during the Dutch Revolt, many autonomous cities in the Southern Netherlands also came under the control of radical Calvinists, especially in the years 1577–1578, and formed so-called Calvinist republics. Due to its extreme theocratic tendencies, the most notable was the Calvinist Republic of Ghent (1577–1584), but Antwerp and Brussels have also been characterised by historians as Calvinist republics between 1577 and 1585. One by one, these cities were reconquered by the Spanish Army of Flanders commanded by Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma . In the north, Amsterdam experienced the Alteratie , a bloodless coup in which Calvinists took control of the city, but mostly in order to end its economic isolation and resume trade; no Calvinist regime was established here.

English Commonwealth [ edit ] In 1641 the English Civil War began. Spearheaded by the Puritans and funded by the merchants of London, the revolt was a success, and led to the Commonwealth of England and the execution of King Charles I . In England James Harrington , Algernon Sidney , and John Milton became some of the first writers to argue for rejecting monarchy and embracing a republican form of government. The English Commonwealth was short lived, and the monarchy soon restored. The Dutch Republic continued in name until 1795, but by the mid-18th century the stadtholder had become a de facto monarch. Calvinists were also some of the earliest settlers of the British and Dutch colonies of North America.

See also [ edit ] Christian state Christian democracy Christian egalitarianism Christianity Christian libertarianism Christianity and politics Civil religion Islamic republic Islamic state Jewish state Secular republic State religion Notes [ edit ] References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Beiner 2010 , p. 3.

^ a b Beiner 2010 , p. 13.

^ Walsh 1997 , p. 168.

^ a b c Cristi 2001 , p. 19–20.

^ Rosenblatt 1997 , p. 264.

^ Bellah 1992 , p. 166.

^ Kries 1997 , p. 268.

^ Viroli & Hanson 2003 , p. 175.

^ a b Beiner 2010 , p. 35.

^ a b Viroli 1990 , p. 171–172.

^ a b Pocock 2003 , p. 214.

^ Finer, Samuel.

The History of Government from the Earliest Times.

Oxford University Press, 1999. pg. 1020.

^ "Republicanism." Encyclopedia of the Enlightenment pg. 435 ^ "Introduction." Republicanism: a Shared European Heritage.

By Martin van Gelderen and Quentin Skinner. Cambridge University Press, 2002 pg. 1 Sources [ edit ] Beiner, Ronald S. (2010).

Civil Religion: A Dialogue in the History of Political Philosophy . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-73843-9 .

Bellah, Robert Neelly (1992).

The broken covenant: American civil religion in time of trial (2nd ed.). University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-04199-5 .

Cristi, Marcela (2001).

From civil to political religion: the intersection of culture, religion and politics . Wilfrid Laurier University Press.

ISBN 978-0-88920-368-6 .

Kries, Douglas (1997). "Rousseau and the Problem of Religious Toleration". In Kries, Douglas (ed.).

Piety and humanity: essays on religion and early modern political philosophy . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-8476-8619-3 .

Pocock, John Greville Agard (2003).

The Machiavellian moment: Florentine political thought and the Atlantic republican tradition (2nd ed.). Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-11472-9 .

Rosenblatt, Helena (1997). "The Social Contract ".

Rousseau and Geneva: from the first discourse to the social contract, 1749–1762 . Ideas in context. Vol. 46. Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-57004-6 .

Viroli, Maurizio (1990). "The concept of ordre and the language of classical republicanism in Jean-Jacques Rousseau". In Pagden, Anthony (ed.).

The Languages of Political Theory in Early-Modern Europe . Ideas in Context. Vol. 4. Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-38666-1 .

Viroli, Maurizio; Hanson, Derek (2003).

Jean-Jacques Rousseau and the "Well-Ordered Society" . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-53138-2 .

Walsh, David (1997). "Struggle as a Source of Liberal Richness § Rousseau as Theorist of Crisis".

The growth of the liberal soul . University of Missouri Press.

ISBN 978-0-8262-1082-1 .

v t e Christianity and politics Christian left Christian right Key concepts Separation of church and state " Render unto Caesar " Two kingdoms doctrine Freedom of religion Movements Christian anarchism Christian democracy Clerical fascism Distributism Evangelical left Christian feminism Christian libertarianism Libertarian Christianity Christianism National Catholicism Christian pacifism Political Catholicism Christian reconstructionism Theoconservatism Paleoconservatism Integrism Christian communism Christian corporatism Christian socialism Theodemocracy Christian Zionism Christofascism Christian nationalism Christian Patriot movement Christian realism Identity Christianity Political influence of Evangelicalism in Latin America Liberal Catholicism Issues Abortion Homosexuality Poverty and wealth Christianity and environmentalism Theology Catholic social teaching Dominion theology Liberation theology Political theology China Korea Middle East Sub-Saharan Africa Social Gospel Prosperity gospel Symphonia Radical orthodoxy Integral mission Christian state Caesaropapism Christian republic Divine right of kings Related topics Christian views on genetically modified foods Christianity and other religions Civil religion State religion Theocracy Dallas Statement Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christian_republic&oldid=1296089936 " Categories : Christianity and government Christianity and political ideologies Theocracy Types of republics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from December 2012 This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 19:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christian republic 4 languages Add topic

