Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Architecture Toggle Architecture subsection 2.1 Long Hall 3 Rosenborg Collections 4 Gardens 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Rosenborg Castle 37 languages বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Latina Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Polski Português Русский Shqip Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 55°41′8″N 12°34′40″E ﻿ / ﻿ 55.68556°N 12.57778°E ﻿ / 55.68556; 12.57778 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Renaissance castle in Copenhagen, Denmark Rosenborg Castle Rosenborg Castle seen from the Castle Gardens Show map of Copenhagen Show map of Denmark General information Architectural style Dutch Renaissance Town or city Copenhagen Country Denmark Coordinates 55°41′8″N 12°34′40″E ﻿ / ﻿ 55.68556°N 12.57778°E ﻿ / 55.68556; 12.57778 Construction started 1606 Completed 1624 Client Christian IV Design and construction Architect(s) Hans van Steenwinckel the Younger , Bertel Lange Rosenborg Castle ( Danish : Rosenborg Slot ) is a renaissance castle in Copenhagen, Denmark . The castle was originally built as a country summerhouse in 1606 and is an example of Christian IV's many architectural projects. It was built in the Dutch Renaissance style, typical of Danish buildings during this period, and has been expanded several times, finally evolving into its present condition by the year 1624.

Architects Bertel Lange and Hans van Steenwinckel the Younger are associated with the structural planning of the castle.

History [ edit ] Rosenborg Castle seen from Gothersgade in 1749 The castle was used by Danish regents as a royal residence until around 1710. After the reign of Frederik IV , Rosenborg was used as a royal residence only twice, and both these times were during emergencies. The first time was after Christiansborg Palace burned down in 1794, and the second time was during the British attack on Copenhagen in 1801 .

Architecture [ edit ] Long Hall [ edit ] The Coat of arms of Denmark is located on the ceiling of the Long Hall Located on the third floor, the Long Hall was completed in 1624. It was originally intended as a ballroom. Around 1700 it was used as Royal Reception Room and for banquets. It was not until the second half of the 19th century that it became known as the "Knight's Hall".

Christian V had the hall partly modernised with twelve tapestries depicting the King's victories in the Scanian War (1675–1679). The stucco ceiling seen today is from the beginning of the 18th century. It shows the Danish Coat of Arms surrounded by the Orders of the Elephant and of Dannebrog . Side reliefs depict historical events from the first years of the reign of Frederik IV , including the liberation of the serfs, the founding of the dragoons and of the land militia among them. The frescos in the ceiling by Hendrick Krock , represent the Regalia.

Among the main attractions of Rosenborg are the coronation chair of the absolutist kings and the throne of the queens with the three silver lions standing in front. The Long Hall also contains a large collection of silver furniture, of which most is from the 17th century.

[ 1 ] Rosenborg Collections [ edit ] The castle is open to the public for tours and houses a museum exhibiting the Royal Collections, artifacts spanning a breadth of royal Danish culture, from the late 16th century of Christian IV to the 19th century. Some of these articles once belonged to the nobility and the aristocracy. The castle, now state property, was opened to the public in 1838.

Of special interest to tourists is a treasury displaying the Crown Jewels and the Danish Crown Regalia located in the castle. A Coronation Carpet is also stored there. The Throne Chair of Denmark is located in the castle. In the summer time, flowers bloom in front of the castle in the castle garden.

Gardens [ edit ] The castle is situated in Kongens Have ("The King's Garden"), also known as " Rosenborg Castle Garden ". The Rosenborg Castle Garden is the country's oldest royal garden and was embellished in the Renaissance style by Christian IV shortly before the construction of the main castle. Today, the gardens are a popular retreat for the people of Copenhagen, and attract an estimated 2.5 million visitors every year. Next to the castle are barracks where the Royal Life Guards is garrisoned. The Life Guard guards the castle.

Gallery [ edit ] Frontal view View from the west Right view Rear of Rosenborg Castle Crown of Christian IV . On display at the castle Denmark's globus cruciger. On display at the castle The royal baptismal set . On display at the castle See also [ edit ] List of castles and palaces in Denmark Tourism in Denmark Oldenburg Horn References [ edit ] ^ "The Long Hall, The Knights' Hall" . Rosenborg Castle . Retrieved 2010-01-06 .

[ permanent dead link ] External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Paintings in Rosenborg Castle .

Media related to Rosenborg Castle at Wikimedia Commons Copenhagen-Portal – Rosenborg Castle and History .

Archived 2010-09-21 at the Wayback Machine .

Official website The Association of Castles and Museums around the Baltic Sea v t e Museums in Metropolitan Copenhagen Art museums and galleries Arken Cisternerne National Gallery of Denmark The David Collection Frederiksborg Castle Gammel Holtegård Hirschsprung Collection Kastrupgård Kunstforeningen Louisiana Museum of Modern Art North Atlantic House Nivaagaard Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek Ordrupgaard Øregård Museum Royal Cast Collection Rudolph Tegner Museum Thorvaldsen Museum Other Amber Museum Amalienborg Museum Bakkehuset Brede House Brede Værk Carlsberg Visitor Centre Museum of Copenhagen Danish Architecture Centre Danish Jewish Museum Danish Maritime Museum Danish Museum of Hunting and Forestry Danish Police Museum Danish Revue Museum Danish War Museum DieselHouse Danish Museum of Art & Design Frieboeshvile Frilandsmuseet Jægerspris Castle Lille Mølle Karen Blixen Museum Kronborg Kroppedal Lightvessel Gedser Rev Medical Museion National Museum Natural History Museum Royal Court Theater Tycho Brahe Planetarium Royal Danish Naval Museum Rosenborg Museum Storm P. Museum Viking Ship Museum (Roskilde) Victorian Home By type Art Historic house museums Local history Museum ships Science and technology v t e Danish royal residences Current Amalienborg Cayx 1 Christiansborg Fredensborg Gråsten Hermitage Marselisborg Sorgenfri Former (non-exhaustive list) Absalon Bernstorff Blågård Børglum Christiansborg (1st) Christiansborg (2nd) Copenhagen Castle Egelund Frederiksberg Frederiksborg Gottorp 1 Hirschholm Jægerspris Klitgaarden Kronborg Prince's Mansion Rosenborg Roskilde Royal Mansion Schackenborg Sønderborg Castle Sophie Amalienborg 1 Not located in Denmark v t e Castles and manor houses in Denmark Capital Region Amalienborg Arresødal Bernstorff Palace Christiansborg Farumgård Fredensborg Frederiksberg Frederiksborg Jægerspris Kronborg Rosenborg Selsø Sorgenfri Svanholm West and South Zealand Borreby Bregentved Dragsholm Eriksholm Gammel Køgegård Gavnø Gisselfeld Gjorslev Gyldenholm Holsteinborg Jomfruens Egede Ledreborg Lerchenborg Knabstrup Nysø Rosenfeldt Rønnebæksholm Skjoldnæsholm Torbenfeldt Vallø Vedbygård Vemmetofte Lolland-Falster Aalholm Berritzgaard Corselitze Fuglsang Klintholm Manor Knuthenborg Krenkerup Liselund Orupgaard Pederstrup Rudbjerggaard Funen Brahetrolleborg Broholm Dallund Egeskov Glorup Hesselagergård Holckenhavn Hvedholm Hvidkilde Krengerup Lykkesholm Nyborg Rønninge Søgård Skovsbo South Jutland Augustenborg Engelsholm Gråsten Haderslevhus Nordborg Sandbjerg Schackenborg Sønderborg Castle Central Jutland Bygholm Clausholm Frijsenborg Gammel Estrup Hald Katholm Meilgaard Nørre Vosborg Rosenholm Skrøbelev Spøttrup Tjele Ulstrup North Jutland Aalborghus Børglum Dueholm Dronninglund Højrus Kongstedlund Kokkedal Odden Store Restrup Voergaard v t e Copenhagen See also: Urban area of Copenhagen Official districts Amager Vest Amager Øst Bispebjerg Brønshøj-Husum Indre By Nørrebro Østerbro Valby Vanløse Vesterbro/Kongens Enghave Notable localities and neighbourhoods Indre By Bellahøj Carlsberg Christiania Christianshavn Frederiksberg Frederiksstaden Holmen Islands Brygge Kongens Nytorv Nyboder Nyhavn Slotsholmen Parks and open spaces Amager Strandpark Assistens Cemetery Frederiksberg Gardens Kastellet Kongens Have Superkilen Churches St. Alban's Alexander Nevsky Church St. Andrew's Anna Church St. Ansgar's Cathedral St. Augustine's Bernstorff Palace Bethlehem Church Brorson's Church Christian's Church Christ Church Elijah's Church Frederik's Church Frederiksberg Church Godthaab Church Grundtvig's Church Gustaf Church Hans Tausen's Church Holmen Church Holy Ghost Church Immanuel Church Isaiah Church St. James's Jerusalem's Church Jesus Church St. John's Church Kildevæld Church St. Luke's Church Mariendal Church St. Mark's St. Matthew's Nathanael's Church St. Paul's St. Peter's Philip's Church Reformed Church Church of Our Saviour Simon Peter's Church Solbjerg Church Sundby Church Trinitatis Church Zion's Church Museums Cisternerne Amber Museum Danish Design Centre Danish Museum of Art & Design Danish Revue Museum Fotografisk Center University of Copenhagen Geological Museum Hirschsprung Collection Jewish Museum Kastrupgård Kunsthal Charlottenborg Medical Museion Museum of Copenhagen National Museum of Denmark National Museum of Photography Natural History Museum of Denmark North Atlantic House Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek Police Museum Revue Museum Royal Danish Naval Museum National Gallery of Denmark Storm P. Museum Tycho Brahe Planetarium War Museum Landmarks Amalienborg Børsen Charlottenborg Palace Christiansborg Palace Copenhagen City Hall Harbour Baths Fortifications Frederiksberg Palace Hotel Astoria Kongens Nytorv Lakes Langelinie The Little Mermaid Medicon Valley Nørreport Station Opera House Øresund Bridge Palace Hotel Radisson Blu Royal Hotel Rosenborg Castle Royal Danish Playhouse Royal Library Tivoli Gardens Politics and administration Capital Region Copenhagen Municipality Lord mayors of Copenhagen Frederiksberg Municipality Education Copenhagen Business School Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts, Schools of Architecture, Design and Conservation Technical University of Denmark University of Copenhagen UCC Transport Copenhagen Airport Copenhagen Central Station Copenhagen Metro Port of Copenhagen S-train Cycling ( Super Bikeways ) Districts History Lists Transport Category v t e Castles in Denmark Aalborghus Aalholm Amalienborg Borreby Castle Christiansborg Palace Clausholm Castle Copenhagen Castle Dragsholm Castle Dronninglund Castle Egeskov Castle Engelsholm Castle Frederiksborg Castle Gamleborg Gammel Estrup Manor Gammel Ryomgård Gavnø Gjorslev Haderslevhus Holckenhavn Castle Hvedholm Castle Jægerspris Castle Kalø Castle Katholm Castle Koldinghus Kongsgård Kronborg Lerchenborg Lilleborg, Bornholm Liselund Lykkesholm Castle Marienlyst Castle Meilgaard Castle Nordborg Castle Nykøbing Castle Rosenborg Castle Rosenholm Castle Schackenborg Castle Sønderborg Castle Valdemar's Castle Vallø Castle Voergaard Castle Vordingborg Castle Also See: Castles in Denmark Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST National Germany United States Israel Geographic Structurae Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rosenborg_Castle&oldid=1303422083 " Categories : 1624 establishments in Denmark Buildings and structures in Copenhagen parks Castles in Denmark Historic house museums in Copenhagen Houses completed in 1624 Museums in Copenhagen Renaissance architecture in Copenhagen Royal residences in Denmark Tourist attractions in Copenhagen 17th-century brick buildings and structures in Denmark Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Danish-language text Commons category link is locally defined Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 22:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rosenborg Castle 37 languages Add topic

