Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Model companion and model completion 2 Examples 3 Non-examples 4 Sufficient condition for completeness of model-complete theories 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Model complete theory 3 languages Deutsch Français Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in model theory In model theory , a first-order theory is called model complete if every embedding of its models is an elementary embedding . 
Equivalently, every first-order formula is equivalent to a universal formula.
This notion was introduced by Abraham Robinson .

Model companion and model completion [ edit ] A companion of  a theory T is a  theory T * such that every model of T can be embedded in a model of T * and vice versa.

A model companion of a theory T is a companion of T that is model complete. Robinson proved that a theory has at most one model companion. Not every theory is model-companionable, e.g. theory of groups. However if T is an ℵ ℵ 0 {\displaystyle \aleph _{0}} - categorical theory , then it always has a model companion.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] A model completion for a theory T is a model companion T * such that for any model M of T , the theory of T * together with the diagram of M is complete . Roughly speaking, this means every model of T is embeddable in a model of T * in a unique way.

If T * is a model companion of T then the following conditions are equivalent: [ 3 ] T * is a model completion of T T has the amalgamation property .

If T also has universal axiomatization, both of the above are also equivalent to: T * has elimination of quantifiers Examples [ edit ] Any theory with elimination of quantifiers is model complete.

The theory of algebraically closed fields is the model completion of the theory of fields. It is model complete but not complete.

The model completion of the theory of equivalence relations is the theory of equivalence relations with infinitely many equivalence classes, each containing an infinite number of elements.

The theory of real closed fields , in the language of ordered rings , is a model completion of the theory of ordered fields (or even ordered domains ).

The theory of real closed fields, in the language of rings , is the model companion for the theory of formally real fields , but is not a model completion.

Non-examples [ edit ] The theory of dense linear orders with a first and last element is complete but not model complete.

The theory of groups (in a language with symbols for the identity, product, and inverses) has the amalgamation property but does not have a model companion.

Sufficient condition for completeness of model-complete theories [ edit ] If T is a model complete theory and there is a model of T that embeds into any model of T , then T is complete.

[ 4 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Saracino 1973 .

^ Simmons 1976 .

^ Chang & Keisler 2012 .

^ Marker 2002 .

References [ edit ] Chang, Chen Chung ; Keisler, H. Jerome (1990) [1973].

Model Theory . Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics (3rd ed.). Elsevier.

ISBN 978-0-444-88054-3 .

Chang, Chen Chung ; Keisler, H. Jerome (2012) [1990].

Model Theory . Dover Books on Mathematics (3rd ed.).

Dover Publications . p. 672.

ISBN 978-0-486-48821-9 .

Hirschfeld, Joram; Wheeler, William H. (1975). "Model-completions and model-companions".

Forcing, Arithmetic, Division Rings . Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Vol. 454. Springer. pp.

44– 54.

doi : 10.1007/BFb0064085 .

ISBN 978-3-540-07157-0 .

MR 0389581 .

Marker, David (2002).

Model Theory: An Introduction .

Graduate Texts in Mathematics 217. New York: Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 0-387-98760-6 .

Saracino, D. (August 1973). "Model Companions for ℵ 0 -Categorical Theories".

Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society .

39 (3): 591– 598.

Simmons, H. (1976). "Large and Small Existentially Closed Structures".

Journal of Symbolic Logic .

41 (2): 379– 390.

v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Model_complete_theory&oldid=1176329221 " Categories : Mathematical logic Model theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 September 2023, at 00:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Model complete theory 3 languages Add topic

