Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical and philosophical background 2 Feminist analysis of aesthetics Toggle Feminist analysis of aesthetics subsection 2.1 Arts vs crafts 3 Relevant groups 4 Feminist art criticism 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Feminist aesthetics 7 languages فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Perspectives in art regarding gender This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Feminist aesthetics first emerged in the 1970s [ 1 ] and  refers not to a particular aesthetic or style but to perspectives that question assumptions in art and aesthetics concerning gender-role stereotypes, or gender.

[ 2 ] Feminist aesthetics has a relationship to philosophy.

Historical and philosophical background [ edit ] The historical philosophical views of what beauty, the arts, and sensory experiences are, relate to the idea of aesthetics. Aesthetics looks at styles of production.

[ 3 ] In particular, feminists argue that despite seeming neutral or inclusive, the way people think about art and aesthetics is influenced by gender roles.

[ 2 ] Feminist aesthetics is a tool for analyzing how art is understood using gendered issues.

[ 4 ] A person's gender identity affects the ways in which they perceive art and aesthetics because of their subject position and that perception is influenced by power.

[ 5 ] The ways in which people see art is also influenced by social values such as class and race.

[ 6 ] One's subject position in life changes the way art is perceived because of people's different knowledge's about life and experiences.

[ 5 ] In the way that feminist history unsettles traditional history, feminist aesthetics challenge philosophies of beauty, the arts and sensory experience.

[ 7 ] Starting in the 18th century, ideas of aesthetic pleasure have tried to define "taste".

Kant and Hume both argued that there was universal good taste, which made aesthetic pleasure. A feminist line of logic about these attempts is that, because fine art was a leisure activity at this time, those who could afford to make art or produce supposed universal truths about how it is enjoyed would do so in a way that creates class and gender division.

[ 2 ] Even when those universal aesthetes did address gender, they categorized aesthetics into two categories: beauty and sublimity ; with beauty being small and delicate (feminine) and sublimity being large and awe-inspiring (masculine).

[ 2 ] Feminist aesthetics analyzes why "feminine" traits are subservient compared to "masculine" traits in art and aesthetics.

[ 8 ] Feminist analysis of aesthetics [ edit ] Another explanation for the male-domination of forming aesthetic theory is that feminists express their aesthetic pleasure differently than non-feminist aesthetes for "whom the pleasure of theorizing [...] is a form of jouissance ". Instead, a feminist is less likely to view the object as a disinterested interpreter, and intellectualize the sensation (Hilde Hein).

[ 7 ] Morse [ 9 ] discusses how art is a social institution. The influence of institutions comes from those who created the structure, which is mainly by men. From a spectator's point of view, men looking at women, compared to women looking at women, produces different social implications. When understanding a feminist perspective, Morse discusses the ideas of “self-defined” and “self-determined” art by women artists.

[ 9 ] Critics of feminist art argue that politics have no place in art, however, many art forms contain politics, but because of their subject position, the critics are unable to perceive it.

[ 10 ] The language used when talking about aesthetics in art is limited. The lexicon is limited because it does not include femme and women identifying language. The language that does exist separates them as “female” artist. The examination of the need for there to be a separate field of feminist aesthetics is discussed. If there is a separate field, women's art gets defined as feminist, then it assumes that the “normal” and all other art is automatically categorized as masculine.

[ 11 ] Some postmodernist feminists engage in kalliphobia (a rejection of the objective concept of beauty ), arguing that the judgment of beauty is highly gendered and often rooted in misogyny. Other feminists endorse a "return to beauty," allowing for beauty to exist as a measuring stick for aesthetic judgment, while acknowledging that such judgment is subjective and contingent upon social mores.

[ 12 ] The idea of the creative genius is inspected in feminist aesthetics. In particular, women artists are often excluded from being creative or artistic geniuses.

[ encycl 1 ] This exclusion in part stems from the traditional masculine definitions of genius.

[ encycl 1 ] Christine Battersby has critiqued  women being excluded from being known as geniuses because female artists will be separated from their art, and instead their art will be called genius, instead of the artist.

[ 13 ] However, women were also excluded because they lacked the opportunities for artistic education required to be recognized as artists and geniuses.

[ 14 ] In addition, the idea of the creative genius itself celebrates individualism – which Battersby calls "a kind of masculine heroism" – and overlooks the work of joint collaborations.

[ 13 ] Linda Nochlin , an art historian, states that art history comes from a Western male point of view, which creates a dominant way of viewing art. Nochlin questions why there have been no "great" women artists in art history and understands that this is due to the influence of Western males within the field of art.

[ 15 ] Feminist art historian Griselda Pollock argues that the Western canon is a structure of exclusion, subordination, and reproduction of sexual difference.

[ 16 ] Arts vs crafts [ edit ] Aesthetic theories that make a distinction between "arts" and "crafts" can be viewed as anti-feminist.

[ 17 ] Here, art usually refers to fine art and crafts refers to everything else which has everyday aesthetics .

[ 5 ] Art forms traditionally used by women, such as embroidery or sewing, are perceived as crafts and not art, because of their domestic uses.

[ 5 ] Feminist aesthetics focuses on all objects created by women, whether or not they are seen as "art".

[ 10 ] Since those craft practices occur in the home where many women continue to work, their creativity is overlooked by the perception of "art", because their domain is marginalized.

[ 18 ] Relevant groups [ edit ] The Guerrilla Girls are a contemporary an activist group that focuses on how feminism plays a role in public art. Their relationship to feminist aesthetics is relevant because they expose gender and ethnic bias, as well as corruption in the art, film and pop culture worlds. The group draws attention to the idea that women are not equally valued in these areas and fight to improve gender equality.

[ 19 ] Feminist art criticism [ edit ] Another areas of study that is tied to feminist aesthetics is feminist art criticism. This area of study can focus on female body imagery, goddess imagery, personal narratives, and devaluation of "individual solitary genius." [ 20 ] The nude is a genre of art highly criticized by feminists, who argue that the depiction of the female nude eroticizes the traditional gender hierarchy and contributes to systemic sex/gender inequality socially and psychologically.

[ 21 ] See also [ edit ] Feminist art criticism Guerrilla Girls References [ edit ] ^ "Feminist Aesthetics: Art and Artists: Historical Background" .

The Feminist eZine .

^ a b c d "Feminist Aesthetics" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved February 1, 2014 .

^ Hein, Hilde (1990). "The Role of Feminist Aesthetics in Feminist Theory".

The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism .

48 (4): 281– 291.

doi : 10.2307/431566 .

JSTOR 431566 .

S2CID 192405160 .

^ Lyudmyla Fedorivna, Bulanova-Duvalko. "Philosophical Aspects of Understanding the Trend of Feminist Aesthetics".

Studia Humanitatis .

3 .

^ a b c d Korsmeyer, Carolyn (2002). "Feminist Aesthetics". In Code, Lorraine (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Feminist Theories . Taylor & Francis Group.

ISBN 9780203195598 .

^ Stubs, Roberta; Teixeira-Filho, Fernando Silva; Lessa, Patricia (2018).

"Artivismo, estetica feminista e producao de sobjetividade" .

Revista Estudos Feministas .

26 (2).

doi : 10.1590/1806-9584-2018v26n238901 .

hdl : 11449/157674 .

^ a b Hein, Hilde (Autumn 1990). "The Role of Feminist Aesthetics in Feminist Theory".

The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism .

48 (4): 281– 291.

doi : 10.1111/1540_6245.jaac48.4.0281 .

JSTOR 431566 .

^ Korsmeyer, Carolyn (2004).

Gender and Aesthetics: An Introduction . Routledge.

ISBN 9780415266581 .

^ a b Morse, Marcia (April 1992). "Feminist Aesthetics and the Spectrum of Gender".

Philosophy East and West .

42 (2): 287– 295.

doi : 10.2307/1399292 .

JSTOR 1399292 .

^ a b Hein, Hilde; Korsmeyer, Carolyn (1993).

Aesthetics in Feminist Perspective . Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

^ Waugh, Joanne B. (1990). "Analytic Aesthetics and Feminist Aesthetics: Neither/Nor?".

The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism .

48 (4): 317– 326.

doi : 10.2307/431569 .

JSTOR 431569 .

^ Wolff, Janet (2006).

"Groundless beauty: feminism and the aesthetics of uncertainty" .

Feminist Theory .

7 (2): 143– 158 – via Sage Journals.

^ a b Battersby, Christine (1989).

Gender and Genius: Towards a Feminist Aesthetics .

The Women's Press Ltd.

ISBN 978-0704343009 .

^ Korsmeyer, Carolyn (2004). "Amateurs and Professionals".

Gender and Aesthetics: An Introduction . Understanding Feminist Philosophy. London: Taylor and Francis. p. 59.

ISBN 9780203646632 .

^ Nochlin, Linda (2018-02-12), "Why Have There Been No Great Women Artists?", Women, Art, and Power and Other Essays , Routledge, pp.

145– 178, doi : 10.4324/9780429502996-7 , ISBN 9780429502996 , S2CID 53325846 ^ Pollock, Griselda (1999).

Differencing the Canon : Feminist Desire and the Writing of Art’s Histories . Routledge.

^ Pollock, Griselda (1999). "Differencing: Feminism's encounter with the canon".

Differencing the Canon: Feminism and the Writing of Art's Histories . New York: Routledge. p. 25.

ISBN 9780415066990 .

^ Leddy, Thomas (2012).

The Extraordinary in the Ordinary: The aesthetics of everyday life . Broadview Press.

^ "OUR STORY" .

Guerrilla Girls . Retrieved 2019-10-17 .

^ "The Crime of Candor: Feminist Art Criticism | Studio Potter" .

studiopotter.org . Retrieved 2019-10-17 .

^ Eaton, A.W. (2012).

Art and Pornography . Oxford University Press.

^ a b Battersby, Christine (1998). "Genius and Feminism". In Kelly, Michael (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Aesthetics . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195113075 .

v t e Feminist theory Academic fields Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Film theory Literary criticism Biology Composition studies Criminology Digital humanities Economics FPDA Geography History International relations ( Constructivism ) Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Political ecology Political theory Postmodernism Psychology Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology Womanist Asian Feminism portal Related subjects Ecofeminism Feminist method Hegemonic masculinity Women's history Women's studies Feminist theorists Elizabeth Anderson Karen Barad Simone de Beauvoir Wendy Brown Nancy Bauer Judith Butler Kimberlé Crenshaw Hélène Cixous Alice Crary Andrea Dworkin Cynthia Enloe Martha Fineman Nancy Fraser Germaine Greer Donna Haraway Sandra Harding Patricia Hill Collins bell hooks Luce Irigaray Julia Kristeva Catharine A. MacKinnon Martha Nussbaum Val Plumwood Diana E. H. Russell Dorothy E. Smith Marilyn Waring Lists Women's studies journals v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminist_aesthetics&oldid=1278682154 " Categories : Movements in aesthetics Feminist theory Feminism and the arts Feminist philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from December 2024 All articles with style issues Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 3 March 2025, at 23:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminist aesthetics 7 languages Add topic

