Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Materials and construction 2 Benefits 3 Gallery 4 Sunken gardens 5 See also 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Raised-bed gardening 17 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Ido Igbo Bahasa Indonesia עברית Nederlands Polski Português தமிழ் 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of gardening Raised bed gardening Raised-bed gardening is a form of gardening in which the soil is raised above ground level and usually enclosed in some way. Raised bed structures can be made of wood, rock, concrete or other materials, and can be of any size or shape.

[ 1 ] The soil is usually enriched with compost .

[ 2 ] Vegetables are grown in geometric patterns, much closer together than in conventional row gardening.

[ 2 ] The spacing is such that when the vegetables are fully grown, their leaves just barely touch each other, creating a microclimate in which weed growth is suppressed and moisture is conserved.

[ 2 ] Overview [ edit ] Raised beds lend themselves to the development of complex agriculture systems that utilize many of the principles and methods of permaculture . They can be used effectively to control erosion and recycle and conserve water and nutrients by building them along contour lines on slopes. This also makes more space available for intensive crop production.

[ 2 ] They can be created over large areas with the use of several commonly available tractor-drawn implements and efficiently maintained, planted and harvested using hand tools.

This form of gardening is compatible with square foot gardening and companion planting .

Circular raised beds with a path to the center (a slice of the circle cut out) are called keyhole gardens .

[ 3 ] Often the center has a chimney of sorts built with sticks and then lined with feedbags or grasses that allows water placed at the center to flow out into the soil and reach the plants' roots.

A self watering raised bed known as a wicking bed is particularly beneficial in dry climates and are often made by converting Intermediate bulk container (IBC's).

Materials and construction [ edit ] Lumber is the most common construction material for making raised beds.

[ 2 ] If using lumber treated with chromated copper arsenate or CCA (though uncommon since 2004 in the US and Europe [ 4 ] [ 5 ] ), it is recommended to use a plastic liner between the wood and soil if the raised bed is intended for growing edibles.

[ 6 ] Another material commonly used are railroad ties , also known as sleepers, joined with steel rods to hold them together. Another approach is to use concrete blocks , although less aesthetically pleasing, they are inexpensive to obtain and easy to use.

On the market are also prefab raised garden bed solutions which are made from long lasting polyethylene that is UV stabilized and food grade so it will not leach undesirable chemicals into the soil or deteriorate in the elements. A double skinned wall provides an air pocket of insulation that minimizes the temperature fluctuations and drying out of the soil in the garden bed. Sometimes raised bed gardens are covered with clear plastic to protect the crops from wind and strong rains.

[ 7 ] Pre-manufactured raised bed gardening boxes also exist.

[ 1 ] There are variants of wood, metal, stone and plastic.

Benefits [ edit ] Raised beds produce a variety of benefits: they extend the planting season, [ 2 ] they can reduce weeds if designed and planted properly, [ 2 ] and they reduce the need to use poor native soil. Since the gardener does not walk on the raised beds, the soil is not compacted and the roots have an easier time growing.

[ 7 ] Waist-high raised beds enable the elderly and physically disabled to grow vegetables without having to bend over to tend them.

[ 7 ] Gallery [ edit ] Picardo Farm , Wedgwood neighborhood, Seattle, Washington: A community allotment garden with raised beds for the physically disabled.

Raised garden bed of lettuce , tomatoes , basil , marigolds , zinnias , garlic chives , zucchini .

Raised garden bed with natural stones of Salvia , Chives , and Parsley .

Raised garden bed with lettuce in Don Det , Laos.

Raised garden beds with painted wooden edgings at Wise Words Community Garden in Mid-City, New Orleans .

Preparing raised flower-beds in a private garden in Brastad , Sweden.

Special raised flower bed, permitting gardening in a wheelchair , in Frankfurt , Germany.

Raised rock garden bed with Mirabilis longiflora in Small Dole , England.

Sunken gardens [ edit ] A sunken garden at Hampton Court Palace A waffle garden is the inverse of raised beds and is a gardening method by the Zuni people . In an arid climate, clay walls are built up around the planting area and plants are watered by filling the bed "cells".

[ 8 ] The term sunken garden usually refers to a formal traditional English garden where the garden is lower than the surrounding land, and may have multiple terraces around it and steps leading down to the garden.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Gardening portal Keyhole garden Kitchen garden Square foot gardening Therapeutic garden Herb spiral Waru Waru – A traditional Quechua, pre-Inca system involving raised beds Hügelkultur – Another type of raised bed References [ edit ] ^ a b Hughes, Megan McConnell (2010).

Better Homes & Gardens Vegetable, Fruit & Herb Gardening . Wiley. pp.

68– 69.

ISBN 9780470638569 . Retrieved March 2, 2012 .

ISBN 978-0-470-63856-9 ^ a b c d e f g Nones, Raymond (2010).

Raised-Bed Vegetable Gardening Made Simple . Countryman Press.

ISBN 9781581578508 . Retrieved March 2, 2012 .

ISBN 978-0-88150-896-3 ^ Kemery, Ricky (January 29, 2012).

"Unlock your creativity with keyhole garden" .

The Journal Gazette . Archived from the original on 2014-07-14 . Retrieved March 6, 2012 .

^ National Pesticide Information Center: Regulation of CCA Treated Wood ^ European Union: Restrictions on Use of CCA-Treated Timber ^ Lively, Ruth (Sep–Oct 1990).

"Does Pressure-Treated Wood Belong in Your Garden?" .

Fine Gardening . No. 15.

^ a b c Whiting, David E. (1991).

The desert shall blossom: a comprehensive guide to vegetable gardening in the Mountain West . Horizon. pp.

41– 42.

ISBN 9780882904184 . Retrieved March 2, 2012 .

ISBN 0-88290-418-3 ^ The Resurgence of Waffle Gardens Is Helping Indigenous Farmers Grow Food with Less Water ^ The Victorian sunken garden Bibliography [ edit ] Bird, Christopher (2001).

Cubed Foot Gardening: Growing Vegetables in Raised, Intensive Beds . Lyons Press.

ISBN 9781599215914 . Retrieved March 2, 2012 .

ISBN 1-58574-312-7 Linhart, Rita & Richardson, Antoinette (2012).

Raised Bed Gardening - low cost, high yield and simply done . Books on Demand.

ISBN 978-3837018417 .

ISBN 978-3-8370-1841-7 External links [ edit ] Media related to Raised garden beds at Wikimedia Commons The Synergistic Garden —A video by Emilia Hazelip , which provides practical information on how to garden with raised beds.

Appeal: Keyhole gardening saves lives in world's most eroded land v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Permaculture Sciences Agroecology Ecosynthesis Mycoforestry Permaforestry Polyculture Synergistic gardening Techniques Companion planting Forest gardening Grassed waterway Holzer Permaculture Intercropping Keyline design Raised-bed gardening Sheet mulching Waru Waru Components Composting toilet Folkewall Leaf mold Mulch Spent mushroom compost Three Sisters (agriculture) Tree bog Organizations Beacon Food Forest Centre for Alternative Technology Permaculture Association Permaculture Action Network Permaculture College Australia Plants for a Future Pomona College Organic Farm Permaculturalists People in permaculture Bill Mollison Brad Lancaster David Blume David Holmgren Geoff Lawton Ianto Evans Patrick Whitefield Paul Stamets Paul Wheaton Robyn Francis Ruth Stout Sepp Holzer Category Commons Wiktionary Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Latvia Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Raised-bed_gardening&oldid=1297457010 " Categories : Agricultural soil science Permaculture Types of garden Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 June 2025, at 08:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Raised-bed gardening 17 languages Add topic

