Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Sardar's characteristics 2 British cultural studies Toggle British cultural studies subsection 2.1 Stuart Hall's directorship of CCCS at Birmingham centre 2.2 Late-1970s and beyond 3 Stuart Hall's cultural Studies 4 Developments outside the UK 5 Issues, concepts, and approaches Toggle Issues, concepts, and approaches subsection 5.1 Gramsci and hegemony 5.2 Structure and agency 5.3 Globalization 5.4 Cultural consumption 5.5 The concept of "text" 6 Academic reception 7 The integration of popular culture in cultural studies and education Toggle The integration of popular culture in cultural studies and education subsection 7.1 Literary scholars 7.2 Sociology 7.3 Science wars 8 Founding works 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Sources 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Cultural studies 40 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Shqip Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Tiếng Việt Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic field For the journal, see Cultural Studies (journal) .

Not to be confused with Culture theory or Cultural theory of risk .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: Many of the references are vague (one or more publications with no specific page); some are just explanations and notes.

Please help improve this article if you can.

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Cultural studies is an academic field that explores the dynamics of contemporary culture (including the politics of popular culture ) and its social and historical foundations.

[ 1 ] Cultural studies researchers investigate how cultural practices relate to wider systems of power associated with, or operating through, social phenomena. These include ideology , class structures , national formations , ethnicity , sexual orientation , gender , and generation. Employing cultural analysis , cultural studies views cultures not as fixed, bounded, stable, and discrete entities, but rather as constantly interacting and changing sets of practices and processes.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Cultural studies was initially developed by British Marxist academics in the late 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, and has been subsequently taken up and transformed by scholars from many different disciplines around the world. Cultural studies is avowedly and even radically interdisciplinary and can sometimes be seen as anti-disciplinary. A key concern for cultural studies practitioners is the examination of the forces within and through which socially organized people conduct and participate in the construction of their everyday lives.

[ 4 ] Cultural studies combines a variety of politically engaged critical approaches including semiotics , Marxism , feminist theory , ethnography , post-structuralism , postcolonialism , social theory , political theory , history , philosophy , literary theory , media theory , film/video studies , communication studies , political economy , translation studies , museum studies and art history /criticism to study cultural phenomena in various societies and historical periods. Cultural studies seeks to understand how meaning is generated, disseminated, contested, bound up with systems of power and control, and produced from the social, political and economic spheres within a particular social formation or conjuncture. The movement has generated important theories of cultural hegemony and agency . Its practitioners attempt to explain and analyze the cultural forces related and processes of globalization .

During the rise of neoliberalism in Britain and the U.S., cultural studies both became a global phenomenon, and attracted the attention of many conservative opponents both within and beyond universities for a variety of reasons. A worldwide movement of students and practitioners with a raft of scholarly associations and programs, annual international conferences and publications carry on work in this field today.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Distinct approaches to cultural studies have emerged in different national and regional contexts.

Overview [ edit ] Sardar's characteristics [ edit ] In his 1994 book, Introducing Cultural Studies , orientalist scholar Ziauddin Sardar lists the following five main characteristics of cultural studies: [ 7 ] The objective of cultural studies is to understand culture in all its complex forms, and analyzing the social and political context in which culture manifests itself.

Cultural study is a site of both study/analysis and political criticism . For example, not only would a cultural studies scholar study an object, but they may also connect this study to a larger political project.

Cultural studies attempts to expose and reconcile constructed divisions of knowledge that purport to be grounded in nature .

Cultural studies has a commitment to an ethical evaluation of modern society .

One aim of cultural studies could be to examine cultural practices and their relation to power , following critical theory . For example, a study of a subculture (such as white working-class youth in London) would consider their social practices against those of the dominant culture (in this example, the middle and upper classes in London who control the political and financial sectors that create policies affecting the well-being of white working-class youth in London).

British cultural studies [ edit ] Dennis Dworkin writes that "a critical moment" in the beginning of cultural studies as a field was when Richard Hoggart used the term in 1964 in founding the Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies (CCCS) at the University of Birmingham .

[ 8 ] The centre would become home to the development of the intellectual orientation that has become known internationally as the " Birmingham School " of cultural studies, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] thus becoming the world's first institutional home of cultural studies.

[ 10 ] Hoggart appointed as his assistant Stuart Hall , who would effectively be directing CCCS by 1968.

[ 11 ] Hall formally assumed the directorship of CCCS in 1971, when Hoggart left Birmingham to become Assistant Director-General of UNESCO .

[ 12 ] Thereafter, the field of cultural studies became closely associated with Hall's work.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] In 1979, Hall left Birmingham to accept a prestigious chair in sociology at the Open University , and Richard Johnson took over the directorship of the centre.

In the late 1990s, "restructuring" at the University of Birmingham led to the elimination of CCCS and the creation of a new Department of Cultural Studies and Sociology (CSS) in 1999. Then, in 2002, the university's senior administration abruptly announced the disestablishment of CSS, provoking a substantial international outcry. The immediate reason for disestablishment of the new department was an unexpectedly low result in the UK's Research Assessment Exercise of 2001, though a dean from the university attributed the decision to "inexperienced 'macho management'." [ 15 ] The RAE, a holdover initiative of the Margaret Thatcher-led British government of 1986, determines research funding for university programs.

[ 16 ] To trace the development of British Cultural Studies, see, for example, the work of Richard Hoggart , E. P. Thompson , Raymond Williams , Stuart Hall, Paul Willis , Angela McRobbie , Paul Gilroy , David Morley, Charlotte Brunsdon , Richard Dyer , and others.

[ 17 ] There are also many published overviews of the historical development of cultural studies, including Graeme Turner's British Cultural Studies: An Introduction , 3rd Ed. and John Hartley's A Short History of Cultural Studies [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Stuart Hall's directorship of CCCS at Birmingham centre [ edit ] Beginning in 1964, after the initial appearance of the founding works of British Cultural Studies in the late 1950s, Stuart Hall 's pioneering work at CCCS , along with that of his colleagues and postgraduate students, gave shape and substance to the field of cultural studies. This would include such people as Paul Willis , Dick Hebdige , David Morley, Charlotte Brunsdon , John Clarke, Richard Dyer , Judith Williamson, Richard Johnson, Iain Chambers , Dorothy Hobson, Chris Weedon , Tony Jefferson, Michael Green and Angela McRobbie .

Many cultural studies scholars employed Marxist methods of analysis , exploring the relationships between cultural forms (i.e., the superstructure ) and that of the political economy (i.e., the base ). By the 1970s, the work of Louis Althusser radically rethought the Marxist account of base and superstructure in ways that had a significant influence on the "Birmingham School." Much of the work done at CCCS studied youth-subcultural expressions of antagonism toward "respectable" middle-class British culture in the post-WWII period. Also during the 1970s, the politically formidable British working classes were in decline.

Britain's manufacturing industries while continuing to grow in output and value, were decreasing in share of GDP and numbers employed, and union rolls were shrinking. Millions of working-class Britons backed the rise of Margaret Thatcher , through the labour losses. For Stuart Hall and his colleagues, this shift in loyalty from the Labour Party to the Conservative Party had to be explained in terms of cultural politics, which they had been tracking even before Thatcher's first victory. Some of this work was presented in the cultural studies classic, Policing the Crisis , [ 21 ] and in other later texts such as Hall's The Hard Road to Renewal: Thatcherism and the Crisis of the Left , [ 22 ] and New Times: The Changing Face of Politics in the 1990s .

[ 23 ] In 2016, Duke University Press launched a new series of Stuart Hall's collected writings, many of which detail his major and decisive contributions toward the establishment of the field of cultural studies.

[ 24 ] In 2023, a new Stuart Hall Archive Project was launched at the University of Birmingham to commemorate Hall's contributions in pioneering the field of cultural studies at CCCS.

[ 25 ] Late-1970s and beyond [ edit ] By the late 1970s, scholars associated with The Birmingham School had firmly placed questions of gender and race on the cultural studies agenda, where they have remained ever since. Also by the late 1970s, cultural studies had begun to attract a great deal of international attention. It spread globally throughout the 1980s and 1990s. As it did so, it both encountered new conditions of knowledge production, and engaged with other major international intellectual currents such as poststructuralism , postmodernism , and postcolonialism .

[ 26 ] The wide range of cultural studies journals now located throughout the world, as shown below, is one indication of the globalization of the field. For overviews of and commentaries on developments in cultural studies during the twenty-first century, see Lawrence Grossberg's Cultural Studies in the Future Tense , Gilbert Rodman's Why Cultural Studies?

and Graeme Turner's What's Become of Cultural Studies?

Stuart Hall's cultural Studies [ edit ] Hall's cultural studies explores culture as a system that affects individuals' identities through the meanings and practices that arise from the constant power dynamics that comprise culture.

[ 27 ] Hall viewed culture as a "critical site of social action and intervention, where power relations are both established and potentially unsettled." [ 28 ] He perceived culture as a power dynamic, in which the media unintentionally possesses more control over ideology than the public.

[ 29 ] Hall viewed the media as a source of preserving the status quo of a reflection that already exists in society. The media hegemony in question, he emphasized, "is not a conscious plot or conspiracy, it’s not overtly coercive, and its effects are not total." [ 30 ] Compared to other thinkers on this subject, he studied and analyzed symbols, ideologies, signs, and other representations within cultural studies.

[ 31 ] Most of his contributions occurred in the 1980s, where he looked at how media cultivates cultural power, how it is consumed, mediated and negotiated, etc.

[ 32 ] Hall has also been accredited with the expansion of cultural studies through “the primacy of culture’s role as an educational site where identities are being continually transformed, power is enacted, and learning assumes a political dynamic.” [ 33 ] He viewed politics as being used mainly for power instead of the betterment of society.

[ 34 ] This led to the belief that political dynamics could change with a reform in the education system (if one changes the education system, then one can change the culture).

[ 34 ] Hall viewed culture as something that is institutionalized, which could only be studied through the interactional patterns that people within a culture exhibit and experience.

[ 35 ] Culture is something that makes up society, is a learned trait, and is influenced by various forms of media that help to establish it.

[ 36 ] Power is the underlying tone of Hall’s cultural studies.

[ 37 ] Hall believed that culture has some power, but the media's use of it is what sways and dictates culture itself.

[ 38 ] Developments outside the UK [ edit ] In the US, prior to the emergence of British Cultural Studies, several versions of cultural analysis had emerged largely from pragmatic and liberal-pluralist philosophical traditions.

[ 39 ] However, in the late 1970s and 1980s, when British Cultural Studies began to spread internationally, and to engage with feminism , poststructuralism , postmodernism , and race, critical cultural studies (i.e., Marxist , feminist, poststructuralist, etc.) expanded tremendously in American universities in fields such as communication studies , education , sociology , and literature .

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] Cultural Studies , the flagship journal of the field, has been based in the US since its founding editor, John Fiske , brought it there from Australia in 1987.

A thriving cultural studies scene has existed in Australia since the late 1970s, when several key CS practitioners emigrated there from the UK, bringing British Cultural Studies with them, after Margaret Thatcher became Prime Minister of the UK in 1979. A school of cultural studies known as cultural policy studies is one of the distinctive Australian contributions to the field, though it is not the only one. Australia also gave birth to the world's first professional cultural studies association (now known as the Cultural Studies Association of Australasia) in 1990.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Cultural studies journals based in Australia include International Journal of Cultural Studies , Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies , and Cultural Studies Review .

In Canada , cultural studies has sometimes focused on issues of technology and society , continuing the emphasis in the work of Marshall McLuhan , Harold Innis , and others. Cultural studies journals based in Canada include Topia: Canadian Journal of Cultural Studies .

In Africa, human rights and Third-World issues are among the central topics treated. There is a thriving cultural and media studies scholarship in Southern Africa, with its locus in South Africa and Zimbabwe.

[ 45 ] Cultural Studies journals based in Africa include the Journal of African Cultural Studies .

In Latin America , cultural studies have drawn on thinkers such as José Martí , Ángel Rama , and other Latin-American figures, in addition to the Western theoretical sources associated with cultural studies in other parts of the world. Leading Latin American cultural studies scholars include Néstor García Canclini , Jésus Martín-Barbero , and Beatriz Sarlo .

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] Among the key issues addressed by Latin American cultural studies scholars are decoloniality , urban cultures , and postdevelopment theory . Latin American cultural studies journals include the Journal of Latin American Cultural Studies .

Even though cultural studies developed much more rapidly in the UK than in continental Europe , there is significant cultural studies presence in countries such as France , Spain , and Portugal . The field is relatively undeveloped in Germany , probably due to the continued influence of the Frankfurt School , [ 48 ] which is now often said to be in its third generation, which includes notable figures such as Axel Honneth . Cultural studies journals based in continental Europe include the European Journal of Cultural Studies , the Journal of Spanish Cultural Studies , French Cultural Studies , and Portuguese Cultural Studies .

In Germany, the term cultural studies specifically refers to the field in the Anglosphere , especially British Cultural Studies, [ 49 ] to differentiate it from the German Kulturwissenschaft which developed along different lines and is characterized by its distance from political science. However, Kulturwissenschaft and cultural studies are often used interchangeably, particularly by lay people.

Throughout Asia, cultural studies have boomed and thrived since at least the beginning of the 1990s.

[ 50 ] Cultural studies journals based in Asia include Inter-Asia Cultural Studies . In India, the Centre for Study of Culture and Society, Bangalore and the Department of Cultural Studies at The English and Foreign Languages and the University of Hyderabad are two major institutional spaces for Cultural Studies.

Issues, concepts, and approaches [ edit ] Marxism has been an important influence upon cultural studies. Those associated with CCCS initially engaged deeply with the structuralism of Louis Althusser , and later in the 1970s turned decisively toward Antonio Gramsci . Cultural studies has also embraced the examination of race, gender, and other aspects of identity, as is illustrated, for example, by a number of key books published collectively under the name of CCCS in the late 1970s and early 1980s, including Women Take Issue: Aspects of Women's Subordination (1978), and The Empire Strikes Back: Race and Racism in 70s Britain (1982).

Gramsci and hegemony [ edit ] To understand the changing political circumstances of class , politics , and culture in the United Kingdom, scholars at The Birmingham School turned to the work of Antonio Gramsci , an Italian thinker, writer, and Communist Party leader. Gramsci had been concerned with similar issues: why would Italian laborers and peasants vote for fascists ? What strategic approach is necessary to mobilize popular support in more progressive directions? Gramsci modified classical Marxism , and argued that culture must be understood as a key site of political and social struggle. In his view, capitalists used not only brute force ( police , prisons , repression , military ) to maintain control , but also penetrated the everyday culture of working people in a variety of ways in their efforts to win popular "consent." It is important to recognize that for Gramsci, historical leadership, or hegemony , involves the formation of alliances between class factions, and struggles within the cultural realm of everyday common sense.

Hegemony was always, for Gramsci, an interminable, unstable and contested process.

[ 51 ] Scott Lash writes: In the work of Hall, Hebdige and McRobbie, popular culture came to the fore... What Gramsci gave to this was the importance of consent and culture. If the fundamental Marxists saw the power in terms of class-versus-class, then Gramsci gave to us a question of class alliance . The rise of cultural studies itself was based on the decline of the prominence of fundamental class-versus-class politics.

[ 52 ] Edgar and Sedgwick write: The theory of hegemony was of central importance to the development of British cultural studies [particularly The Birmingham School . It facilitated the analysis of the ways subordinate groups actively resist and respond to political and economic domination. The subordinate groups needed not to be seen merely as the passive dupes of the dominant class and its ideology.

[ 53 ] Structure and agency [ edit ] The development of hegemony theory in cultural studies was in some ways consonant with work in other fields exploring agency , a theoretical concept that insists on the active, critical capacities of subordinated people (e.g. the working classes , colonized peoples, women).

[ 54 ] As Stuart Hall famously argued in his 1981 essay, "Notes on Deconstructing 'the Popular ' ": "ordinary people are not cultural dopes." [ 55 ] Insistence on accounting for the agency of subordinated people run counter to the work of traditional structuralists . Some analysts [ who?

] have however been critical of some work in cultural studies that they feel overstates the significance of or even romanticizes some forms of popular cultural agency.

Cultural studies often concerns itself with the agency at the level of the practices of everyday life, and approaches such research from a standpoint of radical contextualism .

[ 56 ] In other words, cultural studies rejects universal accounts of cultural practices , meanings, and identities.

Judith Butler , an American feminist theorist whose work is often associated with cultural studies, wrote that: the move from a structuralist account in which capital is understood to structure social relations in relatively homologous ways to a view of hegemony in which power relations are subject to repetition, convergence, and rearticulation brought the question of temporality into the thinking of structure. It has marked a shift from a form of Althusserian theory that takes structural totalities as theoretical objects to one in which the insights into the contingent possibility of structure inaugurate a renewed conception of hegemony as bound up with the contingent sites and strategies of the rearticulation of power.

[ 57 ] Globalization [ edit ] In recent decades, as capitalism has spread throughout the world via contemporary forms of globalization , cultural studies has generated important analyses of local sites and practices of negotiation with and resistance to Western hegemony .

[ 58 ] Cultural consumption [ edit ] Cultural studies criticizes the traditional view of the passive consumer, particularly by underlining the different ways people read , receive and interpret cultural texts, or appropriate other kinds of cultural products, or otherwise participate in the production and circulation of meanings. On this view, a consumer can appropriate , actively rework, or challenge the meanings circulated through cultural texts. In some of its variants, cultural studies has shifted the analytical focus from traditional understandings of production to consumption – viewed as a form of production (of meanings, of identities, etc.) in its own right.

Stuart Hall , John Fiske , and others have been influential in these developments.

A special 2008 issue of the field's flagship journal, Cultural Studies , examined " anti-consumerism " from a variety of cultural studies angles. Jeremy Gilbert noted in the issue, cultural studies must grapple with the fact that "we now live in an era when, throughout the capitalist world, the overriding aim of government economic policy is to maintain consumer spending levels. This is an era when 'consumer confidence' is treated as the key indicator and cause of economic effectiveness." [ 59 ] The concept of "text" [ edit ] Cultural studies, drawing upon and developing semiotics , uses the concept of text to designate not only written language, but also television programs , films , photographs , fashion , hairstyles , and so forth; the texts of cultural studies comprise all the meaningful artifacts of culture. This conception of textuality derives especially from the work of the pioneering and influential semiotician, Roland Barthes , but also owes debts to other sources, such as Juri Lotman and his colleagues from Tartu–Moscow School . Similarly, the field widens the concept of culture . Cultural studies approach the sites and spaces of everyday life, such as pubs, living rooms, gardens, and beaches, as "texts." [ 60 ] Culture , in this context, includes not only high culture , [ 61 ] but also everyday meanings and practices, a central focus of cultural studies.

Jeff Lewis summarized much of the work on textuality and textual analysis in his cultural studies textbook and a post-9/11 monograph on media and terrorism.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] According to Lewis, textual studies use complex and difficult heuristic methods and require both powerful interpretive skills and a subtle conception of politics and contexts. The task of the cultural analyst, for Lewis, is to engage with both knowledge systems and texts and observe and analyze the ways the two interact with one another. This engagement represents the critical dimensions of the analysis, its capacity to illuminate the hierarchies within and surrounding the given text and its discourse .

Academic reception [ edit ] Cultural studies has evolved through its uptake across a variety of different disciplines— anthropology , media studies , communication studies , literary studies , education , geography , philosophy , sociology , politics , and others.

While some [ who?

] have accused certain areas of cultural studies of meandering into political relativism and a kind of empty version of " postmodern " analysis, others [ who?

] hold that at its core, cultural studies provides a significant conceptual and methodological framework for cultural , social , and economic critique. This critique is designed to " deconstruct " the meanings and assumptions that are inscribed in the institutions, texts, and practices that work with and through, and produce and re-present, culture.

[ 64 ] [ page needed ] Thus, while some scholars and disciplines have dismissed cultural studies for its methodological rejection of disciplinarity, its core strategies of critique and analysis have influenced areas of the social sciences and humanities ; for example, cultural studies work on forms of social differentiation , control and inequality , identity , community-building , media, and knowledge production has had a substantial impact. Moreover, the influence of cultural studies has become increasingly evident in areas as diverse as translation studies , health studies, international relations , development studies , computer studies , economics , archaeology , and neurobiology .

[ citation needed ] Cultural studies has also diversified its own interests and methodologies, incorporating a range of studies on media policy , democracy , design , leisure , tourism , warfare , and development. While certain key concepts such as ideology or discourse , class, hegemony, identity, and gender remain significant, cultural studies has long engaged with and integrated new concepts and approaches. The field thus continues to pursue political critique through its engagements with the forces of culture and politics.

[ 65 ] [ page needed ] The integration of popular culture in cultural studies and education [ edit ] [edit]
The integration of popular culture in classrooms has influenced educational practices in Cultural Studies. Through the analysis of TV series, movies, memes, and other cultural materials, educators can encourage media literacy, critical thinking, and a deeper understanding of social issues. Popular culture can be an effective tool for critical pedagogy.

Evan Faidley explores how TV shows, movies, and memes can be used in the classroom to discuss topics like social justice and identity.

[ 66 ] Shows like South Park allow students to evaluate societal norms and political issues, using a pedagogy of resistance [ 67 ] (Stevens) . Cultural studies encourage students to analyze intertextuality .

Patricia Duff discusses how popular culture incorporates with academic discourse to build media literacy which helps students critically engage with the media they consume daily.

[ 68 ] Kathy Mills also highlights the importance of multiliteracies , which encourages students to utilize a variety of communication media outside of the standard text, including digital and visual media.

[ 69 ] Diane Penrod argues that incorporating popular culture in education makes learning more relevant and engaging. Teachers can aid students in comprehending difficult concepts like gender, ethnicity, and class by utilizing works from their own culture. Students are also encouraged to develop critical analytical abilities which they can use in both academic and everyday situations when popular culture is integrated into the classroom.

[ 70 ] Incorporating popular culture into education through cultural studies helps students critically engage with the world around them, fostering media literacy and critical thinking. Educators can use cultural texts to discuss societal issues, challenge norms, and prepare students for active participation in a media-dominated world.

Literary scholars [ edit ] Many cultural studies practitioners work in departments of English or comparative literature . Nevertheless, some traditional literary scholars such as Yale professor Harold Bloom have been outspoken critics of cultural studies. On the level of methodology , these scholars dispute the theoretical underpinning of the movement's critical framework.

Bloom stated his position during the 3 September 2000 episode of C-SPAN 's Booknotes , while discussing his book How to Read and Why : [T]here are two enemies of reading now in the world, not just in the English-speaking world. One [is] the lunatic destruction of literary studies...and its replacement by what is called cultural studies in all of the universities and colleges in the English-speaking world, and everyone knows what that phenomenon is. I mean, the...now-weary phrase 'political correctness' remains a perfectly good descriptive phrase for what has gone on and is, alas, still going on almost everywhere and which dominates, I would say, rather more than three-fifths of the tenured faculties in the English-speaking world, who really do represent treason of the intellectuals, I think, a 'betrayal of the clerks'." [ 71 ] Marxist literary critic Terry Eagleton is not wholly opposed to cultural studies, but has criticised aspects of it and highlighted what he sees as its strengths and weaknesses in books such as After Theory (2003). For Eagleton, literary and cultural theory have the potential to say important things about the "fundamental questions" in life, but theorists have rarely realized this potential.

English departments also host cultural rhetorics scholars. This academic field defines cultural rhetorics as "the study and practice of making meaning and knowledge with the belief that all cultures are rhetorical and all rhetorics are cultural." [ 72 ] Cultural rhetorics scholars are interested in investigating topics like climate change , [ 73 ] autism , [ 74 ] Asian American rhetoric , [ 75 ] and more.

Sociology [ edit ] Cultural studies have also had a substantial impact on sociology . For example, when Stuart Hall left CCCS at Birmingham, it was to accept a prestigious professorship in Sociology at the Open University in Britain. The subfield of cultural sociology , in particular, is disciplinary home to many cultural studies practitioners. Nevertheless, there are some differences between sociology as a discipline and the field of cultural studies as a whole. While sociology was founded upon various historic works purposefully distinguishing the subject from philosophy or psychology , cultural studies have explicitly interrogated and criticized traditional understandings and practices of disciplinarity. Most CS practitioners think it is best that cultural studies neither emulate disciplines nor aspire to disciplinarity for cultural studies. Rather, they promote a kind of radical interdisciplinarity as the basis for cultural studies.

One sociologist whose work has had a major influence on cultural studies is Pierre Bourdieu , whose work makes innovative use of statistics and in-depth interviews.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] However, although Bourdieu's work has been highly influential within cultural studies, and although Bourdieu regarded his work as a form of science , cultural studies has never embraced the idea that it should aspire toward "scientificity," and has marshalled a wide range of theoretical and methodological arguments against the fetishization of "scientificity" as a basis for cultural studies.

Two sociologists who have been critical of cultural studies, Chris Rojek and Bryan S. Turner , argue in their article, "Decorative sociology: towards a critique of the cultural turn," that cultural studies, particularly the flavor championed by Stuart Hall, lacks a stable research agenda, and privileges the contemporary reading of texts, thus producing an ahistorical theoretical focus.

[ 78 ] Many, [ who?

] however, would argue, following Hall, that cultural studies have always sought to avoid the establishment of a fixed research agenda; this follows from its critique of disciplinarity. Moreover, Hall and many others have long argued against the misunderstanding that textual analysis is the sole methodology of cultural studies, and have practiced numerous other approaches, as noted above. Rojek and Turner also level the accusation that there is "a sense of moral superiority about the correctness of the political views articulated" in cultural studies.

[ 78 ] Science wars [ edit ] Main articles: Science wars and Sokal affair In 1996, physicist Alan Sokal expressed his opposition to cultural studies by submitting a hoax article to a cultural studies journal, Social Text . The article, which was crafted as a parody of what Sokal referred to as the "fashionable nonsense" of postmodernism , was accepted by the editors of the journal, which did not at the time practice peer review . When the paper appeared in print, Sokal published a second article in a self-described "academic gossip" magazine, Lingua Franca , revealing his hoax on Social Text . Sokal stated that his motivation stemmed from his rejection of contemporary critiques of scientific rationalism : [ 79 ] Politically, I'm angered because most (though not all) of this silliness is emanating from the self-proclaimed Left. We're witnessing here a profound historical volte-face . For most of the past two centuries, the Left has been identified with science and against obscurantism ; we have believed that rational thought and the fearless analysis of objective reality (both natural and social) are incisive tools for combating the mystifications promoted by the powerful – not to mention being desirable human ends in their own right. The recent turn of many "progressive" or "leftist" academic humanists and social scientists toward one or another form of epistemic relativism betrays this worthy heritage and undermines the already fragile prospects for progressive social critique. Theorizing about "the social construction of reality" won't help us find an effective treatment for AIDS or devise strategies for preventing global warming. Nor can we combat false ideas in history, sociology, economics and politics if we reject the notions of truth and falsity.

In response to this critique, Jacques Derrida wrote: [ 80 ] In whose interest was it to go for a quick practical joke rather than taking part in the work which, sadly, it replaced?

Founding works [ edit ] Hall and others have identified some core originating texts, or the original " curricula ," of the field of cultural studies: Richard Hoggart 's The Uses of Literacy Raymond Williams ' Culture and Society and The Long Revolution [ 20 ] [ page needed ] E. P. Thompson 's The Making of the English Working Class .

See also [ edit ] Culturology Cultural Studies Association (US) European Communication Research and Education Association (Norway) International Association for Translation and Intercultural Studies (South Korea) Popular culture studies References [ edit ] ^ See Lawrence Grossberg, Cary Nelson, and Paula A. Treichler (eds.), Cultural Studies . New York: Routledge , 1992. Also see Simon During (ed.), The Cultural Studies Reader , 3rd Ed. New York: Routledge , 2007.

^ "Cultural studies" is not synonymous with either " area studies ", " ethnic studies ," or cultural anthropology —although there are many cultural studies practitioners working in these areas.

^ "cultural studies | interdisciplinary field" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2017 .

^ Pain, R. and Smith, S. eds., 2008. Fear: Critical geopolitics and everyday life. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd.

^ Bérubé, Michael (2009), "What's the Matter with Cultural Studies?" Archived 12 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine , The Chronicle of Higher Education .

^ "Cultural Studies Associations, Networks and Programs" Archived 9 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine , extensive, but incomplete, list of associations, networks and programs as found on the website for the Association of Cultural Studies, Tampere, Finland.

^ Sardar, Ziauddin , and Borin Van Loon . 1994.

Introducing Cultural Studies . New York: Totem Books ^ a b Dworkin, Dennis (1997).

Cultural Marxism in Post-War Britain: History, the New Left, and the Origins of Cultural Studies . Durham: Duke University Press . p. 116.

^ see also: Corner, John (1991). "Postscript: Studying Culture—Reflections and Assessment: An Interview with Richard Hoggart".

Media, Culture & Society .

13 (2).

doi : 10.1177/016344391013002002 .

^ "About the Birmingham CCCS – University of Birmingham" .

birmingham.ac.uk .

Archived from the original on 2 June 2017 . Retrieved 14 June 2017 .

^ Davies, Ioan (1991). "British Cultural Marxism".

International Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society .

4 (3): 323– 344.

doi : 10.1007/BF01386507 .

S2CID 143846218 .

^ Hoggart, Richard . 2011.

An Idea and Its Servants: UNESCO from Within . Newark, NJ: Transaction Publishers .

^ Morley, David; Chen, Kuan-Hsing, eds. (1996).

Stuart Hall: Critical Dialogues in Cultural Studies . London: Routledge .

^ Gilroy, Paul; Grossberg, Lawrence; McRobbie, Angela, eds. (2000).

Without Guarantees: In Honour of Stuart Hall . London: Verso Books .

^ Webster, Frank (2004). "Cultural Studies and Sociology at, and After, the Closure of the Birmingham School".

Cultural Studies .

18 (6): 848.

doi : 10.1080/0950238042000306891 .

S2CID 145110580 .

^ Curtis, Polly (2002).

"Birmingham's cultural studies department given the chop" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 13 March 2007.

^ Storey, John (1996).

"What is Cultural Studies?" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 October 2016 . Retrieved 14 June 2017 .

^ Turner, Graeme (2003).

British Cultural Studies: An Introduction (Third ed.). London: Routledge.

^ Hartley, John (2003).

A Short History of Cultural Studies . London: SAGE Publications .

^ a b Hall 1980 ^ Hall, Stuart ; Critcher, Chas; Jefferson, Tony; Clarke, John; Roberts, Brian (1978).

Policing the Crisis: Mugging, the State, and Law and Order . New York: Holmes & Meier Publishers, Inc.

^ Hall, Stuart (1988).

The Hard Road to Renewal: Thatcherism and the Crisis of the Left . London: Verso.

^ Stuart Hall; Martin Jacques, eds. (1991).

New Times: The Changing Face of Politics in the 1990s . London: Verso.

^ See the Duke University Press Stuart Hall: Selected Writings webpage (below in External Links) ^ See the Stuart Hall Archive Project webpage (below in External Links) ^ Abbas, Ackbar; Erni, John Nguyet, eds. (2005).

Internationalizing Cultural Studies: An Anthology . Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing .

^ Griffin, E. A., Ledbetter, A., & Sparks, G. G. (2023). Cultural Studies of Stuart Hall. A First Look at Communication Theory (11th ed.,  pp. 451-462). McGraw Hill.

^ Procter, James (2004).

Stuart Hall . London: Routledge.

ISBN 9781134504251 .

^ Wood, Brennon (1998). "Stuart Hall's Cultural Studies and the Problem of Hegemony".

The British Journal of Sociology .

49 (3): 399– 414.

doi : 10.2307/591390 .

JSTOR 591390 .

^ Procter, James (2004).

ISBN 9781134504251 .

^ Miller, Toby (15 April 2008).

A Companion to Cultural Studies . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-0-470-99879-3 .

^ Holt, Jennifer; Perren, Alisa (19 September 2011).

Media Industries: History, Theory, and Method . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-1-4443-6023-3 .

^ Giroux, Henry A. (2004). "Cultural studies, public pedagogy, and the responsibility of intellectuals".

Communication and Critical/Cultural Studies .

1 : 59– 79.

doi : 10.1080/1479142042000180926 .

^ a b Giroux, H. A. (2004). p. 59–79.

^ Hall 1980b .

^ Hall, G., & Birchall, C. (2006). New Cultural Studies: Adventures in Theory (1st ed.). Edinburgh University Press.

^ Hall, G., & Birchall, C. (2006).

New Cultural Studies: Adventures in Theory (1st ed.). Edinburgh University Press.

^ Goggin, G. (2016). Media and Power After Stuart Hall.

Cultural Studies Review, 22(1) , p. 277.

^ Lindlof & Taylor, 2002, p. 60.

^ Grossberg, Nelson & Treichler 1992 ^ Catherine A. Warren; Mary Douglas Vavrus, eds. (2002).

American Cultural Studies . Urbana Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press.

^ John Hartley; Roberta E. Pearson, eds. (2000).

American Cultural Studies: A Reader . Oxford University Press.

^ John Frow; Meaghan Morris, eds. (1993).

Australian Cultural Studies: A Reader . Urbana Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press.

^ Turner, Graeme, ed. (1993).

Nation, Culture, Text: Australian Cultural and Media Studies . London: Routledge.

^ Tomaselli, K.G.; Ronning, H.; Mboti, N (2013). "South–North perspectives: the development of cultural and media studies in Southern Africa".

Media, Culture & Society .

35 (1): 36– 43.

doi : 10.1177/0163443712464556 .

S2CID 145257054 .

^ Ana del Sarto; Alicia Ríos; Abril Trigo, eds. (2004).

The Latin American Cultural Studies Reader . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

^ Robert McKee Irwin; Mónica Szurmuk, eds. (2012).

Dictionary of Latin American Cultural Studies . Gainesville: University Press of Florida.

^ See, e.g., Geoffrey Winthrop-Young, "Cultural Studies and German Media Theory," in Gary Hall & Claire Birchall (eds.), New Cultural Studies: Adventures in Theory (pp. 88-104). Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press , 2006.

^ Ahrens, Johannes; Beer, Raphael; Bittlingmayer, Uwe H.; Gerdes, Jürgen (10 February 2011).

Normativität: Über die Hintergründe sozialwissenschaftlicher Theoriebildung [ Normativity: On the background of social science theory formation ] (in German). Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 9783531930107 .

Archived from the original on 30 June 2023 . Retrieved 2 October 2020 .

^ Chen, Kuan-Hsing; Chua, Beng Huat (2007).

The Inter-Asia Cultural Studies Reader . London: Routledge .

^ Hall, Stuart (June 1986). "Gramsci's Relevance for the Study of Race and Ethnicity".

Journal of Communication Inquiry .

10 (2): 5– 27.

doi : 10.1177/019685998601000202 .

S2CID 53782 .

^ Lash 2007 , pp. 68–69 ^ Edgar & Sedgewick, 165.

^ Giddens, Anthony (1984).

The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration . Malden, MA: Polity Press .

^ Guins, Raiford; Cruz, Omayra Zaragoza, eds. (1 May 2005).

Popular Culture: A Reader . London: SAGE Publications . p. 67.

ISBN 978-0-7619-7472-7 .

Archived from the original on 30 June 2023 . Retrieved 6 January 2023 .

^ Grossberg, Lawrence (2010).

Cultural Studies in the Future Tense . Durham, NC: Duke University Press .

^ Butler, Judith (1997).

"Further Reflections on Conversations of Our Time" .

Diacritics .

27 (1): 13– 15.

doi : 10.1353/dia.1997.0004 .

S2CID 170598741 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 June 2023 . Retrieved 2 October 2020 .

^ Appadurai, Arjun (1996).

Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press .

^ Gilbert, Jeremy (2008). "Against the Commodification of Everything".

Cultural Studies .

22 (5): 551– 566.

doi : 10.1080/09502380802245811 .

S2CID 142515063 .

^ Fiske, Hodge and Turner (1987).

Myths of Oz: Reading Australian Popular Culture . Allen & Unwin: Boston.

^ Bakhtin, Mikhail (1981).

The Dialogic Imagination . Austin, Texas: University of Texas Press . p. 4.

^ Lewis, Jeff . 2008.

Cultural Studies . London: SAGE .

^ Lewis, Jeff . 2005.

Language Wars: The Role of Media and Culture in Global Terror and Political Violence . London: Pluto Press .

^ Lewis 2008 ^ During 2007 ^ Faidley, Evan W. " ""Movies, TV Shows, and Memes... Oh My!" : An Honors Education through Popular Culture and Critical Pedagogy" ".

National Collegiate Honors Council .

^ Stevens, Lisa Patel (2001).

" ""South Park" and Society: Instructional and Curricular Implications of Popular Culture in the Classroom" " .

Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy .

44 (6): 548– 555.

JSTOR 40013566 .

^ Duff, Patricia A. (2003).

"Intertextuality and Hybrid Discourses: The Infusion of Pop Culture in Educational Discourse." . Linguistics and Education. pp.

231– 276.

^ Mills, Kathy A. (2009).

" "Multiliteracies: Interrogating Competing Discourses." " (PDF) .

Language and Education .

23 (2): 103– 116.

doi : 10.1080/09500780802152762 .

^ Penrod, Diane.

Miss Grundy doesn't teach here anymore: Popular culture and the composition classroom . Heinemann Educational Books.

^ "How to Read and Why" .

C-SPAN . 3 September 2000.

Archived from the original on 19 April 2017 . Retrieved 19 April 2017 .

^ "Cultural Rhetorics Consortium" . Archived from the original on 24 September 2021 . Retrieved 13 September 2021 .

^ "Introduction: Rhetorics and Literacies of Climate Change | enculturation" .

enculturation.net .

Archived from the original on 12 October 2021 . Retrieved 13 September 2021 .

^ "I Am #ActuallyAutistic, Hear Me Tweet: The Autist-Topoi of Autistic Activists on Twitter | enculturation" .

enculturation.net .

Archived from the original on 13 September 2021 . Retrieved 13 September 2021 .

^ "Beyond Representation: Spatial, Temporal and Embodied Trans/Formations of Asian/Asian American Rhetoric | enculturation" .

enculturation.net .

Archived from the original on 13 September 2021 . Retrieved 13 September 2021 .

^ Harker, Richard; Mahar, Cheleen; Wilkes, Chris, eds. (1990).

An Introduction to the Work of Pierre Bourdieu: The Theory of Practice . Houndmills: Macmillan. pp.

68– 71.

^ Bourdieu, Pierre (1984).

Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 9780674212770 .

^ a b Rojek, Chris; Turner, Bryan (2000). "Decorative sociology: towards a critique of the cultural turn".

The Sociological Review .

48 (4): 629– 648.

doi : 10.1111/1467-954X.00236 .

^ Sokal, Alan . 1996. " A Physicist Experiments With Cultural Studies Archived 4 September 2019 at the Wayback Machine ," translated by D. Sleator .

NYU Department of Physics .

^ Derrida, Jacques . 2005. "Sokal and Bricmont aren't serious" In: J. Derrida (Ed.), R. Bowlby (Trans.), Paper Machine . (pp. 70-72). Stanford CA: Stanford University Press (first published 1997 "Sokal et Bricmont ne sont pas sérieux." in Le Monde : p. 17.).

Sources [ edit ] Bitar, Amer (2020).

Bedouin Visual Leadership in the Middle East: The Power of Aesthetics and Practical Implications .

Springer Nature .

ISBN 9783030573973 .

Du Gay, Paul, et al. 1997.

Doing Cultural Studies: The Story of the Sony Walkman. Culture, Media and Identities . London: SAGE , in association with Open University .

During, Simon (2007).

The cultural studies reader (3rd ed.). London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-37412-5 .

Edgar, Andrew, and Peter Sedgwick . 2005.

Cultural Theory: The Key Concepts (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge.

Engel, Manfred. 2008. "Cultural and Literary Studies." Canadian Review of Comparative Literature 31:460–67.

Grossberg, Lawrence (2010).

Cultural Studies in the Future Tense . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Grossberg, Lawrence ; Nelson, Cary ; Treichler, Paula, eds. (1992).

Cultural Studies . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-90351-3 .

.

Hall, Gary & Birchall, Claire, eds. (2006).

New Cultural Studies: Adventures in Theory . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press .

Hall, Stuart , ed. (1980).

Culture, Media, Language: Working Papers in Cultural Studies, 1972-1979 . London: Routledge in association with the Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies, University of Birmingham .

ISBN 0-09-142070-9 .

—— (1980b). "Cultural studies: Two paradigms".

Media, Culture & Society .

2 : 57– 72.

doi : 10.1177/016344378000200106 .

—— 1992. "Race, Culture, and Communications: Looking Backward and Forward at Cultural Studies." Rethinking Marxism 5(1):10–18.

Hoggart, Richard . 1957.

The Uses of Literacy: Aspects of Working Class Life .

Chatto and Windus .

ISBN 0-7011-0763-4 Hartley, John (2003).

A Short History of Cultural Studies . London: Sage.

Johnson, Richard. 1986–87. "What Is Cultural Studies Anyway?" Social Text 16:38–80.

—— 2004. "Multiplying Methods: From Pluralism to Combination." pp. 26–43 in Practice of Cultural Studies . London: SAGE.

—— "Post-Hegemony? I Don't Think So" Theory, Culture & Society 24(3):95–110.

Lash, Scott (May 2007). "Power after Hegemony: Cultural Studies in Mutation?".

Theory, Culture & Society .

24 (3): 55– 78.

doi : 10.1177/0263276407075956 .

S2CID 145639801 .

Lewis, Jeff (2008).

Cultural Studies: The Basics (2nd ed.). London: SAGE Publications .

ISBN 978-1-4129-2229-6 .

Lindlof, T. R., and B. C. Taylor. 2002.

Qualitative Communication Research Methods (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.

Longhurst, Brian, Greg Smith , Gaynor Bagnall, Garry Crawford , and Michael Ogborn. 2008.

Introducing Cultural Studies (2nd ed.). London: Pearson .

ISBN 978-1-4058-5843-4 .

Miller, Toby , ed. (2006).

A Companion to Cultural Studies . Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers .

ISBN 978-0-631-21788-6 .

Pollock, Griselda , ed. 1996.

Generations and Geographies: Critical Theories and Critical Practices in Feminism and the Visual Arts . Routledge.

—— 2006.

Psychoanalysis and the Image . Boston: Blackwell.

Sardar, Ziauddin , Van Loon, Borin (1997). Introducing Cultural Studies. New York: Totem Books.

Smith, Paul . 1991. "A Course In 'Cultural Studies'." The Journal of the Midwest Modern Language Association 24(1):39–49.

—— 2006. " Looking Backwards and Forwards at Cultural Studies [ permanent dead link ] ." pp. 331–40 in A Companion to Cultural Studies , edited by T. Miller. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-631-21788-6 .

Rodman, Gil (2015).

Why Cultural Studies?

Maldon, MA: Wiley Blackwell.

Turner, Graeme (2003).

British Cultural Studies: An Introduction (Third ed.). London: Routledge .

—— 2012.

What's Become of Cultural Studies?

Los Angeles: SAGE.

Williams, Jeffrey, interviewer. 1994. " Questioning Cultural Studies: An Interview with Paul Smith ." Hartford, CT: MLG Institute for Culture and Society, Trinity College . Retrieved 1 July 2020.

Williams, Raymond . 1985.

Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society (revised ed.). New York: Oxford University Press .

—— 1966.

Culture and Society, 1780-1950 . New York: Harper & Row .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cultural studies .

CCCS publications (Annual Reports and Stencilled Occasional [ sic ] Papers) of the University of Birmingham Archived 10 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine CSAA: Cultural Studies Association of Australasia Cultural Studies International Journal of Cultural Studies Stuart Hall Archive Project, University of Birmingham, UK Stuart Hall: Selected Writings, Duke University Press Research institute for Interculturality v t e British New Left General Communist Party Historians Group ( Communist Party of Great Britain ) Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Revisionism Marxist humanism Cultural studies Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies Partisan Coffee House Socialist Society Socialist Movement Figures E. P. Thompson John Saville Stuart Hall Raymond Williams Richard Hoggart Perry Anderson Tom Nairn Peter Worsley Ralph Miliband Raphael Samuel Rodney Hilton Robin Blackburn Tariq Ali Catherine Hall Sheila Rowbotham Dick Hebdige Jeffrey Weeks Organisations The Angry Brigade Big Flame British Black Panthers Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament Gay Left International Marxist Group International Socialists (UK) King Mob Major influences Antonio Gramsci Louis Althusser Frankfurt School Isaac Deutscher Harold Laski C. Wright Mills Talcott Parsons Iris Murdoch Publications New Reasoner Universities and Left Review New Left Review Socialist Register Radical Philosophy Soundings Related articles Far-left politics in the United Kingdom Anti-Stalinist left Eurocommunism UK underground Counterculture v t e Culture Outline Sciences Cultural anthropology Cultural astronomy Cultural ecology Cultural geography Cultural neuroscience Cultural studies Culturology Culture theory Subfields Bioculture Cross-cultural studies Cross-cultural communication Cross-cultural leadership Cross-cultural psychiatry Cross-cultural psychology Cultural analytics Cultural economics Cultural entomology Cultural history Cultural mapping Cultural mediation Cultural psychology Cultural values Culturomics Intercultural learning Intercultural relations Philosophy of culture Popular culture studies Postcritique Semiotics of culture Sociology of culture Sound culture Theology of culture Transcultural nursing Types Constructed culture Dominant culture Folk culture High culture Individualistic culture Legal culture Microculture Official culture Political culture Civic Popular culture Low culture Media culture Recombinant culture Remix culture Trash culture Urban Primitive culture Resistance through culture Subculture Alternative culture Counterculture Fandom Far-right subcultures Underground culture Youth subculture list Super culture Vernacular culture Culture by location Aspects Acculturation Cultural appreciation Cultural appropriation Cultural area Cultural artifact Cultural baggage Cultural bias Cultural capital Cross-cultural Cultural communication Cultural conflict Cultural cringe Cultural dissonance Cultural emphasis Cultural framework Cultural heritage Destroyed Cultural icon Cultural identity Cultural industry Cultural invention Cultural landscape Cultural learning Cultural leveling Cultural memory Cultural pluralism Cultural practice Cultural property Cultural reproduction Cultural system Cultural technology Cultural universal Cultureme Enculturation High- and low-context cultures Interculturality Internet culture Manuscript culture Material culture Non-material culture Organizational culture Assessment culture Design culture Journalism culture Print culture Protoculture Relational mobility Safety culture Symbolic culture Technoculture Trans-cultural diffusion Transculturation Visual culture Politics Colonial mentality Consumer capitalism Cross cultural sensitivity Cultural assimilation Cultural attaché Cultural backwardness Cultural Bolshevism Cultural conservatism Cultural contracts Cultural deprivation Cultural diplomacy Cultural environmentalism Cultural exception Cultural feminism Cultural genocide Cultural globalization Cultural hegemony Cultural imperialism Cultural intelligence Cultural liberalism Cultural nationalism Cultural pessimism Cultural policy Cultural racism Cultural radicalism Cultural retention Cultural Revolution Cultural rights Cultural safety Cultural silence Cultural subsidy Cultural Zionism Culture change Culture minister Culture of fear Culture war Deculturalization Dominator culture Interculturalism Monoculturalism Multiculturalism Biculturalism Multiracial democracy Pluriculturalism Polyculturalism Transculturism Religions Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Cultural Christians Protestantism Role of Christianity in civilization Eastern Orthodoxy Mormonism Cultural Hindus Islam Cultural Muslims Judaism Sikhism Related Algorithmic culture Animal culture Archaeological culture Bennett scale Cannabis culture Circuit of culture Civilization Coffee culture Cringe culture Cross-cultural Cultural center Cultural competence Cultural critic Cultural determinism Cultural diversity Cultural evolutionism Cultural homogenization Cultural institution Cultural jet lag Cultural lag Cultural literacy Cultural mosaic Cultural movement Cultural mulatto Cultural probe Cultural relativism Cultural tourism Pop-culture Cultural translation Cultural turn Cultural sensibility Culture and menstruation Culture and positive psychology Culture and social cognition Culture gap Culture hero Culture industry Culture shock Culturgen Children's culture Culturalism Cyberculture Death and culture Disability culture Deaf culture Drinking culture Drug culture Eastern culture Emotions and culture Historical culture Intercultural communication Intercultural competence Languaculture Living things in culture Media culture Oppositional culture Participatory culture Permission culture Rape culture Remix culture Tea culture Transformation of culture Urban culture Welfare culture Western culture Youth culture Category v t e Social sciences Outline History Index Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural social physical Economics microeconomics macroeconomics econometrics mathematical Geography physical human technical integrated History cultural auxiliary sciences economic human military political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems public law private law Linguistics semiotics Political science international relations comparative philosophy public policy public administration Psychology abnormal cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Administration business public Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Criminology Critical animal studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental social science studies Food studies Gender studies Global studies Historical sociology History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Linguistics Management Media studies Philosophies science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Political sociology Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Quantum social science Social work Vegan studies List List of social science journals Other categorizations Behavioural sciences Geisteswissenschaft Human science Humanities Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐7x7vm
Cached time: 20250814220307
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.999 seconds
Real time usage: 1.230 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6955/1000000
Revision size: 63176/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 209236/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17193/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 254276/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.646/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20785798/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1014.262      1 -total
 38.56%  391.113      1 Template:Reflist
 17.75%  179.984     35 Template:Cite_book
  8.45%   85.755      2 Template:Lang
  7.97%   80.804      2 Template:Cite_news
  7.94%   80.578      3 Template:Navbox
  7.37%   74.762     15 Template:Cite_journal
  7.32%   74.269      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  6.69%   67.856      1 Template:British_New_Left
  6.13%   62.183      9 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:37961224:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220307 and revision id 1299060746. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cultural_studies&oldid=1299060746 " Categories : Cultural studies Social sciences Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from January 2024 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from January 2024 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from January 2024 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from June 2023 Articles containing German-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2020 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2024 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2020 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 09:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cultural studies 40 languages Add topic

