Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Members 3 Meetings 4 Fellowships 5 Biochemical nomenclature 6 Publications 7 Leadership 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 19 languages Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski Català Deutsch فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Монгол 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia International non-governmental organization concerned with biochemistry and molecular biology This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology IUBMB Abbreviation IUBMB Formation 1955 ; 70 years ago ( 1955 ) Type INGO , standards organization Region served Worldwide Official language English President Dario Alessi (United Kingdom) Website iubmb .org The International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology ( IUBMB ) is an international non-governmental organisation concerned with biochemistry and molecular biology . Formed in 1955 as the International Union of Biochemistry ( IUB ), the union has presently 79 member countries and regions (as of 2020).

[ 1 ] The Union is devoted to promoting research and education in biochemistry and molecular biology throughout the world, and gives particular attention to localities where the subject is still in its early development.

History [ edit ] The first Congress of Biochemistry was held in 1949 in Cambridge, UK, organized by the Biochemical Society , [ 2 ] and was inspired by German-born British biochemist Sir Hans Adolf Krebs as a means of bringing together biochemists who had been separated by World War II .  At the time, biochemistry was blossoming as a discipline and was seeking its own recognition as a union within the International Council for Science (ICSU). The congress was a first step to recognize biochemistry as a separate discipline and entity.  At the final session of this congress, the International Committee of Biochemistry was set up with 20 members from fourteen countries with the goal obtaining from the ICSU 'recognition as the international body representative of biochemistry, with a view to the formal constitution of an International Union of Biochemistry as soon as possible.'  Discussions continued over the next few years, and by the third Congress of Biochemistry, which took place in Brussels in 1955, the International Union of Biochemistry (IUB) was formed and officially admitted to the ICSU.

[ 3 ] In 1991, the IUB changed its name to the International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (IUBMB).

[ citation needed ] Members [ edit ] The IUBMB unites biochemists and molecular biologists in 75 countries that belong to the IUBMB as an "Adhering Body" or "Associate Adhering Body" represented by a biochemical society, a national research council or an academy of sciences.

[ 4 ] It also represents the regional organizations, [ 5 ] Federation of Asian Oceanian Biochemists and Molecular Biologists (FAOBMB), Federation of European Biochemical Societies (FEBS), and Pan-American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (PABMB).

[ citation needed ] Meetings [ edit ] IUBMB organizes a triennial Congress of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and sponsors three annual focussed meetings.  In addition, it supports symposia, educational activities (including the Tang Fellowships), award lectures (including Jubilee Lectures), and travel grants for students around the world.

[ citation needed ] Fellowships [ edit ] The IUBMB is committed to providing training opportunities to biochemists and molecular biologists around the world. The Wood Whelan Research fellowship, established in honor of past-Presidents Harland G. Wood and William Joseph Whelan , provides opportunities for students to travel to a laboratory in a different country to work on a specified project.  Mid Career Fellowships provide a similar opportunity to early career investigators.

[ 6 ] The IUBMB collaborates with American Society of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology to offer PROLAB fellowships to provide opportunities for Latin American students to study in the US.

[ citation needed ] Biochemical nomenclature [ edit ] The IUBMB publishes standards on biochemical nomenclature, including Enzyme Commission number nomenclature, in some cases jointly with the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC). The enzyme nomenclature scheme [ 7 ] was developed in 1955 at the International Congress of Biochemistry and, with the addition of translocases in 2018, contains 7 classes of enzymes.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Publications [ edit ] The IUBMB is associated with the journals IUBMB Life , Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education (formerly Biochemical Education ), BioFactors , Biotechnology and Applied Biochemistry , Molecular Aspects of Medicine and Trends in Biochemical Sciences . The publishing program supports the IUBMB's mission of fostering growth and advancement of biochemistry and molecular biology as the foundation from which the biomolecular sciences derive their basic ideas and techniques in the service of humanity.

[ 10 ] Leadership [ edit ] Presidents [ 11 ] Nr.

Term President From 21.

2024–2027 Dario Alessi United Kingdom 20.

2021–2024 Alexandra Newton Canada & United States & United Kingdom 19.

2018–2021 Andrew H. J. Wang Taiwan 18.

2015–2018 Joan J. Guinovart Spain 17.

2012–2015 Gregory Petsko United States 16.

2007–2012 Angelo Azzi Switzerland & United States 15.

2006 George L. Kenyon United States 14.

2003–2006 Mary Osborn United Kingdom & Germany 13.

2000–2003 Brian F.C. Clark Denmark 12.

1997–2000 William Joseph Whelan United Kingdom & United States 11.

1994–97 Kunio Yagi (ja) Japan 10.

1991–94 Hans L. Komberg United Kingdom 9.

1988–91 E.C. (Bill) Slater Netherlands 8.

1985–88 Marianne Grunberg-Manago France 7.

1979–85 Harland G. Wood United States 6.

1979 Feodor Lynen Germany 5.

1976–79 Aleksander A. Bayev (ru) Russia 4.

1973–76 Osamu Hayaishi Japan 3.

1967–73 A. Hugo T. Theorell Sweden 2.

1961–67 Severo Ochoa Spain & United States 1.

1955–61 Marcel Florkin Belgium See also [ edit ] Biology portal Chemistry portal EC number Federation of European Biochemical Societies IUPAC nomenclature of organic chemistry Nomenclature References [ edit ] ^ IUBMB: the first half-century.

This is the IUBMB History.

^ P. Campbell, W. Whelan (1961). "Golden Jubilee of the Biochemical Society".

Nature .

189 : 702– 704.

doi : 10.1038/189702a0 .

^ https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/bmb.2005.494033032461 IUBMB 50th Anniversary and the history of BAMBED.

^ "Adhering Bodies and Associate Adhering Bodies" .

IUBMB.ORG . Retrieved 2021-09-13 .

^ "Organizations & Special Members" .

IUBMB.ORG . Retrieved 2021-09-13 .

^ "Fellowship programs" .

IUBMB.ORG . Retrieved 2021-09-13 .

^ Webb, E. C. (1992).

Enzyme nomenclature 1992: recommendations of the Nomenclature Committee of the International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology on the nomenclature and classification of enzymes . Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0-12-227164-9 .

^ "ExplorEnz: Information" .

www.enzyme-database.org . Retrieved 2021-09-13 .

^ "Enzyme Nomenclature" .

^ "IUBMB Journal - Wiley Online Library" .

IUBMB . Retrieved 2021-09-13 .

^ IUBMB Previous Officers .  Retrieved 23 February 2020.

External links [ edit ] IUBMB Nomenclature Recommendations v t e International Science Council (ISC) National members Albania Angola Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Benin Bolivia Bosnia & Herzegovina Republika Srpska Botswana Brazil ANPOCS Bulgaria Burkina Faso Cameroon Canada SSHRC Chile China CASS Colombia Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Cuba Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Egypt El Salvador Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Finland France Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Guatemala Honduras Hungary India ICSSR Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya North Korea South Korea KSSRC KAST Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Mauritius Mexico COMECSO Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nigeria North Macedonia Norway UB Oman Pakistan PAS PCSIR Panama Peru Philippines PSSC Poland Portugal Romania Russia Rwanda Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Singapore Slovak Republic Slovenia South Africa HSRC Spain Sri Lanka Sudan SNAS Sweden Switzerland Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Togo Tunisia Turkey Science Academy TÜBİTAK Uganda Ukraine United Kingdom British Academy ESRC United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Zambia Zimbabwe RCZ Transnational members ACSS AASSREC CASS CLACSO CODESRIA FLACSO UAI OSSREA USP Unions and associations 4S IALS IASSA IAU ICA IEA IFSM IGU IMU INQUA IPRA IPSA ISA ISEE ISPRS IUBMB IUBS IUCr IUFoST IUFRO IUGG IUGS IUHPST IUIS IUMRS IUMS IUNS IUPAB IUPAC IUPAP IUPESM IUPHAR IUPS IUPsyS IUSS IUSSP IUTAM IUTOX URSI WAPOR WAU Affiliated members AAS AASSA ACSS ASTC CIE EADI ECPR FIG GYA IAAP IAHR IASC ICA ICIAM ICLAS ICO ICSTI IFDO IFIP IFLA IFS IIASA ISA ISDE IUVSTA IWA PSA SSRC TNI TWAS UIS Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic 2 Norway Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Union_of_Biochemistry_and_Molecular_Biology&oldid=1300441290 " Categories : Biochemistry organizations Scientific organizations established in 1955 Molecular biology organizations Chemistry organizations Standards organizations in Canada Chemical nomenclature International scientific organizations Scientific supraorganizations Members of the International Council for Science Members of the International Science Council Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2018 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 10:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 19 languages Add topic

