Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Gordon Foster 3 languages العربية اردو Volapük Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Irish creator of ISBN code F. Gordon Foster Born ( 1921-02-24 ) 24 February 1921 Belfast , United Kingdom Died 20 December 2010 (2010-12-20) (aged 89) Dublin , Ireland Nationality Irish Known for Foster's theorem Scientific career Doctoral advisor David George Kendall Frederic Gordon Foster (24 February 1921 – 20 December 2010) [ 1 ] was an Irish computational engineer, statistician, professor, and college dean who is widely known for devising, in 1965, a nine-digit code upon which the International Standard Book Number (ISBN) is based.

[ 1 ] Life [ edit ] Foster was born in Belfast , United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , between the 1920 enactment and 1921 implementation of the partition of Ireland . He studied at the Royal Belfast Academical Institution and began advanced study in mathematics at Queen's University Belfast . During World War II , he was recruited from Queen's by MI6 to work as a code-breaker at Bletchley Park .

After the war, he resumed studies at Magdalen College, Oxford . A lecture on feedback control by Norbert Wiener , regarded as the originator of cybernetics , proved to be a great influence on Foster's 
research.  Upon completing his PhD at Magdalen, he accepted an offer to lecture on his research at the University of Manchester , where he met Alan Turing , a Bletchley Park veteran who became known as the father of computer science . Turing introduced him to the Manchester Mark I computer and enlisted his help working on it. In 1956, Foster joined the faculty of the London School of Economics (LSE), first as an assistant lecturer in statistics, then as a lecturer and reader. In 1964, he was appointed to the chair of computational methods. While at LSE, he helped develop operations research as an academic discipline.

[ citation needed ] Most noteworthy, in 1965 while at the LSE, Gordon Foster was commissioned by WH Smith, the book publisher and bookseller, to develop a computerised filing system as part of the publisher's drive to modernise its growing company. Gordon Foster developed for WH Smith, a 9 digit code which he named the Standard Book Numbering System (SBN). This code was very successful and was rapidly adopted by all UK publishers and booksellers. In 1970, the International Standard Organisation (ISO) expanded the SBN to 10 digits by adding an initial zero and the code was renamed to become the International Book Numbering System: ISBN.

[ citation needed ] The ISBN was born, and is now used worldwide by all publishers and booksellers.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In 1967, Gordon Foster was asked by Trinity College Dublin to start a Department of Statistics, and became professor of statistics at Trinity College Dublin . He promoted statistical analysis and computer applications in several constituent schools and academic departments . He fostered a lively forward thinking postgraduate and undergraduate program, with courses highly applicable to the current statistical problems of the day. He also set up the Statistics and Operations Research Laboratory, known for outreach to industry and public services. He was elected a fellow of Trinity College Dublin in 1971 and Dean of Engineering and System Sciences.

[ 1 ] Foster died in Dublin, 20 December 2010.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Portal : Ireland References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "Pioneering Figure in the Worlds of Informatics and Computing" (PDF) .

The Irish Times . Dublin. 26 February 2011.

ISSN 0791-5144 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 August 2016 . Retrieved 3 May 2013 – via johnl.org.

^ "ISBN - International Standard Book Number" . MobilioDevelopment. 14 March 2013.

Archived from the original on 20 September 2020 . Retrieved 18 December 2021 .

^ "History" .

ISBN.org .

Archived from the original on 12 August 2021 . Retrieved 3 August 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Gordon Foster at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Oxford Dictionary of National Biography Death Notice for FOSTER, Frederic Gordon Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Australia Netherlands Israel Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gordon_Foster&oldid=1294755012 " Categories : 1921 births 2010 deaths Academics of Trinity College Dublin Irish cryptographers Irish statisticians Cyberneticists Fellows of Trinity College Dublin Probability theorists Systems scientists Bletchley Park people 20th-century Irish mathematicians 21st-century Irish mathematicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2022 Use Hiberno-English from January 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in Hiberno-English Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 16:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gordon Foster 3 languages Add topic

