Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Work 3 Publications 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Mihajlo D. Mesarovic 10 languages Deutsch Eesti Հայերեն Македонски Malagasy Nederlands Polski Русский Српски / srpski Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Serbian scientist (born 1928) Mihajlo D. Mesarovic ( Serbian Latin : Mihajlo D. Mesarović , Serbian Cyrillic : Михајло Д. Месаровић; born 2 July 1928) is a Serbian scientist , who is a professor of Systems Engineering and Mathematics at Case Western Reserve University . Mesarovic has been a pioneer in the field of systems theory, he was UNESCO Scientific Advisor on Global change and also a member of the Club of Rome .

Biography [ edit ] Mihajlo D. Mesarović was born on 2 July 1928, in Zrenjanin , Yugoslavia . He was awarded the B.S. from the University of Belgrade Faculty of Electrical Engineering in 1951. In 1955 he received a Ph.D.

in Technical sciences from the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts.

From 1951 to 1955, Mesarović was a research assistant at the Nikola Tesla Institute in Belgrade. From 1955 to 1958 he was head of the inspection department of the Institute. At the same time, Mesarović held academic positions at the University of Belgrade, Yugoslavia from 1954 to 1958. In 1958 he became a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology / USA (MIT), where he served until 1959.

[ 1 ] He was an associate professor at Case Western Reserve University from 1959 to 1964 and professor from 1964 to 1978. In that time he was head of the Systems Engineering Group 1965–68, head of the Systems Engineering Department 1968-72 and director of the Systems Research Center 1968–78. Starting 1978, Prof. Mesarović has been the Cady Staley Professor of Systems Engineering and Mathematics. One of his students was Roger W. Brockett .

He has lectured in more than 60 countries, advised government officials on a variety of issues, consulted for international organizations, and published widely.

[ 2 ] He was also the founder of the 'Mathematical Theory of General Systems' Journal, Springer Verlag.

In 1999, he was appointed a Scientific Advisor on Global Change by Federico Mayor, Director-General of UNESCO. In that role, Mesarović travelled to UNESCO's headquarters in Paris and advised the director general's office on issues such as climate change, economics, population, technology transfer, and the education of women in developing countries.

[ 3 ] In 2005 he was awarded the Hovorka Prize from Case Western Reserve University for exceptional achievements.

[ 2 ] In 2005 he was awarded the USA Club of Rome Lifetime Achievement Award at the United Nations.

Work [ edit ] His research interests include areas and topics like complexity , complex systems theory, global change and sustainable human development, hierarchical systems, large-scale systems theory, mathematical theory of general systems, multi-level systems, systems biology , and world and regional modelling. In the field of mathematics he is considered to be the founder of: Mathematical theory of coordination Multi-level Hierarchical Systems Developer, Negotiation Support Software System Publications [ edit ] Mesarovic published several books and numerous articles.

[ 4 ] A selection: 1960.

Multi-variable Control Systems . MIT Press.

1962.

General Systems Theory and Systems Research Contrasting Conceptions of Systems Science . (ed.) Proceedings from the Second System Symposium.

1964.

Foundations for a General Systems Theory . (ed.) 1968.

Systems Theory and Biology . (ed.). Springer Verlag.

1970.

Non-Numerical Problem Solving . with R. Banerji (ed.), Springer Verlag, 1970.

1970.

Theory of Multi-level Hierarchical Systems . With D. Macko and Yasuhiko Takahara. Academic Press.

1972.

Mathematical Theory of General Systems . With Y. Takahara. Academic Press.

1972.

Organization Structure: Cybernetic Systems Foundation . IFSR Int’l. Series on Systems Science and Engineering, Vol. 22. Kluwer, Academic Publishers.

1972.

Systems Approach and the City . Edited with Arnold Reisman. North Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam.

1974.

Mankind at the Turning Point , Second Report to the Club of Rome, co-authored with Eduard Pestel . Dutton, reviewed with summaries of chapters.

[ 5 ] 1975.

General Systems Theory: Mathematical Foundations . With Yasuhiko Takaraha.

1994.

Abstract Systems Theory , Springer Articles: 1996.

"Cybernetics of global change: human dimension and managing of complexity" . With David L. McGinnis and A. West Dalton. UNESCO MOST policy papers 3, 43 p.

See also [ edit ] Systems science portal Club of Rome Foundation for the Rights of Future Generations Systems biology Systems engineering Ladislaus Bortkiewicz References [ edit ] ^ Mihailo Mesarović biography ^ a b "Case engineering professor wins Hovorka Prize for exceptional achievements" . Archived from the original on May 8, 2005 . Retrieved June 20, 2017 .

Case Western Reserve University News center, 2005.

^ "Mesarović named UNESCO scientific adviser" . 6 November 1997. Archived from the original on 22 September 2006 . Retrieved 20 June 2017 .

^ "Mihajlo D. Mesarovic" . Archived from the original on November 3, 2006 . Retrieved June 20, 2017 .

Homepage at Case Western Reserve University ^ Mihram, Arthur (1977).

"Mankind at the Turning Point" .

IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics .

7 : 73– 74.

doi : 10.1109/TSMC.1977.4309596 . Retrieved 13 August 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Mihajlo D. Mesarovic .

Homepage at Case Western Reserve University at the Wayback Machine (archived 1 January 1996) Hovorka Prize for exceptional achievements (2005) at the Wayback Machine (archived 31 May 2005) Homepage at the Complex Systems Biology Center , Case Western Reserve University.

(cached version ) .

v t e Systems science System types Art Biological Complex Coupled human–environment Ecological Economic Information Multi-agent Nervous Recommender Social Concepts Doubling time Leverage points Limiting factor Negative feedback Positive feedback Theoretical fields Control theory Cybernetics Earth system science Living systems Sociotechnical system Systemics Urban metabolism World-systems theory Analysis Biology Dynamics Ecology Engineering Neuroscience Pharmacology Philosophy Psychology Theory ( Systems thinking ) Scientists Russell L. Ackoff Victor Aladjev William Ross Ashby Ruzena Bajcsy Béla H. Bánáthy Gregory Bateson Anthony Stafford Beer Richard E. Bellman Ludwig von Bertalanffy Margaret Boden Alexander Bogdanov Kenneth E. Boulding Murray Bowen Kathleen Carley Mary Cartwright C. West Churchman Manfred Clynes George Dantzig Edsger W. Dijkstra Fred Emery Heinz von Foerster Stephanie Forrest Jay Wright Forrester Barbara Grosz Charles A. S. Hall Mike Jackson Lydia Kavraki James J. Kay Faina M. Kirillova George Klir Allenna Leonard Edward Norton Lorenz Niklas Luhmann Humberto Maturana Margaret Mead Donella Meadows Mihajlo D. Mesarovic James Grier Miller Radhika Nagpal Howard T. Odum Talcott Parsons Ilya Prigogine Qian Xuesen Anatol Rapoport John Seddon Peter Senge Claude Shannon Katia Sycara Eric Trist Francisco Varela Manuela M. Veloso Kevin Warwick Norbert Wiener Jennifer Wilby Anthony Wilden Applications Systems theory in anthropology Systems theory in archaeology Systems theory in political science Organizations List Principia Cybernetica Category Portal Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Norway 2 3 Latvia Croatia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH DBLP MathSciNet People DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mihajlo_D._Mesarovic&oldid=1260342931 " Categories : 1928 births Living people Control theorists Systems biologists Systems engineers Complex systems scientists University of Belgrade School of Electrical Engineering alumni American people of Serbian descent American systems scientists 20th-century Serbian engineers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2024 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 30 November 2024, at 06:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mihajlo D. Mesarovic 10 languages Add topic

