Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Government and private support 3 Recognition 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Oyez Project 1 language 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Online multimedia archive of the Supreme Court of the US Oyez.org Type of site Database Available in English Owner Illinois Institute of Technology Chicago-Kent College of Law Cornell Law School Legal Information Institute Justia Created by Jerry Goldman URL oyez.org Commercial No Registration None Current status active The Oyez Project is an unofficial online multimedia archive website for the Supreme Court of the United States . It was initiated by the Illinois Institute of Technology 's Chicago-Kent College of Law and now also sponsored by Cornell Law School Legal Information Institute and Justia .

The website has emphasis on the court's audio of oral arguments. The website "aims to be a complete and authoritative source for all audio recorded in the Court since [...] October 1955." [ 1 ] The website also includes biographical information of both incumbent and historical justices of the Court and advocates who have argued before the court. The project's name refers to the interjection, " Oyez ", that is spoken by the Supreme Court Marshal at the beginning of each argument session. The website was founded by Jerry Goldman, a research professor of law at the Chicago-Kent College of Law at Illinois Institute of Technology .

History [ edit ] The Oyez Project was conceived in Chicago in the late 1980's by Jerry Goldman, a professor of political science, and initially implemented using Apple's HyperCard software. Subsequent support from the National Science Foundation and National Endowment for the Humanities allowed the project to evolve and establish a presence on the internet.

[ 2 ] Government and private support [ edit ] According to the website, the Oyez Project received technological support from National Science Foundation and grants from National Endowment for the Humanities . The project is also supported by various academic institutions such as Weinberg College of Arts and Sciences , the legal web portal FindLaw , and the law firm Mayer Brown , among others.

[ 1 ] Jerry Goldman put the Oyez Project up for sale in 2016. He estimated it is "worth well over $1 million", but he hopes the buyer will not put the project behind a paywall. Harvard Law School offered to pay the project's operating costs, but not Goldman's price.

[ 3 ] In July 2016, the Legal Information Institute at Cornell Law School and Justia joined IIT as sponsors.

[ 4 ] Recognition [ edit ] Oyez.org is listed by the Supreme Court as an authentic, although unofficial, online source to access the court's information.

[ 5 ] Oyez.org was featured as "Website of the Week" by international broadcaster Voice of America in January 2006.

[ 6 ] The old version of the Oyez database was awarded the Silver Gavel Award for New Media by American Bar Association in 1998.

[ 7 ] Its founder, Jerry Goldman, was given a medal award in 1997 by EDUCAUSE .

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Oyez Supreme Court Historical Society References [ edit ] ^ a b About Oyez Archived 2020-09-29 at the Wayback Machine Oyez.org ^ "The History of Oyez" .

Oyez .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2020 . Retrieved 18 January 2020 .

^ Bravin, Jess (1 February 2016).

"Future of Oyez Supreme Court Archive Hangs in the Balance" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on 1 February 2016 . Retrieved 2 February 2016 .

^ "Oyez website finds sponsors to take over its Supreme Court audio archives" .

ABA Journal .

Archived from the original on 2017-09-08 . Retrieved 2017-09-08 .

^ Where to Obtain Supreme Court Opinions Archived 2020-06-19 at the Wayback Machine Supreme Court of the United States ^ Oyez.org Segment in Our World program 28 January 2006 Audio is at timecode 10:36, HTML transcript also available. Retrieved 2019-08-08.

^ Silver Gavel Awards for Media and The Arts Archived 2007-10-12 at the Wayback Machine American Bar Association ^ educause.edu Archived 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine , EDUCAUSE Medal Awards Further reading [ edit ] NPR staff (April 24, 2013).

"Once under wraps, Supreme Court audio trove now online. It's all politics" . Retrieved 2013-04-24 .

But as of just a few weeks ago, all of the archived historical audio — which dates back to 1955 — has been digitized, and almost all of those cases can now be heard and explored at an online archive called the Oyez Project.

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Illinois Institute of Technology Academic programs and institutes Center for Sustainable Enterprise Chicago-Kent College of Law ( Oyez Project ) Gas Technology Institute IIT Institute of Design IIT Physics Department IIT Research Institute IIT Stuart School of Business Institute for Food Safety and Health Institute on Biotechnology and the Human Future VanderCook College of Music Buildings Academic Campus Carman Hall S. R. Crown Hall McCormick Tribune Campus Center Rice Campus State Street Village People Alumni Faculty Presidents Frank W. Gunsaulus (1892–1921) Howard M. Raymond (1922–1932) Willard E. Hotchkiss (1933–1937) George N. Carman (1896–1936) Dugald C. Jackson Jr (1936–1938) Fred A. Rogers (1938–1940) Clarence L. Clarke (1938–1940) Henry Townley Heald (1937–1952) John T. Rettaliata (1952–1973) Maynard P. Venema (1973–1974) Thomas Lyle Martin Jr.

(1974–1987) Meyer Feldberg (1987–1989) Henry R. Linden (1989–1990) Lewis Collens (1990–2007) John L. Anderson (2007–2015) Alan W. Cramb (2015–2021) Raj Echambadi (2021–present) Student life Pi Nu Epsilon Student groups WIIT v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Oyez_Project&oldid=1288016828 " Categories : American legal websites Illinois Institute of Technology Supreme Court of the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 29 April 2025, at 21:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Oyez Project 1 language Add topic

