Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mission 2 History 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Trees for Life (Scotland) 4 languages Azərbaycanca Français Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rewilding charitable company in the UK Trees for Life Formation 1993 [ 1 ] Type Conservation charity Location The Park, Findhorn Bay, Forres , Moray, Scotland Area served Scottish Highlands Revenue £4,162,000 (2023) Website https://treesforlife.org.uk/ Trees for Life is a registered charity working to rewild the Scottish Highlands .

Scots pine Red squirrel Mission [ edit ] Trees for Life states that its long-term plan is to see Dundreggan restored to a wild landscape of diverse natural forest cover, with the return of native wildlife. Rewilding supports nature, climate and people by boosting biodiversity, creating jobs, and supporting re-peopling.

History [ edit ] Trees for Life was founded in 1986 by Alan Watson Featherstone , as a project under the Findhorn Foundation . Practical work began in 1989, and the first volunteer week was held in 1991. Trees for Life registered as an independent charity in 1993.

Trees for Life works to restore the Caledonian Forest , especially in Glen Affric where one of the most important fragments of Caledonian Forest survived.

[ 2 ] In August 2008 Trees for Life purchased the 10,000 acre Dundreggan Estate in Glenmoriston , in the Scottish Highlands  – one of the largest areas in the UK to be bought for forest restoration .

[ 3 ] In 2020, golden eagles returned to breed for the first time in 40 years.

[ 4 ] The charity established the Dundreggan Rewilding Centre, the first of its kind in the world, which opened in April 2023 at the Dundreggan Estate.

[ 5 ] Dundreggan Tree Nursery Initial work took place in Glen Cannich . TFL also supported woodland creation in Glen Affric , where they operate in partnership with Forestry and Land Scotland and the National Trust for Scotland . Work expanded into other nearby glens, such as Glenmoriston , to the south of Glen Affric, at Achnashellach , and at Corrimony , where they partnered with the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds .

[ citation needed ] Affric Highlands is a 30-year collaborative initiative by Trees for Life and Rewilding Europe who are working to restore woodland, peatland and riverside habitats in the Scottish Highlands.

[ 6 ] In June 2022, Affric Highlands was recommended for UN flagship status by the Scottish and UK governments.

[ 7 ] Young Scots pines planted by Trees for Life on the heather moors at Corrimony See also [ edit ] Rewilding Britain - an organisation founded in 2015 that aims to promote the rewilding of Great Britain.

Rewilding Europe - a non-profit organisation established in 2011 dedicated to creating rewilded landscapes throughout Europe.

References [ edit ] ^ Results of our work Archived 5 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 12 February 2011.

^ Webster, Helen.

"Trees for Life buy estate in Glenmoriston" .

Walkhighlands . Retrieved 8 July 2024 .

^ Webster, Helen.

"Trees for Life buy estate in Glenmoriston" .

Walkhighlands . Retrieved 8 July 2024 .

^ Life, Trees for (13 August 2020).

"Golden eagles breed at Highlands rewilding estate for first time in 40 years" .

Trees for Life . Retrieved 8 July 2024 .

^ "A world-first in the Scottish Highlands" .

www.bbc.com . Retrieved 8 July 2024 .

^ "Affric Highlands" .

Trees for Life . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ "Affric Highlands rewilding project recommended for global UN flagship status | Scottish Rural Network" .

www.ruralnetwork.scot . Retrieved 9 July 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Trees for Life .

Official website "Trees for Life, Registered Charity no. SC021303" .

Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trees_for_Life_(Scotland)&oldid=1269000883 " Categories : Rural Scotland Charities based in Scotland 1989 establishments in Scotland Findhorn community Nature conservation in Scotland Nature conservation organisations based in the United Kingdom Environmental organisations based in Scotland Forestry in Scotland Rewilding in the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from May 2018 Use dmy dates from May 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 January 2025, at 15:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trees for Life (Scotland) 4 languages Add topic

