Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Design 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Kinetic energy penetrator 19 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Deutsch Français Gaeilge 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Slovenščina Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia High density non-explosive projectile This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Kinetic energy penetrator" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) French anti-tank round with its sabot A kinetic energy penetrator ( KEP ), also known as long-rod penetrator ( LRP ), is a type of ammunition designed to penetrate vehicle armour using a flechette -like, high- sectional density projectile . Like a bullet or kinetic energy weapon , this type of ammunition does not contain explosive payloads and uses purely kinetic energy to penetrate the target. Modern KEP munitions are typically of the armour-piercing fin-stabilized discarding sabot (APFSDS) type.

History [ edit ] A partly cut-away 30 × 173 mm APFSDS - T round Early cannons fired kinetic energy ammunition, initially consisting of heavy balls of worked stone and later of dense metals . From the beginning, combining high muzzle energy with projectile weight and hardness have been the foremost factors in the design of such weapons. Similarly, the foremost purpose of such weapons has generally been to defeat protective shells of armored vehicles or other defensive structures , whether it is stone walls , sailship timbers, or modern tank armour. Kinetic energy ammunition, in its various forms, has consistently been the choice for those weapons due to the highly focused terminal ballistics .

The development of the modern KE penetrator combines two aspects of artillery design, high muzzle velocity and concentrated force. High muzzle velocity is achieved by using a projectile with a low mass and large base area in the gun barrel. Firing a small-diameter projectile wrapped in a lightweight outer shell, called a sabot , raises the muzzle velocity. Once the shell clears the barrel, the sabot is no longer needed and falls off in pieces. This leaves the projectile traveling at high velocity with a smaller cross-sectional area and reduced aerodynamic drag during the flight to the target (see external ballistics and terminal ballistics ). Germany developed modern sabots under the name " treibspiegel " ("thrust mirror") to give extra altitude to its anti-aircraft guns during the Second World War . Before this, primitive wooden sabots had been used for centuries in the form of a wooden plug attached to or breech loaded before cannonballs in the barrel, placed between the propellant charge and the projectile. The name "sabot" (pronounced / ˈ s æ b oʊ / SAB -oh in English usage) [ 1 ] is the French word for clog (a wooden shoe traditionally worn in some European countries).

Concentration of force into a smaller area was initially attained by replacing the single metal (usually steel ) shot with a composite shot using two metals, a heavy core (based on tungsten ) inside a lighter metal outer shell. These designs were known as armour-piercing composite rigid (APCR) by the British, high-velocity armor-piercing (HVAP) by the US, and hartkern (hard core) by the Germans. On impact, the core had a much more concentrated effect than plain metal shot of the same weight and size. The air resistance and other effects were the same as for the shell of identical size. High-velocity armor-piercing (HVAP) rounds were primarily used by tank destroyers in the US Army and were relatively uncommon as the tungsten core was expensive and prioritized for other applications.

Between 1941 and 1943, the British combined the two techniques in the armour-piercing discarding sabot (APDS) round. The sabot replaced the outer metal shell of the APCR. While in the gun, the shot had a large base area to get maximum acceleration from the propelling charge but once outside, the sabot fell away to reveal a heavy shot with a small cross-sectional area. APDS rounds served as the primary kinetic energy weapon of most tanks during the early-Cold War period, though they suffered the primary drawback of inaccuracy. This was resolved with the introduction of the armour-piercing fin-stabilized discarding sabot (APFSDS) round during the 1970s, which added stabilising fins to the penetrator, greatly increasing accuracy.

[ 2 ] Design [ edit ] The principle of the kinetic energy penetrator is that it uses its kinetic energy, which is a function of its mass and velocity, to force its way through armor. If the armor is defeated, the heat and spalling (particle spray) generated by the penetrator going through the armor, and the pressure wave that develops, ideally destroys the target.

[ 3 ] The modern kinetic energy weapon maximizes the stress (kinetic energy divided by impact area) delivered to the target by: maximizing the mass – that is, using the densest metals practical, which is one of the reasons depleted uranium or tungsten carbide is often used – and muzzle velocity of the projectile, as kinetic energy scales with the mass m and the square of the velocity v of the projectile ( m v 2 / 2 ) .

{\displaystyle (mv^{2}/2).} minimizing the width, since if the projectile does not tumble, it will hit the target face first. As most modern projectiles have circular cross-sectional areas, their impact area will scale with the square of the radius r (the impact area being π π r 2 {\displaystyle \pi r^{2}} ). For the same reason, "self-sharpening" through the generation of adiabatic shear bands is also a desired feature for the projectile material.

[ 4 ] The penetrator length plays a large role in determining the ultimate depth of penetration. Generally, a penetrator is incapable of penetrating deeper than its own length, as the sheer stress of impact and perforation ablates it.

[ 5 ] This has led to the current designs which resemble a long metal arrow .

For monobloc penetrators made of a single material, a perforation formula devised by Wili Odermatt and W. Lanz can calculate the penetration depth of an APFSDS round.

[ 6 ] In 1982, an analytical investigation drawing from concepts of gas dynamics and experiments on target penetration [ 7 ] [ conflicted source ] led to the conclusion on the efficiency of impactors that penetration is deeper [ 8 ] using unconventional three-dimensional shapes.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Compact Kinetic Energy Missile Earthquake bomb Flechette Hellfire R9X Impact depth Kinetic bombardment MGM-166 LOSAT Röchling shell Notes [ edit ] ^ Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (2007) 6th Ed. p. 2641 ^ "Tank - Armament" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2020-02-22 .

^ "Heat Rounds and Sabots" .

xbradtc.wordpress.com . Archived from the original on 2011-07-18.

^ Magness, Lee S. (1994-03-01).

"High strain rate deformation behaviors of kinetic energy penetrator materials during ballistic impact" .

Mechanics of Materials .

17 ( 2– 3): 147– 154.

doi : 10.1016/0167-6636(94)90055-8 .

^ M829A3 penetration test , archived from the original on 2021-12-11 , retrieved 2020-02-22 ^ "Long Rod Penetrators. Perforation Equation" .

www.longrods.ch . Retrieved 2020-02-22 .

^ Bondarchuk, V.S.; Vedernikov, Y.; Dulov, V.G.; Minin, V.F.

(1982). "Optimization of star-shaped penetrators".

LZV. Sib. Otd. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Tekh. Nauk (in Russian).

13 : 60– 64.

^ Bivin, Y.K.; Simonov, I.V. (2010). "Mechanics of Dynamic Penetration into Soil Medium".

Mechanics of Solids .

45 (6). Allerton Press: 892– 920.

Bibcode : 2010MeSol..45..892B .

doi : 10.3103/S0025654410060130 .

ISSN 0025-6544 .

S2CID 120416067 .

^ Ben-Dor, G.; Dubinsky, A.; Elperin, T. (1997). "Area rules for penetrating bodies".

Applied Fracture Mechanics .

26 (3). Elsevier Ltd.: 193– 198.

doi : 10.1016/S0167-8442(96)00049-3 .

ISSN 0167-8442 .

References [ edit ] Cai, W. D.; Li, Y.; Dowding, R. J.; Mohamed, F. A.; Lavernia, E. J. (1995). "A review of tungsten-based alloys as kinetic energy penetrator materials".

Review of Particulate Materials .

3 : 71– 131.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kinetic_energy_penetrator&oldid=1292016711 " Categories : Anti-tank rounds Projectiles Ammunition Collision Tank ammunition Hidden categories: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2007 All articles needing additional references Articles with minor POV problems from July 2020 This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 18:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kinetic energy penetrator 19 languages Add topic

