Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 2.1 Extent 2.2 Meteorology 2.3 Reefs and islands 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 World War II 4 Hydrology Toggle Hydrology subsection 4.1 Timor Current 5 Hydrocarbon reserves Toggle Hydrocarbon reserves subsection 5.1 Bayu-Undan project 5.2 Ichthys gas field 5.3 Other projects 6 Territorial dispute Toggle Territorial dispute subsection 6.1 Timor Sea Treaty 6.2 2018 Maritime Boundaries Treaty 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Timor Sea 89 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Кырык мары Latina Latviešu Лезги Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی ភាសាខ្មែរ Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Tetun ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 10°S 127°E ﻿ / ﻿ 10°S 127°E ﻿ / -10; 127 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sea between Malay Archipelago and Australia Timor Sea Laut Timor ( Indonesian ) Mar de Timor ( Portuguese ) Tasi Mane / Tasi Timór ( Tetum ) The Timor Sea at Vessoru, East Timor Location of the Timor Sea Location Eastern Indian Ocean , Asia , Oceania Coordinates 10°S 127°E ﻿ / ﻿ 10°S 127°E ﻿ / -10; 127 Type Sea Etymology Timor Island Part of Indian Ocean Ocean/sea sources Indian Ocean Basin countries Indonesia East Timor Australia Surface area 610,000 km 2 (240,000 sq mi) Average depth 406 m (1,332 ft) Max. depth 3,300 m (10,800 ft) Islands Ashmore and Cartier Islands , Browse Island , Tiwi Islands Trenches Timor Trough Settlements Darwin, Northern Territory Location The Timor Sea ( Indonesian : Laut Timor , Portuguese : Mar de Timor , Tetum : Tasi Mane or Tasi Timór ) is a relatively shallow sea in the Indian Ocean bounded to the north by the island of Timor with Timor-Leste to the north, Indonesia to the northwest, Arafura Sea to the east, and to the south by Australia . The Sunda Trench marks the deepest point of the Timor Sea with a depth of more than 3300 metres, separating the continents of Oceania in the southeast and Asia to the northwest and north. The Timor sea is prone to earthquakes and tsunamis north of the Sunda Trench , due to its location on the Ring of Fire as well as volcanic activity and can experience major cyclones, due to the proximity from the Equator .

The sea contains a number of reefs, uninhabited islands and significant hydrocarbon reserves. International disputes emerged after the reserves were discovered resulting in the signing of the Timor Sea Treaty .

The Timor Sea was hit by the worst oil spill for 25 years in 2009 .

[ 1 ] It is possible that Australia's first inhabitants crossed the Timor Sea from the Malay Archipelago at a time when sea levels were lower.

[ citation needed ] Etymology [ edit ] The Timor Sea is named after Timor , the island on the other side of the sea's northern coastline.

[ 2 ] The island's name is a variant of timur , Malay for "east".

In Tetum , the sea is often referred to by the expression tasi mane ( lit. transl.

'male sea' ). The counterpart of that body of water, the ' Ombai - Wetar Strait', which has smaller waves, is less turbid , and washes most of Timor island's northern shores, is commonly referred to in Tetum as tasi feto ( lit. transl.

'female sea' ).

[ 3 ] Geography [ edit ] Timor Sea and neighbouring seas The waters to the east are known as the Arafura Sea . The Timor Sea is adjacent to three substantial inlets on the north Australian coast, the Joseph Bonaparte Gulf , Beagle Gulf and the Van Diemen Gulf . The Australian city of Darwin which is located in part on the shore of the Beagle Gulf, is the nearest large city to the sea.

[ 4 ] The small town of Wyndham is located on the west arm of Cambridge Gulf , an inlet of Joseph Bonaparte Gulf.

Rivers that enter the Timor Sea from the Northern Territory include Fish River , King River , Dry River , Victoria River and the Alligator Rivers . Rivers in the Kimberley region that flows into the Timor Sea include the Ord River , Forrest River , Pentecost River and Durack River .

The sea is about 480 km (300 mi) wide, covering an area of about 610 thousand km 2 (240,000 sq mi). Its deepest point is the Timor Trough (which some geologists consider to be the south-eastern extension of the Java Trench , but others view it as a foreland trough to the Timor Island "mountain range"), located in the northern part of the sea, which reaches a depth of 3,300 m (10,800 ft). The remainder of the sea is much shallower, much of it averaging less than 200 m (660 ft) deep, as it overlies the Sahul Shelf , part of the Australian continental shelf .

The Big Bank Shoals is an area on the sloping seabed between the continental shelf and the Timor Trough where a number of submerged banks are located.

[ 5 ] The ecosystem of the shoals differs significantly from the deeper waters surrounding them. In May 2010, it was announced that a crater about 50 km (31 mi) wide has been discovered on the seabed of the Timor Sea.

[ 6 ] Extent [ edit ] Tropical cyclone Floyd over the Timor Sea, 2006 The International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) defines the Timor Sea as being one of the waters of the East Indian Archipelago . The IHO defines its limits as follows: [ 7 ] On the North The Southeastern limit of the Savu Sea [By a line from the Southwest point of Timor to the Northeast point of Roti , through this island to its Southwest point] the Southeastern coast of Timor and the Southern limit of the Banda Sea [A line from Tanjong Aro Oesoe, through Sermata to Tanjong Njadora the Southeast point of Lakov ( 8°16′S 128°14′E ﻿ / ﻿ 8.267°S 128.233°E ﻿ / -8.267; 128.233 ) along the South coasts of Lakov, Moa and Leti Islands to Tanjong Toet Pateh, the West point of Leti, thence a line to Tanjong Sewirawa the Eastern extremity of Timor].

On the East.

The Western [limit] of the Arafura Sea [A line from Cape Don to Tanjong Aro Oesoe, the Southern point of Selaroe ( Tanimbar Islands )].

On the South.

The North coast of Australia from Cape Don to Cape Londonderry ( 13°47′S 126°55′E ﻿ / ﻿ 13.783°S 126.917°E ﻿ / -13.783; 126.917 ).

On the West.

A line from Cape Londonderry to the Southwest point of Roti Island ( 10°56′S 122°48′E ﻿ / ﻿ 10.933°S 122.800°E ﻿ / -10.933; 122.800 ).

Meteorology [ edit ] Many tropical storms and cyclones originate or pass through the Timor Sea. In February 2005, Tropical Cyclone Vivienne disrupted oil and gas production facilities in the area, and the next month, Severe Tropical Cyclone Willy interrupted production.

[ citation needed ] Petroleum production facilities are designed to withstand the effects of cyclones, although as a safety precaution production work is often reduced or temporarily halted and workers evacuated by helicopter to the mainland – usually to Darwin or Dili .

Reefs and islands [ edit ] August 2005 NASA satellite photograph of the Rowley Shoals A number of significant islands are located in the sea, notably Melville Island , part of the Tiwi Islands , off Australia and the Australian-governed Ashmore and Cartier Islands . It is thought that early humans reached Australia by "island-hopping" across the Timor Sea.

Scott and Seringapatam Reefs formed in the area and to the west, on the same underwater platform, are the Rowley Shoals .

History [ edit ] World War II [ edit ] Main article: Battle of Timor (1942–43) During the 1940s the Japanese navy conducted air raids on Australia from ships in the Timor Sea. On the 19 February 1942 the Japanese aircraft carrier Kaga with other vessels, launched air strikes against Darwin, Australia , sinking nine ships, including the USS Peary . This bombing marked the beginning of the Battle of Timor in the Pacific theatre of World War II .

Hydrology [ edit ] Timor Current [ edit ] The Timor Current is an oceanic current that runs south-west in the Timor Sea between the Malay Archipelago and Australia. It is a major contributor to the Indonesian Throughflow that transports water from the Pacific Ocean to the Indian Ocean .

Hydrocarbon reserves [ edit ] Oil slick from the Montara oil spill in the Timor Sea September 2009.

Big John Beneath the Timor Sea lie considerable reserves of oil and gas . Confirmation of the prospectivity of the Timor Sea came when Woodside-Burmah's Big John rig drilled Troubadour No. 1 well in June 1974 on the Troubadour Shoals about 200 kilometres (120 mi) southeast of Timor, and intersected 83 metres (272 ft) of hydrocarbons. A number of offshore petroleum projects are in operation and there is considerable exploration activity either underway and numerous proposed projects. A gas pipeline crosses the Timor Sea from the Joint Petroleum Development Area to Wickham Point near Darwin.

[ 8 ] The Timor Sea was the location for Australia's largest oil spill when the Montara oil field leaked oil, natural gas and condensate from 21 August to 3 November 2009.

[ 9 ] During the spill 400 barrels (64 m 3 ) of oil leaked each day. The Montara Commission of Inquiry placed blame on the Thai company PTTEP, owner of the wells.

[ 1 ] In response to the disaster, Indonesian seaweed farmers engaged in a class action lawsuit to claim for damages.

[ 10 ] Bayu-Undan project [ edit ] The largest petroleum project in operation in the Timor Sea is the Bayu-Undan project operated by Santos .

[ 11 ] The Bayu-Undan field is located approximately 500 km (310 mi) north-west of Darwin in the Bonaparte Basin .

[ 12 ] Production commenced in 2004 as a gas recycle project – with liquids (condensate, propane and butane) being stripped from the raw production stream and exported. Gas was pumped back down into the reservoir. At around the same time, construction commenced on a 500 km (310 mi) subsea natural gas pipeline connecting the Bayu-Undan processing facility to a liquefied natural gas plant situated at Wickham Point in Darwin harbour. Since the completion of the pipeline and the Darwin LNG plant in 2005, gas produced offshore at Bayu-Undan is now transported to the Darwin plant where it is converted into a liquid and transported to Japan under long-term sales contracts.

[ 13 ] Timor-Leste has made, as of 2017, over $18 billion from Bayu-Undan since production began; however, it is predicted its reserves will be exhausted by 2023.

[ 14 ] Ichthys gas field [ edit ] The Ichthys gas field is a natural gas field located in the Timor Sea, off the northwestern coast of Australia . The field is located 220 km offshore Western Australia and 820 km southwest of Darwin, with an average water depth of approximately 250 metres.

[ 15 ] It was discovered in 2000. First Gas from the Ichthys field was achieved on 30 July 2018.

[ 16 ] Other projects [ edit ] AED Oil owns the large oil project at Puffin oilfield and Woodside Petroleum previously produced oil at the Laminaria oil field . The Greater Sunrise gas field , discovered in 1974, is one of the largest in the area and is expected to earn East Timor several billion dollars in royalty revenues. Woodside Petroleum plans to process gas from Greater Sunrise via a floating platform , however Xanana Gusmão , East Timor's Prime Minister opposes this plan and instead wants the gas to go to Beaço via a pipeline for processing.

[ 17 ] Since 2018, Santos has sought to establish the Barossa offshore gas project to exploit a gas field in order to supply the Darwin liquefield natural gas (LNG) onshore terminal when gas from Bayu-Undan runs out in the 2020s. This has been opposed by Dangalaba and Larrakia people as well as climate justice organisations.

[ 10 ] Territorial dispute [ edit ] Demonstration against Australia in December 2013 Since the discovery of petroleum in the Timor Sea in the 1970s, there have been disputes surrounding the rights to ownership and exploitation of the resources situated in a part of the Timor Sea known as the Timor Gap , which is the area of the Timor Sea which lies outside the territorial boundaries of the nations to the north and south of the Timor Sea.

[ 18 ] These disagreements initially involved Australia and Indonesia, although a resolution was eventually reached in the form of the Timor Gap Treaty . After declaration of East Timor's nationhood in 1999, the terms of the Timor Gap Treaty were abandoned and negotiations commenced between Australia and East Timor, culminating in the Timor Sea Treaty .

From 1965 to 2018, Australia's territorial claim extended to the bathymetric axis (the line of greatest sea-bed depth) at the Timor Trough. It overlapped East Timor's own territorial claim, which followed the former colonial power Portugal and the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea in claiming that the dividing line should be midway between the two countries. In 2018, Australia agreed to a median line boundary.

It was revealed in 2013 that the Australian Secret Intelligence Service (ASIS) planted listening devices to listen to East Timor during negotiations over the Greater Sunrise oil and gasfields. This is known as the Australia–East Timor spying scandal .

Timor Sea Treaty [ edit ] The Timor Sea Treaty , which was signed on the 20 May 2002, led to the establishment of the Timor Sea Designated Authority (TSDA). This organisation is responsible for the administration of all petroleum-related activities in a part of the Timor Sea known as the Joint Petroleum Development Area (JPDA). The treaty was ratified in February 2007.

[ 18 ] Under the terms of the treaty, royalties on petroleum production in the JPDA are split in a 90:10 ratio between East Timor and Australia .

[ 19 ] It has been criticised because the treaty did not finalise the maritime boundary between East Timor and Australia.

[ 18 ] 2018 Maritime Boundaries Treaty [ edit ] The Australia–Timor Leste Treaty Establishing Their Maritime Boundaries in the Timor Sea was signed on 6 March 2018 at United Nations headquarters in New York in the presence of United Nations Secretary-General Antonio Guterres.

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Australia portal Asia portal Indonesia portal Banda Sea The great Jukung race References [ edit ] ^ a b Andrew Burrell (29 April 2011).

"Montara oil spill firm seeks permission for more drills" .

The Australian . News Limited . Retrieved 22 May 2011 .

^ Ormeling, Ferjan (2000).

"Sea Names Categories and Their Implications" (PDF) .

Journal of Geography Education, 44 .

44 : 54– 61 . Retrieved 15 April 2022 .

^ Hunnam, Kimberley; Carlos, Imelda; Hammer, Michael P.; Dos Reis Lopes, Joctan; Mills, David J.; Stacey, Natasha (2021).

"Untangling Tales of Tropical Sardines: Local Knowledge From Fisheries in Timor-Leste" .

Frontiers in Marine Science .

8 .

doi : 10.3389/fmars.2021.673173 .

hdl : 1885/277964 .

ISSN 2296-7745 .

^ "Survey Plan CP/5090 – localities within the Tiwi sub-region" .

Place Names Committee . Northern Territory Government of Australia. 5 April 2007 . Retrieved 1 May 2019 .

^ "Big Bank Shoals of the Timor Sea" . Australian Institute of Marine Science. 30 August 2001 . Retrieved 4 June 2010 .

^ Jess Teideman (21 May 2010).

"Vast asteroid crater found in Timor Sea" .

Australian Geographic . Archived from the original on 24 May 2010 . Retrieved 31 May 2010 .

^ "Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition" (PDF) . International Hydrographic Organization. 1953. p. 28 . Retrieved 28 December 2020 .

^ "Santos – Our Activities – Timor Sea" .

Santos . Archived from the original on 13 October 2010 . Retrieved 23 October 2010 .

^ "Huge oil spill plugged at last – rig owner" .

The Australian .

News Limited . 3 November 2009 . Retrieved 3 November 2009 .

[ dead link ] ^ a b Commons Librarian (22 December 2023).

"Campaigns that Changed the Northern Territory" .

The Commons Social Change Library . Retrieved 5 April 2024 .

^ "Santos Completes Acquisition of ConocoPhillips' Australia Assets" . OE Digital. 28 May 2020 . Retrieved 28 May 2020 .

^ "Bayu Undan / Darwin LNG" .

Santos Limited . Retrieved 21 December 2018 .

^ Darwin LNG ^ "Timor-Leste's big-spending leaders are squandering its savings" .

The Economist . 4 May 2017 . Retrieved 5 May 2017 .

^ "Project map" .

INPEX . Retrieved 1 October 2018 .

^ "UPDATE 1-Inpex's Ichthys LNG produces first gas off Australia" .

U.S . Reuters. 30 June 2018 . Retrieved 1 October 2018 .

^ "East Timor's Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão accuses Woodside of lying" .

news.com.au .

News Limited . 27 May 2010 . Retrieved 31 May 2010 .

^ a b c Richard Baker (21 April 2007).

"New Timor treaty 'a failure' " .

Theage.com.au . The Age Company Ltd . Retrieved 3 January 2010 .

^ "Joint Petroleum Development Area Fact sheet" (PDF) . Retrieved 29 January 2008 .

^ Australian Senate Economics Legislation Committee, Report: Timor Sea Maritime Boundaries Treaty Consequential Amendments Bill 2018 [Provisions] and the Passenger Movement Charge Amendment (Timor Sea Maritime Boundaries Treaty) Bill 2018 [Provisions], 8 February 2019 ; Hao Duy Phan, Tara Davenport and Robert Beckman (eds.), Timor-Leste/Australia Conciliation: A Victory for UNCLOS and Peaceful Settlement, Centre for International Law, National University of Singapore, 2019.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Timor Sea .

Khamsi, Kathryn (2005).

"A Settlement to the Timor Sea Dispute?" .

Harvard Asia Quarterly 9 (1) 6–23.

East Timor is protective of oil, gas industry Robert J. King, Submission to the Senate Economics Legislation Committee on the provisions of the Timor Sea Maritime Boundaries Treaty, January 2019 v t e List of Australian seas Ocean Indian Ocean Pacific Ocean Southern Ocean Sea Arafura Sea Coral Sea Tasman Sea Timor Sea Strait Backstairs Passage Bass Strait Clarence Strait Dundas Strait Endeavour Strait Investigator Strait Torres Strait Gulf Admiralty Gulf Beagle Gulf Cambridge Gulf Gulf of Carpentaria Great Australian Bight Exmouth Gulf Joseph Bonaparte Gulf Gulf St Vincent Spencer Gulf Van Diemen Gulf Australia portal Oceans portal v t e Indonesian seas East Indian Archipelago Ocean Indian Ocean Pacific Ocean Sea Andaman Sea Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Celebes Sea Flores Sea Halmahera Sea Java Sea Molucca Sea Natuna Sea Philippine Sea Savu Sea Seram Sea South China Sea Timor Sea Strait Alas Strait Alor Strait Badung Strait Bali Strait Bangka Strait Berhala Strait Dampier Strait Gaspar Strait Karimata Strait Laut Strait Lombok Strait Madura Strait Makassar Strait Malacca Strait Mentawai Strait Ombai Strait Pitt Strait Riau Strait Rupat Strait Sape Strait Selayar Strait Singapore Strait Sumba Strait Sunda Strait Wetar Strait Gulf Ambon Bay Balikpapan Bay Berau Gulf Bintuni Bay Boni Gulf Cenderawasih Bay Jakarta Bay Lampung Bay Palabuhanratu Bay Saleh Bay Semangka Bay Tolo Gulf Tomini Gulf Yos Sudarso Bay Indonesia portal Oceans portal v t e Countries and territories bordering the Indian Ocean Africa Comoros Djibouti Egypt Eritrea France Mayotte Réunion Kenya Madagascar Mauritius Mozambique Seychelles Somalia Somaliland South Africa Sudan Tanzania Asia Bahrain Bangladesh Christmas Island (Australia) Cocos (Keeling) Islands (Australia) India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Malaysia Maldives Myanmar Oman Pakistan Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Thailand Timor-Leste United Arab Emirates Yemen Other Antarctica Australian Antarctic Territory French Southern and Antarctic Lands Heard Island and McDonald Islands Australia v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National France BnF data Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Timor_Sea&oldid=1305382810 " Categories : Timor Sea Australia–Timor-Leste border Australia–Indonesia border Bodies of water of Australia Bodies of water of Timor-Leste Coastline of the Northern Territory Indonesia–Timor-Leste border Seas of Asia Seas of Indonesia Seas of the Indian Ocean Seas of Oceania Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from April 2022 Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles containing Indonesian-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles containing Tetum-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2011 Articles containing Malay (macrolanguage)-language text Articles with unsourced statements from January 2008 Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 19:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Timor Sea 89 languages Add topic

