Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Methods 2 Legal dispute resolution 3 Extrajudicial dispute resolution 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Dispute resolution 9 languages العربية Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Türkçe Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Act of resolving disputes between parties For dispute resolution policies on Wikipedia, see Wikipedia:Dispute resolution .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Dispute resolution" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Conflict resolution Principles Democracy Might makes right Non-aggression Nonviolence Pacifism Rule of man Speaking truth to power Toleration paradox Law Collaborative Dispute resolution Right to an effective remedy Rule of law Management Arbitration Alternative dispute resolution Auction Conciliation Family therapy Mediation Party-directed Negotiation Nonviolent Communication Peacebuilding International relations Appeasement Armistice Ceasefire Diplomacy Multilateralism Peacebuilding Peacemaking Peace process Peace treaty Track II diplomacy War Models and theories Brinkmanship Conflict escalation Conflict avoidance Conflict continuum Conflict style inventory Deterrence theory Game theory Prisoner's dilemma v t e Dispute resolution or dispute settlement is the process of resolving disputes between parties . The term dispute resolution is conflict resolution through legal means.

[ 1 ] Prominent venues for dispute settlement in international law include the International Court of Justice (formerly the Permanent Court of International Justice ); the United Nations Human Rights Committee (which operates under the ICCPR ) and European Court of Human Rights ; the Panels and Appellate Body of the World Trade Organization ; and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea .

[ 2 ] Half of all international agreements include a dispute settlement mechanism.

[ 3 ] States are also known to form their own arbitration tribunals to settle disputes.

[ 2 ] Prominent private international courts, which adjudicate disputes between commercial private entities, include the International Court of Arbitration (of the International Chamber of Commerce ) and the London Court of International Arbitration .

[ 4 ] Methods [ edit ] Methods of dispute resolution include: lawsuits (litigation) (legislative) [ 5 ] arbitration collaborative law mediation conciliation negotiation facilitation avoidance Dispute resolution processes fall into two major types: Adjudicative processes, such as litigation or arbitration, in which a judge, jury or arbitrator determines the outcome.

Consensual processes, such as collaborative law, mediation, conciliation, or negotiation, in which the parties attempt to reach agreement.

Not all disputes, even those in which skilled intervention occurs, end in resolution. Such intractable disputes form a special area in dispute resolution studies.

[ 6 ] Dispute resolution is an important requirement in international trade, including negotiation, mediation, arbitration and litigation.

[ 7 ] [ full citation needed ] Legal dispute resolution [ edit ] The legal system provides resolutions for many different types of disputes. Some disputants will not reach agreement through a collaborative process. Some disputes need the coercive power of the state to enforce a resolution. Perhaps more importantly, many people want a professional advocate when they become involved in a dispute, particularly if the dispute involves perceived legal rights, legal wrongdoing, or threat of legal action against them.

The most common form of judicial dispute resolution is litigation. Litigation is initiated when one party files suit against another. In the United States, litigation is facilitated by the government within federal, state, and municipal courts. While litigation is often used to resolve disputes, it is strictly speaking a form of conflict adjudication and not a form of conflict resolution per se. This is because litigation only determines the legal rights and obligations of parties involved in a dispute and does not necessarily solve the disagreement between the parties involved in the dispute. For example, supreme court cases can rule on whether US states have the constitutional right to criminalize abortion but will not cause the parties involved in the case to no longer disagree on whether states do indeed have the constitutional authority to restrict access to abortion as one of the parties may disagree with the supreme courts reasoning and still disagree with the party that the supreme court sided with. Litigation proceedings are very formal and are governed by rules, such as rules of evidence and procedure, which are established by the legislature. Outcomes are decided by an impartial judge and/or jury , based on the factual questions of the case and the application law. The verdict of the court is binding, not advisory; however, both parties have the right to appeal the judgment to a higher court. Judicial dispute resolution is typically adversarial in nature, for example, involving antagonistic parties or opposing interests seeking an outcome most favorable to their position.

Due to the antagonistic nature of litigation, collaborators frequently opt for solving disputes privately.

[ 8 ] Retired judges or private lawyers often become arbitrators or mediators; however, trained and qualified non-legal dispute resolution specialists form a growing body within the field of alternative dispute resolution (ADR). In the United States, many states now have mediation or other ADR programs annexed to the courts, to facilitate settlement of lawsuits.

Extrajudicial dispute resolution [ edit ] Some use the term dispute resolution to refer only to alternative dispute resolution (ADR), that is, extrajudicial processes such as arbitration, collaborative law, and mediation used to resolve conflict and potential conflict between and among individuals, business entities, governmental agencies, and (in the public international law context) states . ADR generally depends on agreement by the parties to use ADR processes, either before or after a dispute has arisen. ADR has experienced steadily increasing acceptance and utilization because of a perception of greater flexibility, costs below those of traditional litigation, and speedy resolution of disputes, among other perceived advantages. However, some have criticized these methods as taking away the right to seek redress of grievances in the courts , suggesting that extrajudicial dispute resolution may not offer the fairest way for parties not in an equal bargaining relationship, for example in a dispute between a consumer and a large corporation . In addition, in some circumstances, arbitration and other ADR processes may become as expensive as litigation or more so.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Collaborative divorce Diplomacy Dispute pyramid Investor-state dispute settlement National Arbitration Forum Party-directed mediation Peacekeeping Restorative justice UN Peacemaker References [ edit ] ^ Burton, J. (1990) Conflict: Resolution and Prevention. New York: St Martin's Press.

^ a b Orakhelashvili, Alexander (2018).

Akehurst's Modern Introduction to International Law . Routledge. pp.

537– 556.

doi : 10.4324/9780429439391 .

ISBN 9780429439391 .

S2CID 159062874 .

^ Koremenos, Barbara (2007).

"If Only Half of International Agreements Have Dispute Resolution Provisions, Which Half Needs Explaining?" .

The Journal of Legal Studies .

36 (1): 189– 212.

doi : 10.1086/509275 .

ISSN 0047-2530 .

S2CID 154949275 .

^ Mattli, Walter (2001).

"Private Justice in a Global Economy: From Litigation to Arbitration" .

International Organization .

55 (4): 919– 947.

doi : 10.1162/002081801317193646 .

ISSN 1531-5088 .

S2CID 154989928 .

^ What is Litigation: The Complete Guide (youtube) ^ "Thesis" (PDF) .

^ Global Business Environment (Fifth Edition) by FITT,
pages 301, 302 & 303 ^ Lieberman, Jethro K.; Henry, James F. (1986).

"Lessons from the Alternative Dispute Resolution Movement" .

The University of Chicago Law Review .

53 (2): 424.

doi : 10.2307/1599646 .

JSTOR 1599646 .

Further reading [ edit ] Sherwyn, David, Tracey, Bruce & Zev Eigen, "In Defense of Mandatory Arbitration of Employment Disputes: Saving the Baby, Tossing out the Bath Water, and Constructing a New Sink in the Process", 2 U. Pa. J. Lab. & Emp. L.

73 (1999) Ury, William , 2000.

The Third Side: Why We Fight and How We Can Stop . New York: Penguin Putnam.

ISBN 0-14-029634-4 Alés, Javier y Mata, Juan Diego " manual práctico para mediadores: el misterio de la mediacion" éxito Atelier. Barcelona 2016 Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dispute_resolution&oldid=1305193492 " Categories : Dispute resolution Interpersonal conflict Mediation Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2020 Articles needing additional references from February 2011 All articles needing additional references All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from December 2016 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2007 This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 16:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dispute resolution 9 languages Add topic

