Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Authors 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Take Ivy Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1965 fashion photography book Take Ivy Language English Genre Fashion photography Publication date 1965 This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Take Ivy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Take Ivy is a 1965 fashion photography book that documents the attire of Ivy League students from the 1960s.

[ 1 ] The New York Times described it as  "a treasure of fashion insiders".

Take Ivy has been the Ivy League bible for Japanese baby boomers ; it influenced a broader "neo-Ivy" style in the mid-2010s.

[ 2 ] The book has sold more than 50,000 copies worldwide. Original copies are rare in the West, garnering auction prices as high as $2,000.

Magazine editors and retailers display looks taken straight from the photos from the book.

[ 2 ] American designers such as Ralph Lauren and J. Crew display copies of "Take Ivy" in their store shelves.

Take Ivy was originally published in 1965 in Japan by Fujingahosha magazine publishers, known today as Hachette Fujuingaho, Co., Ltd. The latest edition was published by powerHouse Books in Brooklyn, New York , on August 31, 2010, and retails for USD $24.95 and CAD $28.95. In 2011, a Dutch translation was written by Michael Hendriks and published by Parvenu Publishers, retailing for €19,95.

Background [ edit ] Take Ivy, written by four Japanese sartorial style enthusiasts, is a collection of candid photographs shot on the campuses of America's elite Ivy League universities between 1959 and 1965.

[ 3 ] Most are of college-aged men distinctively dressed in fine American-made garments engaged in college activities such as eating, lounging in the quad, riding bikes, studying in the library, in class, or at the boathouse. The title was inspired by the jazz song " Take Five " by Dave Brubeck .

[ 4 ] Authors [ edit ] Teruyoshi Hayashida was born and raised in the fashionable Aoyama District of Tokyo . He began shooting cover images for Men's Club magazine right after the title's launch. His style is considered to be highly sophisticated and he is a connoisseur of gourmet food.

Shosuke Ishizu, the director of Ishizu Office, was born in Okayama Prefecture . He started working in the editorial division at Men's Club after graduating from Kuwasawa Design School. He established Ishizu Office in 1983, and continues to produce several clothing brands including Niblick.

Toshiyuki Kurosu joined VAN Jacket Inc.

[ jp ] in 1961, where he developed merchandise and promoted sales. He left the company in 1970 and started his own business called Cross and Simon. After the brand stopped doing business, Toshiyuki began appearing as a regular guest on the hit variety show called Asayan . Toshiyuki is also an active writer and intellectual.

Hajime (Paul) Hasegawa is from Hyogo Prefecture. After finishing his studies in the U.S. in 1963, Hasegawa returned to Japan to join VAN Jacket Inc. There he was responsible for advertising and public relations . Hasegawa was the main coordinator and interpreter for the production of Take Ivy . Since then he held various managerial positions in Japan and abroad, including as the executive director for Cosmo Public Relations Corporation.

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ Trebay, Guy (23 July 2010).

"Prep, Forward and Back" .

New York Times . Retrieved 20 June 2012 .

^ a b Marx, W. David (2015-12-01).

"Stalking the Wild Madras Wearers of the Ivy League" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved 2017-10-19 .

^ powerHouse Books Take Ivy ^ Preppy: Cultivating Ivy Style ;  Jeffrey Banks and Doria de la Chapelle, Rizzoli Further reading [ edit ] http://www.acontinuouslean.com/2008/05/19/take-ivy/ http://putthison.com/post/40100819929/colin-marshall-on-menswear-books-take-ivy-by http://thetrad.blogspot.ca/2008/12/take-ivy-chapter-i.html v t e Ivy League Institutions Brown University Columbia University Cornell University Dartmouth College Harvard University University of Pennsylvania Princeton University Yale University Teams Brown Bears Columbia Lions Cornell Big Red Dartmouth Big Green Harvard Crimson Penn Quakers Princeton Tigers Yale Bulldogs Competitions Baseball Basketball (men's) Basketball (women's) Fencing Rugby Soccer (men's) Soccer (women's) Schools Business schools Law schools Medical schools Public policy schools Related topics Big Three Ivy Council Nude posture photos Public Ivy Southern Ivy Take Ivy Defunct Digital Network Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Take_Ivy&oldid=1271367164 " Categories : Ivy League 1965 non-fiction books Japanese fashion American fashion 1960s fads and trends Books of photographs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2022 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 This page was last edited on 23 January 2025, at 19:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Take Ivy Add languages Add topic

