Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology Toggle Terminology subsection 1.1 United States 1.2 United Kingdom 2 References Toggle the table of contents Doctor of Theology 12 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Norsk bokmål Slovenčina Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Doctoral degree Conferral of a Doctorate of Theology honoris causa on Desmond Tutu (right) by the University of Vienna Doctor of Theology ( Latin : Doctor Theologiae , abbreviated DTh , ThD , DTheol , or Dr. theol.

) is a terminal degree in the academic discipline of theology . The ThD, like the ecclesiastical Doctor of Sacred Theology , is an advanced research degree equivalent to the Doctor of Philosophy .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Terminology [ edit ] In the academic study of theology, often deeply rooted in the Christian religion, the nomenclature of doctoral degrees varies between Doctor of Theology, Doctor of Philosophy , and Doctor of Sacred Theology . However, Doctor of Ministry is generally understood as a professional doctorate , whereas Doctor of Divinity is an academic doctorate in the UK and a honorary doctorate in the USA where it is often awarded  as honoris causa .

[ citation needed ] United States [ edit ] In the United States, some of the older theological seminaries began offering the ThD as an equivalent to the research Doctor of Philosophy . In Princeton Theological Seminary , for example, this practice was inherited from the German system of education, since the professors involved in establishing the doctoral program were trained in German universities. Though the PhD was the doctorate of arts faculties in German universities (called the philosophy faculty in Germany, hence the Ph), Princeton Theological Seminary has since switched to using Doctor of Philosophy as its main designation.

[ 3 ] A similar shift happened at Harvard Divinity School in 2015.

[ 4 ] As of 2024, five Association of Theological Schools accredited schools currently accept students to ThD programs: Duke Divinity School , Kairos University ( Evangelical Seminary ), Northwest Nazarene University 's Graduate School of Theology, Seventh-day Adventist Theological Seminary , and United Theological Seminary .

[ 5 ] Due to the secular push in doctoral studies, some ThD programs have moved to other known accreditation, like the Association for Biblical Higher Education (ABHE), Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools (TRACS), or The Council of Private Colleges of America (CPCA).

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] In the United Kingdom, the Doctor of Theology is a relatively new academic doctoral programme.

[ 9 ] Certain universities have begun offering it as a form of research-based professional doctorate, not unlike the Doctor of Education .

[ 10 ] To distinguish the more practical nature of the degree, some British universities have adopted the term Doctor of Practical Theology .

[ 11 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Structure of U.S. Education Systems: Research Doctorate Degrees" . U.S. Department of Education . Retrieved 18 January 2018 .

^ "Degree Program Standards" (PDF) .

ATS . Association of Theological Schools . Retrieved 18 January 2018 .

^ "History - PhD Anniversary" .

phd75.ptsem.edu . Princeton Theological Seminary. Archived from the original on 26 August 2016 . Retrieved 23 August 2016 .

^ "Degree Programs" .

hds.harvard.edu . Harvard Divinity School . Retrieved 23 August 2016 .

^ "Approved Degrees" .

www.ats.edu . Retrieved 2024-11-17 .

^ "The Association for Biblical Higher Education: Home" .

Association for Biblical Higher Education . Retrieved 2020-08-19 .

^ "Meeting A Higher Standard" .

TRACS . Retrieved 2022-04-20 .

^ "The Council Of Private Colleges Of America" .

cpca-edu.us . Retrieved 2022-04-20 .

^ "Degrees of the University" (PDF) .

Ordinances . University of Birmingham . Retrieved 1 March 2021 .

^ "Professional Doctorates" .

University of Birmingham . Retrieved 2 March 2021 .

^ "DPT Practical Theology Doctorate" .

www.birmingham.ac.uk . University of Birmingham . Retrieved 23 August 2016 .

This article relating to education is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Doctor_of_Theology&oldid=1306458911 " Categories : Religious degrees Doctoral degrees Education stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015 All stub articles This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 21:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Doctor of Theology 12 languages Add topic

