Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Birth of the movement 2 Distinct from Constructivism 3 Influences on the movement 4 The Supremus journal 5 El Lissitzky: Bridge to the West 6 Architecture 7 Social context 8 Notable exhibitions Toggle Notable exhibitions subsection 8.1 Historic exhibitions 8.2 Retrospective exhibitions 9 Artists associated with Suprematism 10 References and sources 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Suprematism 60 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Early-20th-century Russian art movement Not to be confused with Supremacism .

Suprematist art Kazimir Malevich's Suprematism , 1916–17, Krasnodar Museum of Art Location Russian Empire Soviet Union Major figures Kazimir Malevich Influences Cubism Futurism P. D. Ouspensky Influenced Bauhaus De Stijl Suprematism ( Russian : супремати́зм ) is an early 20th-century art movement focused on the fundamentals of geometry (circles, squares, rectangles), painted in a limited range of colors. The term suprematism refers to an abstract art based upon "the supremacy of pure artistic feeling" rather than on the figurative depiction of real-life subjects.

[ 1 ] Founded by Russian artist Kazimir Malevich in 1913, [ 2 ] Supremus ( Russian : Супремус ) conceived of the artist as liberated from everything that predetermined the ideal structure of life and art.

[ 3 ] Projecting that vision onto Cubism , which Malevich admired for its ability to deconstruct art, and in the process change its reference points of art, [ 4 ] he led a group of Russian avant-garde artists—including Aleksandra Ekster , [ 5 ] Liubov Popova , Olga Rozanova , Ivan Kliun , Ivan Puni , Nadezhda Udaltsova , Nina Genke-Meller , Ksenia Boguslavskaya and others [ 6 ] —in what has been described as the first attempt to independently found a Russian avant-garde movement, seceding from the trajectory of prior Russian art history.

[ 4 ] To support the movement, Malevich established the journal Supremus (initially titled Nul or Nothing ), which received contributions from artists and philosophers.

[ 7 ] The publication, however, never took off and its first issue was never distributed due to the Russian Revolution .

[ 7 ] The movement itself, however, was announced in Malevich's 1915 Last Futurist Exhibition of Paintings 0,10 , in St. Petersburg, where he, and several others in his group, exhibited 36 works in a similar style.

[ 8 ] Birth of the movement Kazimir Malevich, Black Square , 1915, oil on linen, 79.5 × 79.5 cm, Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow Kazimir Malevich, Black Circle , motive 1915, painted 1924, oil on canvas, 106.4 × 106.4 cm, State Russian Museum, St. Petersburg Kazimir Malevich, Suprematist Composition – White on White , 1918, Museum of Modern Art, New York See also: Kazimir Malevich and Russian avant-garde Kazimir Malevich developed the concept of Suprematism when he was already an established painter, having exhibited in the Donkey's Tail and the Der Blaue Reiter (The Blue Rider) exhibitions of 1912 with cubo-futurist works. The proliferation of new artistic forms in painting, poetry and theatre as well as a revival of interest in the traditional folk art of Russia provided a rich environment in which a Modernist culture was born.

In "Suprematism" (Part II of his book The Non-Objective World , which was published 1927 in Munich as Bauhaus Book No. 11), Malevich clearly stated the core concept of Suprematism: Under Suprematism I understand the primacy of pure feeling in creative art. To the Suprematist, the visual phenomena of the objective world are, in themselves, meaningless; the significant thing is feeling, as such, quite apart from the environment in which it is called forth.

He created a suprematist "grammar" based on fundamental geometric forms; in particular, the square and the circle. In the 0.10 Exhibition in 1915, Malevich exhibited his early experiments in suprematist painting. The centerpiece of his show was the Black Square , placed in what is called the red/beautiful corner in Russian Orthodox tradition; the place of the main icon in a house. "Black Square" was painted in 1915 and was presented as a breakthrough in his career and in art in general. Malevich also painted White on White which was also heralded as a milestone.

White on White marked a shift from polychrome to monochrome Suprematism.

Distinct from Constructivism See also: Constructivism (art) Malevich's Suprematism is fundamentally opposed to the postrevolutionary positions of Constructivism and materialism. Constructivism, with its cult of the object, is concerned with utilitarian strategies of adapting art to the principles of functional organization. Under Constructivism, the traditional easel painter is transformed into the artist-as-engineer in charge of organizing life in all of its aspects.

Suprematism, in sharp contrast to Constructivism, embodies a profoundly anti-materialist, anti-utilitarian philosophy. In "Suprematism" (Part II of The Non-Objective World ), Malevich writes: Art no longer cares to serve the state and religion, it no longer wishes to illustrate the history of manners, it wants to have nothing further to do with the object, as such, and believes that it can exist, in and for itself, without "things" (that is, the "time-tested well-spring of life").

Jean-Claude Marcadé has observed that "Despite superficial similarities between Constructivism and Suprematism, the two movements are nevertheless antagonists and it is very important to distinguish between them." According to Marcadé, confusion has arisen because several artists—either directly associated with Suprematism such as El Lissitzky or working under the suprematist influence as did Rodchenko and Lyubov Popova —later abandoned Suprematism for the culture of materials.

Suprematism does not embrace a humanist philosophy which places man at the center of the universe. Rather, Suprematism envisions man—the artist—as both originator and transmitter of what for Malevich is the world's only true reality—that of absolute non-objectivity.

...a blissful sense of liberating non-objectivity drew me forth into a "desert", where nothing is real except feeling...

— "Suprematism", Part II of The Non-Objective World For Malevich, it is upon the foundations of absolute non-objectivity that the future of the universe will be built - a future in which appearances, objects, comfort, and convenience no longer dominate.

Influences on the movement See also: Cubism and Futurism (art) Malevich also credited the birth of Suprematism to Victory Over the Sun , Kruchenykh 's Futurist opera production for which he designed the sets and costumes in 1913. The aim of the artists involved was to break with the usual theater of the past and to use a "clear, pure, logical Russian language". Malevich put this to practice by creating costumes from simple materials and thereby took advantage of geometric shapes. Flashing headlights illuminated the figures in such a way that alternating hands, legs or heads disappeared into the darkness. The stage curtain was a black square. One of the drawings for the backcloth shows a black square divided diagonally into a black and a white triangle. Because of the simplicity of these basic forms they were able to signify a new beginning.

Another important influence on Malevich were the ideas of the Russian mystic, philosopher, and disciple of Georges Gurdjieff , P. D. Ouspensky , who wrote of "a fourth dimension or a Fourth Way beyond the three to which our ordinary senses have access".

[ 9 ] Some of the titles to paintings in 1915 express the concept of a non-Euclidean geometry which imagined forms in movement, or through time; titles such as: Two dimensional painted masses in the state of movement . These give some indications towards an understanding of the Suprematic compositions produced between 1915 and 1918.

The Supremus journal See also: Verbovka Village Folk Centre The Supremus group, which in addition to Malevich included Aleksandra Ekster , Olga Rozanova , Nadezhda Udaltsova , Ivan Kliun , Lyubov Popova , Lazar Khidekel , Nikolai Suetin , Ilya Chashnik , Nina Genke-Meller , Ivan Puni and Ksenia Boguslavskaya , met from 1915 onwards to discuss the philosophy of Suprematism and its development into other areas of intellectual life. The products of these discussions were to be documented in a monthly publication called Supremus , titled to reflect the art movement it championed, that would include painting, music, decorative art, and literature. Malevich conceived of the journal as the contextual foundation in which he could base his art, and originally planned to call the journal Nul . In a letter to a colleague, he explained: We are planning to put out a journal and have begun to discuss the how and what of it. Since in it we intend to reduce everything to zero, we have decided to call it Nul . Afterward we ourselves will go beyond zero.

Malevich conceived of the journal as a space for experimentation that would test his theory of nonobjective art. The group of artists wrote several articles for the initial publication, including the essays "The Mouth of the Earth and the Artist" (Malevich), "On the Old and the New in Music" (Matiushin), "Cubism, Futurism, Suprematism" (Rozanova), "Architecture as a Slap in the Face to Ferroconcrete" (Malevich), and "The Declaration of the Word as Such" (Kruchenykh).  However, despite a year spent planning and writing articles for the journal, the first issue of Supremus was never published.

[ 10 ] El Lissitzky: Bridge to the West See also: El Lissitzky The most important artist who took the art form and ideas developed by Malevich and popularized them abroad was the painter El Lissitzky . Lissitzky worked intensively with Suprematism particularly in the years 1919 to 1923. He was deeply impressed by Malevich's Suprematist works as he saw it as the theoretical and visual equivalent of the social upheavals taking place in Russia at the time. Suprematism, with its radicalism, was to him the creative equivalent of an entirely new form of society. Lissitzky transferred Malevich's approach to his Proun constructions, which he himself described as "the station where one changes from painting to architecture". The Proun designs, however, were also an artistic break from Suprematism; the Black Square by Malevich was the end point of a rigorous thought process that required new structural design work to follow. Lissitzky saw this new beginning in his Proun constructions, where the term "Proun" (Pro Unovis ) symbolized its Suprematist origins.

Lissitzky exhibited in Berlin in 1923 at the Hanover and Dresden showrooms of Non-Objective Art. During this trip to the West, El Lissitzky was in close contact with Theo van Doesburg, forming a bridge between Suprematism and De Stijl and the Bauhaus .

Architecture Lazar Khidekel (1904–1986), Suprematist artist and visionary architect, was the only Suprematist architect who emerged from the Malevich circle. Khidekel started his study in architecture in Vitebsk art school under El Lissitzky in 1919–20. He was instrumental in the transition from planar Suprematism to volumetric  Suprematism, creating axonometric projections (The Aero-club: Horizontal architecton, 1922–23), making three-dimensional models, such as the architectons, designing  objects (model of an "Ashtray", 1922–23), and producing  the first Suprematist architectural project (The Workers' Club, 1926). In the mid-1920s, he began his journey into the realm of visionary architecture . Directly inspired by  Suprematism and its notion of an organic form-creation continuum, he explored new philosophical, scientific  and technological futuristic approaches, and proposed  innovative solutions for the creation of new urban environments, where people would live in harmony with nature and would be protected from man-made and natural disasters (his still topical proposal for flood protection – the City on the Water, 1925).

Nikolai Suetin used Suprematist motifs on works at the Imperial Porcelain Factory, Saint Petersburg where Malevich and Chashnik were also employed, and Malevich designed a Suprematist teapot. The Suprematists also made architectural models in the 1920s, which offered a different conception of socialist buildings to those developed in Constructivist architecture .

Malevich's architectural projects were known after 1922 Arkhitektoniki . Designs emphasized the right angle , with similarities to De Stijl and Le Corbusier , and were justified with an ideological connection to communist governance and equality for all. Another part of the formalism was low regard for triangles which were "dismissed as ancient , pagan , or Christian ".

[ 11 ] The first Suprematist architectural project was created by Lazar Khidekel in 1926. In the mid-1920s to 1932 Lazar Khidekel also created a series of futuristic projects such as Aero-City, Garden-City, and City Over Water.

In the 21st century, architect Zaha Hadid had 'a particular interest [in] the Russian avant-garde, and the movement known as Constructivism,' and 'as part of their work on the Russian avant-garde, Hadid's unit studied Suprematism, the abstract movement founded by the painter Kazimir Malevich.'.

[ 12 ] Social context Malevich, Self-Portrait , 1933 This development in artistic expression came about when Russia was in a revolutionary state, ideas were in ferment, and the old order was being swept away. As the new order became established, and Stalinism took hold from 1924 on, the state began limiting the freedom of artists. From the late 1920s the Russian avant-garde experienced direct and harsh criticism from the authorities and in 1934 the doctrine of Socialist Realism became official policy, and prohibited abstraction and divergence of artistic expression. Malevich nevertheless retained his main conception. In his self-portrait of 1933 he represented himself in a traditional way—the only way permitted by Stalinist cultural policy—but signed the picture with a tiny black-over-white square.

Notable exhibitions Historic exhibitions Exhibition of Modern Decorative Art at Lemercier Gallery, Moscow, 1915 The Last Futurist Exhibition of Paintings 0.10 at Galerie Dobychina, Petrograd, 1915 First Russian Art Exhibition at Galerie Van Diemen , Berlin, 1922 First State Exhibition of Local and Moscow Artists , Vitebsk, 1919 Exhibition of Paintings by Petrograd Artists of All Trends , 1918–1923, Petrograd, 1923 Retrospective exhibitions The Great Utopia: The Russian and Soviet Avant-Garde, 1915-1932 at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum , New York, 1992 Malevich's Circle. Confederates. Students. Followers in Russia 1920s-1950s at The State Russian Museum, St. Petersburg, 2000 Kazimir Malevich: Suprematism at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum , New York, 2003 Zaha Hadid and Suprematism at Galerie Gmurzynska , Zürich, 2010 Lazar Khidekel: Surviving Suprematism at Judah L. Magnes Museum, Berkeley CA, 2004-2005 Lazar Markovich Khidekel – the Rediscovered Suprematist at House Konstruktiv, Zurich, 2010-2011 Kazimir Malevich and the Russian Avant-Garde at the Stedelijk Museum , Amsterdam, 2013 Malevich: Revolutionary of Russian Art at the Tate Modern , London, 2014 Floating Worlds and Future Cities. Genius of Lazar Khidekel, Suprematism and Russian Avant-garde.

NYC, 2013 Artists associated with Suprematism Kazimir Malevich El Lissitzky Ilya Chashnik Lazar Khidekel Anna Kogan Alexandra Exter Lyubov Popova Sergei Senkin References and sources References ^ Malevich, Kazimir (1927).

The Non-Objective World . Munich.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Tate.

"Suprematism – Art Term" .

Tate . Retrieved 2021-11-09 .

^ Potter, Polyxeni and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2013).

Art in Science: Selections from EMERGING INFECTIOUS DISEASES . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-931571-0 .

^ a b Gourianova, Nina; Гурьянова, Н. А. (2012).

The aesthetics of anarchy: art and ideology in the early Ukrainian avant-garde . Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-26876-0 .

OCLC 748941743 .

^ Hodge, Susie (2019).

I know an artist : the inspiring connections between the world's greatest artists . Sarah Papworth. London.

ISBN 978-1-78131-844-7 .

OCLC 1090652528 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Boersma, Linda S. (1994).

0,10 : the last futurist exhibition of painting . Rotterdam: 010 Publishers.

ISBN 90-6450-135-1 .

OCLC 33984058 .

^ a b Souter, Gerry (2012).

Malevich : journey to infinity . New York: Parkstone International.

ISBN 978-1-78042-926-7 .

OCLC 793511481 .

^ Honour, H.

and Fleming, J. (2009) A World History of Art . 7th edn. London: Laurence King Publishing, pp. 793–795.

ISBN 978-1-85669-584-8 ^ (Gooding, 2001) ^ Drutt, Matthew (2003).

Kazimir Malevich: Suprematism . New York: Guggenheim Museum Publications. pp.

44– 60.

ISBN 0-89207-265-2 .

^ Hanno-Walter Kruft, Elsie Callander, Ronald Taylor, and Antony Wood A history of architectural theory : from Vitruvius to the present Edition 4 Publisher Princeton Architectural Press, 2003 ISBN 978-1-56898-010-2 , p. 416 ^ Seabrook, John (21 December 2009).

"The Abstractionist" .

New Yorker . Retrieved 21 February 2016 .

Sources Kasimir Malevich, The Non-Objective World . English translation by Howard Dearstyne from the German translation of 1927 by A. von Riesen from Malevich's original Russian manuscript, Paul Theobald and Company, Chicago, 1959.

Camilla Gray, The Russian Experiment in Art , Thames and Hudson, 1976.

Mel Gooding, Abstract Art , Tate Publishing , 2001.

Jean-Claude Marcadé, "What is Suprematism?", from the exhibition catalogue, Kasimir Malewitsch zum 100. Geburtstag , Galerie Gmurzynska , Cologne, 1978.

Further reading Jean-Claude Marcadé, "Malevich, Painting and Writing: On the Development of a Suprematist Philosophy", Kazimir Malevich: Suprematism , Guggenheim Museum, April 17, 2012 [Kindle Edition] Jean-Claude Marcadé, "Some Remarks on Suprematism"; and Emmanuel Martineau, "A Philosophy of the 'Suprema' ", from the exhibition catalogue Suprematisme , Galerie Jean Chauvelin, Paris, 1977 Miroslav Lamac and Juri Padrta, "The Idea of Suprematism", from the exhibition catalogue, Kasimir Malewitsch zum 100. Geburtstag , Galerie Gmurzynska , Cologne, 1978 Lazar Khidekel and Suprematism. Regina Khidekel, Charlotte Douglas, Magdolena Dabrowsky, Alla Rosenfeld, Tatiand Goriatcheva, Constantin Boym . Prestel Publishing, 2014.

S. O. Khan-Magomedov. Lazar Khidekel (Creators of Russian Classical Avant-garde series), M., 2008 Alla Efimova . Surviving Suprematism: Lazar Khidekel. Judah L. Magnes Museum, Berkeley CA, 2004.

S.O. Khan-Magomedov. Pioneers of the Soviet Design. Galart, Moscow, 1995.

Selim Khan-Magomedov, Regina Khidekel. Lazar Markovich Khidekel. Suprematism and Architecture. Leonard Hutton Galleries, New York, 1995.

Alexandra Schatskikh. Unovis: Epicenter of a New World. The Great Utopia. The Russian and Soviet Avant-Garde 1915–1932.- Solomon Guggenheim Museum, 1992, State Tretiakov Gallery, State Russian Museum, Schirn Kunsthalle, Frankfurt.

Mark Khidekel. Suprematism and Architectural Projects of Lazar Khidekel.

Architectural Design 59, # 7–8, 1989 Mark Khidekel.

Suprematism in Architecture . L’Arca, Italy, # 27, 1989 Selim O. Chan-Magomedow. Pioniere der sowjetischen Architectur, VEB Verlag der Kunst, Dresden, 1983.

Larissa A. Zhadova.

Malevich: Suprematism and Revolution in Russian Art 1910–1930 , Thames and Hudson, London, 1982.

Larissa A. Zhadowa. Suche und Experiment. Russische und sowjetische Kunst 1910 bis 1930, VEB Verlag der Kunst, Dresden, 1978 External links External videos Art & Context: Monet's Cliff Walk at Pourville and Malevich's White on White , Smarthistory Media related to Suprematism at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Suprematism at Wikiquote Kazimir Malevich. Suprematism. Manifesto.

Online extracts from Malevich' suprematism art manifesto.

Suprematist Manifesto v t e Kazimir Malevich Paintings The Knifegrinder (1912–13) Black Square (1915) Red Square (1915) Black Cross (1915) Black Circle (1915) Suprematist Composition (1916) An Englishman in Moscow (1917) Suprematist Composition: White on White (1918) Red Cavalry (1928–1932) Other Suprematism Supremus Victory over the Sun (1913 opera, stage setting) v t e Geometric abstraction Concrete art Constructivism De Stijl Minimalism Op art Suprematism v t e Russian art and literary movements Abramtsevo Colony Acmeist poetry Russian avant-garde Second Russian avant-garde Conceptualism Constructivism The Five Russian Futurism Cubo-Futurism Ego-Futurism Zaum Imaginism Lieutenant prose Metarealism Mir iskusstva Natural school New peasant poets Oberiu Peredvizhniki Rayonism Russian postmodernism Russian symbolism Socialist realism Soviet nonconformism Stroganov school Suprematism Village prose v t e Avant-garde movements Visual art Abstract expressionism Art Nouveau Art & Language Conceptual art Constructivism Proto-Cubism Cubism Functionalism Bauhaus Grosvenor School Devětsil Divisionism Fauvism Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Post-Impressionism Color Field Incoherents Lyrical Abstraction Mail art Minimalism Mir iskusstva Multidimensional art Neoplasticism De Stijl Neue Slowenische Kunst Nonconformism Nouveau réalisme Orphism Performance art Pop art Process art Purism Rayonism Suprematism Temporary art Vorticism Literature and poetry Acmeism Angry Penguins Asemic writing Conceptual poetry Cyberpunk Ego-Futurism Experimental literature Flarf poetry Hungry generation Imaginism Imagism Language poets Neoavanguardia Neoteric Nouveau roman Oberiu Oulipo Slam poetry Ultraísmo Visual poetry Zaum Music By style Funk Jazz Free funk Yass Pop Rock Prog Punk Metal Others Aleatoric music Ars nova Ars subtilior Atonal music Electroacoustic music Electronic music Industrial music Experimental pop Free jazz Free improvisation Futurism Microtonal music Minimal music Drone music Music theatre Musique concrète New Complexity No wave Noise music Post-rock Rock in Opposition Second Viennese School Serialism Spectral music Stochastic music Textural music Totalism Twelve-tone technique Cinema and theatre Cinéma pur Dogme 95 Drop Art Epic theatre Experimental film Experimental theatre Modernist film Poetic realism Postdramatic theatre Remodernist film Structural film Theatre of the Absurd Theatre of Cruelty General Constructivism Dada Expressionism Fluxus Futurism Russian Futurism Cubo-Futurism Lettrism Modernism Minimalism Postminimalism Neo-minimalism Neo-Dada Neoism Postmodernism Postmodernist film Late modernism Primitivism Situationist International Social realism Socialist realism Surrealism Symbolism Russian symbolism v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nchxs
Cached time: 20250817044714
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.799 seconds
Real time usage: 1.042 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3133/1000000
Revision size: 22348/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 177543/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4422/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 94484/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.484/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16277220/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  806.028      1 -total
 24.00%  193.410      1 Template:Reflist
 18.79%  151.463      7 Template:Cite_book
 15.91%  128.240      2 Template:Langx
 15.58%  125.619      9 Template:Navbox
 10.69%   86.161      1 Template:Kazimir_Malevich
  7.00%   56.421      2 Template:Infobox
  6.73%   54.267      1 Template:Short_description
  6.37%   51.373      1 Template:Infobox_art_movement
  6.08%   49.033      1 Template:Pp Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:293097:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044714 and revision id 1301226047. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Suprematism&oldid=1301226047 " Categories : Russian artist groups and collectives Russian avant-garde Ukrainian avant-garde Suprematism (art movement) Russian art movements Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Wikipedia semi-protected pages Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Russian-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 19:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Suprematism 60 languages Add topic

