Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ancestors 2 Greek tribes Toggle Greek tribes subsection 2.1 Late Bronze Age: Homeric Age of the Iliad (circa 1200 BC) 2.1.1 Hellenes 2.2 Iron Age: Archaic and Classical Greece (from circa 800 BC) 2.2.1 Hellenes 3 Pre-Greek and non-Greek tribes (later Hellenized) 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents List of ancient Greek tribes 6 languages Български Ελληνικά Español Magyar Shqip Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Indo-European topics Languages List of Indo-European languages Extant Albanoid Albanian Armenian Balto-Slavic Baltic Slavic Celtic Germanic Hellenic Greek Indo-Iranian Indo-Aryan Iranian Nuristani Italic Romance Extinct Anatolian Tocharian Paleo-Balkan Dacian Illyrian Liburnian Messapic Mysian Paeonian Phrygian Thracian Reconstructed Proto-Indo-European language Phonology : Sound laws , Accent , Ablaut Hypothetical Balkanic Daco-Thracian Graeco-Albanian Graeco-Armenian Graeco-Aryan Graeco-Phrygian Indo-Hittite Italo-Celtic Thraco-Illyrian Grammar Vocabulary Root Verbs Nouns Pronouns Numerals Particles Other Proto-Albanian Proto-Anatolian Proto-Armenian Proto-Germanic ( Proto-Norse ) Proto-Italo-Celtic ( Proto-Celtic · Proto-Italic ) Proto-Greek Proto-Balto-Slavic ( Proto-Slavic · Proto-Baltic ) Proto-Indo-Iranian ( Proto-Indo-Aryan , Proto-Iranian , Proto-Nuristani ) Philology Hittite inscriptions Hieroglyphic Luwian Linear B Rigveda Avesta Homer Behistun Greek epigraphy Phrygian epigraphy Messapic epigraphy Latin epigraphy Gaulish epigraphy Runic epigraphy Ogham Gothic Bible Bible translations into Armenian Tocharian script Old Irish glosses Albanian Kanun Origins Homeland Proto-Indo-Europeans Society Religion Mainstream Kurgan hypothesis Indo-European migrations Eurasian nomads Alternative and fringe Anatolian hypothesis Armenian hypothesis Beech argument Indigenous Aryanism Baltic homeland Paleolithic continuity theory Archaeology Chalcolithic (Copper Age) Pontic Steppe Domestication of the horse Kurgan Kurgan stelae Kurgan culture Steppe cultures Bug–Dniester Sredny Stog Dnieper–Donets Samara Khvalynsk Yamnaya Mykhailivka culture Novotitarovskaya culture Caucasus Maykop East Asia Afanasievo Eastern Europe Usatove Cernavodă Cucuteni Northern Europe Corded ware Baden Middle Dnieper Bronze Age Pontic Steppe Chariot Yamnaya Catacomb Multi-cordoned ware Poltavka Srubnaya Northern/Eastern Steppe Abashevo culture Andronovo Sintashta Europe Globular Amphora Corded ware Bell Beaker Únětice Trzciniec Nordic Bronze Age Terramare Tumulus Urnfield Proto-Villanovan Lusatian Este South Asia Bishkent Vakhsh BMAC Ochre Coloured Pottery Copper Hoard Cemetery H Gandhara grave Iron Age Steppe Chernoles Europe Thraco-Cimmerian Hallstatt Latial Jastorf Caucasus Colchian Central Asia Yaz India Painted Grey Ware Northern Black Polished Ware Peoples and societies Bronze Age Anatolian peoples ( Hittites ) Armenians Mycenaean Greeks Indo-Iranians Iron Age Indo-Aryans Indo-Aryans Iranians Iranians Nuristanis Nuristanis East Asia Wusun Yuezhi Europe Celts Gauls Celtiberians Insular Celts Cimmerians Hellenic peoples Italic peoples Germanic peoples Paleo-Balkan / Anatolia Thracians Dacians Illyrians Paeonians Phrygians Scythians Middle Ages East Asia Tocharians Europe Albanians Balts Slavs Norsemen / Medieval Scandinavians Middle Ages Indo-Aryan Medieval India Iranian Greater Iran Religion and mythology Reconstructed Proto-Indo-European mythology Proto-Indo-Iranian religion Historical Vedic religion Ancient Iranian religion Historical Hittite Indo-Aryan Vedic Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Sikhism Iranian Persian Zoroastrianism Kurdish Yazidism Yarsanism Scythian Ossetian Others Armenian European Paleo-Balkan ( Albanian · Illyrian · Thracian · Dacian ) Greek Roman Celtic Irish Scottish Breton Welsh Cornish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Norse Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Slavic Practices Fire rituals Horse sacrifice Sati Winter solstice / Yule Indo-European studies Scholars Marija Gimbutas J. P. Mallory Institutes Copenhagen Studies in Indo-European Publications Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture The Horse, the Wheel, and Language Journal of Indo-European Studies Indogermanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch Indo-European Etymological Dictionary Category v t e The ancient Greek tribes ( Ancient Greek : Ἑλλήνων ἔθνη ) were groups of Greek-speaking populations living in Greece , Cyprus , and the various Greek colonies . They were primarily divided by geographic , dialectal , political , and cultural criteria, as well as distinct traditions in mythology and religion .

Some groups were of mixed origin, forming a syncretic culture through absorption and assimilation of previous and neighboring populations into the Greek language and customs. Greek word for tribe was Phylē (sing.) and Phylai (pl.), the tribe was further subdivided in Demes (sing.

Demos , pl.

Demoi ) roughly matching to a clan .

The name Pelasgians was used exclusively by the ancient Greek writers, who referred to the populations they considered the ancestors of the Greeks or "pre-Hellenic". Some, mainly later ones, use it to describe purely Greek populations.

With the dominion of land passing on from one tribe to the other, cultural exchange through art and trade, and frequent alliances toward common goals, the ethnic character of the different tribes had become primarily political by the dawn of the Hellenistic period . The Roman conquest of Greece , the subsequent division of the Roman Empire into Greek East and Latin West , as well as the advent of Christianity , molded the common ethnic and political Greek identity once and for all to the subjects of the Greek world by the 3rd century AD.

Ancestors [ edit ] Map 1: Indo-European migrations as described in The Horse, the Wheel, and Language by David W. Anthony Proto-Indo-Europeans ( Proto-Indo-European speakers (?) Proto-Graeco-Phrygians (proposed subgroup of Proto-Graeco-Phrygian speakers) [ 1 ] (?) Proto-Graeco-Armenians (proposed subgroup of Proto-Graeco-Armenian speakers) [ 2 ] (?) Proto-Graeco-Aryans (proposed subgroup of Proto-Graeco-Aryan speakers) [ 3 ] Proto-Greeks (Proto-Greek speakers) Greek tribes [ edit ] This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "List of ancient Greek tribes" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Map 2: The Greek/Illyrian/Thracian contact zone ( Paleo-Balkan languages ) Late Bronze Age: Homeric Age of the Iliad (circa 1200 BC) [ edit ] Hellenes [ edit ] Map 3: Homeric Greece Map 4: Greek language prehistory (2000-1000 BC), showing the complex pattern of peoples migrations and their languages and dialects Map 5: Reconstruction of the Proto-Greek area in c.

3rd millennium BC as suggested by Vladimir I. Georgiev Achaeans / Argives / Danaans ( Danaoi ) / Hellenes / Panhellenes (used as synonym of Greeks by Homer in the Iliad ) ( Mycenaean Greece before Late Bronze Age collapse and Dorian Invasion ) Central and Eastern Greek tribes ( Aeolians , Achaeans and Ionians ) Achaeans (Broader sense) Central Greek tribes ( Aeolians and Achaeans ) Aeolians Acarnanians , Pre-Dorian Acarnanians Dulichiumians / Doulicheis (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Taphians and Teleboans - in the Echinades Islands Taphians ( Táphioi ) - in Taphos Island and other Echinades Islands Teleboans ( Tēlebóai ) - Originally in the Mainland (in Acarnania ), after in Taphos Island and other Echinades Islands Cephallenians - Original dwellers of Cephalonia / Kefalonia , Ithaca (homeland of Odysseus ), Leucas / Lefkada and Zakynthos (Southern Ionian Islands ) (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Aenianes /Enienes - Pre-Dorian Aenianes of Aenis Boeotians Aones (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Curetes or Aetolians (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Dryopes - Pre-Dorian dwellers of Doris Locrians - Pre-Dorian Locrians (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Phoceans - Pre-Dorian Phoceans (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Thessalians Lapiths ( Lapíthai ) (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) ( Phlegyas was their mythical king) Myrmidons ( Myrmidónes ) (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) (people of Achilles in the Iliad ) Perrhaebi ( Perraiboí ) (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Achaeans (Narrower sense) - Pre-Doric people of Peloponnese Peninsula (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Arcadians (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Argives - Pre-Doric people of Argos (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Epeans ( el ) of Elis ( Epeioí ) - Pre-Doric people of Elis (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Lacedaemonians - Pre-Doric people of Lacedaemonia , later doric Sparta (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Mycenaeans - Pre-Doric Myceneans , Mycenae was their main settlement (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Symians (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Eastern Greek tribes ( Ionians ) Ionians Oldest tribes ( Phylai ) Agikoreis Argadeis Geleontes Hopletes Attics Athenians (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Euboeans Abantes Salamineans (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Western Greek tribes ( Dorians and Magnetes ) Dorians Oldest tribes ( Phylai ) Dymanes (descendants from the legendary eponym hero Dymas ) Hylleis (descendants from the legendary eponym hero from Hyllus ) Pamphylians (descendants from the legendary eponym hero Pamphylos ) Northwestern Doric Greek tribes Epirotes ( Epirotic Dorians ?) Phaeacians - They lived in the island Scheria (may have been an old name for the island of Kerkyra / Corfu before Corinthian colonization) (mentioned in the Odyssey as a people that welcomed Odysseus before his return to Ithaca ).

Magnetes (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Iron Age: Archaic and Classical Greece (from circa 800 BC) [ edit ] Archaic and Classical Greece after Late Bronze Age collapse and Dorian Invasion Further information: Ancient Greek dialects Distribution of Greek dialects in Greece in the classical period .

[ 4 ] Western group: Doric proper Northwest Doric Achaean Doric (probably Northwest Doric) Central group: Aeolic Arcado-Cypriot Eastern group: Attic Ionic Distribution of Greek dialects in Magna Graecia (Southern Italy and Sicily) in the classical period.

Western group: Doric proper Northwest Doric Achaean Doric (probably Northwest Doric) Eastern group: Attic - Ionic Map 7: Major Greek tribes, as the ancient Greeks perceived them, based on the mythical account provided in the Catalogue of Women by pseudo-Hesiod (6th c. BC) Map 8: Archaic Greece Map 9: Major regions of mainland ancient Greece, and adjacent "barbarian" lands.

Map 10: Ancient Regions of Epirus and Macedon.

Map 11: Ancient Regions of West Central, North and West Greece.

Map 12: Ancient regions of Central Greece.

Map 13: Ancient Regions of Peloponnese (southern mainland Greece).

Map 14: Ancient Crete Map 15: Ancient Macedonia Hellenes [ edit ] Central and Eastern Greek tribes ( Aeolians , Achaeans and Ionians ) Achaeans (Broader sense) - They lived in Eastern, East Central and Southern Greece ( Mycenean Greece ) before Dorian migrations or Dorian invasions (after that most Achaeans were displaced or assimilated by Dorians in Southern Greece regions, except for Arcadia ). They spoke Mycenean Greek that was the ancestor of Aeolic , Arcado-Cypriot and Ionic Greek dialects of Classical Greece .

Central Greek tribes ( Aeolians and Achaeans ) Aeolians - They spoke Aeolic Greek dialects (archaic dialects that preserved some Mycenean Greek features).

Boeotians - They lived in Boeotia ( Aonia ) Dryopes - They lived in Dryopis , later known as Doris (after driven out by the Malians , a Dorian tribe, many scattered to other Greek regions, mostly towards far southern of Euboea Island).

Thessalians - They lived in Thessaly ( Thessalia / Aeolia ).

Mount Olympus is on the border between Thessaly and Macedon .

Achaeans, Phtiothis - They lived in Achaea Phthiotis .

Dolopes ? - They lived in Dolopia (mostly considered a Thessalian tribe) Histiaeoteans - They lived in Histiaeotis , Thessaly 's Northwest district.

Thessalians Proper - They lived in Thessaliotis .

Aeolian Diaspora Asia Minor Aeolians - They lived in Aeolis , Northwestern Anatolian coast.

Lesbians - They lived in Lesbos Island.

Achaeans (Narrower sense) (Arcado-Cyprian tribes) - They spoke Arcado-Cypriot Greek dialects (archaic dialects that preserved some Mycenean Greek features).

Arcadians - They lived in Arcadia (Central Peloponnese Peninsula) and were a pre- Dorian invasion or Dorian migration Greek tribal confederation.

Azanes Triphylians - They were a group of three tribes ( Tri - Three, Phylai -Tribes) that lived in Western Peloponnese , in southern part of Elis (south of Alpheiós river) but saw themselves as Arcadians and not Eleans .

Amphidolians Letrinians Marganians Achaean Diaspora Cypriots - They lived in Cyprus Island Pamphylians - They lived in Pamphylia (South-West Anatolia ).

Eastern Greek tribes ( Ionians ) Ionians - They spoke Ionic Greek dialects (basis of the Greek Koiné and its descendant Modern Greek ).

Oldest tribes ( Phylai ) Agikoreis Argadeis Geleontes Hopletes Attics - They lived in Attica (included ancient Athenians ) ( Marathon is in Attica ) Aiantis (named after Ajax ) ( Aeschylus was a member of this tribe) Aigeis (named after Aegeus ) Akamantis / Acamantis (named after Acamas ) ( Pericles was a member of this tribe) Antiochis (named after Antiochus, son of Heracles ) ( Socrates was a member of this tribe) Erechtheis (named after Erechtheus ) ( Critias may also have been a member of this tribe) Hippothontis (named after Hippothoon ) Kekropis (named after Cécrops ) Leontis (named after Leos , son of Orpheus ) ( Themistocles was a member of this tribe) Oineis (named after Oeneus ) Pandionis (named after Pandion ) Euboeans (West Ionians) - They lived in Euboea Island.

Abantes Euboean Diaspora Chalcidicians , Euboean - They lived in the Peninsula of Chalcidicia (many were descendants from Euboean colonies from the cities of Chalcis and Eretria ).

Catanians - They lived in Catania , Magna Graecia (many were descendants from a Euboean colony from the city of Chalcis ).

Cumaeans - They lived in Cumae , that was founded by settlers from Euboea island (from Chalcis and Eretria cities) in Magna Graecia . It was one of the Greek colonies that most influenced ancient Etruscan and Roman cultures, namely by the introduction of the Alphabet .

Cumae by itself was the Metropolis of other poleis in southern Italy coast, including Nea Polis (New City), today's Naples (it was to the West and close of Naples ).

Neapolitans - They lived in Naples (many were descendants from Rhodean and Ionic colonies, the last ones were more numerous).

Ionians, Cycladian (Central Ionians) - They lived in Cyclades Islands.

Delos Island that had the important Delos sanctuary was in this group of islands.

Cycladian Diaspora Chalcidicians , Cycladian - They lived in the Peninsula of Chalcidicia (many were descendants of a colony from Andros Island).

Salamineans - in Salamis / Salamina Island Ionian Diaspora Asia Minor Ionians (East Ionians) - They lived in Ionia , Western Anatolian coast.

Sirisians - They lived in Siris in Lucania / Basilicata eastern coast (many were descendants of a colony from the city of Colophon , in the Western Anatolian coast).

Western Greek tribes ( Dorians and Macedonians ) Dorians - They spoke Doric Greek dialects (that were not descendants of Mycenean Greek but from a common Proto-Greek language).

Northwestern Doric Greek tribes - They spoke North-West Doric Greek dialect Acarnanians , Northwestern Greek - They lived in Acarnania (this region had two groups of Greeks: the native Northwestern Greek Acarnanians and the Dorians Proper Acarnanians, many of whom were descendants from Corinthian colonies).

Achaean Dorians - Many were Achaeans assimilated by Dorians . They spoke a Northwest Greek dialect but with a stronger Achaean Greek substrate. They spoke Achaean Doric Greek (not to be confused with Achaean Greek).

Achaean Dorians of Peloponnese - They lived in Achaea (whose older name was Aegialus/Aegialea and was dwelt by Ionians ) (North Peloponnese Peninsula).

Achaean Dorians Diaspora Crotoneans - They lived in Crotone (Eastern Calabria coast), Magna Graecia (many were descendants from an Achaean colony from the city of Rhypes ).

Achaean Dorians of the Islands Doulicheis - Older dwellers of Leucas / Lefkada Island (before Corinthian colonization).

Ithacians - They lived in Ithaca Island (the land of the legendary Odysseus , the main character of the Odyssey and also one of the main ones in the Iliad whose author is traditionally thought to be Homer ).

Kefalloneis - They lived in Kephalonia Island.

Zakynthians - They lived in Zakynthos Island.

Aenianians - They lived in Aeniania / Ainis .

Aetolians / Curetes - They lived in Aetolia .

Aetolian Mountain tribes (Southern Pindus Mountains) Agraeis Aperantoi Apodotoi Eurytanians ( Eurytanes ) - They lived in Eurytania / Evrytania .

Ophioneis Dolopes ? - They lived in Dolopia . (sometimes considered an Aetolian tribe) Amphilochians - They lived in Amphilochia .

Eleans - They lived in Elis (West Peloponnese Peninsula).

Olympia , where the Ancient Olympic Games were held, was in Elis.

Epirotes (Epirotic Dorians) - They lived in Epirus .

Amantes [ 5 ] (?) (there is ongoing debate on if the tribe was Epirote Greek or Illyrian .) Atintanes [ 6 ] (?) (there is ongoing debate on if the tribe was Epirote Greek or Illyrian .) Chaonians - They lived in Chaonia .

Subtribes or Clans: Dexaroi Molossians - A tribal confederation. They lived in Molossis / Molossia .

Apheidantes - They were named after king Apheidas .

Arktanoi [ 7 ] Athamanians (or Athamanes) - They lived in Athamania Dodonaioi or Selloi [ 8 ] - Dodona sanctuary and oracle was in their land.

Orestaes - They lived in Orestis .

Parauaei / Paroraioi - They lived in Parauaea , Northern Pindus Mountains.

Paroraioi (Paroraei) - They lived in the western slopes of Mount Tymphe , Northern Pindus Mountains.

Pelagones [ 9 ] - They lived in Pelagonia .

Talares - They lived on Mount Pindus and in the neighborhood of Mount Tomarus .

Tymphaeans - They lived in Tymphaea , eastern slopes of Mount Tymphe .

Thesprotians - They lived in Thesprotia .

Subtribes or Clans: Aegestaeoi ; Chimerioi ; Eleaeoi ; Elinoi ; Ephyroi ; Elopes ; Fanoteis ; Farganaeoi ; Fylates ; Graeci ; Ikadotoi ; Kartatoi ; Kassopaioi ( Kassopaeans ); [ 10 ] Kestrinoi ; Klauthrioi ; Kropioi ; Larissaeoi ; Onopernoi ; Opatoi ; Parauaioi ; Tiaeoi ; Torydaeoi .

Locrians - They lived in Locris .

Malians - They lived in Malia /Malis.

Thermopylae was in their land.

Oetaeans - They lived in Oetaea , included Mount Oeta .

Phoceans - They lived in Phocis .

Delphi sanctuary and oracle was in their land (on the southern slopes of Mount Parnassus ).

Dorians Proper They spoke Doric Greek dialects.

Oldest tribes ( Phylai ) Dymanes (descendants from the legendary eponym hero Dymas ) Hylleis (descendants from the legendary eponym hero from Hyllus ) Pamphylians (descendants from the legendary eponym hero from Pamphylus ) Argives - They lived in Argolis (East Peloponnese Peninsula).

Corinthians - They lived in Corinthia ( Isthmus of Corinth and North-East Peloponnese Peninsula). Many Greek colonies were of Corinthian origin (i.e.

Corinth was the Metropolis - Mother City, the origin of many Greek colonies).

Corinthian Diaspora Acarnanians , Dorians Proper - They lived in Acarnania (this region had two groups of Greeks: the native Northwestern Greek Acarnanians and the Dorians Proper Acarnanians, many of whom were descendants from Corinthian colonies).

Ambracians - Descendants of a Corinthian colony . They lived in Ambracia .

Kerkyreans / Corcyraeans - Descendants of a Corinthian colony . They lived in Kerkyra / Corfu ( Corcyra ). ( Phaeacians may have been the original inhabitants and called their island Scheria ).

Leucadians - Descendants of a Corinthian colony . They lived in Leucas ( Lefkada ) Island.

Syracusans - They lived in Syracuse in South-East Sicily Island, Magna Graecia (many were descendants from a Corinthian colony).

Cretans - They lived in Crete Island.

Cythereans - They lived in Cythera ( Kythera / Kythira ) Island, south of Peloponnese Peninsula.

Dorians (of Doris ) - They lived in Doris (Upper Cephissus river valley). They were viewed as a people close to the land were Dorians originated - roughly south Epirus and Aetolia in Northwest Greece (when they migrated towards south).

Laconians - They lived in Laconia (South Peloponnese Peninsula).

Spartans-Lacedaemonians - They lived in Sparta / Lacedaemon a part of Laconia (South Peloponnese Peninsula).

Spartan Diaspora Tarantinoi - They lived in Taranto , Magna Graecia (many were descendants from a Spartan colony).

Megareans - They lived in Megaris .

Messenians - They lived in Messenia (South-West Peloponnese Peninsula).

Thereans - They lived in Thera / Thira Island ( Santorini ).

Therean Diaspora Cyreneans - Descendants from a Thera Island colony. They lived in Cyrene , Cyrenaica (Eastern Libya ).

Dorian Diaspora Doric Hexapolis Cnideans - They lived in Cnidus .

Coans - They lived in Kos Island.

Halicarnasseans - They lived in Halicarnassus .

Rhodians - They lived in Rhodes Island.

Camirians - They lived in Camirus .

Ialysians - They lived in Ialysos .

Lindians - They lived in Lindus .

Macedonians - Magnetes Macedonians ( Makedónes ) - They lived in Ancient Macedonia and may have spoken a version of the Doric dialect.

Argeads - According to their oral tradition their tribe originally came from Argos , in Argolis , Eastern Peloponnese Peninsula ( Argeads = Argives ) (origin of the Macedonian ruling dynasty - The Argeads - House of Argos ).

Elimiotai [ 9 ] - They lived in Elimiotis / Elimeia .

Eordeans - They lived in Eordaia .

Lyncestai - They lived in Lynkestis .

Magnetes - They lived in Magnesia (most of Thessaly 's coastal region). They were seen by ancient Greeks as a people that shared a common ancestor with the Macedonians .

Pre-Greek and non-Greek tribes (later Hellenized) [ edit ] Pre-Greek and non-Greek tribes who became hellenized and whom some of the later Greek tribes claimed descent from Anatolians ?

Caucones Leleges Telchines - Pre-Greek dwellers of Rhodes Island (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Cadmeans Eteocypriots (" True Cypriots ") - They lived scattered through Cyprus island.

Minoan Cretans (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Eteocretans ? (" True Cretans ") - They lived in the eastern region of Crete island.

Bottiaeans ? - They originally lived in Bottiaea , after Macedonian conquest many of them migrated to Bottike Minyans ( Minyes ) (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships ) Mysians ?

Pelasgians (mentioned in Iliad 's Catalogue of Ships and in Trojan Battle Order ) - They lived scattered through several regions of ancient Greece (like Pelasgiotis ) in enclaves.

Aethices / Aethikes - They lived on Mount Pindus and in the neighborhood of Mount Tomarus .

Attican Pelasgians - They lived in Attica in scattered communities. Later they were fully assimilated into an Attican Ionian Greek ethnic identity.

Crestones - They lived in Crestonia (southern slopes of Bertiscus Mount , today's Vertiskos Mount ; Vertiskos village is on the slopes), to the north of the Mygdonia , to the northeast of Thessalonika ).

Cretan Pelasgians - They lived in parts of Crete island along with other peoples of the island: Eteocretans ("True Cretans" or Cretans proper), Achaean and Dorian Greeks and the Cydonians (of the city of Cydonia /modern Chania ).

Hellespontus Pelasgians - They lived in the Thracian Chersonesus (today's Gallipoli Peninsula ) and some parts on the coast of the other side of the Hellespontus or Dardanelles strait (on the Asian side) before the Thracian expansion and conquest of that peninsula.

Lemnian Pelasgians - They lived in Lemnos island, in the North Aegean Sea . They were conquered by Athens at the end of the 6th century BC and later assimilated into an Ionian Greek identity. Some of them moved to the peninsula's promontory of Actē (today's Mount Athos ).

Cynurians - They lived in Cynuria ( Cynuria had two enclaves, one on the coast of eastern Peloponnese Peninsula, between Laconia and Argolis , and another inland, in the far southwestern Arcadia , also called Parrhasia ) but it is not certain if Cynurians of East Peloponnese coast and Cynurians of the inland ( Arcadia ) were the same people, two branches of an original people or even if they were directly related.

Arcadian Cynurians / Inland Cynurians (Arcadian Pelasgians/Parrhasia Pelasgians) - They lived in far southwestern Arcadia (an inland region of Peloponnese ), that was also called Parrhasia , around Mount Lykaion / Lycaeus .

East Peloponnese Coastal Cynurians - They lived on the coast of eastern Peloponnese Peninsula, from the coast to the eastern slopes of Mount Parnon .

Hyantes Pelasgians (legendary or partly based on a true people and historical events) - Former Pelasgians inhabitants of Boeotia , from which country they were expelled by the followers of Cadmus (Peck; Pliny's Natural History, iv.12).

Pelasgiotes - They lived in Pelasgiotis (eastern Thessaly that included Thessaly 's own capital Larissa ).

Propontis Pelasgians - They lived in some islands ( Marmara , Aphousia ) and parts of the southern coast of the Propontis (today's Marmara Sea ), mostly in Cyzicus .

Samothracian Pelasgians - They lived in the island of Samothrace in the North Aegean Sea , south of Thrace . They were conquered by Athens at the beginning of the 5th century BC and later assimilated into an Ionian Greek identity.

Phrygians ?

Bryges Mygdones Phrygians Proper Thracians ?

Pieres - They originally lived in Pieria , after Macedonian conquest many of them migrated to Pieris Tyrrhenians ?

See also [ edit ] Greeks Regions of ancient Greece List of Celtic tribes List of Germanic peoples List of ancient peoples of Italy List of Ancient Iranian peoples List of ancient Indo-Aryan peoples and tribes References [ edit ] ^ Ligorio, Orsat; Lubotsky, Alexander (2018).

"Handbook of Comparative and Historical Indo-European Linguistics" .

De Gruyter : 1816– 1831.

^ Ebert, Max (1924).

Reallexikon der Vorgeschichte: unter Mitwirkung zahlreicher Fachgelehrter (in German). W. de Gruyter. pp.

219– 226.

^ Euler, Wolfram (1979).

Indoiranisch-griechische Gemeinsamkeiten der Nominalbildung und deren indogermanische Grundlagen (in German). Institut für Sprachwissenschaft der Universität Innsbruck.

ISBN 978-3-85124-550-9 .

^ Roger D. Woodard (2008), "Greek dialects", in: The Ancient Languages of Europe , ed. R. D. Woodard, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 51.

^ The Illyrian Atintani, the Epirotic Atintanes and the Roman Protectorate N. G. L. Hammond, The Journal of Roman Studies Vol. 79 (1989), pp. 11-25 "There were Illyrian Amantini in Pannonia and Greek Amantes in North Epirus" ^ Wilkes, John.

The Illyrians (The Peoples of Europe) . Wiley-Blackwell, 1995, p. 97.

^ Mogens Herman Hansen and Thomas Heine Nielsen.

An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis . Oxford University Press, 2004, p. 345.

^ Mogens Herman Hansen and Thomas Heine Nielsen.

An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis . Oxford University Press, 2004, p. 338.

^ a b John Boardman and Nicholas Geoffrey Lemprière Hammond.

The Cambridge Ancient History Volume 3, Part 3: The Expansion of the Greek World, Eighth to Sixth Centuries B.C.

Cambridge University Press, 1992, p. 284.

^ Woodhouse, William John.

Aetolia: Its Geography, Topography, and Antiquities . Clarendon Press, 1897, p. 70. "Ptolemy, however, makes them neighbours of the Epirot tribe of the Kassopaioi, who lived on the coast of the Ionian sea." External links [ edit ] Source texts of ancient Greek and Roman authors Strabo's The Geography ( Geographica ). Books 7, Chapter 7 and Books 8, 9 and 10 are about Greece (each region has a chapter).

v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_ancient_Greek_tribes&oldid=1305511349 " Categories : Ancient tribes in Greece Lists of ethnic groups Lists of ancient people Lists of tribes Lists of ancient Greek people Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles needing additional references from February 2018 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 13:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of ancient Greek tribes 6 languages Add topic

