Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Functions 2 Main audience 3 Collections and services 4 Management Committee 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Publications Office of the European Union 26 languages Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Français Gaeilge Italiano Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Malti Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Publications Office (European Union) ) Academic and legal publisher This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Publications Office of the European Union" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Publications Office of the European Union Former building of the Publications Office of the European Union (2023) Agency overview Formed 1969 ( 1969 ) Type EU Interinstitutional body Jurisdiction European Union Headquarters Luxembourg , Luxembourg 20, rue de Reims, 2417 Luxembourg, Luxembourg Employees 615 Agency executive Ms Hilde Hardeman, Director-General Key documents Decision 2009/496/EC [ 1 ] Procedure 2012/C 402/05 [ 2 ] Website op .europa .eu The Publications Office of the European Union is the official provider of publishing services and data, information and knowledge management services to all EU institutions, bodies and agencies. This makes it the central point of access to EU law, publications, open data, research results, procurement notices, and other official information.

[ 3 ] Its mission is to support EU policies and make a broad range of information publicly available as accessible and reusable data. The overall aim is to facilitate transparency, economic activity, and the dissemination of knowledge.

[ 3 ] As such, it is the central provider of access to publications of the European Union including legal publications (prominently the Official Journal of the European Union ), public procurement notices, open data and applications.

Functions [ edit ] Supports the policies and communication activities of the EU institutions and agencies with its services and offers them expertise and synergies in a number of domains.

Ensures, with its modelling and referencing activities, that the diverse information assets coming from EU institutions take the form of findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable (FAIR) information and data.

Makes sure that this vast array of official EU information and data – an essential element in today's data-driven economy – is made available to the public to support transparency, economic activity, the development of modern technologies, such as artificial intelligence, and access to knowledge in general.

Makes sure that this content is preserved and made accessible for future generations.

Engages with citizens on a regular and increasing basis to help achieve its objectives.

[ 4 ] Main audience [ edit ] The Publications Office's main audience is the public (individuals and businesses).

Thanks to its work, a wide range of official EU information is available to the public as findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable (FAIR) data — essential in today's data-driven economy. The Publications Office thus supports transparency, economic activity, the development of modern technologies such as artificial intelligence, and access to knowledge in general.

[ 4 ] This means it plays a significant role in several of the EU's political priorities: democracy, the economy, and digital transformation.

Collections and services [ edit ] Community Research and Development Information Service (CORDIS), the European Commission's primary source of results from the projects funded by the EU's framework programmes for research and innovation .

EUR-Lex , the gateway to EU law, providing free access to, and information about, public legal documents from the European Union.

TED ( Tenders Electronic Daily ), the online version of the Supplement to the Official Journal of the European Union , dedicated to European public procurement. It is the official entry point to all business opportunities involving public procurement contracts for values above EU thresholds (EUR 144 000) in the European Union, the European Economic Area and beyond.

the Publications Office online public access catalogue (OPAC), allowing librarians or other information professionals, to search in more than 330 000 individual bibliographic records and download metadata of their selected publications into their own catalogues.

the EU Web Archive preserves websites of EU institutions, agencies and bodies.

[ 5 ] It maintains collections using the Archive-It service: data.europa.eu : the official portal for European data EU publications website: the publications of EU institutions, agencies and other bodies in various formats EU Whoiswho : the directory of the European institutions Management Committee [ edit ] The Publications Office of the European Union is managed by its director-general and senior management on the basis of the strategic guidelines set by the management committee.

See also [ edit ] Official Journal of the European Union EUR-Lex data.europa.eu EuroVoc CORDIS (Community Research & Development Information Service) References [ edit ] ^ "2009/496/EC, Euratom: Decision of the European Parliament, the Council, the Commission, the Court of Justice, the Court of Auditors, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions of 26 June 2009 on the organisation and operation of the Publications Office of the European Union" .

^ Rules of Procedure of the Management Committee of the Publications Office of the European Union ^ a b "About us: mission, vision, values - About Us - Publications Office of the EU" .

op.europa.eu . Retrieved 16 June 2022 .

Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License .

^ a b "What we do - About Us - Publications Office of the EU" .

beta.op.europa.eu . Retrieved 16 June 2022 .

Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License .

^ "EU web archive - Web tools - Publications Office of the EU" .

Publications Office of the European Union .

Archived from the original on 29 October 2020 . Retrieved 7 January 2021 .

v t e Administration of the European Commission Table of European Commission Directorates-General and Services DG = Directorate-General Civil Service Directorates-General Cabinets Comitology EPSO Civil Service Tribunal Policy DGs Agriculture and Rural Development Climate Action Communications Networks, Content and Technology Competition Defence Industry and Space Economic and Financial Affairs Education and Culture Employment, Social Affairs and Equal Inclusion Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs Environment Health and Food Safety Migration and Home Affairs Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital Markets Union Joint Research Centre Justice and Consumers Maritime Affairs and Fisheries Regional and Urban Policy Research and Innovation Taxation and Customs Union Mobility and Transport Energy External DGs Service for Foreign Policy Instruments Neighborhood and Enlargement Negotiations Trade International Cooperation and Development European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations General Services Communication Eurostat HERA OLAF Publications Secretariat-General Secretary-General Europe by Satellite Structural Reform Support Service Internal Services Budget European Political Strategy Centre Digital Services Data Protection Officer Infrastructures and Logistics (Brussels & Luxembourg) Internal Audit Service Interpretation Legal Service PMO Human Resources and Security Translation Buildings Berlaymont Breydel Charlemagne Convent Van Maerlant Euroforum Jean Monnet 2 Joseph Bech Madou Plaza Tower Missions Triangle building European Union portal Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF 2 National United States Czech Republic 2 Portugal Israel 2 Academics CiNii People ISIL : OCLC-LUPEU Trove Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Publications_Office_of_the_European_Union&oldid=1291458494 " Categories : General Services in the European Commission Web archiving initiatives Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2021 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 21 May 2025, at 10:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Publications Office of the European Union 26 languages Add topic

