Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Examples gallery 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Book frontispiece 30 languages Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano ქართული Кыргызча Lëtzebuergesch Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Illustration facing a book's title page For other uses, see Frontispiece (disambiguation) .

A frontispiece painted by William Blake for his Milton a Poem , published in 1810 A frontispiece in books is a decorative or informative illustration facing a book's title page , usually on the left-hand, or verso , page opposite the right-hand, or recto page of a book.

[ 1 ] In some ancient editions or in modern luxury editions the frontispiece features thematic or allegorical elements, in others is the author's portrait that appears as the frontispiece. In medieval illuminated manuscripts , a presentation miniature showing the book or text being presented (by whom and to whom varies) was often used as a frontispiece.

Etymology [ edit ] The word comes from the French frontispice , which derives from the late Latin frontispicium , [ 2 ] composed of the Latin frons ('forehead') and specere ('to look at'). It was synonymous with ' metoposcopy '. In English, it was originally used as an architectural term , referring to the decorative facade of a building. In the 17th century, in other languages as in Italian , [ 3 ] the term came to refer to the title page of a book, which at the time was often decorated with intricate engravings that borrowed stylistic elements from architecture, such as columns and pediments .

Over the course of the 17th century, the title page of a book came to be accompanied by an illustration on the facing page (known in Italian as antiporta ), so that in English the term took on the meaning it retains today as early as 1682. By then, the English spelling had also morphed, by way of folk etymology , from 'frontispice' to 'frontispiece' ('front' + 'piece').

[ 4 ] Examples gallery [ edit ] A frontispiece and title page of Matthias Klostermayr 's biography (1772) A portrait of Yung Wing used as the frontispiece of his 1909 book My Life in China and America Frontispiece to A popular treatise on the winds: Comprising the general motions of the atmosphere, monsoons, cyclones, tornadoes, waterspouts, hail-storms, etc.

by William Ferrel (1904) Title page and frontispiece to Telliamed by Benoît de Maillet (1749) Title page and frontispiece to volume I1 of Joannis Kepleri Astronomi Opera Omnia by Johannes Kepler (1858) Frontispiece and title page to De Rerum Natura by Titus Lucretius Carus (1754) Frontispiece and title page to volume I of Histoire Naturelle, Générale et Particulière by Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon (1774) Frontispiece illustration from Johann Bode's Anleitung zur Kentniss des Gestirnten Himmels (1772) Frontispiece of the first edition of the memoirs of Pierre Victor, Baron de Besenval de Brunstatt , showing his portrait (1805) Frontispiece of the seventh edition of Germain Brice's Paris travel guide (1717). This is a special print dedicated to August Wilhelm, Herzog von Braunschweig-Wolfenbüttel See also [ edit ] Book design Shamsa References [ edit ] ^ Franklin H. Silverman, Self-Publishing Textbooks and Instructional Materials , Ch. 9, Atlantic Path Publishing, 2004.

^ Wedgwood, Hensleigh (1855).

"On False Etymologies" .

Transactions of the Philological Society (6): 68– 69.

^ Since 1619. Cf.

Cortelazzo, Manlio; Zolli, Paolo (1980).

Dizionario etimologico della lingua italiana (in Italian). Vol. II. Bologna: Zanichelli. p. 461.

^ Michael Quinion, World Wide Words Entry External links [ edit ] Look up frontispiece in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Prints & People: A Social History of Printed Pictures , an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art (fully available online as PDF), which contains material on book frontispieces Marika Sardar, “Frontispiece,” Khamseen: Islamic Art History Online , published 3 September 2021.

v t e Book design Page layout and typography Annotation Footnote Gloss Marginal note Scholia Canons of page construction Catchword Column Footer Header Headpiece Illumination Initial Historiated Inhabited Margin Miniature Ornament Page numbering Pull quote Recto and verso Rubric Rubrication Typeface Font Front and back covers Anthropodermic bibliopegy Bookbinding Buckram Dust jacket Hardcover Leather Paperback Picture cover Treasure binding Endpapers Marbled Front matter Half-title bastard title Frontispiece Title page Edition notice Imprimi potest Nihil obstat Imprimatur Dedication Epigraph Table of contents Foreword Preface Acknowledgments Introduction Prologue Printer's mark Body matter Body text Chapters Illustrations Parts Sections Tipped-in pages Back matter Afterword Conclusion Epilogue Outro Postscript Addendum/Appendix Endnotes Glossary Bibliography Index Errata Colophon Postface Author page Other elements Book curse Bookplate ex-librīs Book rhyme Die-cutting Endband Extra-illustration Fore-edge painting Intentionally blank page Pop-ups Slipcase Thumb index Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Book_frontispiece&oldid=1282951247 " Categories : Illustration Book design Book terminology Typography Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 29 March 2025, at 15:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Book frontispiece 30 languages Add topic

