Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Anthropology 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Mores 26 languages Чӑвашла Deutsch فارسی Français ગુજરાતી Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kiswahili Magyar مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Customary behaviour For the municipality in the province of Sassari, see Mores, Sardinia . For the municipality in Spain, see Morés .

A 19th-century children's book informs its readers that the Dutch were a " very industrious race ", and that Chinese children were " very obedient to their parents ".

Mores ( / ˈ m ɔːr eɪ z / , sometimes / ˈ m ɔːr iː z / ; [ 1 ] from Latin mōrēs [ˈmoːreːs] , plural form of singular mōs , meaning "manner, custom, usage, or habit") are social norms that are widely observed within a particular society or culture.

[ 2 ] Mores determine what is considered morally acceptable or unacceptable within any given culture. A folkway is what is created through interaction and that process is what organizes interactions through routine, repetition, habit and consistency.

[ 3 ] William Graham Sumner (1840–1910), an early U.S.

sociologist , introduced both the terms "mores" (1898) [ 4 ] and "folkways" (1906) into modern sociology.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Mores are strict in the sense that they determine the difference between right and wrong in a given society, and people may be punished for their immorality which is common place in many societies in the world, at times with disapproval or ostracizing. Examples of traditional customs and conventions that are mores  include lying , cheating , causing harm , alcohol use , drug use , marriage beliefs , gossip , slander , jealousy , disgracing or disrespecting parents , refusal to attend a funeral , politically incorrect humor, sports cheating, vandalism , leaving trash , plagiarism , bribery , corruption , saving face , respecting your elders, religious prescriptions and fiduciary responsibility .

[ 7 ] Folkways are ways of thinking, acting and behaving in social groups which are agreed upon by the masses and are useful for the ordering of society. Folkways are spread through imitation, oral means or observation, and are meant to encompass the material, spiritual and verbal aspects of culture.

[ 8 ] Folkways meet the problems of social life; we feel security and order from their acceptance and application.

[ 9 ] Examples of folkways include: acceptable dress , manners , social etiquette , body language , posture, level of privacy , working hours and five day work week, acceptability of social drinking —abstaining or not from drinking during certain working hours, actions and behaviours in public places , school , university , business and religious institution , ceremonial situations , ritual , customary services and keeping personal space .

[ 10 ] Terminology [ edit ] The English word morality comes from the same Latin root "mōrēs", as does the English noun moral . However, mores do not, as is commonly supposed, necessarily carry connotations of morality. Rather, morality can be seen as a subset of mores, held to be of central importance in view of their content, and often formalized into some kind of moral code or even into customary law . Etymological derivations include More danico , More judaico , More veneto , Coitus more ferarum , and O tempora, o mores!

.

The Greek terms equivalent to Latin mores are ethos (ἔθος, ἦθος, 'character') or nomos (νόμος, 'law'). As with the relation of mores to morality , ethos is the basis of the term ethics , while nomos gives the suffix -onomy , as in astronomy .

Anthropology [ edit ] Part of a series on Conservatism Variants Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Libertarian Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Balance of power Class collaboration Collective identity Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family as a state model Family values Fundamentalism Gender roles Complementarianism Essentialism Historism Honour Imperialism Law and order Loyalty Maternalism Monarchism Royalism Moral absolutism Natalism Nationalism Nativism Natural law Norms Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organised religion State Orthodoxy Patriarchy Patriarchalism Patriotism Peace through strength Property rights Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Sovereignty Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Johnson Hume Burke More Maistre Bonald Chateaubriand Czartoryski Coleridge Karamzin Savigny Carlyle Ranke Newman Tocqueville Dostoevsky Taine Le Bon Nordau Belloc Iorga Chesterton Spengler Jabotinsky Ilyin Savarkar Schmitt Eliot Mannheim Jünger Evola Strauss Röpke Gadamer Freyre Voegelin Oakeshott Burnham Lefebvre Qutb Kuehnelt-Leddihn Gómez Dávila Kirk Solzhenitsyn Koselleck Mishima Buckley Sowell Mansfield Scruton Hoppe Dugin Peterson Politicians Adams Pitt Canning Metternich Disraeli Bismarck Salisbury Dmowski Mannerheim Baldwin Maurras Horthy Metaxas Churchill Adenauer De Gasperi Chiang Salazar De Gaulle Dollfuss Franco Khomeini Reagan Powell Pinochet Marcos Park Smith Reza Shah Suharto Lee Zia Vajpayee Thatcher Kohl Fujimori Trump Bush Kaczyński Netanyahu Modi Putin Erdoğan Abe Sarkozy Bolsonaro Yoon Orbán Milei Meloni Bukele Religion Christian democracy Christian right Confucianism Clericalism Hindutva Islamism Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Theravada Buddhism Traditionalist Catholicism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Personal variants Berlusconism Bukelism Cameronism Chiangism Erdoğanism Francoism Fujimorism Gaullism Janismo Kaczyzm Maurrassisme Mellismo Metaxism Powellism Pinochetism Putinism Qutbism Khomeinism Reaganism Sarkozysm Thatcherism Trumpism Ziaism National variants Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Belize Brazil Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Cuba Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Guatemala Hungary Iceland India Iran Israel Italy Japan Luxembourg Malaysia Mexico Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Panama Peru Poland Russia Serbia Singapore Sweden Switzerland South Korea Taiwan Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Toryism United States Related ideologies Agrarianism Black conservatism In US Conservative feminism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Conservative socialism Corporatism Hispanic conservatism In US LGBTQ conservatism Ordoliberalism Para-fascism Related topics Anti-communism White Terror Anti-gender movement Anti-immigration Catholic social teaching Conservative wave NatCon Radical right Europe US Right realism Right-wing politics Alt Authoritarianism Centre Dictatorship Far New Small-c conservative Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e The meaning of all these terms extend to all customs of proper behavior in a given society, both religious and profane, from more trivial conventional aspects of custom , etiquette or politeness —"folkways" enforced by gentle social pressure , but going beyond mere "folkways" or conventions in including moral codes and notions of justice —down to strict taboos , behavior that is unthinkable within the society in question, very commonly including incest and murder , but also the commitment of outrages specific to the individual society such as blasphemy . Such religious or sacral customs may vary. Some examples include funerary services , matrimonial services ; circumcision and covering of the hair in Judaism, Christian Ten Commandments , New Commandment and the sacraments or for example baptism , and Protestant work ethic , Shahada , prayer , alms , the fast and the pilgrimage as well as modesty in Islam, and religious diet .

While cultural universals are by definition part of the mores of every society (hence also called "empty universals"), the customary norms specific to a given society are a defining aspect of the cultural identity of an ethnicity or a nation . Coping with the differences between two sets of cultural conventions is a question of intercultural competence .

Differences in the mores of various nations are at the root of ethnic stereotype , or in the case of reflection upon one's own mores , autostereotypes.

The customary norms in a given society may include indigenous land rights [ dubious – discuss ] , honour , filial piety , customary law and the customary international law that affects countries who may not have codified their customary norms. Land rights of indigenous peoples is under customary land tenure, its a system of arrangement in-line with customs and norms.

[ citation needed ] This is the case in colonies. An example of a norm is a culture of honor exists in some societies, where the family is viewed as the main source of honor and the conduct of family members reflects upon their family honor . For instance some writers say in Rome to have an honorable stance, to be equals with someone, existed for those who are most similar to one another (family and friends) this could be due to the competing for public recognition and therefore for personal and public honor, over rhetoric, sport, war, wealth and virtue.

[ 11 ] To protrude, stand out, be recognized and demonstrate this "A Roman could win such a "competition" by pointing to past evidences of their honor" and "Or, a critic might be refuted by one's performance in a fresh showdown in which one's bona fides could be plainly demonstrated." [ 12 ] Honor culture only can exist if the society has for males the shared code, a standard to uphold, guidelines and rules to follow, do not want to break those rules and how to interact successfully and to engage, this exists within a "closed" community of equals.

[ 13 ] Filial piety is ethics towards one's family, as Fung Yu-lan states "the ideological basis for traditional [Chinese] society" and according to Confucious repay a burden debt back to ones parents or caregiver but its also traditional in another sense so as to fulfill an obligation to ones own ancestors, also to modern scholars it suggests extends an attitude of respect to superiors also, who are deserving to have that respect.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Look up folkway or mores in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Culture-bound syndrome Enculturation Euthyphro dilemma , discussing the conflict of sacral and secular mores Habitus (sociology) Nihonjinron "Japanese mores " Piety Political and Moral Sociology: see Luc Boltanski and French Pragmatism Repugnancy costs Value (personal and cultural) References [ edit ] ^ "mores" .

The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (5th ed.). HarperCollins.

^ Macionis, John J.; Gerber, Linda Marie (2010).

Sociology (7 ed.).

Pearson Education Canada . p. 65.

ISBN 9780138002701 .

^ Crossman, Ashley.

"Folkways, Mores, Taboos, and Laws" .

www.thoughtco.com . Retrieved 5 June 2022 .

^ "mores" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) - "Professor Sumner:-..

Systematic Societology ..knowledge and pseudo-knowledge, world philosophy, otherworldliness, industrial theories, mores, codes, mental training, traditional wisdom." ^ Macionis, John J.; Gerber, Linda Marie (2010).

Sociology (7 ed.).

Pearson Education Canada . p. 65.

ISBN 9780138002701 .

^ Sumner, William Graham (1906). Keller, Albert Galloway (ed.).

Folkways: A Study of the Sociological Importance of Usages, Manners, Customs, Mores, and Morals . Ginn. pp.

692 .

^ Drew, Chris (3 January 2022).

"27 Examples Of Morals & Ethics (A To Z List)" .

helpfulprofessor . Retrieved 5 June 2022 .

^ Campbell, Henry (1995).

Black's Law Dictionary . USA: Manhattan: Manhattan: West Publishing.

ISBN 1886363102 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ "The Sanction of Folkways" .

www.sociologyguide.com . Retrieved 5 June 2022 .

^ "Folkways in Sociology Meaning Definition with Example" .

studylecturenotes.com . 9 September 2014 . Retrieved 5 June 2022 .

^ McKay, Brett and Kate (28 October 2018).

"Does Stoicism Extinguish the Fire of Life?" .

www.artofmanliness.com . Retrieved 25 March 2021 .

Rome was thus not only an honor culture, but a contest culture... Romans competed both with the living and the dead. They strove to not only live up to the good name of their ancestors, but to surpass them in glory. And while we moderns think it gauche to compete with one's family and friends, the Romans thought these peers made the best fellow competitors, for they were equals with whom one shared the most in common... Romans competed over who was most skilled and excellent in rhetoric, in sports, in war, in wealth, and in virtue — particularly the defining quality of manhood: courage... The Roman legionary strove not only for personal honor, but for public recognition; ancient Rome offered many different awards and commendations, and soldiers competed strenuously for them all.

^ McKay, Brett and Kate (28 October 2018).

"Does Stoicism Extinguish the Fire of Life?" .

www.artofmanliness.com . Retrieved 25 March 2021 .

A Roman could win such a "competition" by pointing to past evidences of their honor; this was a culture in which politicians shamed political opponents or bolstered the credibility of their own arguments by tearing open their tunic to reveal scars earned in defense of the republic. Or, a critic might be refuted by one's performance in a fresh showdown in which one's bona fides could be plainly demonstrated.

^ McKay, Brett and Kate (28 October 2018).

"Does Stoicism Extinguish the Fire of Life?" .

www.artofmanliness.com . Retrieved 25 March 2021 .

An honor culture can only function in a society in which there is a shared code - clear rules, standards and expectations for interaction and engagement - and within a closed community of equals.

^ Cong, Y. (2004). "Doctor–family–patient Relationship: The Chinese Paradigm of Informed Consent".

The Journal of Medicine and Philosophy .

29 (2): 149– 78.

doi : 10.1076/jmep.29.2.149.31506 .

PMID 15371185 .

^ King, A.Y.; Bond, M.H. (1985). Tseng, W.S.; Wu, D.Y.H. (eds.). "The Confucian Paradigm of Man: A Sociological View".

Chinese Culture and Mental Health .

Academic Press : 2– 45.

^ Kwan, K.L.K. (2000).

"Counseling Chinese peoples: Perspectives of Filial Piety" (PDF) .

Asian Journal of Counseling .

7 (1): 23– 41.

v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mores&oldid=1303595433 " Categories : Conformity Consensus reality Deviance (sociology) Morality Social agreement Sociological terminology Folklore Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages with Latin IPA Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from June 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 22:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mores 26 languages Add topic

