Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Development 2 In literature and in practice 3 Related concepts 4 Notable utopian socialists 5 Notable utopian communities 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Utopian socialism 52 languages العربية Asturianu বাংলা Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt West-Vlams 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political theory concerned with imagined socialist societies Phalanstère , a type of building designed by Charles Fourier Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Utopias Mythical and religious Arcadia City of the Caesars Cloud cuckoo land Cockaigne Eden Elysium Fortunate Isles Garden of the gods Golden Age Great Unity Ketumati Kingdom of God Libertatia Mag Mell Mahoroba Merry England Mezzoramia Most Great Peace Mount Penglai New Jerusalem Opona Satya Yuga Shangri-La Valhalla Yvy marã e'ỹ Zion Literature Ideology and Utopia List The Republic Utopia Gulliver's Travels Dystopian literature Theory Communitas perfecta Communist society Heterotopia Ideal city Renaissance Sforzinda Pantisocracy Real utopian sociology Third International Theory Utopia for Realists Utopian studies Concepts Arcology Agriculturalism Escapism Millenarianism New Man Social harmony Technological Cyber-utopianism Post-scarcity economy Transhumanism Utopian socialism Practice Architecture Egalitarian community HosPex Open borders Pirate utopia UBI Intentional community Atarashiki-mura Huaxi Village Nanjie Sustainable Communities by country America Finland Germany Organizations Associationists Anthroposophs Lindisfarne Millennium WSF Zeitgeist v t e Utopian socialism is the term often used to describe the first current of modern socialism and socialist thought as exemplified by the work of Henri de Saint-Simon , Charles Fourier , Étienne Cabet , and Robert Owen .

[ 1 ] Utopian socialism is often described as the presentation of visions and outlines for imaginary or futuristic ideal and socialist societies that pursue ideals of positive inter-personal relationships separate from capitalist mechanisms. However, later socialists such as the Marxists and the critics of socialism both disparaged utopian socialism as not being grounded in actual material conditions of existing society. Utopian socialist visions of ideal societies compete with revolutionary and social democratic movements.

[ 2 ] Later socialists have applied the term utopian socialism to socialists who lived in the first quarter of the 19th century. They used the term as a pejorative in order to dismiss the ideas of the earlier thinkers as fanciful and unrealistic.

[ 3 ] Ethical socialism , a similar school of thought that emerged in the early 20th century, makes the case for socialism on moral grounds and is sometimes also disparaged.

[ 4 ] The anarchists and Marxists who dismissed utopian socialism did so because utopian socialists generally did not believe that class struggle or social revolution was necessary for socialism to emerge. Utopian socialists believed that people of all classes could voluntarily adopt their plan for society if it were presented convincingly.

[ 2 ] Cooperative socialism could be established among like-minded people in small communities that would demonstrate the feasibility of their plan for the broader society.

[ 2 ] Because of this tendency, utopian socialism was also related to classical radicalism , a left-wing liberal ideology.

[ 5 ] Development [ edit ] Part of a series on Radicalism History Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Belgian Revolution Chartism Progressive Era Ideas Anti-clericalism Civic nationalism Civil liberties Classical liberalism Cultural radicalism Classical radicalism Direct democracy Egalitarianism Freedom of movement Jacobinism Labor movement Laissez-faire Liberal socialism Social democracy Libertarianism left Liberté, égalité, fraternité Modernity Populism left-wing Progressivism Rationalism Reform movement Republicanism Revolution Secularism Laicité Social change Social justice Social liberalism Suffrage women Utilitarianism Utopian socialism Welfare People Alem Alfonsín Atatürk Bentham Bolívar Bonino Bright Bryan Cartwright Castberg Clemenceau Cobbett Cobden Daladier Dewey Dilke Domergue Fox Garibaldi George Godwin Green Hébert Herriot Hobhouse Hunt Jefferson Lacombe La Follette Leclerc Lerroux Lloyd George Mazzini Mendès France Mill (James) Mill (John Stuart) Mommsen Mossadegh Paine Pannella Papanastasiou Papandreou Plastiras Robespierre Roosevelt Rosselli Roux Sacchi Saint-Just Servan-Schreiber Stevens Varlet Venizelos Videla Virchow Wilkes Wilson Wollstonecraft Yrigoyen Zahle Groups Alfarista Radical Front Association of Radicals for the United States of Europe Authentic Radical Liberal Party Ecuadorian Radical Liberal Party European Radical Alliance Independent Radicals Italian Radical Party Italian Radicals Liberals, Democrats and Radicals National Radical Party Partido Ecologista Radical Intransigente People's Radical Party 1881 1919 1990 Political Party of Radicals Radical Cause Radical Change Radical Civic Union Radicales K Radical Democracy Radical Democratic Party Bulgaria Estonia India Spain United States Radical Federative Movement Radical International Radical League Radical Liberal Party Luxembourg Paraguay Radical Movement Radical Movement of Social Democratic Alliance Radical Party Bolivia France Hungary Italy Luxembourg Radical Party of Chile 1863 2018 Radical Party of the Left Radical People's Party Finland Norway Turkey Radical Republican Party Radical Republicans Radical Socialist Party Luxembourg Estonia Radical Socialist Republican Party Radical Whigs Radicals of the Left Radicals (UK) Socialist Radical Party Stratford Dialectical and Radical Club Transnational Radical Party Ultra-radicals By region Bulgaria Chile Denmark Ecuador France Hungary Italy Paraguay Romania Spain Switzerland United States Works Rights of Man (1791) The English Constitution Produced and Illustrated (1824) Related Conservative liberalism History of socialism Irish republicanism Liberalism in Europe History portal Liberalism portal v t e Part of a series on Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related  topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e In The Poverty of Philosophy , Marx criticized the economic and philosophical arguments of Proudhon set forth in The System of Economic Contradictions, or The Philosophy of Poverty . Marx accused Proudhon of wanting to rise above the bourgeoisie . In the history of Marx's thought and Marxism , this work is pivotal in the distinction between the concepts of utopian socialism and what Marx and the Marxists claimed as scientific socialism. Although utopian socialists shared few political, social, or economic perspectives, Marx and Engels argued that they shared certain intellectual characteristics. In The Communist Manifesto , Marx and Friedrich Engels wrote: [ 6 ] The undeveloped state of the class struggle, as well as their own surroundings, causes Socialists of this kind to consider themselves far superior to all class antagonisms. They want to improve the condition of every member of society, even that of the most favored. Hence, they habitually appeal to society at large, without distinction of class; nay, by preference, to the ruling class. For how can people, when once they understand their system, fail to see it in the best possible plan of the best possible state of society? Hence, they reject all political, and especially all revolutionary, action; they wish to attain their ends by peaceful means, and endeavor, by small experiments, necessarily doomed to failure, and by the force of example, to pave the way for the new social Gospel.

Marx and Engels associated utopian socialism with communitarian socialism which similarly sees the establishment of small intentional communities as both a strategy for achieving and the final form of a socialist society.

[ 7 ] Marx and Engels used the term scientific socialism to describe the type of socialism they saw themselves developing. According to Engels, socialism was not "an accidental discovery of this or that ingenious brain, but the necessary outcome of the struggle between two historically developed classes, namely the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. Its task was no longer to manufacture a system of society as perfect as possible, but to examine the historical-economic succession of events from which these classes and their antagonism had of necessity sprung, and to discover in the economic conditions thus created the means of ending the conflict". Critics have argued that utopian socialists who established experimental communities were in fact trying to apply the scientific method to human social organization and were therefore not utopian. On the basis of Karl Popper 's definition of science as "the practice of experimentation, of hypothesis and test", Joshua Muravchik argued that "Owen and Fourier and their followers were the real 'scientific socialists.' They hit upon the idea of socialism, and they tested it by attempting to form socialist communities". By contrast, Muravchik further argued that Marx made untestable predictions about the future and that Marx's view that socialism would be created by impersonal historical forces may lead one to conclude that it is unnecessary to strive for socialism because it will happen anyway.

[ 8 ] Social unrest between the employee and employer in a society, resulting from the growth of productive forces such as technology and natural resources, is the main causes of social and economic development.

[ 9 ] These productive forces require a mode of production, or an economic system, that's based around private property rights and institutions that determine the wage for labor.

[ 9 ] Additionally, the capitalist rulers control the modes of production. This ideological economic structure allows the bourgeoises to undermine the worker's sensibility of their place in society, being that the bourgeoises rule the society in their own interests. These rulers of society exploit the relationship between labor and capital, allowing for them to maximize their profit.

[ 10 ] To Marx and Engels, the profiteering through the exploitation of workers is the core issue of capitalism, explaining their beliefs for the oppression of the working class. Capitalism will reach a certain stage, one of which it cannot progress society forward, resulting in the seeding of socialism.

[ 10 ] As a socialist, Marx theorized the internal failures of capitalism. He described how the tensions between the productive forces and the modes of production would lead to the downfall of capitalism through a social revolution.

[ 9 ] Leading the revolution would be the proletariat, being that the preeminence of the bourgeoise would end. Marx's vision of his society established that there would be no classes, freedom of mankind, and the opportunity of self-interested labor to rid any alienation.

[ 11 ] Since the mid-19th century, Engels overtook utopian socialism in terms of intellectual development and number of adherents. At one time almost half the population of the world lived under regimes that claimed to be Marxist.

[ 12 ] Currents such as Owenism and Fourierism attracted the interest of numerous later authors but failed to compete with the now dominant Marxist and Anarchist schools on a political level. It has been noted that they exerted a significant influence on the emergence of new religious movements such as spiritualism and occultism .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Utopian socialists were seen as wanting to expand the principles of the French revolution in order to create a more rational society. Despite being labeled as utopian by later socialists, their aims were not always utopian and their values often included rigid support for the scientific method and the creation of a society based upon scientific understanding.

[ 15 ] In literature and in practice [ edit ] Utopian socialist pamphlet of Swiss social medical doctor Rudolf Sutermeister (1802–1868) Edward Bellamy (1850–1898) published Looking Backward in 1888, a utopian romance novel about a future socialist society. In Bellamy's utopia, property was held in common and money replaced with a system of equal credit for all. Valid for a year and non-transferable between individuals, credit expenditure was tracked via "credit-cards" (which bear no resemblance to modern credit cards which are tools of debt-finance). Labour was compulsory from age 21 to 40 and organised via various departments of an Industrial Army to which most citizens belonged. Working hours were cut drastically due to technological advances (including organisational). People were expected to be motivated by a Religion of Solidarity, and criminal behavior was treated as a form of mental illness or "atavism". The book ranked as a second or third best seller of its time (after Uncle Tom's Cabin and Ben Hur ). In 1897, Bellamy published a sequel entitled Equality as a reply to his critics and which lacked the Industrial Army and other authoritarian aspects.

William Morris (1834–1896) published News from Nowhere in 1890, partly as a response to Bellamy's Looking Backward , which he equated with the socialism of Sydney Webb and other Fabians. Morris' vision of a future socialist society was centred around his concept of useful work as opposed to useless toil and the redemption of human labour. Morris believed all work should be artistic, in the sense that the worker should find it both pleasurable and an outlet for creativity. Morris' conception of labour thus bears strong resemblance to Fourier's, while Bellamy's (the reduction of labour) is more akin to that of Saint-Simon or in aspects to Marx.

[ 16 ] The Brotherhood Church in Britain and the Life and Labor Commune in Russia were based on the Christian anarchist ideas of Leo Tolstoy (1828–1910).

Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (1809–1865) and Peter Kropotkin (1842–1921) wrote about anarchist forms of socialism in their books. Proudhon wrote What is Property?

(1840) and The System of Economic Contradictions, or The Philosophy of Poverty (1847). Kropotkin wrote The Conquest of Bread (1892) and Fields, Factories and Workshops (1912). Many of the anarchist collectives formed in Spain during the Spanish Civil War , especially in Aragon and Catalonia , were based on their ideas.

[ 17 ] Many participants in the historical kibbutz movement in Palestine in the Ottoman Empire, then later Mandatory Palestine under British occupation and later Israel were motivated by utopian socialist ideas.

[ 18 ] Augustin Souchy (1892–1984) spent most of his life investigating and participating in many kinds of socialist communities. Souchy wrote about his experiences in his autobiography Beware! Anarchist!

Behavioral psychologist B. F. Skinner (1904–1990) published Walden Two in 1948. The Twin Oaks Community was originally based on his ideas.

Ursula K. Le Guin (1929–2018) wrote about an impoverished anarchist society in her book The Dispossessed , published in 1974, in which anarchists avoid a bloody revolution by leaving their home planet to go to colonize a barely habitable moon.

Related concepts [ edit ] Classless modes of production in hunter-gatherer societies are referred to as primitive communism by Marxists to stress their classless nature.

[ 19 ] Some communities of the modern intentional community movement such as kibbutzim could be categorized as utopian socialist. Some religious communities such as the Hutterites are categorized as utopian religious socialists .

[ 20 ] Notable utopian socialists [ edit ] Catherine Isabella Barmby John Goodwyn Barmby Edward Bellamy Alphonse Toussenel Tommaso Campanella Etienne Cabet Icarians Victor Considérant David Dale Charles Fourier North American Phalanx The Phalanx King Gillette Jean-Baptiste Godin Laurence Gronlund Matti Kurikka John Humphrey Noyes John Ball Robert Owen Philippe Buonarroti Vaso Pelagić Henri de Saint-Simon William Thompson Wilhelm Weitling Gerrard Winstanley Thomas Paine Notable utopian communities [ edit ] Utopian communities have existed all over the world. In various forms and locations, they have existed continuously in the United States since the 1730s, beginning with Ephrata Cloister , a religious community in what is now Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.

[ 21 ] Owenite communities New Lanark , Scotland, 1786 New Harmony, Indiana , 1814 Fourierist communities Brook Farm , Massachusetts, 1841 La Reunion (Dallas) , Texas, 1855 North American Phalanx , New Jersey, 1843 Silkville , Kansas, 1870 Utopia, Ohio , 1844 Icarian communities Corning, Iowa , 1860 Anarchist communities Home, Washington , 1898 Life and Labor Commune , Moscow Oblast, Soviet Union (Russia), 1921 Socialist Community of Modern Times , New York, 1851 Whiteway Colony , United Kingdom, 1898 Others Fairhope , Alabama, US, 1894 Kaweah Colony , California, 1886 Llano del Rio , California, 1914 Los Mochis , Sinaloa, Mexico, 1893 Nevada City, Nevada , 1916 New Australia , Paraguay, 1893 Oneida Community , New York, 1848 Ruskin Colony , Tennessee, 1894 Rugby, Tennessee , 1880 Sointula , British Columbia, 1901 See also [ edit ] Pre-Marx socialists Pre-Marxist communism Christian socialism Communist utopia Diggers Ethical socialism Futurism History of socialism Ideal (ethics) Intentional communities Kibbutz List of anarchist communities List of American utopian communities List of intentional communities Marxism Nanosocialism Post-capitalism Post-scarcity Radicalism (historical) [ 5 ] Ricardian socialism Scientific socialism Socialism Socialist economics Syndicalism Utopia for Realists Yellow socialism Zero waste References [ edit ] ^ "Utopian socialism" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved July 12, 2020 .

^ a b c Draper, Hal (1990).

Karl Marx's Theory of Revolution, Volume IV: Critique of Other Socialisms . New York: Monthly Review Press. pp.

1– 21.

ISBN 978-0853457985 .

^ Newman, Michael . (2005) Socialism: A Very Short Introduction , Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-280431-6 .

^ Thompson, Noel W. (2006).

Political Economy and the Labour Party: The Economics of Democratic Socialism, 1884–2005 (2nd ed.). Abingdon, England: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-32880-7 .

^ a b Jean-Pierre Cabestan, Jacques deLisle, ed. (1990).

State Private Life And Political Change .

Springer . p. 225.

ISBN 9781349207077 .

The socialist movement of the early twentieth century divided into two different ideological camps; one which had its intellectual roots in both early utopian socialism and radical liberalism and which has been characterised as ethical ...

^ Engels, Friedrich and Marx, Karl Heinrich.

Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei . Edited by Sálvio M. Soares. MetaLibri, October 31, 2008, v1.0s.

^ Leopold, David (2018).

"Marx, Engels and Some (Non-Foundational) Arguments Against Utopian Socialism" . In Kandiyali, Jan (ed.).

Reassessing Marx's Social and Political Philosophy: Freedom, Recognition and Human Flourishing . Routledge. p. 73.

^ Muravchik, Joshua (8 February 1999).

"The Rise and Fall of Socialism" .

Bradley Lecture Series . American Enterprise Institute.

Archived 3 May 1999 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 21 August 2020.

^ a b c Sandmo, Agnar (2011).

Economics evolving: a history of economic thought . Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-14063-6 .

OCLC 587249004 .

^ a b The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics . Springer. 2016-05-18.

ISBN 978-1-349-58802-2 .

^ Coby, John (1986-01-01).

"The Utopian Vision of Karl Marx" .

Modern Age .

30 (1): 22– 32.

^ Steven Kreis (January 30, 2008).

"Karl Marx, 1818-1883" . The History Guide.

^ Strube, Julian (2016). "Socialist religion and the emergence of occultism: a genealogical approach to socialism and secularization in 19th-century France".

Religion .

46 (3): 359– 388.

doi : 10.1080/0048721X.2016.1146926 .

S2CID 147626697 .

^ Cyranka, Daniel (2016). "Religious Revolutionaries and Spiritualism in Germany around 1848".

Aries .

16 (1): 13– 48.

doi : 10.1163/15700593-01601002 .

^ Frederick Engels.

"Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (Chpt. 1)" . Marxists.org . Retrieved July 3, 2013 .

^ Tod, Ian; Wheeler, Michael (1979) [1978].

Utopia [ Utopia ] (in Dutch). Translated by Tist, A.F. De Haan. pp.

108– 117.

^ Sam Dolgoff (1990).

The Anarchist Collectives: Workers' Self-Management in the Spanish Revolution, 1936–1939 . Black Rose Books.

^ Sheldon Goldenberg and Gerda R. Wekerle (September 1972). "From utopia to total institution in a single generation: the kibbutz and Bruderhof".

International Review of Modern Sociology .

2 (2): 224– 232.

JSTOR 41420450 .

^ "Primitive communism: life before class and oppression" .

Socialist Worker . May 28, 2013 . Retrieved December 27, 2019 .

^ Donald E. Frey (2009).

America's Economic Moralists: A History of Rival Ethics and Economics . SUNY Press. p. 61.

ISBN 9780791493663 .

^ Yaacov Oved (1988).

Two Hundred Years of American Communes . Transaction Publishers. pp. 3, 19.

Further reading [ edit ] Taylor, Keith (1992).

The political ideas of Utopian socialists . London: Cass.

ISBN 0714630896 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Utopian socialism at Wikimedia Commons Be Utopian: Demand the Realistic by Robert Pollin, The Nation , March 9, 2009.

v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Utopian_socialism&oldid=1303127413 " Categories : Utopian socialism History of social movements Idealism Radicalism (historical) Social theories Socialism Syndicalism Types of socialism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 06:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Utopian socialism 52 languages Add topic

