Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition and usage 2 Management 3 Components Toggle Components subsection 3.1 International waters 3.2 Atmosphere 3.3 Antarctica 3.4 Outer space 4 See also 5 References 6 External links 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Global commons 4 languages العربية Eesti Ελληνικά Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in political economic theory Global commons is a concept to describe international, supranational, and global resource domains in which common-pool resources are found. They are "areas that lie outside of the political reach of any one nation State".

[ 1 ] Global commons include the earth's shared natural resources, such as the high seas ( international waters ), the atmosphere and outer space and the Antarctic in particular.

[ 1 ] The global commons concept investigates how those shared resources that lie outside of national borders can be managed or governed.

[ 2 ] Definition and usage [ edit ] "Global commons" is a term typically used to describe international, supranational , and global resource domains in which common-pool resources are found. In economics , common goods are rivalrous and non-excludable , constituting one of the four main types of goods .

[ 3 ] A common-pool resource , also called a common property resource, is a special case of a common good (or public good ) whose size or characteristics makes it costly, but not impossible, to exclude potential users.  Examples include both natural or human-made resource domains (e.g., a "fishing hole" or an irrigation system). Unlike global public goods , global common-pool resources face problems of congestion, overuse, or degradation because they are subtractable (which makes them rivalrous ).

[ 4 ] The term " commons " originates from the term common land in the British Isles.

[ 5 ] "Commoners rights" referred to traditional rights held by commoners, such as mowing meadows for hay or grazing livestock on common land held in the open field system of old English common law .

Enclosure was the process that ended those traditional rights, converting open fields to private property .  Today, many commons still exist in England , Wales , Scotland , and the United States , although their extent is much reduced from the millions of acres that existed until the 17th century.

[ 6 ] There are still over 7,000 registered commons in England alone.

[ 7 ] According to the World Conservation Strategy , a report on conservation published by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) in collaboration with UNESCO and with the support of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World Wildlife Fund (WWF): "A commons is  a tract of land or water owned or used jointly by the members of a community. The global commons includes those parts of the Earth's surface beyond national jurisdictions — notably the open ocean and the living resources found there — or held in common — notably the atmosphere. The only landmass that may be regarded as part of the global commons is Antarctica ..." [ 8 ] Some refer to the Internet , World Wide Web and resulting cyberspace as global commons.

[ 9 ] Cyberspace is more commonly called digital commons . Other usages sometimes include references to open access information of all kinds, including arts and culture, language and science, though these are more formally referred to as the common heritage of mankind .

[ 10 ] Management [ edit ] The key challenge of the global commons is the design of governance structures and management systems capable of addressing the complexity of multiple public and private interests, subject to often unpredictable changes, ranging from the local to the global level.

[ 11 ] As with global public goods , management of the global commons requires pluralistic legal entities, usually international and supranational, public and private, structured to match the diversity of interests and the type of resource to be managed, and stringent enough with adequate incentives to ensure compliance.

[ 12 ] Such management systems are necessary to avoid, at the global level, the classic tragedy of the commons , in which common resources become overexploited .

[ 13 ] There are several key differences in management of resources in the global commons from those of the commons, in general.

[ 14 ] There are obvious differences in scale of both the resources and the number of users at the local versus the global level.  Also, there are differences in the shared culture and expectations of resource users; more localized commons users tend to be more homogeneous and global users more heterogeneous. This contributes to differences in the possibility and time it takes for new learning about resource usage to occur at the different levels. Moreover, global resource pools are less likely to be relatively stable and the dynamics are less easily understood. Many of the global commons are non-renewable on human time scales.

[ citation needed ] Thus, resource degradation is more likely to be the result of unintended consequences that are unforeseen, not immediately observable, or not easily understood. For example, the carbon dioxide emissions that drive climate change continue to do so for at least a millennium after they enter the atmosphere.

[ 15 ] Several environmental protocols have been established (see List of international environmental agreements ) as a type of international law , "an intergovernmental document intended as legally binding with a primary stated purpose of preventing or managing human impacts on natural resources." [ 16 ] International environmental protocols came to feature in environmental governance after trans-boundary environmental problems became widely perceived in the 1960s.

[ 17 ] Following the Stockholm Intergovernmental Conference in 1972, creation of international environmental agreements proliferated.

[ 18 ] Due to the barriers already discussed, environmental protocols are not a panacea for global commons issues.  Often, they are slow to produce the desired effects, tend to the lowest common denominator , and lack monitoring and enforcement. They also take an incremental approach to solutions where sustainable development principles suggest that environmental concerns should be mainstream political issues.

[ citation needed ] Components [ edit ] International waters [ edit ] The Law of the Sea is a body of public international law governing relationships between nations in respect to navigational rights, mineral rights , and jurisdiction over coastal waters.  Maritime law, also called Admiralty law , is a body of both domestic law governing maritime activities and private international law governing the relationships between private entities which operate vessels on the oceans. It deals with matters including marine commerce, marine navigation , shipping , sailors , and the transportation of passengers and goods by sea.

The United Nations Environment Programme ( UNEP ) has identified several areas of need in managing the global ocean: strengthen national capacities for action, especially in developing countries; improve fisheries management; reinforce cooperation in semi-enclosed and regional seas; strengthen controls over ocean disposal of hazardous and nuclear wastes; and advance the Law of the Sea. Specific problems identified as in need of attention include Current rising sea levels ; contamination by hazardous chemicals (including oil spills); microbiological contamination; ocean acidification; harmful algal blooms ; and over-fishing and other overexploitation .

[ 19 ] Atmosphere [ edit ] The atmosphere is a complex dynamic natural gaseous system that is essential to support life on planet Earth. A primary concern for management of the global atmosphere is air pollution , the introduction into the atmosphere of chemicals , particulates , or biological materials that cause discomfort, disease, or death to humans, damage other living organisms such as food crops, or damage the natural environment or built environment .

Pollution of breathable air is a central problem in the management of the global commons. Pollutants can be in the form of solid particles, liquid droplets, or gases and may be natural or man-made.  Although controversial and limited in scope by methods of enforcement, in several parts of the world the polluter pays principle , which makes the party responsible for producing pollution responsible for paying for the damage done to the natural environment , is accepted. It has strong support in most Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and European Community (EC) countries. It is also known as extended producer responsibility (EPR). EPR seeks to shift the responsibility dealing with waste from governments (and thus, taxpayers and society at large) to the entities producing it. In effect, it attempts to internalise the cost of waste disposal into the cost of the product, theoretically resulting in producers improving the waste profile of their products, decreasing waste and increasing possibilities for reuse and recycling .

[ citation needed ] The 1979 Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution , or CLRTAP, is an early international effort to protect and gradually reduce and prevent air pollution. It is implemented by the European Monitoring and Evaluation Programme (EMEP), directed by the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE).

The Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer , or Montreal Protocol (a protocol to the Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer ), is an international treaty designed to protect the ozone layer by phasing out the production of numerous substances believed to be responsible for ozone depletion . The treaty was opened for signature on 16 September 1987, and entered into force on 1 January 1989. The Vienna Convention and Montreal Protocol were widely regarded as highly successful, both in achieving ozone reductions and as a pioneering model for management of the global commons.

[ 20 ] Global warming and climate change in general are a major concern of global commons management. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), established in 1988 to develop a scientific consensus, concluded in a series of reports that reducing emissions of greenhouse gases was necessary to prevent catastrophic harm. For example, the IPCC concluded in a 2018 report that dangerous climate change was inevitable unless much greater reductions were promised and carried out.

The 1992 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) pledged to work toward "stabilisation of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic [i.e., human-induced] interference with the climate system" (as of 2019 there were 197 parties to the convention, although not all had ratified it).

[ 21 ] The 1997 Kyoto Protocol to the FCCC set forth binding obligations on industrialised countries to reduce emissions. It expired in 2012 and was followed by the 2015 Paris Agreement in which nations made individual promises of reductions.

Antarctica [ edit ] The Antarctic Treaty and related agreements, collectively called the Antarctic Treaty System or ATS, regulate international relations with respect to Antarctica , Earth's only continent without a native human population. The treaty, entering into force in 1961 and currently having 50 signatory nations, sets aside Antarctica as a scientific preserve, establishes freedom of scientific investigation and bans military activity on that continent .

[ 22 ] Outer space [ edit ] See also: Outer space , Space law , and Asteroid mining § Regulation and safety Management of outer space global commons has been contentious since the successful launch of the Sputnik satellite by the former Soviet Union on 4 October 1957.  There is no clear boundary between Earth's atmosphere and space, although there are several standard boundary designations: one that deals with orbital velocity (the Kármán line ), one that depends on the velocity of charged particles in space, and some that are determined by human factors such as the height at which human blood begins to boil without a pressurized environment (the Armstrong line ).

[ citation needed ] Space policy regarding a country's civilian space program , as well as its policy on both military use and commercial use of outer space, intersects with science policy , since national space programs often perform or fund research in space science , and also with defense policy , for applications such as spy satellites and anti-satellite weapons .  It also encompasses government regulation of third-party activities such as commercial communications satellites and private spaceflight [ 23 ] as well as the creation and application of space law and space advocacy organizations that exist to support the cause of space exploration.

The growth of all tracked objects in space over time [ 24 ] Scientists have outlined rationale for governance that regulates the current free externalization of true costs and risks , treating orbital space around the Earth as part of the global commons – as an "additional ecosystem" or "part of the human environment" – which should be subject to the same concerns and regulations like e.g. oceans on Earth . The study concluded in 2022 that it needs "new policies, rules and regulations at national and international level".

[ 25 ] [ 24 ] The Outer Space Treaty , signed in 1967, provides a basic framework for international space law. It covers the legal use of outer space by nation states. The treaty states that outer space is free for all nation states to explore and is not subject to claims of national sovereignty . It also prohibits the deployment of nuclear weapons in outer space.

Beginning in 1958, outer space has been the subject of multiple resolutions by the United Nations General Assembly. Of these, more than 50 have concerned the international co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space and preventing an arms race in space. Four additional space law treaties have been negotiated and drafted by the UN's Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space . Still, there remain no legal prohibitions against deploying conventional weapons in space and anti-satellite weapons have been successfully tested by the US, USSR and China. The 1979 Moon Treaty turned the jurisdiction of all heavenly bodies (including the orbits around such bodies) over to the international community. However, this treaty has not been ratified by any nation that currently practices crewed spaceflight.

See also [ edit ] Digital commons (economics) Environmental economics Environmental law Goods Global public goods Human ecology References [ edit ] ^ a b "Global Commons" .

Archived from the original on 2015-09-23 . Retrieved 2015-09-23 .

^ Rockström, Johan; Kotzé, Louis; Milutinović, Svetlana; Biermann, Frank; Brovkin, Victor; Donges, Jonathan; Ebbesson, Jonas; French, Duncan; Gupta, Joyeeta; Kim, Rakhyun; Lenton, Timothy; Lenzi, Dominic; Nakicenovic, Nebojsa; Neumann, Barbara; Schuppert, Fabian (2024).

"The planetary commons: A new paradigm for safeguarding Earth-regulating systems in the Anthropocene" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

121 (5): e2301531121.

Bibcode : 2024PNAS..12101531R .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2301531121 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 10835110 .

PMID 38252839 .

^ For current definitions of public goods see any mainstream microeconomics textbook, e.g.: Hal R. Varian, Microeconomic Analysis ISBN 0-393-95735-7 ; Mas-Colell , Whinston & Green, Microeconomic Theory ISBN 0-19-507340-1 ; or Gravelle & Rees, Microeconomics ISBN 0-582-40487-8 .

^ Ostrom, Elinor (1990).

Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-40599-8 .

^ Neeson, Jeanette M. (1996).

Commoners: Common Right, Enclosure and Social Change in England, 1700–1820 . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521567749 .

^ * Callander, Robin Fraser (1987), A pattern of Landownership in Scotland: With Particular Reference to Aberdeenshire , Finzean: Haughend, OCLC 60041593 .

^ DEFRA Database of registered common land in England Archived 2014-11-29 at the Wayback Machine ^ " " Chapter 18, The global commons." World Conservation Strategy , International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, accessed 22 May 2009" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 22 May 2009 .

^ "Raymond, Mark (2012). "The Internet as a Global Commons?" Governing the Internet: Chaos, Control or Consensus?

The Centre for International Governance Innovation (CIGI)" . Archived from the original on 2013-04-26 . Retrieved 2013-06-30 .

^ Baslar, Kemal (1998).

The Concept of the Common Heritage of Mankind in International Law . Martinus Nijhoff Pubs.

ISBN 978-90-411-0505-9 ^ Brousseau, Eric; et al. (2012).

Global Environmental Commons: Analytical and Political Challenges in Building Governance Mechanisms . Cambridge, UK: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199656202 .

^ Shaffer, Gregory (August 2012).

"International Law and Global Public Goods in a Legal Pluralist World" .

European Journal of International Law .

23 (3): 669– 693.

doi : 10.1093/ejil/chs036 .

^ Hardin, G. (1968).

"The Tragedy of the Commons" .

Science .

162 (3859): 1243– 1248.

Bibcode : 1968Sci...162.1243H .

doi : 10.1126/science.162.3859.1243 .

PMID 5699198 .

Also available here [1] Archived 2010-02-28 at the Wayback Machine and here.

Archived 2012-01-24 at the Wayback Machine ^ Stern, Paul C (2011).

"Design principles for global commons: natural resources and emerging technologies" .

International Journal of the Commons .

5 (2): 213.

Bibcode : 2011IJCom...5..213S .

doi : 10.18352/ijc.305 .

hdl : 10535/7545 .

Archived from the original on 2014-03-16 . Retrieved 2013-07-01 .

^ Solomon, S.; et al. (2009).

"Irreversible Climate Change Due to Carbon Dioxide Emissions" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

106 (6): 1704– 1709.

Bibcode : 2009PNAS..106.1704S .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0812721106 .

PMC 2632717 .

PMID 19179281 .

^ Kanie, Norichike (2007). "Governance with Multi-lateral Environmental Agreements: A healthy or ill-equipped fragmentation?" Global Environmental Governance: Perspectives on the Current Debate , Walter Hoffmann and Lydia Swart (eds.): 67-86. New York: Center for UN Reform Education.

^ Haas, Keohane and Levy (1993).

Institutions for the Earth: Sources of effective international environmental protection.

Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

^ Zürn, Michael (1998). "The Rise of International Environmental Politics: A Review of Current Research." World Politics , 50(4):617-649.

^ Global environment outlook: environment for development (GEO4) . World Commission on Environment and Development, The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 2007.

ISBN 978-9280728361 .

^ "Home | Ozone Secretariat" .

ozone.unep.org . Retrieved 2025-05-06 .

^ "Article 2" .

The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change . Archived from the original on 28 October 2005 . Retrieved 5 December 2019 .

Such a level should be achieved within a time-frame sufficient to allow ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change, to ensure that food production is not threatened and to enable economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner.

^ "Information about the Antarctic Treaty and how Antarctica is governed" . Polar Conservation Organisation. December 28, 2005. Archived from the original on March 8, 2011 . Retrieved February 6, 2011 .

^ Goldman, Nathan C. (1992).

Space Policy:An Introduction . Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press. p. vii.

ISBN 978-0-8138-1024-9 .

^ a b Lawrence, Andy; Rawls, Meredith L.; Jah, Moriba; Boley, Aaron; Di Vruno, Federico; Garrington, Simon; Kramer, Michael; Lawler, Samantha; Lowenthal, James; McDowell, Jonathan; McCaughrean, Mark (April 2022). "The case for space environmentalism".

Nature Astronomy .

6 (4): 428– 435.

arXiv : 2204.10025 .

Bibcode : 2022NatAs...6..428L .

doi : 10.1038/s41550-022-01655-6 .

ISSN 2397-3366 .

S2CID 248300127 .

^ "Orbital space around Earth must be protected amid rise in satellites, say scientists" .

The Guardian . 22 April 2022 . Retrieved 13 May 2022 .

External links [ edit ] The Global Environmental Facility Share the World's Resources Sustainable Economics to End Global Poverty – the Global Commons in Economic Practice.

Further reading [ edit ] Library resources about Global commons Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Goldman, Michael (1998).

Privatizing Nature: Political Struggles for the Global Commons . Rutgers University Press.

ISBN 978-0813525549 .

Amstutz, Mark R. (2008).

International Ethics: Concepts, Theories, and Cases in Global Politics . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0742556041 .

Harrison, Kathryn; Lisa McIntosh Sundstrom (2010).

Global Commons, Domestic Decisions: The Comparative Politics of Climate Change . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0262514316 .

Milun, Kathryn (2010).

The Political Uncommons: The Cross-cultural Logic of the Global Commons . Ashgate Publishing, Ltd.

ISBN 978-0754671398 .

Jasper, Scott (2012).

Conflict and Cooperation in the Global Commons: A Comprehensive Approach for International Security . Georgetown University Press.

ISBN 978-1589019232 .

v t e Types of goods Anti-rival goods Capital goods Club goods Common goods Common-pool resource Complementary goods vs.

Substitute goods vs.

Independent goods Composite goods Credence goods (Non-)durable goods (Post-)experience goods Final goods Free goods vs.

Positional goods Giffen goods Global commons Global public goods Inferior goods Information goods Intangible goods Intermediate goods Luxury goods Merit goods and demerit goods Neutral goods Normal goods Necessity goods Ordinary goods Private goods Household goods Public goods Digital public goods (Non-)rivalrous goods and (Non-)excludable goods Search goods Superior goods Used goods Veblen goods v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Global_commons&oldid=1304165175 " Categories : Public commons World Goods (economics) Globalization Human ecology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 11:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Global commons 4 languages Add topic

