Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions Toggle Definitions subsection 1.1 Distinctions between empathy and related concepts 2 Classification 3 Measurement Toggle Measurement subsection 3.1 Self-report measures 4 Development Toggle Development subsection 4.1 Ontogenetic development 4.2 Individual differences 4.3 Sex differences 4.4 Environmental influences 4.5 Evolution across species 5 Other animals and empathy between species 6 Genetics Toggle Genetics subsection 6.1 Neuroscientific basis of empathy 7 Impairment Toggle Impairment subsection 7.1 Autism and controversy 7.2 Psychopathy 7.3 Other conditions 8 Effects Toggle Effects subsection 8.1 Benefits of empathizing 8.2 Empathic inaccuracy and empathic bias 8.3 Disadvantages of empathy 8.3.1 Manipulation and Instrumental Use 8.4 Empathy and power 8.5 Empathy and violence 8.6 Compassion fatigue 8.7 Empathy backfire 8.8 Influence on helping behavior 8.9 Conflict Resolution 9 Empathic anger and distress Toggle Empathic anger and distress subsection 9.1 Anger 9.2 Distress 10 Disciplinary approaches Toggle Disciplinary approaches subsection 10.1 Philosophy 10.1.1 Ethics 10.1.2 Phenomenology 10.2 History 10.3 Psychotherapy 10.4 Business and management 10.5 Evolution of cooperation 11 In educational contexts 12 In intercultural contexts 13 In fiction 14 See also 15 References 16 Further reading 17 External links Toggle the table of contents Empathy 66 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Capacity to understand or feel what another person is experiencing For other uses, see Empathy (disambiguation) and Empath (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Sympathy or Empath .

Hugging someone who is hurt is a signal of empathy.

Part of a series on Emotions Affect Classification In animals Emotional intelligence Mood Self-regulation Interpersonal Dysregulation Valence Emotions Acceptance Admiration Affection Amusement Anger Angst Anguish Annoyance Anticipation Anxiety Apathy Arousal Awe Belongingness Boredom Confidence Confusion Contempt Contentment Courage Curiosity Depression Desire Determination Disappointment Disgust Distrust Doubt Ecstasy Elevation Embarrassment Emotional detachment Empathy Enthusiasm Envy Euphoria Faith Fear Frustration Gratification Gratitude Greed Grief Guilt Happiness Hatred Hope Horror Hostility Hubris Humiliation Interest Jealousy Joy Kindness Limerence Loneliness Love Lust Nostalgia Outrage Panic Passion Pity Pleasure Pride Rage Regret Rejection Relief Remorse Resentment Sadness Saudade Schadenfreude Self-pity Shame Shock Shyness Social connection Sorrow Suffering Surprise Suspicion Trust Wonder Worry v t e Empathy is generally described as the ability to take on another person's perspective, to understand, feel, and possibly share and respond to their experience.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] There are more (sometimes conflicting) definitions of empathy that include but are not limited to social, cognitive, and emotional processes primarily concerned with understanding others.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Often times, empathy is considered to be a broad term, and broken down into more specific concepts and types that include cognitive empathy, emotional (or affective) empathy, somatic empathy, and spiritual empathy.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Empathy is still a topic of research. The major areas of research include the development of empathy, the genetics and neuroscience of empathy, cross-species empathy, and the impairment of empathy. Some researchers have made efforts to quantify empathy through different methods, such as from questionnaires where participants can fill out and then be scored on their answers.

The ability to imagine oneself as another person is a sophisticated process. However, the basic capacity to recognize emotions in others may be innate [ 5 ] and may be achieved unconsciously. Empathy is not all-or-nothing; rather, a person can be more or less empathic toward another and empirical research supports a variety of interventions that are able to improve empathy.

[ 6 ] The English word empathy is derived from the Ancient Greek ἐμπάθεια ( empatheia , meaning "physical affection or passion").

[ 7 ] That word derives from ἐν ( en , "in, at") and πάθος ( pathos , "passion" or "suffering").

[ 8 ] Theodor Lipps adapted the German aesthetic term Einfühlung ("feeling into") to psychology in 1903, [ 9 ] : ch. 1 and Edward B. Titchener translated Einfühlung into English as "empathy" in 1909.

[ 10 ] In modern Greek εμπάθεια may mean, depending on context, prejudice , malevolence , malice , or hatred.

[ 11 ] Definitions [ edit ] Since its introduction into the English language, empathy has had a wide range of (sometimes conflicting) definitions among both researchers and laypeople.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Empathy definitions encompass a broad range of phenomena, including caring for other people and having a desire to help them, experiencing emotions that match another person's, discerning what another person is thinking or feeling, [ 15 ] and making less distinct the differences between the self and the other.

[ 16 ] Since empathy involves understanding the emotional states of other people, the way it is characterized derives from the way emotions are characterized. For example, if emotions are characterized by bodily feelings, then understanding the bodily feelings of another will be considered central to empathy. On the other hand, if emotions are characterized by a combination of beliefs and desires, then understanding those beliefs and desires will be more essential to empathy.

Paradigmatically, a person exhibits empathy when they communicate an accurate recognition of the significance of another person's ongoing intentional actions, associated emotional states, and personal characteristics in a manner that seems accurate and tolerable to the recognized person.

[ 17 ] This is a nuanced perspective on empathy which assists in the understanding of complex human emotions and interactions. Acknowledging subjective experiences highlights the need for balance and understanding when engaging in empathy.

[ 18 ] One's ability to recognize the bodily feelings or emotions of another is related to one's imitative capacities, and seems to be grounded in an innate capacity to associate the bodily movements and facial expressions one sees in another with the proprioceptive feelings of producing those corresponding movements or expressions oneself. Empathy is just a deep "objectively moral" form of manipulation(a diversion from reality) do we actually care about the sufferer as much as we fear the day we find ourselves in their shoes?

[ 19 ] Further information: Empathy in media research Distinctions between empathy and related concepts [ edit ] Compassion and sympathy are terms associated with empathy. A person feels compassion when they notice others are in need, and this feeling motivates that person to help. Like empathy, compassion has a wide range of definitions and purported facets (which overlap with some definitions of empathy).

[ 20 ] Sympathy is a feeling of care and understanding for someone in need. Some include in sympathy an empathic concern for another person, and the wish to see them better off or happier.

[ 21 ] Empathy is also related to pity and emotional contagion .

[ 22 ] [ 21 ] One feels pity towards others who might be in trouble or in need of help. This feeling is described as "feeling sorry" for someone.

[ 23 ] Emotional contagion is when a person (especially an infant or a member of a mob ) imitatively "catches" the emotions that others are showing without necessarily recognizing this is happening.

[ 24 ] Alexithymia describes a deficiency in understanding, processing, or describing one's own emotions (unlike empathy which is about someone else's emotions).

[ 25 ] Classification [ edit ] Empathy has two major components: [ 26 ] Affective empathy , also called emotional empathy , [ 27 ] is the ability to respond with an appropriate emotion to another's mental states.

[ 26 ] Our ability to empathize emotionally is based on emotional contagion: [ 27 ] being affected by another's emotional or arousal state.

[ 28 ] Affective empathy can be subdivided into the following scales: [ 26 ] [ 29 ] Empathic concern : sympathy and compassion for others in response to their suffering.

[ 26 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] Personal distress : feelings of discomfort and anxiety in response to another's suffering.

[ 26 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] There is no consensus regarding whether personal distress is a form of empathy or instead is something distinct from empathy.

[ 22 ] [ 30 ] There may be a developmental aspect to this subdivision. Infants respond to the distress of others by getting distressed themselves; only when they are two years old do they start to respond in other-oriented ways: trying to help, comfort, and share.

[ 30 ] Affective mentalizing: uses clues like body language, facial expressions, knowledge about the other's beliefs & situation, and context to understand more about what one is empathizing with.

[ 9 ] Cognitive empathy is the ability to understand another's perspective or mental state.

[ 32 ] [ 26 ] [ 33 ] The terms empathic accuracy , social cognition , perspective-taking , theory of mind , and mentalizing are often used synonymously, but due to a lack of studies comparing theory of mind with types of empathy, it is unclear whether these are equivalent.

[ 26 ] Although measures of cognitive empathy include self-report questionnaires and behavioral measures, a 2019 meta-analysis [ 34 ] found only a negligible association between self-report and behavioral measures, suggesting that people are generally not able to accurately assess their own cognitive empathy abilities. Cognitive empathy can be subdivided into the following scales: [ 26 ] [ 29 ] Perspective-taking : the tendency to spontaneously adopt others' psychological perspectives.

[ 26 ] [ 35 ] Fantasy: the tendency to identify with fictional characters.

[ 26 ] Tactical (or strategic) empathy: the deliberate use of perspective-taking to achieve certain desired ends.

[ 36 ] Emotion regulation: a damper on the emotional contagion process that allows you to empathize without being overwhelmed by the emotion you are empathizing with.

[ 37 ] The scientific community has not coalesced around a precise definition of these constructs, but there is consensus about this distinction.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Affective and cognitive empathy are also independent from one another; someone who strongly empathizes emotionally is not necessarily good in understanding another's perspective.

[ 40 ] Additional constructs that have been proposed include behavioral empathy [ 41 ] (which governs how one chooses to respond to feelings of empathy), social empathy (in which the empathetic person integrates their understanding of broader social dynamics into their empathetic modeling), [ 42 ] and ecological empathy (which encompasses empathy directed towards the natural world).

[ 43 ] In addition, Fritz Breithaupt emphasizes the importance of empathy suppression mechanisms in healthy empathy.

[ 44 ] : ch.2 Measurement [ edit ] Efforts to measure empathy go back to at least the mid-twentieth century.

[ 13 ] [ 45 ] Researchers approach the measurement of empathy from a number of perspectives.

Behavioral measures normally involve raters assessing the presence or absence of certain behaviors in the subjects they are monitoring. Both verbal and non-verbal behaviors have been captured on video by experimenters.

[ 46 ] Other experimenters required subjects to comment upon their own feelings and behaviors, or those of other people involved in the experiment, as indirect ways of signaling their level of empathic functioning to the raters.

[ 47 ] Physiological responses tend to be captured by elaborate electronic equipment that has been physically connected to the subject's body. Researchers then draw inferences about that person's empathic reactions from the electronic readings produced.

[ 48 ] Bodily or "somatic" measures can be seen as behavioral measures at a micro level. They measure empathy through facial and other non-verbally expressed reactions. Such changes are presumably underpinned by physiological changes brought about by some form of "emotional contagion" or mirroring.

[ 48 ] These reactions, while they appear to reflect the internal emotional state of the empathizer, could also, if the stimulus incident lasted more than the briefest period, reflect the results of emotional reactions based on cognitions associated with role-taking ("if I were him I would feel...").

Picture or puppet-story indices for empathy have been adopted to enable even very young, pre-school subjects to respond without needing to read questions and write answers.

[ 49 ] Dependent variables (variables that are monitored for any change by the experimenter) for younger subjects have included self reporting on a seven-point smiley face scale and filmed facial reactions.

[ 50 ] In some experiments, subjects are required to watch video scenarios (either staged or authentic) and to make written responses which are then assessed for their levels of empathy; [ 51 ] scenarios are sometimes also depicted in printed form.

[ 47 ] Self-report measures [ edit ] Measures of empathy also frequently require subjects to self-report upon their own ability or capacity for empathy, using Likert -style numerical responses to a printed questionnaire that may have been designed to reveal the affective, cognitive-affective, or largely cognitive substrates of empathic functioning. Some questionnaires claim to reveal both cognitive and affective substrates.

[ 52 ] However, a 2019 meta analysis questions the validity of self-report measures of cognitive empathy, finding that such self-report measures have negligibly small correlations with corresponding behavioral measures.

[ 34 ] Balancing subjective self-perceptions along with observable behaviors can help to contribute to a more reliable assessment of empathy.

Such measures are also vulnerable to measuring not empathy but the difference between a person's felt empathy and their standards for how much empathy is appropriate. For example, one researcher found that students scored themselves as less empathetic after taking her empathy class. After learning more about empathy, the students became more exacting in how they judged their own feelings and behavior, expected more from themselves, and so rated themselves more severely.

[ 9 ] In the field of medicine, a measurement tool for carers is the Jefferson Scale of Physician Empathy, Health Professional Version (JSPE-HP) .

[ 53 ] The Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI) is among the oldest published measurement tools still in frequent use (first published in 1983) that provides a multi-dimensional assessment of empathy. It comprises a self-report questionnaire of 28 items, divided into four seven-item scales covering the subdivisions of affective and cognitive empathy described above.

[ 26 ] [ 29 ] More recent self-report tools include The Empathy Quotient (EQ) created by Baron-Cohen and Wheelwright [ 54 ] which comprises a self-report questionnaire consisting of 60 items. Another multi-dimensional scale is the Questionnaire of Cognitive and Affective Empathy (QCAE, first published in 2011).

[ 55 ] The Empathic Experience Scale is a 30-item questionnaire that measures empathy from a phenomenological perspective on intersubjectivity , which provides a common basis for the perceptual experience (vicarious experience dimension) and a basic cognitive awareness (intuitive understanding dimension) of others' emotional states.

[ 56 ] It is difficult to make comparisons over time using such questionnaires because of how language changes. For example, one study used a single questionnaire to measure 13,737 college students between 1979 and 2009, and found that empathy scores fell substantially over that time.

[ 57 ] A critic noted these results could be because the wording of the questionnaire had become anachronistically quaint (it used idioms no longer in common use, like "tender feelings", "ill at ease", "quite touched", or "go to pieces" that today's students might not identify with).

[ 44 ] Development [ edit ] Ontogenetic development [ edit ] By the age of two, children normally begin to exhibit fundamental behaviors of empathy by having an emotional response that corresponds with another person's emotional state.

[ 58 ] Even earlier, at one year of age, infants have some rudiments of empathy; they understand that, as with their own actions, other people's actions have goals.

[ 59 ] Toddlers sometimes comfort others or show concern for them. During their second year, they play games of falsehood or pretend in an effort to fool others. Such actions require that the child knows what others believe in order that the child can manipulate those beliefs.

[ 60 ] According to researchers at the University of Chicago who used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), children between the ages of seven and twelve, when seeing others being injured, experience brain activity similar that which would occur if the child themself had been injured.

[ 61 ] Their findings are consistent with previous fMRI studies of pain empathy with adults, and previous findings that vicarious experiencing, particularly of others' distress, is hardwired and present early in life.

[ 61 ] The research found additional areas of the brain, associated with social and moral cognition, were activated when young people saw another person intentionally hurt by somebody, including regions involved in moral reasoning.

[ 61 ] Although children are capable of showing some signs of empathy, including attempting to comfort a crying baby, from as early as 18 months to two years, most do not demonstrate a full theory of mind until around the age of four.

[ 62 ] Theory of mind involves the ability to understand that other people may have beliefs that are different from one's own, and is thought to involve the cognitive component of empathy.

[ 32 ] Children usually can pass false-belief tasks (a test for a theory of mind) around the age of four. It is theorised that people with autism find using a theory of mind to be very difficult, but there is quite a bit of controversy on this subject. (e.g. the Sally–Anne test ).

[ 63 ] Empathic maturity is a cognitive-structural theory developed at the Yale University School of Nursing. It addresses how adults conceive or understand the personhood of patients. The theory, first applied to nurses and since applied to other professions, postulates three levels of cognitive structures. The third and highest level is a meta-ethical theory of the moral structure of care. Adults who operate with level-III understanding synthesize systems of justice and care-based ethics.

[ 64 ] Individual differences [ edit ] The Empathic Concern scale assesses other-oriented feelings of sympathy and concern and the Personal Distress scale measures self-oriented feelings of personal anxiety and unease.

[ 65 ] Researchers have used behavioral and neuroimaging data to analyze extraversion and agreeableness. Both are associated with empathic accuracy and increased brain activity in two brain regions that are important for empathic processing (medial prefrontal cortex and temporoparietal junction ).

[ 66 ] Sex differences [ edit ] Part of a series on Sex differences in humans Biology Sexual differentiation disorders In research Physiology Dimorphism Scientific measures Medicine and health Autoimmunity Life expectancy Health survival paradox suicide Mental disorders autism depression schizophrenia substance abuse Stroke care Neuroscience and psychology Cognition Coping Emotional expression Aggression Emotional intelligence Empathy Gender empathy gap Intelligence Memory Narcissism Neurosexism Sexuality age disparity in relationships attraction desire fantasy jealousy Sociology and society Crime Education in mathematics and reading in the U.S.

Gender inequality Greater male expendability Greater male variability Leadership Religion Social capital Social support Sociolinguistics Gender-equality paradox v t e See also: Sex differences in psychology § Empathy , and Sex differences in emotional intelligence § Empathy On average, females score higher than males on measures of empathy, [ 67 ] such as the Empathy Quotient (EQ), while males tend to score higher on the Systemizing Quotient (SQ). Both males and females with autistic spectrum disorders usually score lower on the EQ and higher on SQ ( see below for more detail on autism and empathy).

[ 32 ] Other studies show no significant sex differences, and instead suggest that gender differences are the result of motivational differences, such as upholding stereotypes.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] Gender stereotypes about men and women can affect how they express emotions. The sex difference is small to moderate, somewhat inconsistent, and is often influenced by the person's motivations or social environment.

[ 67 ] Bosson et al.

say "physiological measures of emotion and studies that track people in their daily lives find no consistent sex differences in the experience of emotion", which "suggests that women may amplify certain emotional expressions, or men may suppress them".

[ 67 ] However, a 2014 review from Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews reported that there is evidence that "sex differences in empathy have phylogenetic and ontogenetic roots in biology and are not merely cultural byproducts driven by socialization." [ 69 ] The review found sex differences in empathy from birth, growing larger with age, and consistent and stable across lifespan.

[ 69 ] Females, on average, had higher empathy than males, while children with higher empathy, regardless of gender, continue to be higher in empathy throughout development.

[ 69 ] Analysis of brain event-related potentials found that females who saw human suffering tended to have higher ERP waveforms than males.

[ 69 ] An investigation of N400 amplitudes found, on average, higher N400 in females in response to social situations, which positively correlated with self-reported empathy.

[ 69 ] Structural fMRI studies also found females to have larger grey matter volumes in posterior inferior frontal and anterior inferior parietal cortex areas which are correlated with mirror neurons in fMRI literature.

[ 69 ] Females also tended to have a stronger link between emotional and cognitive empathy.

[ 69 ] The researchers believe that the stability of these sex differences in development are unlikely to be explained by environmental influences but rather by human evolution and inheritance.

[ 69 ] Throughout prehistory, women were the primary nurturers and caretakers of children; so this might have led to an evolved neurological adaptation for women to be more aware and responsive to non-verbal expressions. According to the "Primary Caretaker Hypothesis", prehistoric men did not have such selective pressure as primary caretakers. This might explain modern day sex differences in emotion recognition and empathy.

[ 69 ] A review published in Neuropsychologia found that females tended to be better at recognizing facial affects, expression processing, and emotions in general.

[ 70 ] Males tended to be better at recognizing specific behaviors such as anger, aggression, and threatening cues.

[ 70 ] A 2014 meta-analysis, in Cognition and Emotion , found a small female advantage in non-verbal emotional recognition.

[ 71 ] Environmental influences [ edit ] Some research theorizes that environmental factors, such as parenting style and relationships, affect the development of empathy in children. Empathy promotes pro-social relationships [ 72 ] and helps mediate aggression.

Caroline Tisot studied how environmental factors like parenting style, parent empathy, and prior social experiences affect the development of empathy in young children. The children studied were asked to complete an effective empathy measure, while the children's parents completed a questionnaire to assess parenting style and the Balanced Emotional Empathy scale. The study found that certain parenting practices, as opposed to parenting style as a whole, contributed to the development of empathy in children. These practices include encouraging the child to imagine the perspectives of others and teaching the child to reflect on his or her own feelings. The development of empathy varied based on the gender of the child and parent. Paternal warmth was significantly positively related to empathy in children, especially boys. Maternal warmth was negatively related to empathy in children, especially girls.

[ 73 ] Empathy may be disrupted due to brain trauma such as stroke . In most cases, empathy is impaired if a lesion or stroke occurs on the right side of the brain.

[ 74 ] Damage to the frontal lobe , which is primarily responsible for emotional regulation, can profoundly impact a person's capacity to experience empathy.

[ 75 ] People with an acquired brain injury also show lower levels of empathy. More than half of those people with a traumatic brain injury self-report a deficit in their empathic capacity.

[ 76 ] There is some evidence that empathy is a skill that one can improve in with training.

[ 77 ] Evolution across species [ edit ] Studies in animal behavior and neuroscience indicate that empathy is not restricted to humans (however the interpretation of such research depends in part on how expansive a definition of empathy researchers adopt [ 22 ] ).

Empathy-like behaviors have been observed in primates , both in captivity and in the wild, and in particular in bonobos , perhaps the most empathic primate.

[ 78 ] One study demonstrated prosocial behavior elicited by empathy in rodents.

[ 79 ] Rodents demonstrate empathy for cagemates (but not strangers) in pain.

[ 80 ] An influential study on the evolution of empathy by Stephanie Preston and Frans de Waal [ 81 ] discusses a neural perception-action mechanism and postulates a bottom-up model of empathy that ties together all levels, [ clarification needed ] from state matching [ clarification needed ] to perspective-taking.

University of Chicago neurobiologist Jean Decety agrees that empathy is not exclusive to humans, but that empathy has deep evolutionary, biochemical, and neurological underpinnings, and that even the most advanced forms of empathy in humans are built on more basic forms and remain connected to core mechanisms associated with affective communication, social attachment , and parental care .

[ 82 ] Neural circuits involved in empathy and caring include the brainstem , the amygdala , hypothalamus , basal ganglia , insula , and orbitofrontal cortex .

[ 83 ] Other animals and empathy between species [ edit ] See also: Emotion in animals and Ecological empathy Researchers Zanna Clay and Frans de Waal studied the socio-emotional development of the bonobo chimpanzee.

[ 84 ] They focused on the interplay of numerous skills such as empathy-related responding, and how different rearing backgrounds of the juvenile bonobo affected their response to stressful events—events related to themselves (e.g. loss of a fight) as well as stressful events of others. They found that bonobos sought out body contact with one another as a coping mechanism. Bonobos sought out more body contact after watching an event distress other bonobos than after their individually experienced stressful event. Mother-reared bonobos sought out more physical contact than orphaned bonobos after a stressful event happened to another. This finding shows the importance of mother-child attachment and bonding in successful socio-emotional development, such as empathic-like behaviors. De Waal suggests the advantages provided to mothers who understand the needs of their children are the reason empathy evolved in the first place.

[ 85 ] Empathic-like behavior has been observed in chimpanzees in different aspects of their natural behaviors. For example, chimpanzees spontaneously contribute comforting behaviors to victims of aggressive behavior in both natural and unnatural settings, a behavior recognized [ by whom?

] as consolation. Researchers led by Teresa Romero observed these empathic and sympathetic-like behaviors in chimpanzees in two separate outdoor housed [ clarification needed ] groups.

[ 86 ] Acts of consolation were observed in both groups. This behavior is also found in humans, particularly in human infants. Another similarity found between chimpanzees and humans is that empathic-like responding was disproportionately provided to kin. Although comforting towards non-family chimpanzees was also observed, as with humans, chimpanzees showed the majority of comfort and concern to close/loved ones. Another similarity between chimpanzee and human expression of empathy is that females provided more comfort than males on average. The only exception to this discovery was that high-ranking males showed as much empathy-like behavior as their female counterparts. This is believed to be because of policing-like behavior and the authoritative status of high-ranking male chimpanzees.

Dogs have been hypothesized to share empathic-like responding towards humans. Researchers Custance and Mayer put individual dogs in an enclosure with their owner and a stranger.

[ 87 ] When the participants were talking or humming, the dog showed no behavioral changes; however when the participants were pretending to cry, the dogs oriented their behavior toward the person in distress whether it be the owner or stranger. The dogs approached the participants when crying in a submissive fashion, by sniffing, licking, and nuzzling the distressed person. The dogs did not approach the participants in the usual form of excitement, tail wagging, or panting. Since the dogs did not direct their empathic-like responses only towards their owner, it is hypothesized that dogs generally seek out humans showing distressing body behavior. Although this could suggest that dogs have the cognitive capacity for empathy, it could also mean that domesticated dogs have learned to comfort distressed humans through generations of being rewarded for that specific behavior.

When witnessing chicks in distress, domesticated hens ( Gallus gallus domesticus ) show emotional and physiological responding. Researchers found that in conditions where the chick was susceptible to danger, the mother hen's heart rate increased, she sounded vocal alarms, she decreased her personal preening, and her body temperature increased.

[ 88 ] This responding happened whether or not the chick felt as if it were in danger. Mother hens experienced stress-induced hyperthermia only when the chick's behavior correlated with the perceived threat.

Humans can empathize with other species. One study of a sample of organisms showed that the strength of human empathic perceptions (and compassionate reactions) toward an organism is negatively correlated with how long ago our species' had a common ancestor. In other words, the more phylogenetically close a species is to us, the more likely we are to feel empathy and compassion towards it.

[ 89 ] Genetics [ edit ] Measures of empathy show evidence of being genetically influenced.

[ 90 ] For example, carriers of the deletion variant of ADRA2B show more activation of the amygdala when viewing emotionally arousing images.

[ 91 ] The gene 5-HTTLPR seems to influence sensitivity to negative emotional information and is also attenuated by the deletion variant of ADRA2b.

[ 92 ] Carriers of the double G variant of the OXTR gene have better social skills and higher self-esteem.

[ clarification needed ] [ 93 ] A gene located near LRRN1 on chromosome 3 influences the human ability to read, understand, and respond to emotions in others.

[ 94 ] Neuroscientific basis of empathy [ edit ] Contemporary neuroscience offers insights into the neural basis of the mind's ability to understand and process emotion. Studies of mirror neurons attempt to measure the neural basis for human mind-reading and emotion-sharing abilities and thereby to explain the basis of the empathy reaction.

[ 95 ] People who score high on empathy tests have especially busy mirror neuron systems.

[ 96 ] Empathy is a spontaneous sharing of affect, provoked by witnessing and sympathizing with another's emotional state. The empathic person mirrors or mimics the emotional response they would expect to feel if they were in the other person's place. Unlike personal distress, empathy is not characterized by aversion to another's emotional response. This distinction is vital because empathy is associated with the moral emotion sympathy, or empathic concern, and consequently also prosocial or altruistic action.

[ 95 ] Empathy involves two interconnected elements: cognitive empathy , which is understanding or recognising the emotions another person is experiencing, and affective empathy , which refers to actually feeling or sharing those emotions yourself.

[ 15 ] [ 97 ] For social beings, negotiating interpersonal decisions is as important to survival as being able to navigate the physical landscape.

[ 98 ] Meta-analysis of fMRI studies of empathy confirms that different brain areas are activated during affective-perceptual empathy than during cognitive-evaluative empathy. Affective empathy is correlated with increased activity in the insula while cognitive empathy is correlated with activity in the mid cingulate cortex and adjacent dorsomedial prefrontal cortex .

[ 99 ] A study with patients who experienced different types of brain damage confirmed the distinction between emotional and cognitive empathy.

[ 27 ] Specifically, the inferior frontal gyrus appears to be responsible for emotional empathy, and the ventromedial prefrontal gyrus seems to mediate cognitive empathy.

[ 27 ] fMRI has been employed to investigate the functional anatomy of empathy.

[ 100 ] Observing another person's emotional state activates parts of the neuronal network that are involved in processing that same state in oneself, whether it is disgust, [ 101 ] touch, [ 102 ] or pain.

[ 103 ] [ 31 ] As these emotional states are being observed, the brain is able activate a network of the brain that is involved in empathy. There are two separate systems of the brain involved with the feeling of empathy: a cognitive system and an emotional system. The cognitive system helps an individual understand another's perspective while the emotional system enables our ability to empathize emotionally.

[ 104 ] The neuronal network that is activated controls the observers response to these emotional states thus prompting an empathetic response.

[ 105 ] The study of the neural underpinnings of empathy received increased interest following a paper published by S.D. Preston and Frans de Waal [ 106 ] after the discovery of mirror neurons in monkeys that fire both when the creature watches another perform an action and when they themselves perform it. Researchers suggest that paying attention to perceiving another individual's state activates neural representations, and that this activation primes or generates the associated autonomic and somatic responses (perception-action coupling), unless inhibited.

[ 107 ] This mechanism resembles the common coding theory between perception and action.

Another study provides evidence of separate neural pathways activating reciprocal suppression in different regions of the brain associated with the performance of "social" and "mechanical" tasks. These findings suggest that the cognition associated with reasoning about the "state of another person's mind" and "causal/mechanical properties of inanimate objects" are neurally suppressed from occurring at the same time.

[ 108 ] Mirroring-behavior in motor neurons during empathy may help duplicate feelings.

[ 109 ] Such sympathetic action may afford access to sympathetic feelings and, perhaps, trigger emotions of kindness and forgiveness.

[ 110 ] Impairment [ edit ] A difference in distribution between affective and cognitive empathy has been observed in various conditions.

Psychopathy and narcissism are associated with impairments in affective but not cognitive empathy, whereas bipolar disorder is associated with deficits in cognitive but not affective empathy. People with borderline personality disorder (BPD) may suffer from impairments in cognitive empathy as well as fluctuating affective empathy, although this topic is controversial.

[ 38 ] Schizophrenia , too, is associated with deficits in both types of empathy.

[ 111 ] However, even in people without conditions such as these, the balance between affective and cognitive empathy varies.

[ 38 ] Atypical empathic responses are associated with some personality disorders such as psychopathy, borderline , narcissistic , and schizoid personality disorders; conduct disorder ; [ 112 ] schizophrenia; bipolar disorder; [ 38 ] and depersonalization .

[ 113 ] Sex offenders who had been raised in an environment where they were shown a lack of empathy and had endured abuse of the sort they later committed, felt less affective empathy for their victims.

[ 114 ] Autism and controversy [ edit ] The subject of whether autism affects empathy is a controversial and complex area of study. Several different factors are proposed to be at play, such as mirror neurons, alexithymia, and more. The double empathy problem theory proposes that prior studies on autism and empathy may have been misinterpreted and that autistic people show the same levels of empathy towards one another as non-autistic people do.

[ 115 ] Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is often correlated to problems with empathy and social communication skills. However, like ASD itself, these issues are often found to be on a spectrum. The suggestion that people with autism are likely to have issues with personal relationships and empathy is a complex issue that has been addressed in many studies. Various research has been exploring these concepts for more than twenty years.

[ 116 ] Certain studies, like this one from 2004 [ 117 ] [ 118 ] found connections between ASD and empathy issues. Another study found that empathy problems may be associated to the comorbidity of alexithymia (a struggle to feel emotions) and ASD.

[ 119 ] However, a more recent study from 2022 [ 120 ] found that there were, in fact, no significant differences between the brain sections (medial prefrontal cortex and amygdala) that are associated with empathy.

Another study (2023) focusing on ASD and empathy with regards to mirror neurons [ 121 ] also reflected on the theory that mirror neurons “ may be dysfunctional in ASD.” However, as the researchers state, this connection is not clear and although mirror neurons are correlated to ASD, there is no proven causational relationship between dysfunctional mirror neurons and ASD. The study from 2023 might be considered contradictory to an earlier (2006) study on mirror neurons that found that high-functioning autistic children showed reduced mirror neuron activity in the brain's inferior frontal gyrus while imitating and observing emotional expressions in other children who were considered non-autistic.

[ 122 ] The correlation between ASD and empathy is a focus for researchers and many relevant articles can be found in the Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders.

[ 26 ] [ 123 ] [ 124 ] [ 125 ] [ 126 ] Psychopathy [ edit ] Psychopathy is a personality construct partly characterized by antisocial and aggressive behaviors, as well as emotional and interpersonal deficits including shallow emotions and a lack of remorse and empathy.

[ 127 ] The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) and International Classification of Diseases (ICD) list antisocial personality disorder (ASPD) and dissocial personality disorder , stating that these have been referred to as or include what is referred to as psychopathy.

[ 128 ] Psychopathy is associated with atypical responses to distress cues (e.g. facial and vocal expressions of fear and sadness ), including decreased activation of the fusiform and extrastriate cortical regions, which may partly account for impaired recognition of and reduced autonomic responsiveness to expressions of fear, and impairments of empathy.

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] Studies on children with psychopathic tendencies have also shown such associations.

[ 131 ] [ 132 ] [ 133 ] The underlying biological surfaces [ clarification needed ] for processing expressions of happiness are functionally intact in psychopaths, although less responsive than in those of controls.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] [ 132 ] [ 133 ] The neuroimaging literature is unclear as to whether deficits are specific to particular emotions such as fear. Some fMRI studies report that emotion perception deficits in psychopathy are pervasive across emotions (positives and negatives).

[ 134 ] One study on psychopaths found that, under certain circumstances, they could willfully empathize with others, and that their empathic reaction initiated the same way it does for controls. Psychopathic criminals were brain-scanned while watching videos of a person harming another individual. The psychopaths' empathic reaction initiated the same way it did for controls when they were instructed to empathize with the harmed individual, and the area of the brain relating to pain was activated when the psychopaths were asked to imagine how the harmed individual felt. The research suggests psychopaths can switch empathy on at will, which would enable them to be both callous and charming. The team who conducted the study say they do not know how to transform this willful empathy into the spontaneous empathy most people have, though they propose it might be possible to rehabilitate psychopaths by helping them to activate their "empathy switch". Others suggested that it remains unclear whether psychopaths' experience of empathy was the same as that of controls, and also questioned the possibility of devising therapeutic interventions that would make the empathic reactions more automatic.

[ 135 ] One problem with the theory that the ability to turn empathy on and off constitutes psychopathy is that such a theory would classify socially sanctioned violence and punishment as psychopathy, as these entail suspending empathy towards certain individuals and/or groups. The attempt to get around this by standardizing tests of psychopathy for cultures with different norms of punishment is criticized in this context for being based on the assumption that people can be classified in discrete cultures while cultural influences are in reality mixed and every person encounters a mosaic of influences. Psychopathy may be an artefact of psychiatry's standardization along imaginary sharp lines between cultures, as opposed to an actual difference in the brain.

[ 136 ] Work conducted by Professor Jean Decety with large samples of incarcerated psychopaths offers additional insights. In one study, psychopaths were scanned while viewing video clips depicting people being intentionally hurt. They were also tested on their responses to seeing short videos of facial expressions of pain. The participants in the high-psychopathy group exhibited significantly less activation in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex , amygdala , and periaqueductal gray parts of the brain, but more activity in the striatum and the insula when compared to control participants.

[ 137 ] In a second study, individuals with psychopathy exhibited a strong response in pain-affective brain regions when taking an imagine-self perspective, but failed to recruit the neural circuits that were activated in controls during an imagine-other perspective—in particular the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and amygdala—which may contribute to their lack of empathic concern.

[ 138 ] Researchers have investigated whether people who have high levels of psychopathy have sufficient levels of cognitive empathy but lack the ability to use affective empathy. People who score highly on psychopathy measures are less likely to exhibit affective empathy. There was a strong negative correlation, showing that psychopathy and lack of affective empathy correspond strongly.

The DANVA-2 [ clarification needed ] found those who scored highly on the psychopathy scale do not lack in recognising emotion in facial expressions. Therefore, such individuals do not lack in perspective-talking ability but do lack in compassion regarding the experiences of others [ clarification needed ] .

[ 139 ] Neuroscientist Antonio R. Damasio and his colleagues showed that subjects with damage to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex lack the ability to empathically feel their way to moral answers, and that when confronted with moral dilemmas, these brain-damaged patients coldly came up with "end-justifies-the-means" answers, leading Damasio to conclude that the point was not that they reached immoral conclusions, but that when they were confronted by a difficult issue – in this case as whether to shoot down a passenger plane hijacked by terrorists before it hits a major city – these patients appear to reach decisions without the anguish that afflicts those with normally functioning brains. According to Adrian Raine , a clinical neuroscientist also at the University of Southern California, one of this study's implications is that society may have to rethink how it judges immoral people: "Psychopaths often feel no empathy or remorse. Without that awareness, people relying exclusively on reasoning seem to find it harder to sort their way through moral thickets. Does that mean they should be held to different standards of accountability?" [ 140 ] Despite studies suggesting psychopaths have deficits in emotion perception and imagining others in pain, professor Simon Baron-Cohen claims psychopathy is associated with intact cognitive empathy, which would imply an intact ability to read and respond to behaviors, social cues, and what others are feeling. Psychopathy is, however, associated with impairment in the other major component of empathy—affective (emotional) empathy—which includes the ability to feel the suffering and emotions of others ( emotional contagion ), and those with the condition are therefore not distressed by the suffering of their victims. Such a dissociation of affective and cognitive empathy has been demonstrated for aggressive offenders.

[ 141 ] Other conditions [ edit ] Atypical empathic responses are also correlated with a variety of other conditions.

Borderline personality disorder is characterized by extensive behavioral and interpersonal difficulties that arise from emotional and cognitive dysfunction.

[ 142 ] Dysfunctional social and interpersonal behavior plays a role in the emotionally intense way people with borderline personality disorder react.

[ 143 ] While individuals with borderline personality disorder may show their emotions excessively, their ability to feel empathy is a topic of much dispute with contradictory findings. Some studies assert impairments in cognitive empathy in BPD patients yet no affective empathy impairments, while other studies have found impairments in both affective and cognitive empathy. Fluctuating empathy, fluctuating between normal range of empathy, reduced sense of empathy, and a lack of empathy has been noted to be present in BPD patients in multiple studies, although more research is needed to determine its prevalence, although it is believed to be at least not uncommon and may be a very common phenomenon. BPD is a very heterogenous disorder, with symptoms including empathy ranging wildly between patients.

One diagnostic criterion of narcissistic personality disorder is a lack of empathy and an unwillingness or inability to recognize or identify with the feelings and needs of others.

[ 144 ] Characteristics of schizoid personality disorder include emotional coldness, detachment, and impaired affect corresponding with an inability to be empathic and sensitive towards others.

[ 145 ] A study conducted by Jean Decety and colleagues at the University of Chicago demonstrated that subjects with aggressive conduct disorder demonstrate atypical empathic responses when viewing others in pain.

[ 112 ] Subjects with conduct disorder were at least as responsive as controls to the pain of others but, unlike controls, subjects with conduct disorder showed strong and specific activation of the amygdala and ventral striatum (areas that enable a general arousing effect of reward ), yet impaired activation of the neural regions involved in self-regulation and metacognition (including moral reasoning ), in addition to diminished processing between the amygdala and the prefrontal cortex .

[ 112 ] Schizophrenia is characterized by impaired affective empathy, [ 15 ] [ 38 ] as well as severe cognitive and empathy impairments as measured by the Empathy Quotient (EQ).

[ 111 ] These empathy impairments are also associated with impairments in social cognitive tasks.

[ 111 ] Bipolar individuals have impaired cognitive empathy and theory of mind, but increased affective empathy.

[ 38 ] [ 146 ] Despite cognitive flexibility being impaired, planning behavior is intact. Dysfunctions in the prefrontal cortex could result in the impaired cognitive empathy, since impaired cognitive empathy has been related with neurocognitive task performance involving cognitive flexibility.

[ 146 ] Dave Grossman , in his book On Killing , reports on how military training artificially creates depersonalization in soldiers, suppressing empathy and making it easier for them to kill other people.

[ 113 ] A deadening of empathic response to workmates, customers and the like is one of the three key components of occupational burnout , according to the conceptualization behind its primary diagnostic instrument, the Maslach Burnout Inventory .

The term Empathy Deficit Disorder (EDD) has gained popularity online, but it is not a diagnosis under the DSM-5. The term was coined in an article by Douglas LaBier.

[ 147 ] In the article, he acknowledges that he "made it up, so you won't find it listed in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders" and that his conclusions are derived from personal experience alone.

[ 147 ] His conclusions have not been validated through clinical studies, nor have studies identified EDD as a separate disorder rather than a symptom associated with previously established diagnoses that do appear in the DSM-5.

Effects [ edit ] The capacity to empathize is a revered trait in society.

[ 26 ] Empathy is considered a motivating factor for unselfish, prosocial behavior, [ 148 ] whereas a lack of empathy is related to antisocial behavior .

[ 26 ] [ 149 ] Apart from the automatic tendency to recognize the emotions of others, one may also deliberately engage in empathic reasoning. Such empathic engagement helps an individual understand and anticipate the behavior of another. Two general methods have been identified: An individual may mentally simulate fictitious versions of the beliefs, desires, character traits, and context of another individual to see what emotional feelings this provokes. Or, an individual may simulate an emotional feeling and then analyze the environment to discover a suitable reason for the emotional feeling to be appropriate for that specific environment.

[ 81 ] An empathizer's emotional background may affect or distort how they perceive the emotions in others.

[ 150 ] Societies that promote individualism have lower ability for empathy [ clarification needed ] .

[ 151 ] The judgments that empathy provides about the emotional states of others are not certain ones. Empathy is a skill that gradually develops throughout life, and which improves the more contact we have with the person with whom one empathizes [ clarification needed ] .

Empathizers report finding it easier to take the perspective of another person in a situation when they have experienced a similar situation, [ 152 ] and that they experience greater empathic understanding.

[ 153 ] Research regarding whether similar past experience makes the empathizer more accurate is mixed.

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] The extent to which a person's emotions are publicly observable, or mutually recognized as such has significant social consequences. Empathic recognition may or may not be welcomed or socially desirable.

[ example needed ] This is particularly the case when we recognize the emotions that someone has towards us during real time interactions. Based on a metaphorical affinity with touch, philosopher Edith Wyschogrod claims that the proximity entailed by empathy increases the potential vulnerability of either party.

[ 154 ] Benefits of empathizing [ edit ] People who score more highly on empathy questionnaires also report having more positive relationships with other people. Supporting this, a 2017 study measuring dispositional empathy with the Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI) found that individuals with higher empathic concern report having a greater number of close relationships.

[ 155 ] They report "greater life satisfaction, more positive affect, less negative affect, and less depressive symptoms than people who had lower empathy scores".

[ 156 ] Children who exhibit more empathy also have more resilience.

[ 157 ] Research by Allemand, Steiger, and Fend (2015) support this by showing many benefits that come with the early development of empathy in adolescence . The main findings of the research indicate that early development of empathy in adolescence will help “predict social competencies in adulthood .” [ 158 ] In other words, their future ability to work well in groups, build relationships, and communicate effectively. Others include the development of social skills , cooperation , and positive relations in life, which further proves the benefit of empathy.

Empathy can be an aesthetic pleasure, "by widening the scope of that which we experience... by providing us with more than one perspective of a situation, thereby multiplying our experience... and... by intensifying that experience." [ 44 ] : Epilogue People can use empathy to borrow joy from the joy of children discovering things or playing make-believe, or to satisfy our curiosity about other people's lives.

[ 159 ] Empathic inaccuracy and empathic bias [ edit ] People can severely overestimate how much they understand others.

[ 160 ] When people empathize with another, they may oversimplify that other person in order to make them more legible.

[ 44 ] It may improve empathic accuracy for the empathizer to explicitly ask the person empathized with for confirmation of the empathic hypothesis.

[ 161 ] However, people may be reluctant to abandon their empathic hypotheses even when they are explicitly denied.

[ 44 ] When people empathize with others, they may oversimplify them to make them easier to understand. This can lead to misperceiving how cohesive others are and to feeling, by comparison, that they themselves lack a strong, unified self. Fritz Breithaupt calls this the "empathic endowment effect". Because the empathic person must temporarily dampen their own sense of self in order to empathize with the other, and because the other seems to have a magnified and extra-cohesive sense of self, the empathic person may suffer from this and may "project onto others the self that they are lacking" and envy "that which they must give up in order to be able to feel empathy: a strong self".

[ 44 ] Some research suggests that people are more able and willing to empathize with those most similar to themselves.

[ 162 ] In particular, empathy increases with similarities in culture and living conditions. Empathy is more likely to occur between individuals whose interaction is more frequent.

[ 163 ] [ 58 ] : 62 A measure of how well a person can infer the specific content of another person's thoughts and feelings was developed by William Ickes.

[ clarification needed ] [ 68 ] In one experiment, researchers gave two groups of men wristbands according to which football team they supported. Each participant received a mild electric shock, then watched another go through the same pain. When the wristbands matched, both brains flared [ clarification needed ] : with pain, and empathic pain. If they supported opposing teams, the observer was found to have little empathy.

[ 164 ] Disadvantages of empathy [ edit ] Psychologist Paul Bloom , author of Against Empathy , points out that empathic bias can result in tribalism and violent responses in the name of helping people of the same "tribe" or social group, for example when empathic bias is exploited by demagogues .

[ 165 ] He proposes "rational compassion" as an alternative; one example is using effective altruism to decide on charitable donations rationally, rather than by relying on emotional responses to images in the media.

[ 165 ] Higher empathy tends to reduce the accuracy of deception detection, and emotion recognition training does not improve deception detection.

[ 166 ] Empathy can also be exploited by sympathetic beggars . Bloom points to the example of street children in India, who can get many donations because they are adorable but this results in their enslavement by organized crime. Bloom says that though someone might feel better about themselves and find more meaning in life than they give to the person in front of them, in some cases they would do less harm and in many cases do more good in the world by giving to an effective charity through an impersonal website.

[ 165 ] Bloom believes improper use of empathy and social intelligence can lead to shortsighted actions and parochialism.

[ 167 ] Bloom points out that parents who have too much short-term empathy might create long-term problems for their children, by neglecting discipline, helicopter parenting , or deciding not to get their children vaccinated because of the short-term discomfort.

[ 165 ] People experiencing too much empathy after a disaster may continue to send donations like canned goods or used clothing even after being asked to stop or to send cash instead, and this can make the situation worse by creating the need to dispose of useless donations and taking resources away from helpful activities.

[ 165 ] Bloom also finds empathy can encourage unethical behavior when it causes people to care more about attractive people than ugly people, or people of one's own race vs. people of a different race.

[ 165 ] The attractiveness bias can also affect wildlife conservation efforts, increasing the amount of money devoted and laws passed to protect cute and photogenic animals, while taking attention away from species that are more ecologically important.

[ 165 ] Manipulation and Instrumental Use [ edit ] While empathy is generally associated with prosocial behavior, scholars have noted that it can be manipulated or used disingenuously. This form of strategic or performative empathy, sometimes colloquially referred to as “fake empathy,” can be employed to gain trust, manage impressions, or influence others emotionally without genuine concern for their well-being.

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] Though not widely used in academic literature, the idea overlaps with the concept of instrumental empathy, in which empathic expressions are used to achieve non-empathic goals, such as persuasion, manipulation, or social control.

[ 170 ] [ 171 ] [ 172 ] Additionally, excessive empathic engagement can lead to emotional exhaustion or empathic distress fatigue, particularly in caregiving professions. This form of burnout can impair moral judgment, reduce caregiving effectiveness, and contribute to depersonalization.

[ 173 ] Selective empathy—when emotional concern is reserved for in-group members—has been linked to in-group favoritism and out-group dehumanization, particularly in political or wartime contexts. Paul Bloom and others have argued that such biased empathy may exacerbate social division and lead to ethically problematic decisions, suggesting that rational compassion may offer a more consistent moral framework.

[ 174 ] Empathy and power [ edit ] People tend to empathize less when they have more social or political power. For example, people from lower-class backgrounds exhibit better empathic accuracy than those from upper-class backgrounds.

[ 175 ] In a variety of "priming" experiments, people who were asked to recall a situation in which they had power over someone else then demonstrated reduced ability to mirror others, to comprehend their viewpoints, or to learn from their perspectives.

[ 176 ] Empathy and violence [ edit ] Bloom says that although psychopaths have low empathy, the correlation between low empathy and violent behavior as documented in scientific studies is "zero".

[ 165 ] Other measures are much more predictive of violent behavior, such as lack of self-control .

[ 165 ] Compassion fatigue [ edit ] See also: Compassion fatigue Excessive empathy can lead to "empathic distress fatigue", especially if it is associated with pathological altruism . The medical [ clarification needed ] risks are fatigue , occupational burnout , guilt , shame , anxiety , and depression .

[ 177 ] Tania Singer says that health care workers and caregivers must be objective regarding the emotions of others. They should not over-invest their own emotions in the other, at the risk of draining away their own resourcefulness.

[ 178 ] Paul Bloom points out that high-empathy nurses tend to spend less time with their patients, to avoid feeling negative emotions associated with witnessing suffering.

[ 165 ] Empathy backfire [ edit ] Despite empathy being often portrayed as a positive attribute, whether or not the people who express empathy are viewed favorably depends on who they show empathy for. Such is the case in which a third party observes a subject showing empathy for someone of questionable character or generally viewed as unethical; that third party might not like or respect the subject for it. This is called "empathy backfire".

[ 179 ] Influence on helping behavior [ edit ] See also: Empathy-altruism Investigators into the social response to natural disasters researched the characteristics associated with individuals who help victims. Researchers found that cognitive empathy, rather than emotional empathy, predicted helping behavior towards victims.

[ 180 ] Taking on the perspectives of others (cognitive empathy) may allow these helpers to better empathize with victims without as much discomfort, whereas sharing the emotions of the victims (emotional empathy) can cause emotional distress, helplessness, and victim-blaming , and may lead to avoidance rather than helping.

[ 181 ] Individuals who expressed concern for the vulnerable (i.e. affective empathy) were more willing to accept the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown measures that create distress.

[ 182 ] People who understand how empathic feelings evoke altruistic motivation may adopt strategies for suppressing or avoiding such feelings. Such numbing, or loss of the capacity to feel empathy for clients, is a possible factor in the experience of burnout among case workers in helping professions. People can better cognitively control their actions the more they understand how altruistic behavior emerges, whether it is from minimizing sadness or the arousal of mirror neurons.

Empathy-induced altruism may not always produce pro-social effects, as it can create bias by leading one to prioritize those for whom empathy is felt over other potential pro-social goals. Researchers suggest that individuals are willing to act against the greater collective good or to violate their own moral principles of fairness and justice if doing so will benefit a person for whom empathy is felt.

[ 183 ] Empathy-based socialization differs [ how?

] from inhibition of egoistic impulses through shaping, modeling, and internalized guilt. Therapeutic programs to foster altruistic impulses by encouraging perspective-taking and empathic feelings might enable individuals to develop more satisfactory interpersonal relations, especially in the long-term. Empathy-induced altruism can improve attitudes toward stigmatized groups, racial attitudes, and actions toward people with AIDS, the homeless, and convicts. Such resulting altruism also increases cooperation in competitive situations.

[ 184 ] Empathy is good at prompting prosocial behaviors that are informal, unplanned, and directed at someone who is immediately present, but is not as good at prompting more abstractly-considered, long-term prosocial behavior.

[ 185 ] Empathy can not only be a precursor to one's own helpful acts, but can also be a way of inviting help from others. If you mimic the posture, facial expressions, and vocal style of someone you are with, you can thereby encourage them to help you and to form a favorable opinion of you.

[ 186 ] Conflict Resolution [ edit ] Empathy plays a crucial role in resolving conflicts by shifting the focus to understanding the other person’s viewpoint, preventing miscommunication , and taking away biases .

[ 187 ] Being able to understand the other party’s side of the argument gives them a different idea of what is creating the conflict. This helps in communicating the problem in a way that will take away any biases and allow for collaboration that will help resolve the conflict. While empathy can play an effective role in conflict resolution, there are situations where it may not have a significant impact.

[ 187 ] While empathy can foster understanding and aid in resolving conflicts, some scholars argue that its effects are context-dependent and not universally positive. Empathy is not inherently moral and can be directed disproportionately toward in-groups, sometimes leading to empathic bias that exacerbates intergroup tensions.

[ 188 ] This phenomenon, often referred to as empathic tribalism, can intensify hostility toward perceived out-groups and be manipulated in political or nationalistic rhetoric. For example, empathy for the suffering of one’s own group has historically been used to justify retaliatory aggression or military interventions.

[ 189 ] Moreover, in conflict or wartime settings, empathy may be selectively disengaged, allowing individuals to maintain moral self-regard while endorsing or participating in violence against others. This process, known as moral disengagement, creates psychological distance from the suffering of out-groups while reinforcing loyalty to in-group members.

[ 190 ] These critiques suggest that while empathy plays a critical role in many conflict-resolution contexts, it is not a universal good and may, under certain conditions, contribute to moral bias, polarization, or even the justification of violence. Scholars such as Paul Bloom have argued for a more measured or rational approach to compassion that avoids the pitfalls of emotionally biased empathy.

[ 191 ] Empathic anger and distress [ edit ] Anger [ edit ] Empathic anger is an emotion, a form of empathic distress.

[ 192 ] Empathic anger is felt in a situation where someone else is being hurt by another person or thing.

[ 193 ] Empathic anger affects desires to help and to punish. Two sub-categories of empathic anger are state empathic anger (current empathic anger) and trait empathic anger (tendency or predisposition to experience empathic anger).

[ 194 ] The higher a person's perspective-taking ability, the less angry they are in response to a provocation. Empathic concern does not, however, significantly predict anger response, and higher personal distress is associated with increased anger.

[ 195 ] Distress [ edit ] Main article: Personal distress Empathic distress is feeling the perceived pain of another person. This feeling can be transformed into empathic anger, feelings of injustice, or guilt. These emotions can be perceived as pro-social; however, views differ as to whether they serve as motives for moral behavior.

[ 192 ] [ 167 ] Stoic philosophers believed that to condition your emotional disposition on the emotions or fortunes of someone else is foolish. Cicero said that someone who feels distress at another's misfortune is committing as much of an error as an envious person who feels distress at another's good fortune.

[ 196 ] Disciplinary approaches [ edit ] Philosophy [ edit ] Ethics [ edit ] In the 2007 book The Ethics of Care and Empathy , philosopher Michael Slote introduces a theory of care-based ethics that is grounded in empathy. He claims that moral motivation does, and should, stem from a basis of empathic response, and that our natural reaction to situations of moral significance are explained by empathy. He explains that the limits and obligations of empathy, and in turn morality, are natural. These natural obligations include a greater empathic and moral obligation to family and friends and to those close to us in time and space. Our moral obligation to such people seems naturally stronger to us than that to strangers at a distance. Slote explains that this is due to the natural process of empathy. He asserts that actions are wrong if and only if they reflect or exhibit a deficiency of fully developed empathic concern for others on the part of the agent.

[ 197 ] In a 2011 article, philosopher Michael Slote delves deeply into how empathy plays a role in moral judgment , suggesting that our ability to understand and determine right from wrong is influenced by empathy. He further stated that being able to empathize with others helps us stay away from behaviors that some deem to be unreasonable or heartless, which can happen because of a lack of empathy.

[ 198 ] Phenomenology [ edit ] In phenomenology , empathy describes the experience of something from the other's viewpoint, without confusion between self and other . This is based on the concept of agency . In the most basic sense, phenomenology is the experience of the other's body as "my body over there." In most other respects, however, it is an experience viewed through the person's own eyes; in experiencing empathy, what is experienced is not "my" experience, even though I experience it. Empathy is also considered to be the condition of intersubjectivity and, as such, the source of the constitution of objectivity.

[ 199 ] History [ edit ] Some postmodernist historians such as Keith Jenkins have debated whether or not it is possible to empathize with people from the past. Jenkins argues that empathy only enjoys such a privileged position in the present because it corresponds harmoniously with the dominant liberal discourse of modern society and can be connected to John Stuart Mill 's concept of reciprocal freedom. Jenkins argues the past is a foreign country and as we do not have access to the epistemological conditions of bygone ages we are unable to empathize with those who lived then.

[ 200 ] Psychotherapy [ edit ] Heinz Kohut introduced the principle of empathy in psychoanalysis. His principle applies to the method of gathering [ clarification needed ] unconscious material.

[ 201 ] Business and management [ edit ] Because empathy seems to have potential to improve customer relations, employee morale, and personnel management capability, it has been studied in a business context.

In the 2009 book Wired to Care , strategy consultant Dev Patnaik argues that a major flaw in contemporary business practice is a lack of empathy inside large corporations. He states that without empathy people inside companies struggle to make intuitive decisions, and often get fooled into believing they understand their business if they have quantitative research to rely upon. He says that companies can create a sense of empathy for customers, pointing to Nike , Harley-Davidson , and IBM as examples of "Open Empathy Organizations". Such companies, he claims, see new opportunities more quickly than competitors, adapt to change more easily, and create workplaces that offer employees a greater sense of mission in their jobs.

[ 202 ] In the 2011 book The Empathy Factor , organizational consultant Marie Miyashiro similarly argues for bringing empathy to the workplace, and suggests Nonviolent Communication as an effective mechanism for achieving this.

[ 203 ] In studies by the Management Research Group, empathy was found to be the strongest predictor of ethical leadership behavior out of 22 competencies in its management model, and empathy was one of the three strongest predictors of senior executive effectiveness.

[ 204 ] The leadership consulting firm Development Dimensions International found in 2016 that 20% of U.S. employers offered empathy training to managers.

[ 205 ] A study by the Center for Creative Leadership found empathy to be positively correlated to job performance among employees as well.

[ 206 ] Patricia Moore pioneered using empathic techniques to better understand customers. For example, she used makeup and prosthetics to simulate the experience of elderly people, and used the insights from this to inspire friendlier products for that customer segment.

[ 207 ] Design engineers at Ford Motor Company wore prosthetics to simulate pregnancy and old age, to help them design cars that would work better for such customers.

[ 208 ] Fidelity Investments trains its telephone customer service employees in a virtual reality app that puts them in a (dramatized) customer's home so they can experience what it is like to be on the other side of their conversations.

[ 209 ] Evolution of cooperation [ edit ] Empathic perspective-taking plays important roles in sustaining cooperation in human societies, as studied by evolutionary game theory. In game theoretical models, indirect reciprocity refers to the mechanism of cooperation based on moral reputations that are assigned to individuals based on their perceived adherence a set of moral rules called social norms. It has been shown that if reputations are relative [ clarification needed ] and individuals disagree on the moral standing of others (for example, because they use different moral evaluation rules or make errors of judgement), then cooperation will not be sustained. However, when individuals have the capacity for empathic perspective-taking, altruistic behavior can once again evolve.

[ 35 ] Moreover, evolutionary models also revealed that empathic perspective-taking itself can evolve, promoting prosocial behavior in human populations.

[ 210 ] In educational contexts [ edit ] Another growing focus of investigation is how empathy manifests in education between teachers and learners.

[ 211 ] Research shows that empathy is important in developing classroom dynamics, fostering student engagement, and enhancing academic outcomes. In 2022, a systematic review of empathy’s effectiveness in teaching shows that empathetic teacher-student relationships can result in a positive learning environment.

[ 212 ] Also, a study at Stanford University found that when a teacher applies active listening and emotional awareness approaches, it can lead to a significant (50%) decrease in suspension rates.

[ 213 ] It also shows empathy’s ability to lessen discipline issues and create desirable academic outcomes.

Despite the positive outcomes, The Philosophy of Empathy emphasizes that empathy is deeply connected to morality , which helps us understand that developing empathy in teachers is challenging. Learning by teaching is one method used to teach empathy.

[ 198 ] Research also found that it is difficult to develop empathy in trainee teachers.

[ 214 ] Learning by teaching is one method used to teach empathy. Students transmit new content to their classmates, so they have to reflect continuously on those classmates' mental processes. This develops the students' feeling for group reactions and networking.

Carl R. Rogers pioneered research in effective psychotherapy and teaching which espoused that empathy coupled with unconditional positive regard or caring for students and authenticity or congruence were the most important traits for a therapist or teacher to have. Other research and meta-analyses corroborated the importance of these person-centered traits.

[ 215 ] Within medical education, a hidden curriculum appears to dampen or even reduce medical student empathy.

[ how?

] [ 216 ] In intercultural contexts [ edit ] Main article: Ethnocultural empathy According to one theory, empathy is one of seven components involved in the effectiveness of intercultural communication. This theory also states that empathy is learnable. However, research also shows that people experience more difficulty empathizing with others who are different from them in characteristics such as status, culture, religion, language, skin colour, gender, and age.

[ 214 ] To build intercultural empathy in others, psychologists employ empathy training. Researchers William Weeks, Paul Pedersen, et al.

state that people who develop intercultural empathy can interpret experiences or perspectives from more than one worldview.

[ 217 ] Intercultural empathy can also improve self-awareness and critical awareness of one's own interaction style as conditioned by one's cultural views and promote a view of self-as-process.

[ 218 ] In fiction [ edit ] “The greatest benefits we owe to the artist, whether painter, poet, or novelist, is the extension of our sympathies. Appeals founded on generalizations and statistics require a sympathy ready-made, a moral sentiment already in activity; but a picture of human life such as a great artist can give, surprises even the trivial and the selfish into that attention to what is apart from themselves, which may be called the raw material of moral sentiment.… Art is the nearest thing to life; it is a mode of amplifying experience and extending our contact with our fellow-men beyond the bounds of our personal lot.” — George Eliot [ 219 ] Lynn Hunt argued in Inventing Human Rights: A History that the concept of human rights developed how it did and when it did in part as a result of the influence of mid-eighteenth-century European novelists, particularly those whose use of the epistolatory novel form gave readers a more vivid sense that they were gaining access to the candid details of a real life. "The epistolatory novel did not just reflect important cultural and social changes of the time. Novel reading actually helped create new kinds of feelings including a recognition of shared psychological experiences, and these feelings then translated into new cultural and social movements including human rights." [ 220 ] The power of empathy has become a frequent ability in fiction , specifically in that of superhero media . "Empaths" have the ability to sense/feel the emotions and bodily sensations of others and, in some cases, influence or control them. Although sometimes a specific power held by specific characters such as the Marvel Comics character Empath , the power has also been frequently linked to that of telepathy such as in the case of Jean Grey .

The rebooted television series Charmed portrays the character Maggie Vera as a witch with the power of empathy. Her powers later expand to allow her to control the emotions of others as well as occasionally concentrate emotion into pure energy. In season four she learns to replicate people's powers by empathically understanding them.

In the 2013 NBC television show reinterpretation  of Hannibal we are introduced in the first episode to Will Graham . Graham is unique in that he seems to have exceptionally high levels of both cognitive and emotional empathy , combined with an eidetic memory and imagination. These abilities help him understand the motives of some of the most depraved killers.

Hannibal Lecter calls his ability "pure empathy". Graham can assume the viewpoint of virtually anyone he meets, even viewpoints that sicken him. When evaluating a crime scene, he uses his imagination and empathy to almost become the killer, feeling what they were feeling during a murder.

Empathy is a Skill in the 2019 game Disco Elysium . It passively reveals what other characters are feeling.

See also [ edit ] Against Empathy: The Case for Rational Compassion (book by Paul Bloom) Artificial empathy Attribution (psychology) Digital empathy Philip K. Dick 's Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

Ecological empathy Emotional intelligence Emotional literacy Empathic concern Empathizing–systemizing theory Empathy in chickens Empathy in literature Empathy in online communities Ethnocultural empathy Grounding in communication Highly sensitive person Humanistic coefficient Identification (psychology) Life skills Mimpathy Mirror-touch synesthesia Moral emotions Oxytocin People skills Rapport Schema (psychology) Self-conscious emotions Sensibility Simulation theory of empathy Social emotions Soft skills Theory of mind in animals Vicarious embarrassment References [ edit ] ^ Bellet PS, Maloney MJ (October 1991). "The importance of empathy as an interviewing skill in medicine".

JAMA .

266 (13): 1831– 2.

doi : 10.1001/jama.1991.03470130111039 .

PMID 1909761 .

^ a b c Rothschild B, Rand ML (2006).

Help for the Helper: The psychophysiology of compassion fatigue and vicarious trauma . Norton.

ISBN 978-0-393-70422-8 .

Read H (August 22, 2019). "A typology of empathy and its many moral forms".

Philosophy Compass .

14 (10) e12623.

doi : 10.1111/phc3.12623 .

S2CID 202396600 .

Chism LA, Magnan MA (2009). "The relationship of nursing students' spiritual care perspectives to their expressions of spiritual empathy".

The Journal of Nursing Education .

48 (11). United States: S&P Global: 597– 605.

doi : 10.3928/01484834-20090716-05 .

PMID 19650610 .

^ a b c Hall JA, Schwartz R, Duong F (January 2, 2021).

"How do laypeople define empathy?" .

The Journal of Social Psychology .

161 (1): 5– 24.

doi : 10.1080/00224545.2020.1796567 .

ISSN 0022-4545 .

PMID 32870130 .

^ Hall JA, Schwartz R (May 4, 2019).

"Empathy present and future" .

The Journal of Social Psychology .

159 (3): 225– 243.

doi : 10.1080/00224545.2018.1477442 .

ISSN 0022-4545 .

PMID 29781776 .

^ Baird JD, Nadel L (April 2010).

Happiness Genes: Unlock the Positive Potential Hidden in Your DNA . New Page Books.

ISBN 978-1-60163-105-3 .

^ O'Malley WJ (1999). "Teaching Empathy".

America .

180 (12): 22– 6.

Teding van Berkhout E, Malouff JM (January 2016). "The efficacy of empathy training: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials".

Journal of Counseling Psychology .

63 (1): 32– 41.

doi : 10.1037/cou0000093 .

PMID 26191979 .

Singer T, Engert V (August 2019). "It matters what you practice: differential training effects on subjective experience, behavior, brain and body in the ReSource Project".

Current Opinion in Psychology .

28 : 151– 8.

doi : 10.1016/j.copsyc.2018.12.005 .

PMID 30684917 .

S2CID 59291558 .

Rathje S, Hackel L, Zaki J (July 2021).

"Attending live theatre improves empathy, changes attitudes, and leads to pro-social behavior" .

Journal of Experimental Social Psychology .

95 104138.

doi : 10.1016/j.jesp.2021.104138 .

S2CID 233549299 .

Weisz E, Ong DC, Carlson RW, Zaki J (August 2021).

"Building empathy through motivation-based interventions" .

Emotion .

21 (5): 990– 9.

doi : 10.1037/emo0000929 .

PMID 33211508 .

S2CID 227079997 .

^ Harper D.

"empathy" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ ἐμπάθεια .

Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert ; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project .

^ a b c Segal EA, Gerdes KE, Lietz CA, Wagaman MA, Geiger JM (2017).

Assessing Empathy . Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-18191-4 .

^ Titchener EB (2014).

"Introspection and empath" (PDF) .

Dialogues in Philosophy, Mental and Neuro Sciences .

7 : 25– 30. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 26, 2014.

Gallese V (2003). "The roots of empathy: the shared manifold hypothesis and the neural basis of intersubjectivity".

Psychopathology .

36 (4): 171– 80.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.143.2396 .

doi : 10.1159/000072786 .

PMID 14504450 .

S2CID 9422028 .

Koss J (March 2006). "On the Limits of Empathy".

The Art Bulletin .

88 (1): 139– 57.

doi : 10.1080/00043079.2006.10786282 .

JSTOR 25067229 .

S2CID 194079190 .

^ "εμπάθεια" .

Glosbe . Glosbe dictionary . Retrieved April 26, 2019 .

^ Batson CD (2011).

Altruism in Humans .

^ a b Lanzoni SM (2018).

Empathy: a history . New Haven: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-22268-5 .

^ Hall JA, Schwartz R (May 4, 2019). "Empathy present and future".

The Journal of Social Psychology .

159 (3): 225– 43.

doi : 10.1080/00224545.2018.1477442 .

PMID 29781776 .

S2CID 29167108 .

Hall JA, Schwartz R, Duong F (January 2, 2021). "How do laypeople define empathy?".

The Journal of Social Psychology .

161 (1): 5– 24.

doi : 10.1080/00224545.2020.1796567 .

PMID 32870130 .

S2CID 221405375 .

^ a b c Pijnenborg GH, Spikman JM, Jeronimus BF, Aleman A (June 2013). "Insight in schizophrenia: associations with empathy".

European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience .

263 (4): 299– 307.

doi : 10.1007/s00406-012-0373-0 .

PMID 23076736 .

S2CID 25194328 .

^ Hodges SD, Klein KJ (September 2001).

"Regulating the costs of empathy: the price of being human" (PDF) .

The Journal of Socio-Economics .

30 (5): 437– 52.

doi : 10.1016/S1053-5357(01)00112-3 .

^ Schwartz W (2002).

"From passivity to competence: a conceptualization of knowledge, skill, tolerance, and empathy" .

Psychiatry .

65 (4): 339– 45.

doi : 10.1521/psyc.65.4.338.20239 .

PMID 12530337 .

S2CID 35496086 .

Schwartz W (2013). "The parameters of empathy: Core considerations for psychotherapy and supervision".

Advances in Descriptive Psychology .

10 .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.2393689 .

^ Håkansson J, Montgomery H (June 1, 2003).

"Empathy as an Interpersonal Phenomenon" .

Journal of Social and Personal Relationships .

20 (3): 267– 284.

doi : 10.1177/0265407503020003001 .

ISSN 0265-4075 .

^ Meltzoff AN, Decety J (March 2003).

"What imitation tells us about social cognition: a rapprochement between developmental psychology and cognitive neuroscience" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences .

358 (1431): 491– 500.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2002.1261 .

PMC 1351349 .

PMID 12689375 .

^ Strauss C, Lever Taylor B, Gu J, Kuyken W, Baer R, Jones F, et al. (July 2016).

"What is compassion and how can we measure it? A review of definitions and measures" .

Clinical Psychology Review .

47 : 15– 27.

doi : 10.1016/j.cpr.2016.05.004 .

PMID 27267346 .

Gu J, Cavanagh K, Baer R, Strauss C (February 17, 2017).

"An empirical examination of the factor structure of compassion" .

PLOS ONE .

12 (2): e0172471.

Bibcode : 2017PLoSO..1272471G .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0172471 .

PMC 5315311 .

PMID 28212391 .

^ a b Batson CD (2009). "These things called empathy: Eight related but distinct phenomena.". In Decety J, Ickes W (eds.).

The Social Neuroscience of Empathy . Cambridge: MIT Press . pp.

3 –15.

ISBN 978-0-262-01297-3 .

^ a b c Coplan A (September 2011). "Will the real empathy please stand up? A case for a narrow conceptualization".

The Southern Journal of Philosophy .

49 : 40– 65.

doi : 10.1111/j.2041-6962.2011.00056.x .

^ Geller JD (April 2006).

"Pity, Suffering, and Psychotherapy" .

American Journal of Psychotherapy .

60 (2): 187– 205.

doi : 10.1176/appi.psychotherapy.2006.60.2.187 .

ISSN 0002-9564 .

PMID 16892954 .

^ Hatfield E, Cacioppo JL, Rapson RL (1993).

"Emotional contagion" (PDF) .

Current Directions in Psychological Science .

2 (3): 96– 9.

doi : 10.1111/1467-8721.ep10770953 .

S2CID 220533081 . Archived from the original (PDF) on November 19, 2012.

^ Bar-On RE, Parker JD (2000).

The Handbook of Emotional Intelligence: Theory, Development, Assessment, and Application at Home, School, and in the Workplace . San Francisco, Calif.: Jossey-Bass.

ISBN 0-7879-4984-1 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Rogers K, Dziobek I, Hassenstab J, Wolf OT, Convit A (April 2007).

"Who cares? Revisiting empathy in Asperger syndrome" (PDF) .

Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders .

37 (4): 709– 15.

doi : 10.1007/s10803-006-0197-8 .

PMID 16906462 .

S2CID 13999363 . Archived from the original (PDF) on July 16, 2015.

^ a b c d Shamay-Tsoory SG, Aharon-Peretz J, Perry D (March 2009).

"Two systems for empathy: a double dissociation between emotional and cognitive empathy in inferior frontal gyrus versus ventromedial prefrontal lesions" .

Brain .

132 (Pt 3): 617– 27.

doi : 10.1093/brain/awn279 .

PMID 18971202 .

^ de Waal FB (2008).

"Putting the altruism back into altruism: the evolution of empathy" (PDF) .

Annual Review of Psychology .

59 (1): 279– 300.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.psych.59.103006.093625 .

PMID 17550343 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 17, 2012.

^ a b c Davis M (1983).

"Measuring individual differences in empathy: evidence for a multidimensional approach" .

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

44 (1): 113– 26.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.44.1.113 .

hdl : 10983/25968 .

^ a b c d Minio-Paluello I, Lombardo MV, Chakrabarti B, Wheelwright S, Baron-Cohen S (December 2009).

"Response to Smith's Letter to the Editor " Emotional Empathy in Autism Spectrum Conditions: Weak, Intact, or Heightened?

"" .

Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders .

39 (12): 1749.

doi : 10.1007/s10803-009-0800-x .

S2CID 42834991 .

PDF Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine Smith A (December 2009).

"Emotional empathy in autism spectrum conditions: weak, intact, or heightened?" .

Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders .

39 (12): 1747– 8, author reply 1749–54.

doi : 10.1007/s10803-009-0799-z .

PMID 19572192 .

S2CID 13290717 .

^ a b c Lamm C, Batson CD, Decety J (January 2007).

"The neural substrate of human empathy: effects of perspective-taking and cognitive appraisal" .

Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience .

19 (1): 42– 58.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.511.3950 .

doi : 10.1162/jocn.2007.19.1.42 .

PMID 17214562 .

S2CID 2828843 .

^ a b c Baron-Cohen S (2003).

The Essential Difference: The Truth about the Male and Female Brain . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0-7382-0844-2 .

^ Gerace A, Day A, Casey S, Mohr P (2013).

"An exploratory investigation of the process of perspective taking in interpersonal situations" .

Journal of Relationships Research .

4 e6: e6, 1– 12.

doi : 10.1017/jrr.2013.6 .

hdl : 10536/DRO/DU:30055549 .

^ a b Murphy BA, Lilienfeld SO (August 2019). "Are self-report cognitive empathy ratings valid proxies for cognitive empathy ability? Negligible meta-analytic relations with behavioral task performance".

Psychological Assessment .

31 (8): 1062– 72.

doi : 10.1037/pas0000732 .

PMID 31120296 .

S2CID 162181339 .

^ a b Radzvilavicius AL, Stewart AJ, Plotkin JB (April 2019).

"Evolution of empathetic moral evaluation" .

eLife .

8 e44269.

doi : 10.7554/eLife.44269 .

PMC 6488294 .

PMID 30964002 .

^ Allyn D (November 30, 2012).

"The Tao of Doing Good (SSIR)" .

ssir.org .

Archived from the original on February 13, 2017 . Retrieved February 13, 2017 .

^ McLaren K (2013).

The Art of Empathy: A Complete Guide to Life's Most Essential Skill . Sounds True.

ISBN 978-1-62203-061-3 .

^ a b c d e f Cox CL, Uddin LQ, Di Martino A, Castellanos FX, Milham MP, Kelly C (August 2012).

"The balance between feeling and knowing: affective and cognitive empathy are reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional dynamics" .

Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience .

7 (6): 727– 37.

doi : 10.1093/scan/nsr051 .

PMC 3427869 .

PMID 21896497 .

^ Winczewski LA, Bowen JD, Collins NL (March 2016). "Is Empathic Accuracy Enough to Facilitate Responsive Behavior in Dyadic Interaction? Distinguishing Ability From Motivation".

Psychological Science .

27 (3): 394– 404.

doi : 10.1177/0956797615624491 .

PMID 26847609 .

S2CID 206588127 .

Schurz M, Radua J, Tholen MG, Maliske L, Margulies DS, Mars RB, et al. (March 2021).

"Toward a hierarchical model of social cognition: A neuroimaging meta-analysis and integrative review of empathy and theory of mind" .

Psychological Bulletin .

147 (3): 293– 327.

doi : 10.1037/bul0000303 .

hdl : 2066/226714 .

ISSN 1939-1455 .

PMID 33151703 .

S2CID 226272359 .

^ Kanske P, Böckler A, Trautwein FM, Parianen Lesemann FH, Singer T (September 2016).

"Are strong empathizers better mentalizers? Evidence for independence and interaction between the routes of social cognition" .

Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience .

11 (9): 1383– 92.

doi : 10.1093/scan/nsw052 .

PMC 5015801 .

PMID 27129794 .

Kanske P, Böckler A, Trautwein FM, Singer T (November 2015). "Dissecting the social brain: Introducing the EmpaToM to reveal distinct neural networks and brain-behavior relations for empathy and Theory of Mind".

NeuroImage .

122 : 6– 19.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.07.082 .

PMID 26254589 .

S2CID 20614006 .

^ Toi M, Batson CD (1982). "More evidence that empathy is a source of altruistic motivation".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

43 (2): 281– 92.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.43.2.281 .

^ Segal EA (2011). "Social empathy: A model built on empathy, contextual understanding, and social responsibility that promotes social justice".

Journal of Social Service Research .

37 (3): 266– 7.

doi : 10.1080/01488376.2011.564040 .

S2CID 76656353 .

Segal EA, et al. (2012).

"Developing the Social Empathy Index: An Exploratory Factor Analysis" .

Advances in Social Work .

13 (3): 541– 560.

doi : 10.18060/2042 .

S2CID 143341962 .

^ Wang L, Sheng G, She S, Xu J (2023).

"Impact of empathy with nature on pro-environmental behaviour" .

International Journal of Consumer Studies .

47 (2): 652– 668.

doi : 10.1111/ijcs.12856 .

ISSN 1470-6423 .

^ a b c d e f Breithaupt F (2019).

The Dark Sides of Empathy . Translated by Hamilton AB. Cornell University Press.

^ Chlopan BE, McCain ML, Carbonell JL, Hagen RL (1985).

"Empathy: Review of available measures" .

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

48 (3): 635– 53.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.48.3.635 .

^ Truax CB (1967). "Rating of Accurate Empathy". In Rogers CR, Gendlin ET, Kiesler DJ, Truax CB (eds.).

The Therapeutic Relationship and its Impact. A Study of Psychotherapy with Schizophrenics . Madison, Wisconsin: The University of Wisconsin Press. pp.

555– 68.

^ a b Mehrabian A, Epstein N (December 1972).

"A measure of emotional empathy" .

Journal of Personality .

40 (4): 525– 43.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-6494.1972.tb00078.x .

PMID 4642390 .

^ a b Levenson RW, Ruef AM (August 1992). "Empathy: a physiological substrate".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

63 (2): 234– 46.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.63.2.234 .

PMID 1403614 .

S2CID 12650202 .

Leslie KR, Johnson-Frey SH, Grafton ST (February 2004). "Functional imaging of face and hand imitation: towards a motor theory of empathy".

NeuroImage .

21 (2): 601– 7.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.09.038 .

PMID 14980562 .

S2CID 1723495 .

^ Denham SA, McKinley M, Couchoud EA, Holt R (August 1990).

"Emotional and behavioral predictors of preschool peer ratings" .

Child Development .

61 (4). JSTOR: 1145– 52.

doi : 10.2307/1130882 .

JSTOR 1130882 .

PMID 2209184 .

^ Barnett MA (1984).

"Similarity of experience and empathy in preschoolers" .

Journal of Genetic Psychology .

145 (2): 241– 50.

doi : 10.1080/00221325.1984.10532271 .

^ e.g.

Geher G, Warner RM, Brown AS (2001). "Predictive validity of the emotional accuracy research scale".

Intelligence .

29 (5). Elsevier BV: 373– 88.

doi : 10.1016/s0160-2896(00)00045-3 .

ISSN 0160-2896 .

^ e.g.

Davis MH (1980). "A multidimensional approach to individual differences in empathy".

JSAS Catalogue of Selected Documents in Psychology .

10 (4): 1– 17.

^ Chen D, Lew R, Hershman W, Orlander J (October 2007).

"A cross-sectional measurement of medical student empathy" .

Journal of General Internal Medicine .

22 (10): 1434– 8.

doi : 10.1007/s11606-007-0298-x .

PMC 2305857 .

PMID 17653807 .

^ Baron-Cohen S, Wheelwright S (April 2004).

"The empathy quotient: an investigation of adults with Asperger syndrome or high functioning autism, and normal sex differences" (PDF) .

Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders .

34 (2): 163– 75.

doi : 10.1023/B:JADD.0000022607.19833.00 .

PMID 15162935 .

S2CID 2663853 . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 4, 2015.

^ Reniers RL, Corcoran R, Drake R, Shryane NM, Völlm BA (January 2011). "The QCAE: a Questionnaire of Cognitive and Affective Empathy".

Journal of Personality Assessment .

93 (1): 84– 95.

doi : 10.1080/00223891.2010.528484 .

PMID 21184334 .

S2CID 3035172 .

^ Innamorati M, Ebisch SJ, Gallese V, Saggino A (April 29, 2019).

"A bidimensional measure of empathy: Empathic Experience Scale" .

PLOS ONE .

14 (4): e0216164.

Bibcode : 2019PLoSO..1416164I .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0216164 .

PMC 6488069 .

PMID 31034510 .

^ Konrath SH, O'Brien EH, Hsing C (2011). "Changes in Dispositional Empathy in American College Students Over Time: A Meta-Analysis".

Personality and Social Psychology Review .

15 (2): 180– 98.

doi : 10.1177/1088868310377395 .

PMID 20688954 .

S2CID 7645344 .

^ a b Hoffman ML (2000).

Empathy and Moral Development . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-58034-2 .

^ Decety J, Meyer M (2008).

"From emotion resonance to empathic understanding: a social developmental neuroscience account" .

Development and Psychopathology .

20 (4): 1053– 80.

doi : 10.1017/S0954579408000503 .

PMID 18838031 .

S2CID 8508693 .

Eisenberg N, Spinrad TL, Sadovsky A (2006). "Empathy-related responding in children.". In Killen M, Smetana J (eds.).

Handbook of Moral Development . Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. pp.

517 –49.

ISBN 978-0-8058-4751-2 .

Falck-Ytter T, Gredebäck G, von Hofsten C (July 2006). "Infants predict other people's action goals".

Nature Neuroscience .

9 (7): 878– 9.

doi : 10.1038/nn1729 .

PMID 16783366 .

S2CID 2409686 .

^ Zahn-Waxler C, Radke-Yarrow M (1990).

"The origins of empathic concern" .

Motivation and Emotion .

14 (2): 107– 30.

doi : 10.1007/BF00991639 .

S2CID 143436918 .

^ a b c Decety J, Michalska KJ, Akitsuki Y (September 2008). "Who caused the pain? An fMRI investigation of empathy and intentionality in children".

Neuropsychologia .

46 (11): 2607– 14.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.05.026 .

PMID 18573266 .

S2CID 19428145 .

^ Wimmer H, Perner J (January 1983).

"Beliefs about beliefs: representation and constraining function of wrong beliefs in young children's understanding of deception" .

Cognition .

13 (1): 103– 28.

doi : 10.1016/0010-0277(83)90004-5 .

PMID 6681741 .

S2CID 17014009 .

^ Baron-Cohen S, Leslie AM, Frith U (October 1985).

"Does the autistic child have a "theory of mind"?" .

Cognition .

21 (1): 37– 46.

doi : 10.1016/0010-0277(85)90022-8 .

PMID 2934210 .

S2CID 14955234 .

Leslie AM, Frith U (November 1988). "Autistic children's understanding of seeing, knowing and believing".

British Journal of Developmental Psychology .

6 (4): 315– 24.

doi : 10.1111/j.2044-835X.1988.tb01104.x .

^ Olsen DP (September 2001).

"Empathetic maturity: theory of moral point of view in clinical relations" .

Advances in Nursing Science .

24 (1): 36– 46.

doi : 10.1097/00012272-200109000-00006 .

PMID 11554532 .

Archived from the original on September 7, 2009.

^ Davis MH (1983).

"Measuring Individual Differences in Empathy: Evidence for a Multidimensional Approach" .

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

44 (1): 113– 26.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.44.1.113 .

hdl : 10983/25968 .

^ Haas BW, Brook M, Remillard L, Ishak A, Anderson IW, Filkowski MM (2015).

"I know how you feel: the warm-altruistic personality profile and the empathic brain" .

PLOS ONE .

10 (3): e0120639.

Bibcode : 2015PLoSO..1020639H .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0120639 .

PMC 4359130 .

PMID 25769028 .

^ a b c d Bosson JK, Buckner CE, Vandello JA (2021).

The Psychology of Sex and Gender . Sage Publications. p. 330.

ISBN 978-1-5443-9403-9 .

^ a b Ickes W (1997).

Empathic accuracy . New York: The Guilford Press.

^ a b c d e f g h i Christov-Moore L, Simpson EA, Coudé G, Grigaityte K, Iacoboni M, Ferrari PF (October 2014).

"Empathy: gender effects in brain and behavior" .

Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews . 46 Pt 4 (Pt 4): 604– 27.

doi : 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.09.001 .

PMC 5110041 .

PMID 25236781 .

Archived from the original on August 14, 2017.

^ a b Kret ME, De Gelder B (June 2012).

"A review on sex differences in processing emotional signals" .

Neuropsychologia .

50 (7): 1211– 21.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.12.022 .

PMID 22245006 .

S2CID 11695245 .

^ Thompson AE, Voyer D (2014). "Sex differences in the ability to recognise non-verbal displays of emotion: a meta-analysis".

Cognition & Emotion .

28 (7): 1164– 95.

doi : 10.1080/02699931.2013.875889 .

PMID 24400860 .

S2CID 5402395 .

^ Decety J, Bartal IB, Uzefovsky F, Knafo-Noam A (January 19, 2016).

"Empathy as a driver of prosocial behaviour: highly conserved neurobehavioural mechanisms across species" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

371 (1686): 20150077.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2015.0077 .

ISSN 0962-8436 .

PMC 4685523 .

PMID 26644596 .

^ Tisot CM (2003).

Environmental contributions to empathy development in young children (PhD thesis).

Temple University .

OCLC 56772472 .

^ Leigh R, Oishi K, Hsu J, Lindquist M, Gottesman RF , Jarso S, et al. (August 2013).

"Acute lesions that impair affective empathy" .

Brain .

136 (Pt 8): 2539– 49.

doi : 10.1093/brain/awt177 .

PMC 3722353 .

PMID 23824490 .

^ de Sousa A, McDonald S, Rushby J (July 1, 2012). "Changes in emotional empathy, affective responsivity, and behavior following severe traumatic brain injury".

Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology .

34 (6): 606– 23.

doi : 10.1080/13803395.2012.667067 .

PMID 22435955 .

S2CID 44373955 .

^ de Sousa A, McDonald S, Rushby J, Li S, Dimoska A, James C (October 2010). "Why don't you feel how I feel? Insight into the absence of empathy after severe traumatic brain injury".

Neuropsychologia .

48 (12): 3585– 95.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.08.008 .

PMID 20713073 .

S2CID 25275909 .

^ van Berkhout ET, Malouff J (2016). "The efficacy of empathy training: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials".

Journal of Counseling Psychology .

63 (1): 32– 41.

doi : 10.1037/cou0000093 .

PMID 26191979 .

^ Sandin J (2007).

Bonobos: Encounters in Empathy . Milwaukee: Zoological Society of Milwaukee & The Foundation for Wildlife Conservation, Inc. p. 109.

ISBN 978-0-9794151-0-4 .

de Waal FB (2009).

The age of empathy: nature's lessons for a kinder society . Harmony Books.

ISBN 978-0-307-40776-4 .

^ Ben-Ami Bartal I, Decety J, Mason P (December 2011).

"Empathy and pro-social behavior in rats" .

Science .

334 (6061): 1427– 30.

Bibcode : 2011Sci...334.1427B .

doi : 10.1126/science.1210789 .

PMC 3760221 .

PMID 22158823 .

^ Langford DJ, Crager SE, Shehzad Z, Smith SB, Sotocinal SG, Levenstadt JS, et al. (June 2006).

"Social modulation of pain as evidence for empathy in mice" .

Science .

312 (5782): 1967– 70.

Bibcode : 2006Sci...312.1967L .

doi : 10.1126/science.1128322 .

PMID 16809545 .

S2CID 26027821 .

^ a b de Waal FB (2008). "Putting the altruism back into altruism: the evolution of empathy".

Annual Review of Psychology .

59 (1): 279– 300.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.psych.59.103006.093625 .

PMID 17550343 .

^ Decety J (August 2011). "The neuroevolution of empathy".

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences .

1231 (1): 35– 45.

Bibcode : 2011NYASA1231...35D .

doi : 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06027.x .

PMID 21651564 .

S2CID 9895828 .

^ Decety J, Svetlova M (January 2012).

"Putting together phylogenetic and ontogenetic perspectives on empathy" .

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience .

2 (1): 1– 24.

doi : 10.1016/j.dcn.2011.05.003 .

PMC 6987713 .

PMID 22682726 .

^ Clay Z, de Waal FB (November 2013).

"Development of socio-emotional competence in bonobos" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

110 (45): 18121– 6.

Bibcode : 2013PNAS..11018121C .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1316449110 .

PMC 3831480 .

PMID 24127600 .

^ "Do These Meerkats Have Deep Emotions? Yeah, Probably" (Podcast).

KERA-FM . May 20, 2019.

^ Romero T, Castellanos MA, de Waal FB (July 2010).

"Consolation as possible expression of sympathetic concern among chimpanzees" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

107 (27): 12110– 5.

Bibcode : 2010PNAS..10712110R .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1006991107 .

PMC 2901437 .

PMID 20547864 .

^ Custance D, Mayer J (September 2012).

"Empathic-like responding by domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) to distress in humans: an exploratory study" (PDF) .

Animal Cognition .

15 (5): 851– 9.

doi : 10.1007/s10071-012-0510-1 .

PMID 22644113 .

S2CID 15153091 .

^ Edgar JL, Paul ES, Nicol CJ (August 2013). "Protective Mother Hens: Cognitive influences on the avian maternal response".

British Journal of Animal Behaviour .

86 (2): 223– 9.

doi : 10.1016/j.anbehav.2013.05.004 .

S2CID 53179718 .

^ Miralles A, Raymond M, Lecointre G (December 2019).

"Empathy and compassion toward other species decrease with evolutionary divergence time" .

Scientific Reports .

9 (1) 19555.

Bibcode : 2019NatSR...919555M .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-019-56006-9 .

PMC 6925286 .

PMID 31862944 .

^ Davis MH, Luce C, Kraus SJ (September 1994).

"The heritability of characteristics associated with dispositional empathy" .

Journal of Personality .

62 (3): 369– 91.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-6494.1994.tb00302.x .

PMID 7965564 .

^ Todd RM, Anderson AK (November 2009).

"The neurogenetics of remembering emotions past" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

106 (45): 18881– 2.

Bibcode : 2009PNAS..10618881T .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0910755106 .

PMC 2776429 .

PMID 19889977 .

Todd RM, Ehlers MR, Müller DJ, Robertson A, Palombo DJ, Freeman N, et al. (April 2015).

"Neurogenetic variations in norepinephrine availability enhance perceptual vividness" .

The Journal of Neuroscience .

35 (16): 6506– 16.

doi : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4489-14.2015 .

PMC 6605217 .

PMID 25904801 .

^ Naudts KH, Azevedo RT, David AS, van Heeringen K, Gibbs AA (September 2012).

"Epistasis between 5-HTTLPR and ADRA2B polymorphisms influences attentional bias for emotional information in healthy volunteers" (PDF) .

The International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology .

15 (8): 1027– 36.

doi : 10.1017/S1461145711001295 .

PMID 21854681 . Archived from the original on October 23, 2017.

^ Saphire-Bernstein S, Way BM, Kim HS, Sherman DK, Taylor SE (September 2011).

"Oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR) is related to psychological resources" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

108 (37): 15118– 22.

Bibcode : 2011PNAS..10815118S .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1113137108 .

PMC 3174632 .

PMID 21896752 .

^ Warrier V, Grasby KL, Uzefovsky F, Toro R, Smith P, Chakrabarti B, et al. (June 2018).

"Genome-wide meta-analysis of cognitive empathy: heritability, and correlates with sex, neuropsychiatric conditions and cognition" .

Molecular Psychiatry .

23 (6): 1402– 9.

doi : 10.1038/mp.2017.122 .

PMC 5656177 .

PMID 28584286 .

^ a b Keen S (2006). "A Theory of Narrative Empathy".

Narrative .

14 (3): 207– 36.

doi : 10.1353/nar.2006.0015 .

S2CID 52228354 .

^ Gazzola V, Aziz-Zadeh L, Keysers C (September 2006).

"Empathy and the somatotopic auditory mirror system in humans" .

Current Biology .

16 (18): 1824– 9.

Bibcode : 2006CBio...16.1824G .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2006.07.072 .

PMID 16979560 .

S2CID 5223812 .

^ "The different types of empathy | Embrace Autism" . Retrieved March 24, 2025 .

^ Bartlett MY, DeSteno D (April 2006). "Gratitude and prosocial behavior: helping when it costs you".

Psychological Science .

17 (4): 319– 25.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01705.x .

PMID 16623689 .

S2CID 6491264 .

^ Fan Y, Duncan NW, de Greck M, Northoff G (January 2011). "Is there a core neural network in empathy? An fMRI based quantitative meta-analysis".

Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews .

35 (3): 903– 11.

doi : 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2010.10.009 .

PMID 20974173 .

S2CID 20965340 .

Eres R, Decety J, Louis WR, Molenberghs P (August 2015).

"Individual differences in local gray matter density are associated with differences in affective and cognitive empathy" .

NeuroImage .

117 : 305– 10.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.05.038 .

PMID 26008886 .

S2CID 15373798 .

Archived from the original on September 8, 2017.

^ Keysers C, Gazzola V (December 2009). "Expanding the mirror: vicarious activity for actions, emotions, and sensations".

Current Opinion in Neurobiology .

19 (6): 666– 71.

doi : 10.1016/j.conb.2009.10.006 .

PMID 19880311 .

S2CID 2692907 .

Decety J, Moriguchi Y (November 2007).

"The empathic brain and its dysfunction in psychiatric populations: implications for intervention across different clinical conditions" .

BioPsychoSocial Medicine .

1 (1): 22.

doi : 10.1186/1751-0759-1-22 .

PMC 2206036 .

PMID 18021398 .

^ Wicker B, Keysers C, Plailly J, Royet JP, Gallese V, Rizzolatti G (October 2003).

"Both of us disgusted in My insula: the common neural basis of seeing and feeling disgust" .

Neuron .

40 (3): 655– 64.

doi : 10.1016/S0896-6273(03)00679-2 .

PMID 14642287 .

^ Keysers C, Wicker B, Gazzola V, Anton JL, Fogassi L, Gallese V (April 2004).

"A touching sight: SII/PV activation during the observation and experience of touch" .

Neuron .

42 (2): 335– 46.

doi : 10.1016/S0896-6273(04)00156-4 .

PMID 15091347 .

Blakemore SJ, Bristow D, Bird G, Frith C, Ward J (July 2005).

"Somatosensory activations during the observation of touch and a case of vision-touch synaesthesia" .

Brain .

128 (Pt 7): 1571– 83.

doi : 10.1093/brain/awh500 .

PMID 15817510 .

^ Morrison I, Lloyd D, di Pellegrino G, Roberts N (June 2004).

"Vicarious responses to pain in anterior cingulate cortex: is empathy a multisensory issue?" .

Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience .

4 (2): 270– 8.

doi : 10.3758/cabn.4.2.270 .

PMID 15460933 .

Jackson PL, Meltzoff AN, Decety J (February 2005). "How do we perceive the pain of others? A window into the neural processes involved in empathy".

NeuroImage .

24 (3): 771– 9.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.391.8127 .

doi : 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.09.006 .

PMID 15652312 .

S2CID 10691796 .

Singer T, Seymour B, O'Doherty J, Kaube H, Dolan RJ, Frith CD (February 2004). "Empathy for pain involves the affective but not sensory components of pain".

Science .

303 (5661): 1157– 62.

Bibcode : 2004Sci...303.1157S .

doi : 10.1126/science.1093535 .

hdl : 21.11116/0000-0001-A020-5 .

PMID 14976305 .

S2CID 14727944 .

^ Shamay-Tsoory SG (February 2011).

"The Neural Bases for Empathy" .

The Neuroscientist .

17 (1): 18– 24.

doi : 10.1177/1073858410379268 .

ISSN 1073-8584 .

PMID 21071616 .

S2CID 2646438 .

^ Riess H (2017).

"The Science of Empathy" .

Journal of Patient Experience .

4 (2): 74– 77.

doi : 10.1177/2374373517699267 .

PMC 5513638 .

PMID 28725865 .

^ Preston SD, de Waal FB (February 2002).

"Empathy: Its ultimate and proximate bases" .

The Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

25 (1): 1– 20, discussion 20–71.

doi : 10.1017/s0140525x02000018 .

PMID 12625087 .

^ Gutsell JN, Inzlicht M (2010). "Empathy constrained: Prejudice predicts reduced mental simulation of actions during observation of outgroups".

Journal of Experimental Social Psychology .

46 (5): 841– 5.

doi : 10.1016/j.jesp.2010.03.011 .

^ Jack AI, Dawson AJ, Begany KL, Leckie RL, Barry KP, Ciccia AH, et al. (February 2013).

"fMRI reveals reciprocal inhibition between social and physical cognitive domains" .

NeuroImage .

66 : 385– 401.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.10.061 .

PMC 3602121 .

PMID 23110882 .

Case Western Reserve University (October 30, 2012).

"Empathy represses analytic thought, and vice versa: Brain physiology limits simultaneous use of both networks" .

Science Daily .

Archived from the original on October 24, 2017.

^ Thomas B (November 6, 2012).

"What's so special about mirror neurons? (guest blog)" .

Scientific American . New York: Scientific American.

Archived from the original on May 21, 2015.

^ Marsh J (March 29, 2012).

"Do mirror neurons give us empathy?" .

Greater Good Magazine .

Greater Good Science Center .

Archived from the original on October 24, 2017.

Ramachandran VS (2011).

The tell-tale brain: a neuroscientist's quest for what makes us human . New York: W.W. Norton.

ISBN 978-0-393-07782-7 .

^ a b c Bora E, Gökçen S, Veznedaroglu B (July 2008). "Empathic abilities in people with schizophrenia".

Psychiatry Research .

160 (1): 23– 9.

doi : 10.1016/j.psychres.2007.05.017 .

PMID 18514324 .

S2CID 20896840 .

^ a b c Decety J, Michalska KJ, Akitsuki Y, Lahey BB (February 2009).

"Atypical empathic responses in adolescents with aggressive conduct disorder: a functional MRI investigation" .

Biological Psychology .

80 (2): 203– 11.

doi : 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2008.09.004 .

PMC 2819310 .

PMID 18940230 .

^ a b Grossman D (1996).

On Killing: The Psychological Cost of Learning to Kill in War and Society . Back Bay Books.

ISBN 978-0-316-33000-8 .

^ Simons D, Wurtele SK, Heil P (December 1, 2002).

"Childhood Victimization and Lack of Empathy as Predictors of Sexual Offending Against Women and Children" .

Journal of Interpersonal Violence .

17 (12): 1291– 1307.

doi : 10.1177/088626002237857 .

ISSN 0886-2605 .

S2CID 145525384 .

^ Milton DE (August 16, 2012).

"On the ontological status of autism: the 'double empathy problem' " .

Disability & Society .

27 (6): 883– 7.

doi : 10.1080/09687599.2012.710008 .

ISSN 0968-7599 .

S2CID 54047060 .

^ Hollander E, Hagerman R, Fein D, eds. (April 30, 2018).

Autism Spectrum Disorders . American Psychiatric Association Publishing.

doi : 10.1176/appi.books.9781615371921 .

ISBN 978-1-61537-192-1 .

^ Bird G, Silani G, Brindley R, White S, Frith U, Singer T (2010).

"Empathic brain responses in insula are modulated by levels of alexithymia but not autism" .

Brain .

133 (5): 1515– 1525.

doi : 10.1093/brain/awq060 .

ISSN 1460-2156 .

PMC 2859151 .

PMID 20371509 .

^ Hill E, Berthoz S, Frith U (April 2004).

"Brief report: cognitive processing of own emotions in individuals with autistic spectrum disorder and in their relatives" (PDF) .

Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders .

34 (2): 229– 35.

doi : 10.1023/B:JADD.0000022613.41399.14 .

PMID 15162941 .

S2CID 776386 . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 19, 2013.

^ Bird G, Silani G, Brindley R, White S, Frith U, Singer T (May 2010).

"Empathic brain responses in insula are modulated by levels of alexithymia but not autism" .

Brain .

133 (Pt 5): 1515– 25.

doi : 10.1093/brain/awq060 .

PMC 2859151 .

PMID 20371509 .

^ Shirayama Y, Matsumoto K, Osone F, Hara A, Guan S, Hamatani S, et al. (January 2024).

"The Lack of Alterations in Metabolites in the Medial Prefrontal Cortex and Amygdala, but Their Associations with Autistic Traits, Empathy, and Personality Traits in Adults with Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Preliminary Study" .

Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders .

54 (1): 193– 210.

doi : 10.1007/s10803-022-05778-7 .

ISSN 0162-3257 .

PMC 10791770 .

PMID 36251207 .

^ Zhao W, Liu Q, Zhang X, Song X, Zhang Z, Qing P, et al. (August 2023).

"Differential responses in the mirror neuron system during imitation of individual emotional facial expressions and association with autistic traits" .

NeuroImage .

277 120263.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2023.120263 .

PMID 37399932 .

^ Dapretto M, Davies MS, Pfeifer JH, Scott AA, Sigman M, Bookheimer SY, et al. (January 2006).

"Understanding emotions in others: mirror neuron dysfunction in children with autism spectrum disorders" .

Nature Neuroscience .

9 (1): 28– 30.

doi : 10.1038/nn1611 .

PMC 3713227 .

PMID 16327784 .

^ Shirayama Y, Matsumoto K, Osone F, Hara A, Guan S, Hamatani S, et al. (January 1, 2024).

"The Lack of Alterations in Metabolites in the Medial Prefrontal Cortex and Amygdala, but Their Associations with Autistic Traits, Empathy, and Personality Traits in Adults with Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Preliminary Study" .

Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders .

54 (1): 193– 210.

doi : 10.1007/s10803-022-05778-7 .

ISSN 1573-3432 .

PMC 10791770 .

PMID 36251207 .

^ Labusch M, Perea M, Sahuquillo-Leal R, Bofill-Moscardó I, Carrasco-Tornero Á, Cañada-Pérez A, et al. (February 1, 2024).

"Development of Moral Judgments in Impersonal and Personal Dilemmas in Autistic Spectrum Disorders from Childhood to Late Adolescence" .

Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders .

54 (2): 691– 703.

doi : 10.1007/s10803-022-05795-6 .

ISSN 1573-3432 .

PMC 10821967 .

PMID 36436146 .

^ Zhang W, Zhuo S, Li X, Peng W (May 1, 2023).

"Autistic Traits and Empathy for Others' Pain Among the General Population: Test of the Mediating Effects of First-Hand Pain Sensitivity" .

Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders .

53 (5): 2006– 2020.

doi : 10.1007/s10803-022-05471-9 .

ISSN 1573-3432 .

PMID 35217943 .

^ Belcher HL, Morein-Zamir S, Stagg SD, Ford RM (August 1, 2023).

"Shining a Light on a Hidden Population: Social Functioning and Mental Health in Women Reporting Autistic Traits But Lacking Diagnosis" .

Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders .

53 (8): 3118– 3132.

doi : 10.1007/s10803-022-05583-2 .

ISSN 1573-3432 .

PMC 10313531 .

PMID 35593995 .

^ Cleckly HC (1941).

The Mask of Sanity: An Attempt to Reinterpret the So-Called Psychopathic Personality . St. Louis, Mo.: Mosby.

Hare RD (1991).

The Hare Psychopathy Checklist-Revised . Toronto: Multi Health Systems.

^ Skeem JL, Polaschek DL, Patrick CJ, Lilienfeld SO (December 2011).

"Psychopathic Personality: Bridging the Gap Between Scientific Evidence and Public Policy" .

Psychological Science in the Public Interest .

12 (3): 95– 162.

doi : 10.1177/1529100611426706 .

PMID 26167886 .

S2CID 8521465 .

Archived from the original on February 22, 2016.

Patrick C (2005).

Handbook of Psychopathy . Guilford Press.

ISBN 978-1-60623-804-2 .

Andrade J (March 23, 2009).

Handbook of Violence Risk Assessment and Treatment: New Approaches for Mental Health Professionals . New York, N.Y.: Springer Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-0-8261-9904-1 . Retrieved January 5, 2014 .

World Health Organization (2010), ICD-10: Clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines: Disorders of adult personality and behavior (PDF) , archived from the original (PDF) on March 23, 2014 ^ Decety J, Skelly L (2013). "The neural underpinnings of the experience of empathy: Lessons for psychopathy.". In Ochsner KN, Kosslyn SM (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Cognitive Neuroscience . Vol. 2. New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

228– 43.

Kiehl KA (June 2006).

"A cognitive neuroscience perspective on psychopathy: evidence for paralimbic system dysfunction" .

Psychiatry Research .

142 ( 2– 3): 107– 28.

doi : 10.1016/j.psychres.2005.09.013 .

PMC 2765815 .

PMID 16712954 .

Blair RJ (October 1995).

"A cognitive developmental approach to mortality: investigating the psychopath" (PDF) .

Cognition .

57 (1): 1– 29.

doi : 10.1016/0010-0277(95)00676-p .

PMID 7587017 .

S2CID 16366546 . Archived from the original (PDF) on July 21, 2013.

Blair RJ (January 2003).

"Neurobiological basis of psychopathy" .

The British Journal of Psychiatry .

182 : 5– 7.

doi : 10.1192/bjp.182.1.5 .

PMID 12509310 .

^ a b "Psychopathy" by Quinton 2006 [ full citation needed ] ^ a b Blair RJ, Colledge E, Mitchell DG (December 2001).

"Somatic markers and response reversal: is there orbitofrontal cortex dysfunction in boys with psychopathic tendencies?" .

Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology .

29 (6): 499– 511.

doi : 10.1023/A:1012277125119 .

PMID 11761284 .

S2CID 1951812 .

^ a b Blair RJ, Mitchell DG, Richell RA, Kelly S, Leonard A, Newman C, et al. (November 2002).

"Turning a deaf ear to fear: impaired recognition of vocal affect in psychopathic individuals" .

Journal of Abnormal Psychology .

111 (4): 682– 6.

doi : 10.1037/0021-843x.111.4.682 .

PMID 12428783 .

^ a b Stevens D, Charman T, Blair RJ (June 2001).

"Recognition of emotion in facial expressions and vocal tones in children with psychopathic tendencies" .

The Journal of Genetic Psychology .

162 (2): 201– 11.

doi : 10.1080/00221320109597961 .

PMID 11432605 .

S2CID 42581610 .

^ Decety J, Skelly L, Yoder KJ, Kiehl KA (February 2014).

"Neural processing of dynamic emotional facial expressions in psychopaths" .

Social Neuroscience .

9 (1): 36– 49.

doi : 10.1080/17470919.2013.866905 .

PMC 3970241 .

PMID 24359488 .

Dawel A, O'Kearney R, McKone E, Palermo R (November 2012). "Not just fear and sadness: meta-analytic evidence of pervasive emotion recognition deficits for facial and vocal expressions in psychopathy".

Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews .

36 (10): 2288– 304.

doi : 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.08.006 .

hdl : 1885/19765 .

PMID 22944264 .

S2CID 2596760 .

^ Hogenboom M (July 25, 2013).

"Psychopathic criminals have empathy switch" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on July 27, 2013 . Retrieved July 28, 2013 .

Lewis T (July 24, 2013).

"Cold-hearted Psychopaths Feel Empathy Too" .

Live Science .

^ Barrett LF (2017).

How Emotions are Made: The Secret Life of the Brain . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

Atkins D (2014).

The Role of Culture in Empathy: The Consequences and Explanations of Cultural Differences in Empathy at the Affective and Cognitive Levels (PhD thesis). University of Kent.

^ Decety J, Skelly LR, Kiehl KA (June 2013).

"Brain response to empathy-eliciting scenarios involving pain in incarcerated individuals with psychopathy" .

JAMA Psychiatry .

70 (6): 638– 45.

doi : 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.27 .

PMC 3914759 .

PMID 23615636 .

^ Decety J, Chen C, Harenski C, Kiehl KA (2013).

"An fMRI study of affective perspective taking in individuals with psychopathy: imagining another in pain does not evoke empathy" .

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience .

7 : 489.

doi : 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00489 .

PMC 3782696 .

PMID 24093010 .

^ Mullins-Nelson JL, Salekin RT, Anne-Marie RT, Leistico RL (2006).

"Psychopathy, Empathy, and Perspective -Taking Ability in a Community Sample: Implications for the Successful Psychopathy Concept" .

International Journal of Forensic Mental Health .

5 (2): 133– 49.

doi : 10.1080/14999013.2006.10471238 .

S2CID 143760402 .

^ Vedantam S (May 28, 2007).

"If It Feels Good to Be Good, It Might Be Only Natural" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved April 23, 2010 .

^ Winter K, Spengler S, Bermpohl F, Singer T, Kanske P (April 2017).

"Social cognition in aggressive offenders: Impaired empathy, but intact theory of mind" .

Scientific Reports .

7 (1) 670.

Bibcode : 2017NatSR...7..670W .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-017-00745-0 .

PMC 5429629 .

PMID 28386118 .

^ Minzenberg MJ, Fisher-Irving M, Poole JH, Vinogradov S (February 2006).

"Reduced Self-Referential Source Memory Performance is Associated with Interpersonal Dysfunction in Borderline Personality Disorder" (PDF) .

Journal of Personality Disorders .

20 (1): 42– 54.

doi : 10.1521/pedi.2006.20.1.42 .

PMID 16563078 . Archived from the original (PDF) on May 16, 2013.

^ Harari H, Shamay-Tsoory SG, Ravid M, Levkovitz Y (February 2010). "Double dissociation between cognitive and affective empathy in borderline personality disorder".

Psychiatry Research .

175 (3): 277– 9.

doi : 10.1016/j.psychres.2009.03.002 .

PMID 20045198 .

S2CID 27303466 .

^ "Diagnostic criteria for 301.81 Narcissistic Personality Disorder" , Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fourth (DSM-IV-TR) ed.), American Psychiatric Association , 2000 ^ "Diagnostic criteria for 301.20 Schizoid Personality Disorder" .

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fourth (DSM-IV-TR) ed.).

American Psychiatric Association . 2000.

Guntrip H (1969).

Schizoid Phenomena, Object-Relations, and The Self . New York: International Universities Press.

Klein R (1995).

Disorders of the Self: New Therapeutic Horizons . Brunner/Mazel. pp.

13– 23.

^ a b Shamay-Tsoory S, Harari H, Szepsenwol O, Levkovitz Y (2009). "Neuropsychological evidence of impaired cognitive empathy in euthymic bipolar disorder".

The Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences .

21 (1): 59– 67.

doi : 10.1176/jnp.2009.21.1.59 .

PMID 19359453 .

^ a b LaBier D.

"Are You Suffering From Empathy Deficit Disorder?" .

Psychology Today . Retrieved March 18, 2022 .

^ Eisenberg N, Miller PA (January 1987).

"The relation of empathy to prosocial and related behaviors" .

Psychological Bulletin .

101 (1): 91– 119.

doi : 10.1037/0033-2909.101.1.91 .

PMID 3562705 .

^ Bjorkqvist K, Osterman K, Kaukiainen A (2000). "Social intelligence - empathy = aggression?".

Aggression and Violent Behavior .

5 (2): 191– 200.

doi : 10.1016/s1359-1789(98)00029-9 .

Geer JH, Estupinan LA, Manguno-Mire GM (2000). "Empathy, social skills, and other relevant cognitive processes in rapists and child molesters".

Aggression and Violent Behavior .

5 (1): 99– 126.

doi : 10.1016/s1359-1789(98)00011-1 .

Segal SA, Gerdes KE, Lietz CA (2017).

Assessing Empathy . Columbia University Press. pp.

79– 81.

ISBN 978-0-231-54388-0 .

^ Goleman D (2005).

Emotional intelligence (in Danish). New York: Bantam Books.

ISBN 978-0-553-38371-3 .

OCLC 61770783 .

^ Weiner IB, Craighead WE (2010).

The Corsini Encyclopedia of Psychology . John Wiley & Sons. p. 810.

ISBN 978-0-470-17026-7 .

^ a b Gerace A, Day A, Casey S, Mohr P (2015).

"Perspective taking and empathy: Does having similar past experience to another person make it easier to take their perspective?" (PDF) .

Journal of Relationships Research .

6 e10: e10, 1– 14.

doi : 10.1017/jrr.2015.6 .

hdl : 2328/35813 .

S2CID 146270695 .

^ a b Hodges SD, Kiel KJ, Kramer AD, Veach D, Villanueva BR (March 2010).

"Giving birth to empathy: the effects of similar experience on empathic accuracy, empathic concern, and perceived empathy" .

Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin .

36 (3): 398– 409.

doi : 10.1177/0146167209350326 .

PMID 19875825 .

S2CID 23104368 .

^ Wyschogrod E (February 1981). "Empathy and sympathy as tactile encounter".

The Journal of Medicine and Philosophy .

6 (1): 25– 43.

doi : 10.1093/jmp/6.1.25 .

PMID 7229562 .

^ Kardos P, Leidner B, Pléh C, Soltész P, Unoka Z (July 2017).

"Empathic people have more friends: Empathic abilities predict social network size and position in social network predicts empathic efforts" .

Social Networks .

50 : 1– 5.

doi : 10.1016/j.socnet.2017.01.004 .

^ Grühn D (2008).

"Empathy across the adult lifespan: Longitudinal and experience-sampling findings" .

Emotion .

8 (6): 753– 65.

doi : 10.1037/a0014123 .

PMC 2669929 .

PMID 19102586 .

^ Bernard B (2004).

Resiliency: What we have learned .

^ Allemand M, Steiger AE, Fend HA (2015).

"Empathy Development in Adolescence Predicts Social Competencies in Adulthood" .

Journal of Personality .

83 (2): 229– 241.

doi : 10.1111/jopy.12098 .

ISSN 1467-6494 .

PMID 24684661 .

^ Bloom P (2016).

Against Empathy: The Case for Rational Compassion . chapter 6.

^ Lau B, Geipel J, Wu Y, Keysar B (2022).

"The extreme illusion of understanding" .

Journal of Experimental Psychology: General .

151 (11): 2957– 62.

doi : 10.1037/xge0001213 .

hdl : 10871/128740 .

PMID 35377705 .

S2CID 247954809 .

^ McLaren K (2013).

The Art of Empathy: A Complete Guide to Life's Most Essential Skill . Sounds True. p. 32.

^ Young S, Hugenberg K (2010). "Mere socialization categorization modulates identification of facial expressions of emotion".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

99 (6): 964– 77.

doi : 10.1037/a0020400 .

PMID 20919774 .

^ Levenson RW, Ruef AM (1997). "Physiological aspects of emotional knowledge and rapport.". In Ickes WJ (ed.).

Empathic Accuracy . New York, N.Y.: The Guilford Press. pp.

44– 72.

ISBN 978-1-57230-161-0 .

^ Hein G, Silani G, Preuschoff K, Batson CD, Singer T (October 2010).

"Neural responses to ingroup and outgroup members' suffering predict individual differences in costly helping" .

Neuron .

68 (1): 149– 60.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.09.003 .

PMID 20920798 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j "The Case Against Empathy" .

Think!

(Podcast).

KERA . January 5, 2017.

^ Zloteanu M, Bull P, Krumhuber EG, Richardson DC (2021).

"Veracity judgement, not accuracy: Reconsidering the role of facial expressions, empathy, and emotion recognition training on deception detection" .

Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology .

74 (5): 910– 927.

doi : 10.1177/1747021820978851 .

ISSN 1747-0218 .

PMC 8056713 .

PMID 33234008 .

^ a b Bloom P (January 2017). "Empathy and Its Discontents".

Trends in Cognitive Sciences .

21 (1): 24– 31.

doi : 10.1016/j.tics.2016.11.004 .

PMID 27916513 .

S2CID 3863278 .

^ Clark C (February 10, 1998).

Misery and Company: Sympathy in Everyday Life . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226107578 .

^ Cameron CD, Payne BK (January 2011).

"Escaping affect: How motivated emotion regulation creates insensitivity to mass suffering" .

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

100 (1): 1– 15.

doi : 10.1037/a0021643 .

ISSN 1939-1315 .

PMID 21219076 .

^ Vacharkulksemsuk T, Fredrickson BL (January 1, 2012).

"Strangers in sync: Achieving embodied rapport through shared movements" .

Journal of Experimental Social Psychology .

48 (1): 399– 402.

doi : 10.1016/j.jesp.2011.07.015 .

ISSN 0022-1031 .

PMC 3290409 .

PMID 22389521 .

^ "Instrumental Empathy: The Basis of Psychological Manipulation" .

Exploring your mind . August 10, 2020 . Retrieved May 21, 2025 .

^ Cameron CD, Payne BK (January 2011).

"Escaping affect: How motivated emotion regulation creates insensitivity to mass suffering" .

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

100 (1): 1– 15.

doi : 10.1037/a0021643 .

ISSN 1939-1315 .

PMID 21219076 .

^ Figley CR (June 17, 2013).

Compassion Fatigue (0 ed.). Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780203777381 .

ISBN 978-1-134-86254-2 .

^ Bloom P (2016).

Against empathy: the case for rational compassion (First ed.). New York, NY: Ecco, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-06-233933-1 .

^ Kraus M, Côté S, Keltner D (2010). "Social class, contextualism, and empathic accuracy".

Psychological Science .

2 (11): 1716– 23.

doi : 10.1177/0956797610387613 .

PMID 20974714 .

S2CID 7306762 .

^ Hogeveen J, Inzlicht M, Obhi S (2014). "Power changes how the brain responds to others".

Journal of Experimental Psychology .

143 (2): 755– 62.

doi : 10.1037/a0033477 .

PMID 23815455 .

Galinsky A (2006). "Power and perspectives not taken".

Psychological Science .

17 (12): 1068– 74.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01824.x .

PMID 17201789 .

S2CID 3524097 .

Van Kleef G (2015).

"Power gets you high: The powerful are more inspired by themselves than by others" (PDF) .

Social Psychological and Personality Science .

6 : 472– 80.

doi : 10.1177/1948550614566857 .

S2CID 8686513 .

^ Klimecki O , Singer T (2012).

"Empathic distress fatigue rather than compassion fatigue? Integrating findings from empathy research in psychology and social neuroscience" (PDF) . In Oakley B, Knafo A, Madhavan G, Wilson DS (eds.).

Pathological Altruism . U.S.: Oxford University Press. pp.

368– 83.

ISBN 978-0-19-973857-1 .

Tone EB, Tully EC (November 2014).

"Empathy as a 'risky strength': a multilevel examination of empathy and risk for internalizing disorders" .

Development and Psychopathology .

26 (4 Pt 2): 1547– 65.

doi : 10.1017/S0954579414001199 .

PMC 4340688 .

PMID 25422978 .

^ Solon O (July 12, 2012).

"Compassion over empathy could help prevent emotional burnout" .

Wired UK .

Archived from the original on May 15, 2016.

^ Robinson BE (December 6, 2020).

"When Empathy Backfires" .

Psychology Today .

^ Marjanovic Z, Struthers G (August 8, 2011). "Who Helps Natural-Disaster Victims? Assessment of Trait and Situational Predictors".

Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy .

12 (1): 245– 67.

doi : 10.1111/j.1530-2415.2011.01262.x .

^ Einolf C (March 13, 2012). "Is Cognitive Empathy More Important than Affective Empathy? A Response to 'Who Helps Natural-Disaster Victims?' ".

Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy .

12 (1): 268– 71.

doi : 10.1111/j.1530-2415.2012.01281.x .

^ Petrocchi S, Bernardi S, Malacrida R, Traber R, Gabutti L, Grignoli N (December 2021).

"Affective empathy predicts self-isolation behaviour acceptance during coronavirus risk exposure" .

Scientific Reports .

11 (1): 10153.

Bibcode : 2021NatSR..1110153P .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-021-89504-w .

PMC 8115029 .

PMID 33980946 .

^ Batson CD, Moran T (1999).

"Empathy-induced altruism in a prisoner's dilemma" .

Eur. J. Soc. Psychol .

29 (7): 909– 24.

doi : 10.1002/(sici)1099-0992(199911)29:7<909::aid-ejsp965>3.0.co;2-l .

^ Snyder CR, Lopez SJ, eds. (2009).

Oxford Handbook of Positive Psychology (Second ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

243 –4.

ISBN 978-0-19-518724-3 .

^ Einolf CJ (2008).

"Empathic concern and prosocial behaviors: A test of experimental results using survey data" .

Social Science Research .

37 (4): 1267– 79.

doi : 10.1016/j.ssresearch.2007.06.003 .

PMID 19227702 .

S2CID 205236870 .

^ van Baaren R, Holland R, Kawakami K, van Knippenberg A (2004). "Mimicry and prosocial behavior".

Psychological Science .

15 (1): 71– 4.

doi : 10.1111/j.0963-7214.2004.01501012.x .

hdl : 2066/64791 .

PMID 14717835 .

S2CID 3681430 .

Müller B, Maaskant A, van Baaren R, Dijksterhuis A (2012). "Prosocial consequences of imitation".

Psychological Reports .

110 (3): 891– 8.

doi : 10.2466/07.09.21.PR0.110.3.891-898 .

hdl : 2066/102818 .

PMID 22897091 .

S2CID 13528009 .

van Baaren R, Janssen R, Chartrand T, Dijksterhuis A (2009).

"Where is the love? The social aspects of mimicry" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

364 (1528): 2381– 9.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2009.0057 .

PMC 2865082 .

PMID 19620109 .

^ a b Klimecki OM (October 1, 2019).

"The Role of Empathy and Compassion in Conflict Resolution" .

Emotion Review .

11 (4): 310– 325.

doi : 10.1177/1754073919838609 .

ISSN 1754-0739 .

^ Bloom P (2018).

Against empathy: the case for rational compassion (First ecco paperback ed.). New York: Ecco.

ISBN 978-0-06-233934-8 .

^ Decety J, Cowell JM (July 3, 2015).

"Empathy, Justice, and Moral Behavior" .

AJOB Neuroscience .

6 (3): 3– 14.

doi : 10.1080/21507740.2015.1047055 .

ISSN 2150-7740 .

PMC 4748844 .

PMID 26877887 .

^ Bandura A (August 1, 1999).

"Moral Disengagement in the Perpetration of Inhumanities" .

Personality and Social Psychology Review .

3 (3): 193– 209.

doi : 10.1207/s15327957pspr0303_3 .

ISSN 1088-8683 .

PMID 15661671 .

^ Bloom P (2018).

Against empathy: the case for rational compassion (First ecco paperback ed.). New York: Ecco.

ISBN 978-0-06-233934-8 .

^ a b Hoffman ML (1990).

"Empathy and justice motivation" .

Motivation and Emotion .

14 (2): 151– 72.

doi : 10.1007/BF00991641 .

S2CID 143830768 .

^ Hoffman 2000 , p. 101.

^ Vitaglione GD, Barnett MA (December 2003).

"Assessing a new dimension of empathy: Empathic anger as a predictor of helping and punishing desires" .

Motivation and Emotion .

27 (4): 301– 25.

doi : 10.1023/A:1026231622102 .

S2CID 143276552 . Archived from the original on May 14, 2011.

^ Mohr P, Howells K, Gerace A, Day A, Wharton M (2007).

"The role of perspective taking in anger arousal" .

Personality and Individual Differences .

43 (3): 507– 17.

doi : 10.1016/j.paid.2006.12.019 .

hdl : 2328/36189 .

Day A, Mohr P, Howells K, Gerace A, Lim L (June 2012).

"The role of empathy in anger arousal in violent offenders and university students" .

International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology .

56 (4): 599– 613.

doi : 10.1177/0306624X11431061 .

hdl : 2328/35889 .

PMID 22158909 .

S2CID 46542250 .

^ Cicero MT. "On Grief of Mind".

Tusculan Disputations .

^ Slote M (2007).

The Ethics of Care and Empathy . Oxford University Press.

^ a b "The philosophy of empathy - Document - Gale Academic OneFile Select" .

go.gale.com . Retrieved December 15, 2024 .

^ Agosta L (2010).

Empathy in the Context of Philosophy . Palgrave/Macmillan.

^ Jenkins K (1991).

Re-thinking History . London: Routledge.

^ "Empathy and Sympathy in Ethics | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" . Retrieved November 13, 2023 .

^ Patnaik D (2009).

Wired to Care: How Companies Prosper When They Create Widespread Empathy . FT Press.

^ Miyashiro MR (2011).

The Empathy Factor: Your Competitive Advantage for Personal, Team, and Business Success . Puddledancer Press. p. 256.

ISBN 978-1-892005-25-0 .

^ Dowden C (June 21, 2013).

"Forget ethics training: Focus on empathy" .

The National Post . Archived from the original on July 27, 2013.

^ Phillips KU (2020).

The Future of Feeling: Building Empathy in a Tech-Obsessed World . pp.

101– 2.

^ "The Importance of Empathy in the Workplace" .

Center for Creative Leadership . Retrieved November 10, 2020 .

^ Krznaric R (2014).

Empathy: Why It Matters, and How to Get It . pp.

xi– ii.

^ Waytz A (2007). "The Limits of Empathy".

Empathy . Harvard Business Review Press.

^ "Fidelity exploits virtual reality for "empathy training" " .

Finextra . October 16, 2017.

^ Radzvilavicius AL, Stewart AJ, Plotkin JB (April 9, 2019). Doebeli M, Tautz D, Masuda N, Nowak MA (eds.).

"Evolution of empathetic moral evaluation" .

eLife .

8 e44269.

doi : 10.7554/eLife.44269 .

ISSN 2050-084X .

PMC 6488294 .

PMID 30964002 .

^ McAlinden M (2014). "Can teachers know learners' minds? Teacher empathy and learner body language in English language teaching". In Dunworth K, Zhang G (eds.).

Critical perspectives on language education: Australia and the Asia Pacific . Cham, Switzerland: Springer. pp.

71– 100.

ISBN 978-3-319-06185-6 .

^ Aldrup K, Carstensen B, Klusmann U (September 1, 2022).

"Is Empathy the Key to Effective Teaching? A Systematic Review of Its Association with Teacher-Student Interactions and Student Outcomes" .

Educational Psychology Review .

34 (3): 1177– 1216.

doi : 10.1007/s10648-021-09649-y .

ISSN 1573-336X .

^ "Teacher empathy reduces student suspensions, Stanford research shows" .

news.stanford.edu . Retrieved December 15, 2024 .

^ a b Tettegah S, Anderson CJ (2007). "Pre-service teachers' empathy and cognitions: Statistical analysis of text data by graphical models".

Contemporary Educational Psychology .

32 (1): 48– 82.

doi : 10.1016/j.cedpsych.2006.10.010 .

^ Cornelius-White JH, Harbaugh AP (2010).

Learner-Centered Instruction . Thousand Oaks, Calif., London, New Delhi, Singapore: SAGE Publications.

Rogers CR, Lyon Jr HC, Tausch R (2013).

On Becoming an Effective Teacher — Person-centered teaching, psychology, philosophy, anddialogues . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-81698-4 .

^ Howick J, Dudko M, Feng SN, Ahmed A, Alluri N, Nockels K, et al. (April 2023).

"Why might medical student empathy change throughout medical school? a systematic review and thematic synthesis of qualitative studies" .

BMC Medical Education .

23 (270) 270.

doi : 10.1186/s12909-023-04165-9 .

PMC 10124056 .

PMID 37088814 .

^ Weeks W, Pedersen P, Brislin R (1979).

A Manual of Structured Experiences for Cultural Learning . La Grange Park, Ill.: Intercultural Network.

^ Brown S, Osland J (2016).

Developing Cultural Diversity Competency . University of Portland.

^ Eliot G (July 1856). "The Natural History of German Life".

Westminster Review .

LXVI : 28– 44.

^ Hunt L (2007).

Inventing Human Rights: A History .

See also: Hunt L.

"Inventing Human Rights" (lecture, March 2008) .

YouTube .

Further reading [ edit ] Buber M (2020).

I and thou . New York: Clydesdale.

ISBN 978-1-945186-88-2 .

OCLC 1129703024 .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of empathy at Wiktionary Quotations related to Empathy at Wikiquote Media related to Empathy at Wikimedia Commons Agosta L.

"Empathy and Sympathy in Ethics" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Eklund JH, Meranius MS (February 2021).

"Toward a consensus on the nature of empathy: A review of reviews" .

Patient Education and Counseling .

104 (2): 300– 7.

doi : 10.1016/j.pec.2020.08.022 .

PMID 32888755 .

Gross D (May 3, 2022).

"Notes on Empathy" .

LessWrong .

Zalta EN (ed.).

"Empathy" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Emotions ( list ) Emotions Acceptance Admiration Adoration Aesthetic Affection Agitation Agony Amusement Anger Angst Anguish Annoyance Anticipation Antipathy Anxiety Apathy Arousal Attraction Awe Belongingness Boredom Calmness Comfort Compassion Confidence Confusion Contempt Contentment Courage Cruelty Curiosity Defeat Depression Desire Disappointment Disgust Distrust Doubt Ecstasy Embarrassment vicarious Emotion work Empathy Emptiness Enthrallment Enthusiasm Envy Euphoria Excitement Faith Fear Flow Frustration Fun Gratification Gratitude Greed Grief Guilt Happiness Joie de vivre Hatred self-hatred Hiraeth Homesickness Hope Horror Hostility Humiliation Hygge Hysteria Ikigai (sense of purpose) Indulgence Infatuation Insecurity Insignificance Inspiration Interest Irritation Isolation Jealousy Joy Kindness Loneliness Love at first sight limerence obsessive parental passionate and companionate Lust Mono no aware Neglect Nostalgia Outrage Panic Passion Pity self-pity Pleasure Pride grandiosity hubris insult vanity Rage Regret Rejection Relaxation Relief Remorse Resentment Revenge Sadness melancholy Saudade Schadenfreude Sehnsucht Sentimentality Shame Shock Shyness Solitude Social connection Sorrow Spite Stress chronic Suffering Surprise Suspense Suspicion Sympathy Trust Wonder sense of wonder Worry Zest Worldviews Cynicism Defeatism Fatalism Misanthropy Nihilism Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Related Affect consciousness in education measures in psychology Affective computing forecasting neuroscience science spectrum Affectivity positive negative Appeal to emotion Amygdala hijack Emotion and art and memory and music and sex and sleep classification circumplex EmojiGrid Lövheim PAD Plutchik evolution expressed functional accounts group homeostatic in animals perception recognition in conversation regulation interpersonal work Emotional aperture bias blackmail competence conflict contagion detachment dysregulation eating exhaustion expression and gender intelligence and bullying Empathy quotient intimacy isolation lability labor lateralization literacy prosody reasoning responsivity security symbiosis thought method well-being Emotionality bounded Emotions and culture history in decision-making in the workplace in virtual communication moral self-conscious social social sharing sociology Feeling Group affective tone Interactions between the emotional and executive brain systems Jealousy in art Mental state Meta-emotion Pathognomy Pathos Social emotional development Stoic passions Theory affect affect as information appraisal Cannon-Bard constructed emotion discrete emotion James-Lange somatic somatic marker two-factor Italics indicate emotion names in foreign languages Category v t e Narcissism Similar personality concepts Egomania Egotism God complex Grandiosity Healthy narcissism Hubris Messiah complex Superiority complex In society Collective narcissism In the workplace Leadership Me generation Narcissus (mythology) Parents Pathological narcissism Narcissistic personality disorder history Malignant narcissism Narcissistic Personality Inventory Phenomena Narcissistic injury neurosis elation mortification supply withdrawal defences Related psychology concepts Compensation Dark triad Empathy Entitlement Grandiosity Manipulation (psychology) Selfishness Category v t e Autism Main Causes Diagnosis Epidemiology Epigenetics Heritability History Memory Pathophysiology Sex and gender Societal and cultural aspects Therapies Diagnoses Pervasive developmental disorder Autistic disorder Asperger syndrome Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder High-functioning autism Associated conditions and phenomena Alexithymia Anxiety LGBTQ identities Burnout Catatonia Masking Meltdowns Inertia Echolalia Echopraxia Emotional dysregulation Hyperlexia Infodumping Late talker Monotropism Nonspeaking Pathological demand avoidance Pronoun reversal Savant syndrome Special interests Stimming Sensory overload Comorbid conditions Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder Avoidant personality disorder Anxiety disorder obsessive–compulsive disorder Bipolar disorder Developmental coordination disorder Developmental verbal dyspraxia Epilepsy Gender dysphoria Global developmental delay Intellectual disability Major depressive disorder Schizoid personality disorder Sensory processing disorder Sleep disorder Suicide Tinnitus Associated syndromes 22q13 deletion syndrome Angelman syndrome CHARGE syndrome Cohen syndrome Cornelia de Lange syndrome DiGeorge syndrome Down syndrome Fetal valproate spectrum disorder Fragile X syndrome MECP2 duplication syndrome Neurofibromatosis type I Noonan syndrome Multiple hamartoma syndrome Rett syndrome Smith–Lemli–Opitz syndrome Timothy syndrome Tuberous sclerosis Williams syndrome Related issues Ableism Autistic rights movement Critical autism studies Discrimination Double empathy problem Employment Military service and conscription Multiple complex developmental disorder Neurodiversity Neuroqueer theory Peripheral neuropathy Reduced affect display Sanism Self-harm Suicidal ideation TEACCH program Twice exceptional Violence and autism Controversies Facilitated communication Lancet MMR autism fraud MMR vaccine Rapid prompting method Thiomersal Chelation Combating Autism Act Autistic supremacism Diagnostic scales Autism Diagnostic Interview Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule Childhood Autism Rating Scale Gilliam Asperger's disorder scale Screening scales Autism-spectrum quotient Childhood Autism Spectrum Test Ritvo Autism and Asperger Diagnostic Scale Lists Autism-related topics Fictional characters Schools Accommodations Autism-friendly Curb cut effect Inclusive design Neurodiversity and labor rights Neuroinclusive design Sensory friendly Supported employment Universal design Category v t e Psychopathy Contexts In fiction In the workplace Characteristics Anti-social behaviour Bold Callous Diminished empathy Disinhibited Grandiose Impulsive Lack of guilt Manipulative Pathological lying Remorseless Shallow affect Superficially charming Related topics Antisocial personality disorder Conduct disorder Dark triad History of psychopathy Juvenile delinquency Machiavellianism Macdonald triad Narcissism Psychopathic Personality Inventory Psychopathy Checklist Sadistic personality disorder Sexual sadism disorder Substance use disorder Sociopathy Notable theorists Hervey M. Cleckley George E. Partridge Robert D. Hare v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Latvia Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐qxqnl
Cached time: 20250818140538
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.915 seconds
Real time usage: 3.114 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 22945/1000000
Revision size: 177520/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1140434/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19746/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1145159/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.923/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24565870/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2677.190      1 -total
 65.19% 1745.237      1 Template:Reflist
 41.13% 1101.211    184 Template:Cite_journal
 19.32%  517.328     35 Template:Multiref2
 10.12%  270.838     59 Template:Cite_book
  4.87%  130.293      1 Template:Sfn
  3.86%  103.444     20 Template:Lang
  3.40%   91.118      6 Template:Navbox
  2.93%   78.419     14 Template:Clarify
  2.92%   78.165      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:302319:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818140538 and revision id 1306572206. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Empathy&oldid=1306572206 " Categories : Empathy Cognitive neuroscience Concepts in ethics Concepts in metaphysics Emotions Interpersonal relationships Life skills Moral psychology Social emotions Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from July 2023 CS1 Danish-language sources (da) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2014 Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Greek-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2022 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2022 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2024 All articles needing examples Articles needing examples from February 2022 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2023 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Articles containing Welsh-language text Articles containing Danish-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 14:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Empathy 66 languages Add topic

