Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical perspective 2 Philosophy 3 Difference in concept to Advaita Vedanta 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Achintya Bheda Abheda 9 languages বাংলা Čeština Deutsch Eesti हिन्दी Lietuvių Русский Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical school of Vedanta Part of a series on Vaishnavism Supreme deity Vishnu / Krishna / Rama Important deities Dashavatara Matsya Kurma Varaha Narasimha Vamana Parasurama Rama Balarama Krishna Buddha Kalki Other forms Dhanvantari Guruvayurappan Hayagriva Jagannath Mohini Nara-Narayana Prithu Shrinathji Venkateshvara Vithoba Consorts Lakshmi Bhumi Sita Radha Rukmini Alamelu Related Garuda Hanuman Shesha Shasta Holy scriptures Vedas Upanishads Vaikhanasa Pancharatra Bhagavad Gita Mahabharata Ramayana Harivamsa Divya Prabandha Gita Govinda Puranas Vishnu Bhagavata Naradiya Garuda Padma Agni Sampradayas Sri ( Vishishtadvaita , Akshar Purushottam Darshan ) Rudra ( Śuddhādvaita ) Kumara ( Dvaitadvaita ) Brahma ( Tattvavada or ( Dvaita )), Acintyabhedabheda ) Others Ekasarana Dharma Mahanubhava Pranami Radha Vallabha Ramsnehi Sant Mat Vaishnava-Sahajiya Warkari Teachers—acharyas Chaitanya Chakradhara Dadu Dayal Harivansh Jayatirtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvara Kabir Madhavdev Madhvacharya Manavala Mamunigal Namadeva Nammalvar Nathamuni Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Padmanabha Tirtha Pillai Lokacharya Purandara Dasa Raghuttama Tirtha Raghavendra Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ravidas Satyanatha Tirtha Satyabhinava Tirtha Satyabodha Tirtha Satyadharma Tirtha Satyadhyana Tirtha Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Swaminarayan Sripadaraja Tukaram Tulsidas Vallabha Vedanta Desika Vidyapati Vishnuswami Viṭṭhalanātha Vyasatirtha Vadiraja Tirtha Yamunacharya Sri Kantha Krishnamacharyulu Annamacharya Bhadrachala Ramadasu Related traditions Bhagavatism Vaikhanasas Pancharatra Tenkalai Vadakalai Munitraya Krishnaism Jagannathism Haridasa Sahajiya Baul Pushtimarg Gaudiya ISKCON Ramanandi Kapadi Balmiki Kabir panth Dadu panth Mahanam v t e The neutrality of this article is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Hindu philosophy Orthodox Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Heterodox Charvaka Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Ajñana Sub-schools Smartist Advaita Vaishnavite Bhedabheda Vishishtadvaita Dvaita Shuddhadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Svabhavika Bhedabheda Mahanubhava Ekasarana Dharma Akshar Purushottam Darshan Shaivite Shaiva Siddhanta Pratyabhijna Panchartika Pramanavada Shakti Vishishtadvaita Shiva Bhedabeda Shiva Advaita Neo-Vedanta Integral yoga Teachers ( Acharyas ) Nyaya Akṣapāda Gotama Jayanta Bhatta Raghunatha Siromani Mīmāṃsā Jaimini Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Prabhākara Advaita (Mayavada) Gaudapada Vāchaspati Misra Adi Shankara Vishishtadvaita Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Dvaita (Tattvavada) Madhvacharya Jayatirtha Vyasatirtha Shuddhadvaita Vallabha Achintya Bheda Abheda Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Svabhavika Bhedabheda Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Purushottam Keshav Kashmiri Harivyas devacharya Mahanubhava Chakradhara Ekasarana Dharma Sankardev Akshar Purushottam Darshan Swaminarayan Tantra Shakta Abhinavagupta Nigamananda Paramahansa Ramprasad Sen Bamakhepa Kamalakanta Bhattacharya Anandamayi Ma Neo-Vedanta Vivekananda Aurobindo Radhakrishnan Others Samkhya Kapila Yoga Patanjali Vaisheshika Kaṇāda , Prashastapada Secular Valluvar Major texts Śruti Smṛti Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Upanishads Principal Upanishads Minor Upanishads Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama (Hinduism) Vachanamrut Shastras and Sutras Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Puranas Dharmaśāstra Arthashastra Kama Sutra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Shiva Samhita Secular ethics Kural Hinduism Other Indian philosophies v t e Achintya-Bheda-Abheda (अचिन्त्यभेदाभेद, acintyabhedābheda in IAST ) is a school of Vedanta representing the philosophy of inconceivable one-ness and difference .

[ 1 ] In Sanskrit achintya means 'inconceivable', [ 1 ] bheda translates as 'difference', and abheda translates as 'non-difference'.
The Gaudiya Vaishnava religious tradition employs the term in relation to the relationship of creation and creator ( Krishna , Svayam Bhagavan ), [ 2 ] [ 3 ] between God and his energies.

[ 4 ] It is believed that this philosophy was taught by the movement's theological founder Chaitanya Mahaprabhu [ 5 ] (1486–1534) and differentiates the Gaudiya tradition from the other Vaishnava Sampradayas . It can be understood as an integration of the strict dualist ( Dvaita ) theology of Madhvacharya and the monistic theology ( Advaita ) of Adi Shankara .

[ 6 ] Historical perspective [ edit ] Advaita schools assert the monistic view that the individual soul and God are one and the same, [ 7 ] whereas Dvaita schools give the dualistic argument that the individual soul and God are eternally separate.

[ 8 ] The philosophy of Achintya-bheda-abheda includes elements of both viewpoints. The living soul is intrinsically linked with God, and yet at the same time is not the same as God - the exact nature of this relationship being inconceivable to the human mind. The soul is considered to be part and parcel of the God. Same in quality but not in quantity. God having all opulence in fullness, the soul however, having only a partial expression of His divine opulence. God in this context is compared to a fire and the souls as sparks coming off of the flame.

Bhāskara's commentary on the Brahma Sutra is the earliest complete work of Bhedabheda to still exist.

[ 9 ] The Bhedabheda philosophy became the foundation for the traditions of Nimbarka , Vallabha, and Caitanya.

[ 10 ] Philosophy [ edit ] The theological view of achintya-bheda-abheda tattva asserts that God is simultaneously "one with and different from His creation". God's separate existence in His own personal form is not denied, even as, creation (or what is termed in Vaishnava theology as the 'cosmic manifestation') is never separate from God. God always exercises supreme control over his creation. Sometimes this control is directly exercised, but most of the time it is indirect, through his different potencies or energies ( Prakrti ).

A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada summarizes the achintya-bheda-abheda philosophy in the following way, "One who knows God knows that the impersonal conception and personal conception are simultaneously present in everything and that there is no contradiction. Therefore Lord Caitanya established His sublime doctrine: acintya bheda-and-abheda-tattva -- simultaneous oneness and difference." [ 4 ] The relationship between the Sun and sunshine analogizes the relationship between God and the jiva .

[ 11 ] The Sun and sunshine are not different qualitatively, but different quantitively— there is great difference between proximity to a beam of sunshine and proximity to the Sun. Similarly, the jiva is qualitatively similar to God, but does not share God's qualities to an infinite extent, as would God himself.

[ 12 ] Another conception of difference-in-nondifference is that jivas partake in the consciousness and bliss aspect of God, but not the being aspect. Thus, jivas are ontologically distinct from the absolute body of God.

[ 13 ] The essence of Achintya Bheda Abheda is summarized as ten root principles called dasa mula.

[ 14 ] The statements of amnaya (scripture) are the chief proof. By these statements the following nine topics are taught.

Krishna is the Supreme Absolute Truth.

Krishna is endowed with all energies.

Krishna is the source of all rasa - flavor, quality, or spiritual rapture/emotions.

The jivas (individual souls) are all separated parts of the Lord.

In the bound state (non-liberated) the jivas are under the influence of matter, due to their tatastha (marginal) nature.

In the liberated state the jivas are free from the influence of matter.

The jivas and the material world are both different from and identical to the Lord.

Pure devotion is the only way to attain liberation.

Pure love of Krishna is the ultimate goal.

Difference in concept to Advaita Vedanta [ edit ] It is clearly distinguished from the concept of anirvacaniya (inexpressible) of Advaita Vedanta . There is a clear difference between the two concepts  as the two ideas arise for different reasons.

Advaita concept is related to the ontological status of the world, whereas both Svayam Bhagavan and his shaktis (in Lord himself and his powers) are empirically real, and they are different from each other, but at the same time they are the same. Yet, this does not negate the reality of both.

[ 1 ] [ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Dvaita Dvaitadvaita Gaudiya Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya International Society for Krishna Consciousness Panentheism Paramatma Shuddhadvaita Svayam Bhagavan Turiya Vishishtadvaita Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Jiva Goswami Baladeva Vidyabhushana References [ edit ] ^ a b c Gupta, Ravi M. (2007).

The Caitanya Vaisnava Vedanta of Jiva Gosvami: When knowledge meets devotion (PDF) . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-40548-5 .

pp. 47-52 ^ Kaviraja, K.G.

Sri Caitanya-caritamrita. Bengali text, translation, and commentary by AC Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada .

Bhaktivedanta Book Trust .

Madhya 20.108-109 Archived 11 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine "It is the living entity's constitutional position to be an eternal servant of Krishna because he is the marginal energy of Krishna and a manifestation simultaneously one with and different from the Lord, like a molecular particle of sunshine or fire." ^ Kṛṣṇa Upaniṣad 1.25: ...na bhinnam. nā bhinnamābhirbhinno na vai vibhuḥ ^ a b Prabhupada, A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami (1972).

Bhagavad-gita as it is . Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Los Angeles, Calif.

ISBN 9780912776804 .

7.8 Archived 19 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Additional information" . Krishna.com. Archived from the original on 7 June 2002 . Retrieved 16 April 2008 .

"Lord Chaitanya taught that as spirit souls we are part of God and thus we are not different with Him in quality, and yet at the same time we are also different from Him in quantity. This is called acintya-bheda-abheda-tattva, inconceivable, simultaneous oneness and difference." ^ Satsvarupa, dasa Goswami (1976).

Readings in Vedit Literature: The Tradition Speaks for Itself . Bhaktivedanta Book Trust. pp. 240 pages.

ISBN 0-912776-88-9 .

^ "Additional information" . Tatfoundation.

Archived from the original on 12 May 2008 . Retrieved 16 April 2008 .

"This interpretation of the Upanishads, that the individual soul and God are absolutely non-different, is what distinguishes advaita from other forms of Vedanta." ^ "Additional information" . dvaita.org.

Archived from the original on 12 April 2008 . Retrieved 16 April 2008 .

"Dvaita,... asserts that the difference between the individual soul or Jiva, and the Creator, or Ishvara, is eternal and real" ^ Nicholson, Andrew J. (1 August 2007).

"Reconciling dualism and non-dualism: three arguments in Vijñānabhikṣu's Bhedābheda Vedānta" .

Journal of Indian Philosophy .

35 (4): 374.

doi : 10.1007/s10781-007-9016-6 .

ISSN 1573-0395 .

^ Nicholson, Andrew J. (1 August 2007).

"Reconciling dualism and non-dualism: three arguments in Vijñānabhikṣu's Bhedābheda Vedānta" .

Journal of Indian Philosophy .

35 (4): 374.

doi : 10.1007/s10781-007-9016-6 .

ISSN 1573-0395 .

^ Prabhupada, A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami (1988).

Srimad Bhagavatam . Bhaktivedanta Book Trust.

SB. 4.31.16 Archived 26 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine "One may be in the sunshine, but he is not on the sun itself." ^ Kaviraja, K.G.

Sri Caitanya-caritamrita. Bengali text, translation, and commentary by AC Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada .

Bhaktivedanta Book Trust .

Madhya 6.163 Archived 25 December 2021 at the Wayback Machine "Qualitatively the living entity and the Supreme Lord are one, but in quantity they are different" ^ Holdrege, Barbara A. (1 August 2024).

"Sex, Gender, and Devotional Desire: Refiguring Bodily Identities in Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Discourse" .

International Journal of Hindu Studies .

28 (2): 204.

doi : 10.1007/s11407-024-09361-w .

ISSN 1574-9282 .

^ Thakura, B. (1993). Jaiva dharma: The universal religion (K. Das, Trans.). Los Angeles, CA: Krishna Institute.

^ S. Devadas Pillai, ed. (1997).

Indian Sociology Through Ghurye: A Dictionary . Columbia, Mo: South Asia Books. p. 403.

ISBN 81-7154-807-5 .

v t e Indian philosophy Topics Atheism Atomism Idealism Logic Monotheism Vedic philosophy Kama Artha Moksha Ancient Āstika Hindu : Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Shaiva Raseśvara Pashupata Shaivism Pāṇiniya Nāstika Ājīvika Ajñana Charvaka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist philosophy and Early Buddhist schools Śūnyatā Madhyamaka Yogachara Sautrāntika Svatantrika Medieval Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Sikh Philosophy Shaiva Pratyabhijna Pashupata Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Modern Integral yoga Gandhism Radical Humanism Progressive utilization theory Texts Abhinavabharati Arthashastra Bhagavad Gita Bhagavata Purana Brahma Sutra Buddhist texts Dharmashastra Hindu texts Jain Agamas Kamasutra Mimamsa Sutras All 108 texts Principal Nyāya Sūtras Nyayakusumanjali Panchadasi Samkhyapravachana Sutra Sangam texts Sarvadarsanasangraha Shiva Sutras Tarka-Sangraha Tattvacintāmaṇi Tirukkuṟaḷ Upanishads Minor Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Vedangas Vedas Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Yoga Vasistha More...

Philosophers Adi Shankara Abhinavagupta Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Maṇḍana Miśra Valluvar Avatsara Vāchaspati Misra Uddalaka Aruni Gautama Buddha Yājñavalkya Gārgī Vāchaknavī Buddhaghosa Patañjali Kanada Kapila Brihadratha Ikshvaku Jaimini Vyasa Chanakya Dharmakirti Akshapada Gotama Nagarjuna Padmasambhāva Vasubandhu Gaudapada Ramana Maharshi Vivekananda Dayananda Saraswati Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Raikva Sadananda Sakayanya Satyakama Jabala Madhvacharya Mahavira Guru Nanak More...

Concepts Abhava Abhasavada Abheda Adarsana Adrishta Advaita Aham Ahimsa Aishvarya Akrodha Aksara Anatta Ananta Anavastha Anupalabdhi Apauruṣheyā Artha Asiddhatva Asatkalpa Ātman Avyakta Bhrama Brahman Bhuman Bhumika Catuṣkoṭi Chaitanya Chidabhasa Cittabhumi Dāna Devatas Dharma Dhi Dravya Dhrti Ekagrata Guṇa Hitā Idam Ikshana Ishvaratva Jivatva Kama Karma Kasaya Kshetrajna Lakshana Matsya Nyaya Mithyatva Mokṣa Nididhyasana Nirvāṇa Nishkama Karma Niyama Padārtha Paramatman Paramananda Parameshashakti Parinama-vada Pradhana Prajna Prakṛti Pratibimbavada Pratītyasamutpāda Puruṣa Rājamaṇḍala Ṛta Sakshi Samadhi Saṃsāra Satya Satkaryavada Shabda Brahman Sphoṭa Sthiti Śūnyatā Sutram Svātantrya Iccha-mrityu Syādvāda Taijasa Tajjalan Tanmatra Tyāga Uparati Upekkhā Utsaha Vivartavada Viraj Yamas Yoga More...

v t e Sampradayas of Vaishnavism Major traditions Brahma Sampradaya of Madhvacharya Sri Sampradaya of Ramanuja Kumara Sampradaya of Nimbarka Rudra Sampradaya of Vishnuswami Related traditions Historical Bhagavatism Vaikhanasas Pancharatra Tenkalai Vadakalai Krishnaism Warkari Mahanubhava Sadh Haridasa Sahajiya Baul Pushtimarg Ekasarana Gaudiya Manipuri Radha-Vallabha Ramanandi Kapadi Balmiki Kabir panth Dadu panth Pranami Swaminarayan Ayyavazhi Mahanam Vedanta Philosophies Dvaitadvaita Dvaita Vishishtadvaita Shuddhadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Achintya_Bheda_Abheda&oldid=1305065063 " Categories : Vaishnavism Vedanta Hindu philosophical concepts Bhakti movement Schools and traditions in ancient Indian philosophy Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from February 2024 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Use British English from March 2015 Use dmy dates from March 2015 This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 21:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Achintya Bheda Abheda 9 languages Add topic

