Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Europe Toggle Europe subsection 1.1 Czech Republic and Slovakia 1.2 Germany 1.3 Netherlands 1.4 Poland 1.5 Nordic countries 1.6 United Kingdom and Ireland 1.6.1 Most universities 1.6.2 Scotland 1.6.3 Oxford, Cambridge, Dublin (conferred) 1.6.3.1 Confusion 1.6.4 Oxford, Cambridge (earned) 2 North America 3 References Toggle the table of contents Master of Arts 25 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Čeština Dansk Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული मराठी مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English தமிழ் Türkçe اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of postgraduate qualification For other uses, see Master of Arts (disambiguation) .

"M.A." redirects here. For other uses, see MA (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Master of Arts" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is missing information about Master of Arts in other continents.

Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page .

( April 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Master of Arts A Master of Arts degree in Education from Antioch University Acronym MA AM Type Master's degree Duration 1 to 4 years (varies) A Master of Arts ( Latin : Magister in Artibus or Artium Magister ; abbreviated MA or AM ) is the holder of a master's degree awarded by universities in many countries. The degree is usually contrasted with that of Master of Science . Those admitted to the degree have typically studied subjects within the scope of the humanities and social sciences , such as history , literature , languages , linguistics , public administration , political science , communication studies , law or diplomacy ; however, different universities have different conventions and may also offer the degree for fields typically considered within the natural sciences and mathematics. The degree can be conferred in respect of completing courses and passing examinations, research, or a combination of the two.

The degree of Master of Arts traces its origins to the teaching license or Licentia docendi of the University of Paris , designed to produce "masters" who were graduate teachers of their subjects.

[ 1 ] Europe [ edit ] Czech Republic and Slovakia [ edit ] Like all EU member states, the Czech Republic and Slovakia follow the Bologna Process. The Czech Republic and Slovakia both award two different types of master's degrees; both award a title of Mgr. or Ing. to be used before the name.

Prior to reforms for compliance with the Bologna process, a master's degree could only be obtained after five years of uninterrupted study. Under the new system, it takes only two years but requires a previously completed three-year bachelor's program (a Bc. title). Writing a thesis (in both master's and bachelor's programs) and passing final exams are necessary to obtain the degree. It is mostly the case that the final exams cover the main study areas of the whole study program, i.e. a student is required to prove their knowledge in the subjects they attended during the two resp. three years of their study. Exams also include the defence of a thesis before an academic board.

Ing. (Engineer) degrees are usually awarded for master's degrees achieved in the natural sciences or mathematics-heavy study programmes, whereas an Mgr. (Magister) is generally awarded for master's studies in social sciences or the humanities while an MgA. (Magister of Arts) is awarded for studies in the arts.

Germany [ edit ] In Germany, the Master of Arts degree was called in Latin Magister Artium . This degree, which usually required between four [ 2 ] and four and a half [ 3 ] years of studies, existed in the Holy Roman Empire and its successors, including the German Empire and the Federal Republic of Germany , but not in the former East Germany , where all degree courses led to a Diplom . Traditional Magister degrees are granted in social sciences and most of the humanities ( international business , European studies and economics included), with the exception of visual and performing arts such as music and theatre.

The Magister Artium held either a double major degree or a combination of one major and two minors. German postgraduate Master of Arts and Master of Science degrees were introduced in 2001. Therefore, the new Master of Arts and the old Magister Artium degrees have existed side by side, since 2010; Magister Artium degrees are still awarded by some universities, as of 2020. The new Bachelor of Arts and Master of Arts degrees together also require five years of studies, which is the reason the new Master of Arts and the old Magister Artium degrees are considered equivalent.

Netherlands [ edit ] In the Netherlands, the Master of Arts and the Master of Science degrees were introduced in 2002. Until that time, a single program that led to the doctorandus degree (or the ingenieur degree in the case of technical subjects) was in effect, which comprised the same course-load as the bachelor's and master's programs put together. Those who had already started the doctorandus program could, upon completing it, opt for the doctorandus degree, which gave the title "Doctorandus" before their name, abbreviated to 'drs.'; in the case of ingenieur, this would be 'ir.'), or else opt for a master's degree as postnominals behind their name, in accordance with the new standard ('MA' or 'MSc'). A master's degree can take one or two years to complete.

Poland [ edit ] The Polish equivalent of Master of Arts is "magister" (its abbreviation "mgr" is placed before one's name, like the title Dr). At the technical universities, a student is awarded with inżynier (engineer) after three years and then with "magister" after completing another two years of study and graduating. Such persons use titles "mgr inż". In the 1990s, the MA programs usually lasting five years were replaced by separate three-year bachelor's and two-year master's programs. The degree is awarded in the arts (visual arts, literature, foreign languages, filmmaking, theatre etc.), natural sciences, mathematics, computer science fields, and economics. The completion of a research thesis is required. All master's degrees in Poland qualify for a doctorate program.

Nordic countries [ edit ] In Finland, Denmark and Norway, the master's degree is a combined taught/research degree, awarded after two years of studies after completing the bachelor's degree. The student is required to write a scientific thesis.

In Finland, this master's degree is called a filosofian maisteri (in Finnish) or filosofie magister (in Swedish), and it is abbreviated as FM or "fil.mag.".

In Sweden, there is still an intermediate degree between the bachelor's ( kandidat ) and master's called magister which only requires one year of studies, including a scientific thesis after completing the bachelor's degree. This fourth year typically constitutes the first half of a master's programme. If not, it may be supplemented by a fifth year and a master's thesis to obtain a master's degree in the field of study.

United Kingdom and Ireland [ edit ] Most universities [ edit ] Except at Aberdeen, Cambridge, Dublin, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Oxford and St. Andrews (see below), the MA is typically a "taught" postgraduate degree, involving lectures, examination, and a dissertation based on independent research. Taught master's programmes involve one or two years of full-time study. Many can be done part-time as well. Until recently, both the undergraduate and postgraduate master's degrees were awarded without grade or class (like the class of an honours degree ). Nowadays, however, master's degrees are normally classified into the categories of Fail, Pass, Pass with Merit, or Pass with Distinction. This education pattern in the United Kingdom is followed in India and many Commonwealth Nations .

The Master of Laws (LLM) is the standard degree taught for law, but certain courses may lead to MA, MLitt, Master of Studies (MSt), and the Bachelor of Civil Law (BCL) at Oxford . All of these degrees are considered substitutes to one another and are thus generally equivalent.

Scotland [ edit ] In the ancient universities of Scotland , the degree of Master of Arts is awarded in universities as a four-year undergraduate degree, see Master of Arts (Scotland) .

The degree of Master of Arts is the first degree awarded in arts , humanities , theology , and social sciences . However, some universities in Scotland award the degree of Master of Letters (MLitt) to students in the arts , humanities , divinity , and social sciences .

Oxford, Cambridge, Dublin (conferred) [ edit ] Main article: Master of Arts (Oxford, Cambridge, and Dublin) At Oxford , Cambridge and the University of Dublin , the title of Master of Arts is conferred after a certain number of years , without further examination, to those who have graduated as Bachelor of Arts and who have the requisite years' standing as members of the university or as graduates. This happens, in England, only at the universities of Oxford , four years after completing a bachelor's degree, and Cambridge , six years after the first term of study. It is also the case at the University of Dublin. The abbreviated name of the university (Oxon, Cantab or Dubl) is therefore almost always appended in parentheses to the initials "MA" in the same way that it is to higher degrees, e.g. "John Smith, MA (Cantab), PhD (Lond)", principally so that it is clear (to those who are aware of the system) that these are nominal and unexamined degrees.

[ 4 ] The MLitt is a research degree at the University of Cambridge , where the Master of Philosophy (MPhil) is the name given to the standard one-year taught degree with a unique research element, in contrast to the use of MPhil at other institutions for a research degree.

Confusion [ edit ] Research in 2000 by the universities watchdog, the Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education , showed that two-thirds of employers were unaware that the Oxford and Cambridge MA did not represent any kind of post-graduate achievement.

[ 5 ] In February 2011, the Labour Member of Parliament Chris Leslie sponsored a private member's bill in Parliament, the master's degrees (Minimum Standards) Bill, to "prohibit universities awarding master's degrees unless certain standards of study and assessment are met". The bill's supporters described the practice as a "historical anachronism" and argued that "unearned qualifications" should be discontinued to preserve the academic integrity of the taught MA. Further, they warned that the title gave Oxbridge graduates an unfair advantage in the job market. On 21 October 2011, the bill received its second reading, but it failed to complete its passage through Parliament before the end of the session, meaning it fell.

[ 6 ] Oxford, Cambridge (earned) [ edit ] A number of different master's degrees may be earned at Oxford and Cambridge. The most common, the Master of Philosophy degree (MPhil), is a two-year research degree. To prepare to graduate as a Master of Science (MSc) or a Master of Studies (MSt) takes only one year, both courses often combining some coursework with research. A Master of Letters (MLitt) is the holder of a pure research master's degree. In comparison to the LLM at Cambridge, Oxford offers two master's degrees in law depending on the jurisdictional background of the student. The degree of Bachelor of Civil Law (BCL) is for those from a common law background, whilst the more recent Magister Juris is for those from civil law jurisdictions.

[ 7 ] More recently, Oxford and Cambridge offer the degree of Master of Business Administration. Master's degrees are generally offered without classification, although the top five percent may be deemed worthy of Distinction.

[ 8 ] Both universities also offer a variety of four-year undergraduate integrated master's degrees such as MEng or MMath .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] North America [ edit ] Main article: List of master's degrees in North America In Canada and the United States, the Master of Arts ( Magister Artium ) and Master of Science ( Magister Scientiæ ) are the basic graduate-level degrees in most subjects and may be course-based, research-based, or, more typically, a combination of the two.

[ 12 ] Admission to a master's program is normally contingent upon holding a bachelor's degree . Some programs provide for a joint bachelor's and master's after about five years.

[ 13 ] Some universities use the Latin degree names, such as Artium Magister (AM) or Scientiæ Magister (SM). For example, Harvard University , Dartmouth College , the University of Chicago , MIT , the University of Pennsylvania , and Brown University use the abbreviations AM and SM for some of their master's degrees.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] A Master of Arts may be given in a scientific discipline, common at Ivy League universities .

Many universities offer Master of Arts programs, which are differentiated either as Thesis or Non-Thesis programs. Usually, the duration for a Non-Thesis option is one to two years of full-time study. The period for a Thesis option may last longer, depending also on the required level of courses and complexity of the thesis . Sometimes, qualified students who are admitted to a "very high research" Master of Arts might have to earn credits also at the PhD level, and they may need to complete their program in about three years of full-time candidature, e.g. at Harvard in the United States and McGill in Canada.

A thesis must be a distinct contribution to knowledge. It must demonstrate ability to plan and carry out research, organize results, and defend the approach and conclusions in a scholarly manner. The research presented must meet current standards of the discipline. Finally, the thesis must clearly demonstrate how the research advances knowledge in the field.

References [ edit ] ^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Master of Arts" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ "Bundesgesetzblatt Jahrgang 1987 Teil I Nr. 25, ausgegeben am 23.04.1987, Seite 1170" . Bundesanzeiger. 9 April 1987 . Retrieved 28 March 2025 .

^ "Bundesgesetzblatt Jahrgang 1999 Teil I Nr. 3, ausgegeben zu Bonn am 27. Januar 1999" . Bundesanzeiger. 19 January 1999 . Retrieved 28 March 2025 .

^ Debretts Correct Form (2013 edn) – Academics ^ Collins, Nick (12 February 2011).

"Oxbridge students' MA 'degrees' under threat" .

Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 2022-01-11 . Retrieved 2 January 2013 .

^ "Master's Degrees (Minimum Standards) Bill 2010-12" . UK Parliament. Archived from the original on Feb 4, 2013 . Retrieved 2 January 2013 .

^ "Law | Graduate courses" .

University of Oxford .

Archived from the original on Mar 31, 2023 . Retrieved Mar 31, 2023 .

^ "Graduate courses A-Z listing" .

University of Oxford . Retrieved Mar 31, 2023 .

^ "The structure of undergraduate courses at the University of Cambridge" . University of Cambridge. 10 December 2015 . Retrieved 28 May 2016 .

^ "Mathematics" . University of Oxford . Retrieved 28 May 2016 .

^ "Engineering Science" . University of Oxford . Retrieved 28 May 2016 .

^ Structure of the U.S. Education System: Master's Degrees , International Affairs Office, U.S. Department of Education , February 2008 , retrieved 2010-02-25 ^ See, for example, the program Archived 2012-07-27 at the Wayback Machine run by Claremont Graduate University for graduates of the Claremont Colleges ^ "Degree Programs – The Graduate School of Arts and Sciences" . Harvard University. Archived from the original on 10 June 2013 . Retrieved 13 June 2013 .

^ "Degree Abbreviations – Harvard University" . Harvard University. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015 . Retrieved 3 October 2015 .

v t e Levels of academic degree Undergraduate ISCED level 5 Associate degree Foundation degree Higher National Diploma / ​ Diploma of Higher Education / ​ Certificate of Higher Education ISCED level 6 Bachelor's degree Honours degree Postgraduate ISCED level 7 Master's degree Postgraduate diploma /​ certificate Diplom degree Engineer's degree ISCED level 8 Doctorate Candidate of Sciences Other Postdoctoral Higher doctorate Doctor of Sciences Habilitation Docent Tenure Fellow No dominant classification Academic certificate Artist diploma External degree Laurea Licentiate Magister degree Microdegree Professional degree Graduate diploma /​ certificate Higher diploma Specialist degree /​ diploma Terminal degree Unearned Honorary degree Ad eundem degree Master of Arts (Oxford, Cambridge and Dublin) Portals : Middle Ages Schools Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐tmhsq
Cached time: 20250817044230
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.475 seconds
Real time usage: 0.609 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1710/1000000
Revision size: 18361/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 80454/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7969/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 69646/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.336/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19812362/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  537.016      1 -total
 27.89%  149.765      1 Template:Reflist
 15.59%   83.726      1 Template:Langx
 13.80%   74.090      4 Template:Navbox
 13.47%   72.355      1 Template:CathEncy
 12.86%   69.074      1 Template:Academic_degrees
 12.38%   66.459      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 10.10%   54.249      1 Template:Short_description
  7.97%   42.794      2 Template:Ambox
  7.95%   42.692     10 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4126896:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044230 and revision id 1305291055. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Master_of_Arts&oldid=1305291055 " Category : Master's degrees Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2009 All articles needing additional references Articles to be expanded from April 2019 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 05:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Master of Arts 25 languages Add topic

