Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Indigenous Australian dance Toggle Indigenous Australian dance subsection 1.1 20th–21st centuries 2 Other varieties of dance 3 The Nutbush 4 Major dance companies 5 Post-secondary dance education 6 List of operating dance companies 7 Defunct companies 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Sources 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Dance in Australia 4 languages Français Русский සිංහල Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Indigenous Australian dance ) Aspect of Australian culture Ceremonial dancing has a very important place in the Indigenous cultures of Australia. They vary from place to place, but most ceremonies combine dance, song, rituals and often elaborate body decorations and costumes. The different body paintings indicate the type of ceremony being performed. They play an important role in marriage ceremonies, in the education of Indigenous children, as well as storytelling and oral history. The term corroboree is commonly used to refer to Australian Aboriginal dances, although this term has its origins among the people of the Sydney region. In some places, Aboriginal people perform corroborees for tourists. In the latter part of the 20th century the influence of Indigenous Australian dance traditions has been seen with the development of concert dance, with the Aboriginal Centre for the Performing Arts (ACPA) providing training in contemporary dance.

The Australian bush dance , which draws on traditions from English, Irish, Scottish and other European dance styles, is also a common community activity. Favourite dances include the Irish Céilidh "Pride of Erin" and the quadrille " The Lancers ". Locally originated dances include the "Waves of Bondi", the Melbourne Shuffle and New Vogue .

The Australian Ballet is the foremost classical ballet company in Australia. It began in 1962 and is today recognised as one of the world's major international ballet companies. It is based in Melbourne and performs works from the classical repertoire as well as contemporary works by major Australian and international choreographers.

Indigenous Australian dance [ edit ] Australian Aboriginal dancers in 1981.

Traditional Aboriginal Australian dance was closely associated with song and was understood and experienced as making present the reality of the Dreamtime . In some instances, they would imitate the actions of a particular animal as part of telling a story. For the people in their own country it defined roles, responsibilities and the place itself. These ritual performances gave them an understanding of themselves in the interplay of social, geographical and environmental forces. The performances were associated with specific places and dance grounds were often sacred places. The body decoration and specific gestures related to kin and other relationships, such as to Dreamtime beings. Some groups hold their dances secret or sacred. Gender is an important factor in some ceremonies with men and women having separate ceremonial traditions, such as the Crane Dance.

[ 1 ] The term " corroboree " is commonly used by non- Indigenous Australians to refer to any Aboriginal dance, although this term has its origins among the people of the Sydney region. In some places, Australian Aboriginal people perform corroborees for tourists.

[ 2 ] [ page needed ] For Torres Strait Islander people, singing and dancing is their "literature" – "the most important aspect of Torres Strait lifestyle. The Torres Strait Islanders preserve and present their oral history through songs and dances;...the dances act as illustrative material and, of course, the dancer himself [sic] is the storyteller" (Ephraim Bani, 1979). There are many songs about the weather; others about the myths and legends; life in the sea and totemic gods; and about important events. "The dancing and its movements express the songs and acts as the illustrative material".

[ 3 ] 20th–21st centuries [ edit ] Aboriginal Dance Theatre Redfern, 1989 In the latter part of the 20th century, the influence of Indigenous Australian dance traditions was seen with the development of concert dance, particularly in contemporary dance with the National Aboriginal and Islander Skills Development Association (established 1975) and the Aboriginal Centre for the Performing Arts (ACPA, founded 1997) providing training to Indigenous Australians in dance, and the Bangarra Dance Theatre (founded 1989).

[ citation needed ] With a new sense of pride emerging in a number of Aboriginal organisations in Redfern , Sydney, the Aboriginal Dance Theatre Redfern (ADTR) was established in 1979.

[ 4 ] The establishment of National Aboriginal Dance Council Australia (NADCA, also referred to as National Aboriginal Dance Council of Australia [ 5 ] ) was instigated by Christine Donnelly and ADTR in 1995.

[ 4 ] It was supported by Ausdance in their presentation of the presentation of three major Indigenous dance conferences.

[ 6 ] The second one was held in Adelaide in 1997, where cultural and intellectual property rights and copyright issues for Australian Indigenous dancers were discussed, and included a free outdoor performance in Rymill Park / Murlawirrapurka .

[ 7 ] The third conference took place in Sydney in 1999, funded by the Australia Council .

[ 8 ] Both the 2nd and 3rd conferences were attended by David Gulpilil 's dance troupe.

[ citation needed ] NADCA  was still in existence in 2007, when it was in the process of developing a document on "Cultural Protocols on Aboriginal Dance".

[ 5 ] Other varieties of dance [ edit ] Sir Robert Helpmann .

Bush dance has developed in Australia as a form of traditional dance, it draws on traditions from English, Irish, Scottish and other European dance. Favourite dances in the community include dances of European descent, such as the Irish Céilidh "Pride of Erin" and the quadrille " The Lancers ". Locally originated dances include the "Waves of Bondi", the Melbourne Shuffle and New Vogue .

Many immigrant communities continue their own dance traditions on a professional or amateur basis. Traditional dances from a large number of ethnic backgrounds are danced in Australia, helped by the presence of enthusiastic immigrants and their Australian-born families. It is quite common to see dances from the Baltic region, as well as Scottish, Irish, Indian, Indonesian or African dance being taught at community centres and dance schools in Australia.

Still more dance groups in Australia employ dances from a variety of backgrounds, including reconstructed European Court dances and Medieval Dance, as well as fusions of traditional steps with modern music and style.

The Australian Ballet is the foremost classical ballet company in Australia. Its inaugural artistic director was the English-born dancer, teacher and repetiteur Dame Peggy van Praagh in 1962 and is today recognised as one of the world's major international ballet companies.

[ 9 ] It is based in Melbourne and performs works from the classical repertoire as well as contemporary works by major Australian and international choreographers. As of 2010, it was presenting approximately 200 performances in cities and regional areas around Australia each year as well as international tours. Regular venues include: the Arts Centre Melbourne , Sydney Opera House , Sydney Theatre , Adelaide Festival Centre and Queensland Performing Arts Centre .

[ 10 ] Robert Helpmann is among Australia's best-known ballerinos.

Baz Luhrmann 's popular 1992 film Strictly Ballroom , starring Paul Mercurio , contributed to an increased interest in dance competition in Australia, and popular dance shows such as So You Think You Can Dance have featured on television in recent years.

The Nutbush [ edit ] The Nutbush is a classic Australian line dance —typically performed to the American song " Nutbush City Limits " by Ike & Tina Turner —was created in the 1970s disco era; it took off in Australia during the 1980s, and it has seen sustained success to this day, including gaining viral popularity internationally through TikTok .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] A common way of first hearing the song is when schools typically make students dance to it as part of a physical education .

Major dance companies [ edit ] Those dance companies funded by the Major Performing Arts Board of the Australia Council and from state arts agencies are: Ballet companies The Australian Ballet The Queensland Ballet The West Australian Ballet Contemporary dance companies Australian Dance Theatre ( Garry Stewart ) Phillip Adams BalletLab [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Bangarra Dance Theatre ( Stephen Page ) Chunky Move Company In Space Dance Hub SA (previously Leigh Warren & Dancers) Dancenorth Descendance Australasian Dance Collective , previously Expressions Dance Company Force Majeure ( Kate Champion ) Lucy Guerin Inc Mirramu Dance Company Phunktional Sydney Dance Company TasDance Youth dance companies QL2 Centre for Youth Dance [ 15 ] Extensions Youth Dance Company [ 16 ] Urban Ignition Youth Dance Company [ 17 ] Dance competitions (Showcase) Australian Dance Championships, established in 1994 Post-secondary dance education [ edit ] NSW Australian College of Physical Education Australian Dance Institute [ 18 ] (ADi) Excelsia College formerly Wesley Institute Macquarie University (North Ryde) National Aboriginal Islander Skills Development Association (NAISDA) University of NSW (Kensington Campus) Victoria Australian Ballet School Box Hill Institute (Centre for Performing Arts) Deakin University (Melbourne Campus, Burwood) Victorian College of the Arts ( University of Melbourne ) Victoria University (Footscray Campus) The Space Dance and Arts Centre [ 19 ] Queensland Aboriginal Centre for the Performing Arts Queensland University of Technology (Kelvin Grove Campus) South Australia Adelaide College of the Arts ( TAFE SA ), a member of the Helpmann Academy Western Australia Western Australian Academy of Performing Arts (Edith Cowan University) Youth Ballet Centre of Western Australia List of operating dance companies [ edit ] A-C Ambition School Of Dance Anything Is Valid Dance Theatre The Australian Ballet The Australian Choreographic Centre Australian Dance Theatre BalletLab (Contemporary dance company – Artistic Director, Phillip Adams) Bangarra Dance Theatre Blink Dance Theatre Buzz Dance Theatre Canberra Dance Theatre Chunky Move D-M Dance Exchange Dance Hub SA (previously Leigh Warren & Dancers) Dance Works Dancehouse Dancenorth Descendance Expressions Dance Company Force Majeure (dance company) led by Kate Champion Igneous Kage Physical Theatre Mirramu Dance Company Move Through Life Dance Company Nunukul Yuggera Aboriginal Dancers O-Z One Extra Dance Passada School of Afro Latin Dance [ 20 ] The Queensland Ballet Raw Metal Dance Company Restless Dance Company Strange Fruit Sydney Dance Company TasDance Tracks Dance Theatre The Dance Collective Visible Dance West Australian Ballet Wu Lin Dance Theatre youMove Dance Company Defunct companies [ edit ] Aboriginal Islander Dance Theatre (1976–1998) The Australian Choreographic Centre (1996–2007) Australian Choreographic Ensemble (ACE) (1992–1998) founded by Paul Mercurio Australian Theatre Ballet (1955–1955) Ballet Australia (1960–1976) Ballet Guild (1946–1967) [ citation needed ] Ballet Victoria (1967–1976) Bodenwieser Ballet (1939–1959) founded by Gertrud Bodenwieser See also [ edit ] Helpmann Award for Best Ballet or Dance Work Australian Dance Awards References [ edit ] ^ Encyclopaedia of Aboriginal Australia, Volume 1 . pp.

255– 7.

^ Burridge, Stephanie; Dyson, Julie (29 November 2020).

Shaping the Landscape: Celebrating Dance in Australia . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-1-000-36575-7 .

^ Wiltshire, Kelly (27 October 2017).

"Audiovisual Heritage of Torres Strait Singing and Dancing" .

AIATSIS . Archived from the original on 21 March 2020 . Retrieved 7 January 2020 .

^ a b "History" .

Aboriginal Dance Theatre Redfern . 25 January 2022. Archived from the original on 16 November 2022 . Retrieved 16 November 2022 .

^ a b Australia Council for the arts (2007).

Performing arts: Protocols for producing Indigenous Australian performing arts (PDF) (2nd ed.). pp.

34– 35.

ISBN 978-1-920784-37-9 .

First published 2002, edited and revised 2007.

(also here ) ^ Meiners, Jeff (2 September 2019).

"How we're losing the history of Australian dance" .

ArtsHub . Retrieved 30 November 2021 .

^ "Deadly Dancing" .

Tandanya . January 1998. p. 8. Archived from the original on 13 May 2001.

^ "3rd National Aboriginal Dance Conference, Powerhouse Museum, Sydney, NSW, Thursday – Sunday, 18–21 November 1999" .

Asia Pacific Channels: The Newsletter of the World Dance Alliance: Asia Pacific Center .

Ausdance : 6, 7. June 1999.

ISSN 1328-2115 .

...funded by the Dance Fund of the Australia Council ^ Ballet, The Australian.

"Our History" .

The Australian Ballet . Archived from the original on 2019-06-21 . Retrieved 2019-06-21 .

^ Ballet, The Australian.

"Our Story" .

The Australian Ballet . Retrieved 2019-06-21 .

^ "Thanks To TikTok The World Has Discovered Australia's Obsession With The Nutbush" .

Junkee . 2019-12-03 . Retrieved 2020-05-01 .

^ "Smac on TikTok" .

TikTok . Retrieved 2022-08-21 .

^ "Phillip Adams BalletLab – Ballet Lab" .

www.balletlab.com . Retrieved 2019-06-21 .

^ Hannah Francis, (15 Mar 2017), Temperance Hall move gives new lease of life to Phillip Adams BalletLab, Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 28 May 2019 ^ QL2 Centre for Youth Dance ^ Extensions Youth Dance Company ^ Urban Ignition Youth Dance Company ^ Australian Dance institute ^ The Space Dance and Arts Centre ^ Passada School Of Afro Latin Dance Sources [ edit ] Dance in Australia – a profile by David Throsby, Professor of Economics at Macquarie University External links [ edit ] The Dance Collection, Performing Arts Collection Archived 2012-11-02 at the Wayback Machine , at Arts Centre Melbourne Ausdance : the Australian Dance Council Australia Dancing [ usurped ] , a directory of dance resources in the National Library of Australia and National Film and Sound Archive Australian Performing and Media Arts magazine List of Australian dance schools by state v t e Dance in Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna v t e Australia articles History Timeline Bibliography Prehistory Archaeology European exploration Territorial evolution 1788–1850 1851–1900 1901–1945 Since 1945 By topic Asian Australians Constitutional Diplomatic Economic Federation Immigration Indigenous Military Monarchy Peace Railway Geography Climate Climate change Continent Deserts Environment issues Earthquakes Flora Fauna Forests Geology Islands Mountains Regions Protected areas Rivers Waterfalls World Heritage Sites Subdivisions States and territories Capitals Cities Politics Asylum Constitution Courts Elections Donations Electoral system Parties Federal budget Foreign relations Human rights Intersex LGBTQ Transgender Intelligence and security Law Constitution Judiciary Enforcement Military Monarchy National debt Parliament Political ideology Anarchism Christian Conservatism Far-right Liberalism Nationalism Republicanism Socialism Public Service Women Government leaders Government ministers Shadow Cabinet Government Cabinet of Australia list Governor-General list Prime Minister list Economy Agriculture Dollar Energy Gross state product Home ownership Public housing Household income Manufacturing Media Mining Poverty Reserve Bank Stock exchange Superannuation Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Transport Welfare system Society Abortion Aged care Censorship Citizenship Crime Education Euthanasia Healthcare Homelessness Human trafficking Immigration Irreligion Languages Life expectancy People Demographics Ethnic groups Indigenous Australians Prostitution Racism Religion Squatting Waste management Women Culture Architecture Art Arts Australian English Cinema Cuisine Dance Literature Music Public holidays Radio Sport Symbols Television Theatre Anglosphere Australian studies Outline Index Bibliography Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dance_in_Australia&oldid=1303502655#Indigenous_Australian_dance " Category : Dance in Australia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2022 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 10:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dance in Australia 4 languages Add topic

