Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In physics 2 In mathematics 3 In computer science 4 Others 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Deterministic system 14 languages العربية Català Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands Polski Simple English Tagalog Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Deterministic system" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) System in which no randomness is involved in determining its future states Part of a series on statistics Probability theory Probability Axioms Determinism System Indeterminism Randomness Probability space Sample space Event Collectively exhaustive events Elementary event Mutual exclusivity Outcome Singleton Experiment Bernoulli trial Probability distribution Bernoulli distribution Binomial distribution Exponential distribution Normal distribution Pareto distribution Poisson distribution Probability measure Random variable Bernoulli process Continuous or discrete Expected value Variance Markov chain Observed value Random walk Stochastic process Complementary event Joint probability Marginal probability Conditional probability Independence Conditional independence Law of total probability Law of large numbers Bayes' theorem Boole's inequality Venn diagram Tree diagram v t e In mathematics , computer science and physics , a deterministic system is a system in which no randomness is involved in the development of future states of the system.

[ 1 ] A deterministic model will thus always produce the same output from a given starting condition or initial state.

In physics [ edit ] The trajectory of a projectile launched from a cannon is modeled by an ODE that is derived from Newton's second law.

Physical laws that are described by differential equations represent deterministic systems, even though the state of the system at a given point in time may be difficult to describe explicitly.

In quantum mechanics , the Schrödinger equation , which describes the continuous time evolution of a system's wave function , is deterministic. However, the relationship between a system's wave function and the observable properties of the system appears to be non-deterministic.

In mathematics [ edit ] The systems studied in chaos theory are deterministic. If the initial state were known exactly, then the future state of such a system could theoretically be predicted. However, in practice, knowledge about the future state is limited by the precision with which the initial state can be measured, and chaotic systems are characterized by a strong dependence on the initial conditions. This sensitivity to initial conditions can be measured with Lyapunov exponents .

Markov chains and other random walks are not deterministic systems, because their development depends on random choices.

In computer science [ edit ] A deterministic model of computation , for example a deterministic Turing machine , is a model of computation such that the successive states of the machine and the operations to be performed are completely determined by the preceding state.

A deterministic algorithm is an algorithm which, given a particular input, will always produce the same output, with the underlying machine always passing through the same sequence of states. There may be non-deterministic algorithms that run on a deterministic machine, for example, an algorithm that relies on random choices. Generally, for such random choices, one uses a pseudorandom number generator , but one may also use some external physical process, such as the last digits of the time given by the computer clock.

A pseudorandom number generator is a deterministic algorithm, that is designed to produce sequences of numbers that behave as random sequences. A hardware random number generator , however, may be non-deterministic.

Others [ edit ] In economics, the Ramsey–Cass–Koopmans model is deterministic. The stochastic equivalent is known as real business-cycle theory .

As determinism relates to modeling in the natural sciences, a deterministic model [ 2 ] uses existing data to model the future behavior of a system. The deterministic model is useful for systems that do not experience frequent or unexpected behavior - unless that behavior is already present in the system via existing data. This type of modeling is distinct from stochastic modeling [ 2 ] or forward modeling.

[ 3 ] Stochastic modeling uses random data in the model while forward modeling uses a given model to predict future behavior in a system. Deterministic models are used across the natural sciences, including geology, oceanography, [ 4 ] physics, and other disciplines.

See also [ edit ] Deterministic system (philosophy) Dynamical system Scientific modelling Statistical model Stochastic process References [ edit ] ^ deterministic system - definition at The Internet Encyclopedia of Science ^ a b Bertsekas, Dimitri P. (1987).

Dynamic programming: deterministic and stochastic models . Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice-Hall.

ISBN 978-0-13-221581-7 .

^ Wang, Yinpeng; Ren, Qiang (2024).

Deep learning-based forward modeling and inversion techniques for computational physics problems . Boca Raton London New York: CRC Press.

ISBN 978-1-032-50303-5 .

^ Jackson, Leland J.; Trebitz, Anett S.; Cottingham, Kathryn L. (2000-08-01). "An Introduction to the Practice of Ecological Modeling".

BioScience .

50 (8): 694– 706.

doi : 10.1641/0006-3568(2000)050[0694:AITTPO]2.0.CO;2 .

ISSN 0006-3568 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Deterministic_system&oldid=1276521658 " Categories : Determinism Dynamical systems Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from January 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 February 2025, at 09:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Deterministic system 14 languages Add topic

