Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Ethnicity 3 Notable people 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Salvadoran Australians 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethnic group Salvadoran Australians Salvadoreño-australiano Total population 10,119 (by birth, 2021 Census ) [ 1 ] 20,000 (by ancestry) [ 2 ] Regions with significant populations Melbourne , Sydney and Brisbane .

Languages Salvadoran Spanish , Australian English Religion Christianity (mostly Roman Catholicism ) Related ethnic groups Hispanic and Latin American Australians , White Hispanics , Mestizos Salvadoran Australians ( Spanish : Salvadoreño-australiano ) are Australians of Salvadoran descent. Salvadoran immigration to Australia was caused principally by economic and political turmoil in El Salvador .

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] The largest flow occurred when refugees left El Salvador during the Salvadoran Civil War in the 1980s. The first wave were former political prisoners whose immigration was facilitated by the Special Humanitarian Program in 1983. After this first group, which consisted of 75 people, another 10,000 Salvadorans arrived in Australia by 1986. Subsequent groups came—not directly from El Salvador—but from countries like Mexico and Costa Rica that housed Salvadoran refugees.

[ 4 ] Most Salvadoran-born Australians came prior to 2001; little followed after the civil war.

[ 5 ] The majority of Salvadorians that live in Australia are of white and mestizo ancestry. The majority of Salvadorans in Australia reside in Melbourne, [ 6 ] (32%), followed by Brisbane, (21%), and Sydney, (18%).

[ 7 ] Census data records showed 25% of Salvadoran Australians work in managerial or professional roles. A further 23% work in production, transport and trades; 20% are labourers. Many migrants from El Salvador are skilled workers, but their lack of fluent English forced them into unskilled jobs. Over 92% speak Spanish at home, and the majority are Catholic. Evangelical born-again Christians of Salvadoran descent exist in increasing numbers.

[ 8 ] A 2006 estimation placed the Salvadorian population as high as 18,755.

[ 9 ] Ethnicity [ edit ] Many of the Salvadoran immigrants are of mixed European and Amerindian (mestizo) ancestry, with a smaller minority of people with predominant or full European ancestry.

[ 10 ] Many can trace their roots back to Spain , Italy , Portugal , Germany , France , Ireland , Poland , and other European countries. In northern departments like the Chalatenango Department , it is well known that residents in the area are of pure Spanish descent.

[ 11 ] The governor of San Salvador, Francisco Luis Héctor de Carondelet , ordered families from northern Spain ( Galicia and Asturias ) to settle the area to compensate for the lack of indigenous people to work the land; it is common to see people with blond hair, fair skin, and blue or green eyes in municipalities like Dulce Nombre de María , La Palma , and El Pital . However, the majority of Salvadorans of full Spanish descent possess Mediterranean racial features: olive skin and dark hair and eyes (black or dark brown) and identify with the mestizo majority.  A majority of Central European settlers in El Salvador arrived during World War II as refugees from the Czech Republic , Germany , Hungary , Poland , and Switzerland , most of them stayed in Chalatenango . Many Jews emigrated to El Salvador during World War II as refugees with the help of José Castellanos Contreras . Indigenous Salvadorans make up less than one percent of the population and are mostly of Pipil and Lenca ancestries; some are Mayan .

[ 12 ] Notable people [ edit ] Carlos Barrios , artist See also [ edit ] El Salvador portal Australia portal Australia–El Salvador relations Hispanic and Latin American Australians Salvadoran Americans References [ edit ] ^ Australian Government - Australian Bureau of Statistics.

"People in Australia who were born in El Salvador" . Retrieved 16 November 2022 .

^ Australian Government - Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

"El Salvador country brief" . Retrieved 16 November 2022 .

^ Hayes, Anna (2016-05-13).

Cultures in Refuge: Seeking Sanctuary in Modern Australia . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-15574-4 .

^ Jupp, James (28 October 2001).

The Australian People: An Encyclopedia of the Nation, its People and their Origins: 2nd Edition . Cambridge University Press. p. 642.

ISBN 9780521807890 .

^ "Community Information Summary El Salvador-born" (PDF) .

Australian Bureau of Statistics Census of Population and Housing . Retrieved 25 January 2015 .

^ - From El Salvador to Australia Archived 2012-01-31 at the Wayback Machine ^ "ABS Census - ethnicity" . Archived from the original on 2020-05-18 . Retrieved 2009-06-21 .

^ History of immigration from El Salvador ^ El Salvador en el Mundo (Spanish) ^ Hayes, Anna (2016-05-13).

Cultures in Refuge: Seeking Sanctuary in Modern Australia . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-15574-4 .

^ Nunez, Salvador (2021-05-25).

El Salvador: Hidden Truths . Xlibris Corporation.

ISBN 978-1-6641-0534-8 .

^ Murphy, Brian; Brian, Murphy (1993-09-06).

The Other Australia: Experiences of Migration . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-44194-0 .

v t e Salvadoran diaspora Australia Guatemala Honduras Mexico Spain United States Houston Los Angeles v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Salvadoran_Australians&oldid=1304428174 " Categories : Australian people of Salvadoran descent Salvadoran diaspora Caribbean diaspora in Australia Australia–El Salvador relations Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Articles containing Spanish-language text This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 00:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Salvadoran Australians 1 language Add topic

