Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Structure 3 Functions Toggle Functions subsection 3.1 Training 3.2 Standardization 3.3 International Cooperation 3.4 Achievements 4 Publications 5 See also 6 Footnotes 7 External links Toggle the table of contents International Hydrographic Organization 60 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latina Lietuvių Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Intergovernmental organization International Hydrographic Organization Organisation hydrographique internationale Abbreviation IHO Founded 21 June 1921 ; 104 years ago ( 1921-06-21 ) Location Monaco Membership 103 member states, but 2 suspended ( see list ) Official languages English , French Secretary-General Mathias Jonas Website iho .int The International Hydrographic Organization ( IHO ) (French: Organisation Hydrographique Internationale ) is an intergovernmental organization representing hydrography .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] As of August 2025, [update] the IHO comprised 103 member states.

A principal aim of the IHO is to ensure that the world's seas, oceans and navigable waters are properly surveyed and charted. It does this through the setting of international standards and through its capacity building programs and offices.

The IHO enjoys observer status at the United Nations , where it is the recognized competent authority on hydrographic surveying and nautical charting .

[ 3 ] When referring to hydrography and nautical charting in conventions and similar instruments, it is the IHO standards and specifications that are normally used.

History [ edit ] During the 19th century, many maritime nations established hydrographic offices to provide means for improving the navigation of naval and merchant vessels by providing nautical publications, nautical charts, and other navigational services. There were substantial differences in hydrographic procedures charts, and publications. In 1889, an International Maritime Conference was held at Washington, D.C.

, and it was proposed to establish a "permanent international commission." Similar proposals were made at the sessions of the International Congress of Navigation held at Saint Petersburg in 1908 and the International Maritime Conference held at Saint Petersburg in 1912.

[ 4 ] In 1919, the national Hydrographers of Great Britain and France cooperated in taking the necessary steps to convene an international conference of Hydrographers. London was selected as the most suitable place for this conference, and on 24 July 1919, the First International Conference opened, attended by the Hydrographers of 24 nations. The object of the conference was "To consider the advisability of all maritime nations adopting similar methods in preparation, construction, and production of their charts and all hydrographic publications; of rendering the results in the most convenient form to enable them to be readily used; of instituting a prompt system of mutual exchange of hydrographic information between all countries; and of providing an opportunity to consultations and discussions to be carried out on hydrographic subjects generally by the hydrographic experts of the world." This is still the major purpose of the IHO.

[ 5 ] As a result of the 1919 Conference, a permanent organization was formed and statutes for its operations were prepared. The IHB, now the IHO, began its activities in 1921 with 18 nations as members. The Principality of Monaco was selected as the seat of the Organization as a result of the offer of Albert I of Monaco to provide suitable accommodation for the Bureau in the Principality.

[ 5 ] The International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) was established in June 1921 as the International Hydrographic Bureau (IHB), with Vice Admiral Sir John Parry, KCB of the United Kingdom serving as its first President.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] In 1970, under the leadership of Guy Chatel of France, the organization adopted its current name as part of a new International Convention on the IHO, which was agreed upon by its member nations.

[ 7 ] The term "International Hydrographic Bureau" continued to describe the IHO's secretariat until 8 November 2016, when a major revision to the Convention took effect. Following this change, the secretariat was renamed the "IHO Secretariat," which consists of an elected Secretary-General, two supporting Directors, and a small permanent staff (18 in 2020) at the Organization's headquarters in Monaco.

[ 3 ] Structure [ edit ] Until 2016 the IHO was administered by a secretariat headed by a Directing Committee comprising a President and two Directors. Since 8 November 2016, upon the entry in to force of revisions to the Convention on the IHO, the secretariat is headed by a Secretary-General, supported by two Directors, with Australia's Robert Ward serving as the first Secretary-General.

[ 7 ] As before, all three senior members of the secretariat continue to be elected to their positions by the Member States at the regular Assembly of the IHO (formerly, IHO Conferences). 
The secretariat staff comprise a number of technical specialists, administrators, and support personnel. The bulk of the IHO's technical and specialist expertise comes from Member States' personnel, often assisted by invited industry experts, who all provide technical contributions through participation in various IHO committees and working groups. 
A Council, comprising a sub-set of all the IHO Member States, meets annually and oversees the work of the IHO. A full description, together with details of the workings of all the organs of the IHO is available on the IHO website: www.iho.int [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Functions [ edit ] Training [ edit ] The IHO ensures the safety of maritime navigation by developing hydrographic survey capability and nautical charting standards.

[ 10 ] To develop and standardize its member states' hydrographic survey capabilities, the IHO worked with the International Federation of Surveyors (Fédération Internationale des Géomètres) and the International Cartographic Association (ICA) to create the IHO's Standards of Competence.

[ 5 ] These standards are used to educate and train member states' respective hydrographic offices and nautical chart makers. Additionally, the IHO also creates syllabi higher education institutions who teach hydrography and nautical navigation. The IHO also has an advisory board which is tasked with supervising and approving member states' education and training programs.

[ 5 ] Standardization [ edit ] Since 1968, the IHO has regularly published updated editions of the Standards of Hydrographic Surveys, with the most recent being published in 2008.

[ 5 ] [ 11 ] Each of these publications was designed to incorporate technological advancements and international shipping demands. This is especially true with regards to the rise of electronic navigation equipment in the 1980s.

[ 5 ] The IHO also works to standardize the specifications, style, and symbols used in producing nautical charts.

[ 5 ] In 1971, the IHO was able to get its member states to use one single chart series, also known as INT charts.

[ 5 ] According to this IHO agreement, if one member state wants to publish a chart for an area covered by another member's existing chart, the duplicate must be created using the same data as the original chart. IHO Publication M-4, which was published in 1984, set specific international standards for nautical charts.

[ 5 ] The advent of the Electronic Chart Display and Information System (ECDIS) made it clear to the IHO it also needed to standardize how electronic navigational data is transferred and displayed on ships. Electronic chart data was standardized and categorized in an international database referred to as Electronic Navigational Charts (ENCs). The way this data is transferred from publishers to users was also standardized, as was the display and capabilities of the ECDIS.

[ 5 ] International Cooperation [ edit ] The IHO has encouraged the formation of Regional Hydrographic Commissions (RHCs). Each RHC coordinates the national surveying and charting activities of countries within each region and acts as a forum to address other matters of common hydrographic interest. The 15 RHCs plus the IHO Hydrographic Commission on Antarctica effectively cover the world. The IHO, in partnership with the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, directs the General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans program.

[ 5 ] Achievements [ edit ] Establishment of the Chart Specifications Committee and International Charts: The exploration of the seabed and movements of the sea Standardization of maritime measurements, hydrographic terminology, marine cartographic products, and geographical information systems for navigation High efficiency of the rapid dissemination of information on safety at sea Training of hydrographers and nautical cartographers Publications [ edit ] Most IHO publications, including the standards, guidelines and associated documents such as the International Hydrographic Review , International Hydrographic Bulletin , the Hydrographic Dictionary and the Year Book are available to the general public free of charge from the IHO website.

[ 12 ] The IHO publishes the international standards related to charting and hydrography, including S-57, IHO Transfer Standard for Digital Hydrographic Data , the encoding standard that is used primarily for electronic navigational charts .

[ 11 ] In 2010, the IHO introduced a new, contemporary hydrographic geospatial standard for modelling marine data and information, known as S-100. S-100 and any dependent product specifications are underpinned by an on-line registry accessible via the IHO website. S-100 is aligned with the ISO 19100 series of geographic standards, thereby making it fully compatible with contemporary geospatial data standards.

[ 13 ] Because S-100 is based on ISO 19100, it can be used by other data providers for their maritime-related (non-hydrographic) data and information. Various data and information providers from both the government and private sector are now using S-100 as part of the implementation of the e-Navigation concept that has been endorsed by the UN International Maritime Organization (IMO).

[ 13 ] Another in the series of publications of interest is S-23, Limits of Oceans and Seas . The 3rd edition dates back to 1953 [ 14 ] while the potential 4th edition, started in 1986, has remained a draft since 2002.

[ 15 ] It was distributed to IHO members, but its official publication has been suspended pending agreement between South Korea and Japan regarding the international standard name of the sea called " Japan Sea " in the 1953 edition.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] World Hydrography Day Footnotes [ edit ] ^ "First Assembly of the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO)" .

hydro-international.com . Retrieved 17 April 2019 .

^ Wingrove, Martyn (11 March 2019).

"IMO takes the e-navigation reins" .

Maritime Digitalisation & Communications . Archived from the original on 17 April 2019 . Retrieved 17 April 2019 .

^ a b (The International Hydrographic Organization), wpe (26 July 2018).

"International Hydrographic Organization Brochure" (PDF) .

International Hydrographic Organization .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 November 2018 . Retrieved 14 May 2022 .

^ International Congress of Navigation (11th : 1908 : St. Petersburg); Permanent International Association of Navigation Congresses (1908).

Report of proceedings . University of California Libraries. Brussels.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k "International Hydrographic Organization" .

www.hydro-international.com . Retrieved 30 November 2024 .

^ Maschke, John (August 1999).

"The International Hydrographic Organization - an effective international regime?" .

Maritime Studies (107): 9– 19.

doi : 10.1080/07266472.1999.10878569 .

^ a b c Bermejo Baró, Federico (2019).

"The IHO and its Secretariat - an updated history -" (PDF) .

IHO Publication M-10 : 49– 53.

^ Maschke, John (July 1999).

"The International Hydrographic Organization – an effective international regime?" .

Maritime Studies (107): 9– 19.

doi : 10.1080/07266472.1999.10878569 .

^ IHO website: www.iho.int ^ "The Role of the International Hydrographic Organization - Terminautical" . 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 30 November 2024 .

^ a b "IHO Transfer Standard for Digital Hydrographic Data (S-57) International Hydrographic Organization" , Spatial Database Transfer Standards 2: Characteristics for Assessing Standards and Full Descriptions of the National and International Standards in the World , Elsevier, pp.

355– 368, 1997, ISBN 978-0-08-042433-0 , retrieved 30 November 2024 ^ "IHO Publications" .

www.hydro-international.com . Retrieved 5 December 2024 .

^ a b IHO S-100: Universal Hydrographic Data Model . International Hydrographic Organization. 2017.

^ "Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition" (PDF) . International Hydrographic Organization. 1953 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 .

^ "Limits of Oceans and Seas, Draft 4th Edition" . International Hydrographic Organization. 2002 . Retrieved 8 January 2021 .

^ Fourcy, Damien; Lorvelec, Olivier (2013).

"A New Digital Map of Limits of Oceans and Seas Consistent with High-Resolution Global Shorelines" .

Journal of Coastal Research .

29 (2): 471– 477.

doi : 10.2112/JCOASTRES-D-12-00079.1 .

JSTOR 23353643 .

S2CID 130458375 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Norway Sweden Poland Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Hydrographic_Organization&oldid=1306374042 " Categories : 1921 establishments in Monaco Intergovernmental organizations International organisations based in Monaco International standards Scientific organizations established in 1921 Oceanographic organizations United Nations General Assembly observers Hydrography organizations International geographic data and information organizations International Hydrographic Organization Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2019 Articles containing potentially dated statements from August 2025 All articles containing potentially dated statements Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 11:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International Hydrographic Organization 60 languages Add topic

