Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 University of Pennsylvania 2.2 The New School 2.3 New York University 2.4 Bard Graduate Center 2.5 Affiliations 3 Work Toggle Work subsection 3.1 Disjuncture and globalization 3.2 The social imaginary 4 Publications Toggle Publications subsection 4.1 Books 4.2 Translations and reprints 4.3 As Editor 4.4 Articles 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Arjun Appadurai 21 languages تۆرکجه Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi தமிழ் Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian-American anthropologist (born 1949) This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Arjun Appadurai" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Arjun Appadurai Appadurai during a lecture in March 2009 Born ( 1949-02-04 ) 4 February 1949 (age 76) Bombay , Province of Bombay , Dominion of India (now Mumbai , Maharashtra , India ) Education Brandeis University (B.A.) University of Chicago (M.A., Ph.D.) Scientific career Fields Anthropology Institutions New York University The New School University of Pennsylvania Arjun Appadurai FRAI (born 4 February 1949) is an Indian-American anthropologist who has been recognized as a major theorist in globalization studies. He is an elected fellow of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland .

[ 1 ] In his anthropological work, he discusses the importance of the modernity of nation-states and globalization .

[ 2 ] He is the former professor of anthropology and South Asian Languages and Civilizations at the University of Chicago , Humanities Dean at the University of Chicago, director of the Center on Cities and Globalization at Yale University , provost and senior vice president for Academic Affairs at The New School , and professor of education and human development studies at New York University 's Steinhardt School .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] He is currently professor emeritus of the Media, Culture, and Communication Department in the Steinhardt School.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Some of his notable works include Worship and Conflict under Colonial Rule (1981), Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Cultural Economy (1990), of which an expanded version is found in Modernity at Large (1996), and Fear of Small Numbers (2006). He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1997.

[ 7 ] Part of a series on Anthropology Outline History Types Archaeological Biological Cultural Linguistic Social Archaeological Aerial Aviation Battlefield Biblical Bioarchaeological Environmental Ethnoarchaeological Experimental Feminist Forensic Maritime Paleoethnobotanical Zooarchaeological Biological Anthrozoological Biocultural Evolutionary Forensic Molecular Neurological Nutritional Paleoanthropological Primatological Social Cultural Applied Art Cognitive Cyborg Development Digital Ecological Environmental Economic Political economy Feminist Food Historical Institutional Kinship Legal Media Medical Museums Musical Political Psychological Public Religion Symbolic Transpersonal Urban Visual Linguistic Anthropological Descriptive Ethnological Ethnopoetical Historical Ideology Semiotic Sociological Research framework Anthropometry Ethnography cyber Ethnology Cross-cultural comparison Participant observation Holism Reflexivity Thick description Cultural relativism Ethnocentrism Emic and etic Key concepts Culture Development Ethnicity Evolution sociocultural Gender Kinship and descent Meme Prehistory Race Society Value Colonialism / Postcolonialism Key theories Actor–network theory Alliance theory Boasian anthropology Cross-cultural studies Cultural materialism Culture theory Diffusionism Feminism Functionalism Historical particularism Interpretive Performance studies Political economy Practice theory Structuralism Post-structuralism Systems theory Lists Anthropologists by nationality Anthropology by year Bibliography Journals List of indigenous peoples Organizations v t e Early life and education [ edit ] Appadurai was born on 4 February 1949 into a Tamil family in present-day Mumbai , Maharashtra , India .

[ 8 ] He graduated from St. Xavier's High School, Fort , Mumbai , and earned his Intermediate Arts degree from Elphinstone College , Mumbai. He moved to the United States and received his B.A. from Brandeis University in 1970. After this he earned his M.A. (1973) and Ph.D. (1976) from the Committee on Social Thought at the University of Chicago .

[ 4 ] He then spent a brief time at Yale University.

Career [ edit ] University of Pennsylvania [ edit ] Appadurai taught for many years at the University of Pennsylvania , in the departments of Anthropology and South Asia Studies. In 1984, during his time there, he hosted a conference through the Penn Ethnohistory program. This conference led to the publication of the volume called The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective (1986).

The New School [ edit ] In 2004, after a brief time as administrator at Yale University , Appadurai became Provost of The New School . Appadurai's resignation from the Provost's office was announced 30 January 2006 by New School President Bob Kerrey . He held the John Dewey Distinguished Professorship in the Social Sciences at New School.

[ 9 ] Appadurai became one of the more outspoken critics of President Kerrey when he attempted to appoint himself provost in 2008.

[ 10 ] New York University [ edit ] In 2008 it was announced that Appadurai was appointed Goddard Professor of Media, Culture, and Communication at the NYU Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development .

[ 11 ] Appadurai retired as emeritus from the department in 2021.

Bard Graduate Center [ edit ] In 2021, Appadurai was appointed Max Weber Global Professor at the Bard Graduate Center , though he is based in Berlin and teaches remotely.

[ 12 ] Affiliations [ edit ] See also: Public Culture Appadurai is a co-founder of the academic journal Public Culture ; [ 13 ] founder of the non-profit Partners for Urban Knowledge, Action and Research (PUKAR) in Mumbai; co-founder and co-director of Interdisciplinary Network on Globalization (ING); and a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences . He has served as a consultant or advisor to a wide range of public and private organizations, including the Ford , Rockefeller and MacArthur Foundations; UNESCO ; the World Bank ; and the National Science Foundation .

Appadurai has presided over Chicago globalization plan, at many public and private organizations (such as the Ford Foundation, the Rockefeller Foundation, UNESCO, the World Bank, etc.) consultant and long-term concern issues of globalization, modernity and ethnic conflicts.

[ clarification needed ] Appadurai has many scholarships and grants, and has received numerous academic honors. He has been a fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences at Stanford University and the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton University , as well as the Open Society Institute (New York). In 1997, he was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 2013, he was awarded an honorary doctorate Erasmus University in the Netherlands.

[ citation needed ] He holds concurrent academic positions as a Mercator Fellow, Free University and Humboldt University, Berlin; Honorary Professor in the Department of Media and Communication at Erasmus University, Rotterdam; and Senior Research Partner at the Max-Planck Institute for Religious and Ethnic Diversity, Göttingen.

He also served as a consultant or adviser, extensive public and private organizations, including many large foundations (Ford, MacArthur and Rockefeller); the UNESCO; UNDP; World Bank; the US National Endowment for the Humanities; National Science Foundation; and Infosys Foundation. He served on the Social Sciences jury for the Infosys Prize in 2010 and 2017. He currently serves as the Asian Art Program Advisory Committee members in the Solomon Guggenheim Museum, and the forum D 'Avignon Paris Scientific Advisory Board.

[ citation needed ] Work [ edit ] Some of his most important works include Worship and Conflict under Colonial Rule (1981), Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Cultural Economy (1990), of which an expanded version is found in Modernity at Large (1996), and Fear of Small Numbers (2006). In The Social Life of Things (1986), Appadurai argued that commodities do not only have economic value; they have political value and social lives as well.

[ 14 ] He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1997.

[ 15 ] His doctoral work was based on the car festival held in the Parthasarathi temple in Triplicane , Madras . Arjun Appadurai is member of the advisory board of the Forum d' Avignon , international meetings of culture, the economy and the media. He is also an advisory member of the journal Janus Unbound: Journal of Critical Studies .

[ 16 ] Disjuncture and globalization [ edit ] In his best known work 'Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Cultural Economy' Appadurai lays out his meta theory of disjuncture. For him the ‘new global cultural economy has to be seen as a complex, overlapping, disjunctive order’.

[ 17 ] This order is composed of different interrelated, yet disjunctive global cultural flows, [ 18 ] specifically the following five: Ethnoscapes : the migration of people across cultures and borders Mediascapes : the variety of media that shape the way we understand our world Technoscapes : the scope and movement of technology (mechanical and informational) around the world Financescapes : the worldwide flux of money and capital Ideoscapes : the global flow of ideas and ideologies The social imaginary [ edit ] Appadurai articulated a view of cultural activity known as the social imaginary , which is composed of the five dimensions of global cultural flows.

He describes his articulation of the imaginary as: The image, the imagined, the imaginary – these are all terms that direct us to something critical and new in global cultural processes: the imagination as a social practice.  No longer mere fantasy (opium for the masses whose real work is somewhere else), no longer simple escape (from a world defined principally by more concrete purposes and structures), no longer elite pastime (thus not relevant to the lives of ordinary people), and no longer mere contemplation (irrelevant for new forms of desire and subjectivity), the imagination has become an organized field of social practices, a form of work (in the sense of both labor and culturally organized practice), and a form of negotiation between sites of agency (individuals) and globally defined fields of possibility. This unleashing of the imagination links the play of pastiche (in some settings) to the terror and coercion of states and their competitors.  The imagination is now central to all forms of agency, is itself a social fact, and is the key component of the new global order.

[ 19 ] Appadurai credits Benedict Anderson with developing notions of imagined communities . Some key figures who have worked on the imaginary are Cornelius Castoriadis , Charles Taylor , Jacques Lacan (who especially worked on the symbolic , in contrast with imaginary and the real), and Dilip Gaonkar . However, Appadurai's ethnography of urban social movements in the city of Mumbai has proved to be contentious with several scholars like the Canadian anthropologist, Judith Whitehead arguing that SPARC (an organization which Appadurai espouses as an instance of progressive social activism in housing) being complicit in the World Bank's agenda for re-developing Mumbai.

Publications [ edit ] Books [ edit ] (with Neta Alexander) Failure . Polity Press. (2020) Banking on Words: The Failure of Language in the Age of Derivative Finance . The University of Chicago Press. (2016) The Future as Cultural Fact: Essays on the Global Condition . Verso. (2013) Worship and Conflict under Colonial Rule: A South Indian Case . Cambridge University Press. (2007) Fear of Small Numbers: An Essay on the Geography of Anger . Durham, NC: Duke University Press. (2006) Modernity At Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. (1996) Worship and Conflict Under Colonial Rule: A South Indian Case.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (1981) Translations and reprints [ edit ] Worship and Conflict Under Colonial Rule: A South Indian Case.

New Delhi: Orient Longman. (1983: Reprint) La Modernidad Desbordada .  (Translation of Modernity At Large) Uruguay and Argentina: Ediciones Trilces and Fondo de Cultura Economica de Argentina. (2001) Apres le Colonialisme: Les Consequences Culturelles de la globalisation . (Translation of Modernity At Large) Paris: Payot. (2001) Modernità in polvere.

(Translation of Modernity At Large) Rome: Meltemi Editore.(2001) As Editor [ edit ] Co-editor (with A. Mack) India's World: The Politics of Creativity in a Globalized Society.

(2012) Globalization (edited volume). Durham, NC: Duke University Press. (2002) Co-editor (with M. Mills and F. Korom, Eds.), Gender, Genre and Power in South Asian Expressive Traditions.

Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. (1991) Guest Editor, Special Issue of Cultural Anthropology on "Place and Voice in Anthropological Theory" (Vol. 3, No. 1). (1988) Guest Editor (with Carol A. Breckenridge), Special Annual Issue of The India Magazine (New Delhi) on "Public Culture". (1987) The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective (edited volume). New York: Cambridge University Press. (1986) Articles [ edit ] "The spirit of calculation".

The Cambridge Journal of Anthropology , (Vol. 30, No. 1): 3–17. (2012) Deep democracy: urban governmentality and the horizon of politics .

Environment and Urbanization , (Vol. 13 No. 2), 23–43. (2001) "The globalization of archaeology and heritage: a discussion with Arjun Appadurai".

Journal of social archaeology , (Vol. 1, No. 1), 35–49. (2001) "Grassroots globalization and the research imagination".

Public Culture , (Vol.12, no. 1): 1-20.(2000) "Spectral housing and urban cleansing: Notes on millenial Mumbai".

Public culture , (Vol. 12, no.3): 627–651. (2000) "Disjuncture and difference in the global cultural economy".

Theory, culture & society , (Vol. 7, No. 2-3): 295–319. (1990) "Introduction: Place and voice in anthropological theory".

Cultural anthropology , (Vol. 3, No. 1): 16–20. (1988) "How to Make a National Cuisine: Cookbooks in Contemporary India".

Comparative Studies in Society and History , (Vol. 31, No. 1): 3-24. (1988) "Theory in Anthropology: Center and Periphery".

Comparative studies in society and history , (Vol. 28, No. 2): 356–374. (1986) "On culinary authenticity".

Anthropology today , (Vol. 2, No. 4): 25. (1986) "Gastro-politics in Hindu South Asia".

American ethnologist , (Vol.8, no.3): 494–511. (1981) "The past as a scarce resource".

Man : 201–219. (1981) "Right and left hand castes in South India".

The Indian Economic & Social History Review , (Vol.11, No.2-3): 216–259. (1974) See also [ edit ] Commodity Pathway Diversion References [ edit ] ^ "FRAI" . 22 October 2023.

^ Airoots Interviews Arjun Appadurai Archived 22 July 2012 at archive.today 21 September 2008.

^ "Arjun Appadurai" .

NYU Steinhardt . Retrieved 19 August 2024 .

^ a b "Arjun Appadurai" .

SASE . Retrieved 19 August 2024 .

^ "Arjun Appadurai | NYU Steinhardt" .

steinhardt.nyu.edu . Retrieved 15 December 2024 .

^ Corsínjiménez, Alberto (2003).

"On Space As A Capacity" .

Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute .

9 (1): 137– 153.

doi : 10.1111/1467-9655.t01-1-00008 .

hdl : 10261/85028 .

ISSN 1467-9655 .

^ "American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 May 2011" (PDF) .

^ Amit, Vered (2004).

BIOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY OF SOCIAL AND CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY . London and New York: Routledge . p. 11.

ISBN 0-203-67291-7 .

^ "Anthropology" .

The New School for Social Research . Archived from the original on 11 January 2006 . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ Santora, Marc; Foderaro, Lisa W. (10 December 2008).

"New School Faculty Votes No Confidence in Kerrey" .

New York Times . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ NYU Steinhardt Appoints Arjun Appadurai As Goddard Professor of Media, Culture, and Communication NYU , Monday, 15 September 2008.

^ Bard Graduate Center appoints Arjun Appadurai as Max Weber Global Professor Bard Graduate Center , 26 January 2021.

^ Public Culture Public Culture website ^ Bello, Paula (2010). "The Shifting Global Landscapes of Things: Goodscapes".

Design and Culture .

2 (1): 63– 78.

doi : 10.2752/175470710X12593419555207 .

S2CID 143098902 .

^ "Book of Members, 1780-2010: Chapter A" (PDF) . American Academy of Arts and Sciences.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 May 2011 . Retrieved 19 April 2011 .

^ "Janus Unbound" .

Archived from the original on 6 November 2021.

^ "Disjuncture and Difference", Modernity at Large , 32 ^ Josiah McC. Heyman, Howard Campbell (2009) "The Anthropology of Global Flows:A critical reading of Appadurai's `Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Cultural Economy", Anthropological Theory(9:2) 131-148 , 133.

^ "Disjuncture and Difference", Modernity at Large , 31 External links [ edit ] Official website Arjun Appadurai, "Patience" in the art-and-culture journal "Brooklyn Rail" (New York) (September 2021): https://brooklynrail.org/2021/09/criticspage/Patience An A–Z of Theory: Arjun Appadurai by Andrew Robinson (Ceasefire Magazin, 22 April 2011) Fear of Small Numbers by Arjun Appadurai (Duke University Press, 2006) Globalization edited by Arjun Appadurai (Duke University Press, 2001) Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Cultural Economy (1990), PDF Arjun Appadurai. "Patience" in Brooklyn Rail (September 2021), as part of section "How Long Is Now?" guest edited by Francesca Pietropaolo: https://brooklynrail.org/2021/09/criticspage v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii ORCID Scopus Artists FID People Trove Archaeology Data Service DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arjun_Appadurai&oldid=1294746428 " Categories : 1949 births Living people Tamil scholars Indian emigrants to the United States Writers from Mumbai 21st-century American anthropologists University of Mumbai alumni Brandeis University alumni University of Chicago alumni University of Chicago faculty New York University faculty American people of Indian Tamil descent American social sciences writers Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Indian Tamil academics Writers about globalization American male writers of Indian descent Indian political writers 20th-century Indian non-fiction writers Indian social sciences writers American male non-fiction writers Hidden categories: Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata BLP articles lacking sources from January 2008 All BLP articles lacking sources Use dmy dates from April 2020 Use Indian English from January 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles with hCards Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 15:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Arjun Appadurai 21 languages Add topic

