Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Global holidays 3 Common secular holidays 4 Public holidays Toggle Public holidays subsection 4.1 Substitute holidays 4.2 National days 5 Religious holidays Toggle Religious holidays subsection 5.1 Secularisation 6 Unofficial holidays 7 Commercialism 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Holiday 95 languages Alemannisch العربية ܐܪܡܝܐ Armãneashti Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Кырык мары Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingála Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Papiamentu Polski Português Qırımtatarca Română Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Татарча / tatarça Tayal ไทย Тоҷикӣ ತುಳು Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Volapük 吴语 Xitsonga 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Festive day set aside by custom or by law This article is about days of observance. For a leave of absence or a trip, see Vacation . For leave from employment, see Annual leave . For the holidays, see Christmas and holiday season . For other uses, see Holiday (disambiguation) and Observance (disambiguation) .

Clockwise from top left: Holi gathering in India Bastille Day military parade in France Eid al-Fitr meal in Malaysia Nowruz bonfire in Azerbaijan Christmas decorations in Brazil International Women's Day demonstration in Malawi A holiday is a day or other period of time set aside for festivals or recreation .

Public holidays are set by public authorities and vary by state or region. Religious holidays are set by religious organisations for their members and are often also observed as public holidays in religious majority countries. Some religious holidays, such as Christmas , have become secularised by part or all of those who observe them. In addition to secularisation, many holidays have become commercialised due to the growth of industry.

[ 1 ] Holidays can be thematic, celebrating or commemorating particular groups, events, or ideas, or non-thematic, days of rest that do not have any particular meaning. In Commonwealth English , the term can refer to any period of rest from work, such as vacations or school holidays . In American English , "the holidays" typically refers to the period from Thanksgiving to New Year's (late November to January 1), which contains many important holidays in American culture.

Terminology [ edit ] The word holiday comes from the Old English word hāligdæg ( hālig " holy " + dæg " day ").

[ 2 ] The word originally referred only to special religious days.

The word holiday has differing connotations in different regions. In the United States , the word is used exclusively to refer to the nationally, religiously, or culturally observed day(s) of rest or celebration or the events themselves, whereas in the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth nations , the word may refer to the period of time where leave from one's duties has been agreed upon and is used as a synonym for the US preferred vacation . This time is usually set aside for rest, travel, or participation in recreational activities, with entire industries targeted to coincide with or enhance these experiences. The days of leave may not coincide with any specific customs or laws. Employers and educational institutes may designate 'holidays' themselves, which may or may not overlap nationally or culturally relevant dates, which again comes under this connotation, but it is the first implication detailed that this article is concerned with. Modern use varies geographically. In North America, it means any dedicated day or period of celebration. In the United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand, holiday is often used instead of the word vacation .

Global holidays [ edit ] The celebration of the New Year has been a common holiday across cultures for at least four millennia.

[ 3 ] Such holidays normally celebrate the last day of a year and the arrival of the next year in a calendar system. In modern cultures using the Gregorian calendar, the New Year's celebration spans New Year's Eve on 31 December and New Year's Day on 1 January. However, other calendar systems also have New Year's celebration, such as Chinese New Year and Vietnamese Tet .

[ 4 ] New Year's Day is the most common public holiday, observed by all countries using the Gregorian calendar except Israel .

[ 5 ] Christmas is a popular holiday globally due to the spread of Christianity . The holiday is recognised as a public holiday in many countries in Europe, the Americas, Africa and Australasia and is celebrated by over 2 billion people.

[ 6 ] Although a holiday with religious origins, Christmas is often celebrated by non-Christians as a secular holiday. For example, 61% of British people celebrate Christmas in an entirely secular way.

[ 7 ] Christmas has also become a tradition in some non-Christian countries. For many Japanese people , it has become customary to buy and eat fried chicken on Christmas.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Recently invented holidays commemorate a range of modern social and political issues and other important topics. The United Nations publishes a list of International Days and Weeks. One such day is International Women's Day on 8 March, which celebrates women's achievements and campaigns for gender equality and women's rights.

[ 10 ] Earth Day has been celebrated by people across the world since 1970, with 10,000 events in 2007. It is a holiday marking the dangers of environmental damage, such as pollution and the climate crisis .

[ 11 ] Common secular holidays [ edit ] Other secular holidays are observed regionally, nationally and across multi-country regions. The United Nations Calendar of Observances [ 12 ] dedicates decades to a specific topic, but also a complete year, month, week and days.  Holidays dedicated to an observance such as the commemoration of the ending of World War II , or the Shoah , can also be part of the reparation obligation as per UN General Assembly Resolution 60/147 Basic Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations of International Human Rights Law and Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law.

[ 13 ] Another example of a major secular holiday is the Lunar New Year , which is celebrated across East Asia and South East Asia. Many other days are marked to celebrate events or people, but are not strictly holidays as time off work is rarely given; examples include Arbor Day , International Worker's Day (celebrated sometimes under different names and on different days in different countries), and Earth Day (22 April).

Public holidays [ edit ] Main article: Public holidays Substitute holidays [ edit ] If a holiday coincides with another holiday or a weekend day a substitute holiday may be recognised in lieu. In the United Kingdom the government website states that "If a bank holiday is on a weekend, a 'substitute' weekday becomes a bank holiday, normally the following Monday.", and the list of bank holidays for  the year 2020 includes Monday 28 December as " Boxing Day (substitute day)", as 26 December is a Saturday.

[ 14 ] The process of moving a holiday from a weekend day to the following Monday is known as Mondayisation in New Zealand.

[ 15 ] National days [ edit ] See also: National day National days are days of significance to a nation or nation state. National days are typically celebratory of a state's independence (e.g.

4 July in the US ), founding or unification (e.g.

German Unity Day ), the commemoration of a revolution (e.g.

Bastille Day in France) or liberation (e.g.

9 May in the Channel Islands ), or the feast day for a patron saint (e.g.

St Patrick's Day in Ireland) or ruler (e.g. 5 December in Thailand). Belgium's national day, on the 21st of July, commemorates the oath of office of the first King of the Belgians (an uncle of the then-future Queen Victoria ), i.e., so to say, the day Belgium became a kingdom by ending the initial interregnum . Every country other than Denmark and the United Kingdom observes a national day.

[ 16 ] In the UK, constituent countries have official or unofficial national days associated with their patron saint. A British national day has often been proposed, such as the date of the Acts of Union 1707 (1 May) or the King's Official Birthday , but never adopted.

[ 17 ] Other days of national importance exist, such as one to celebrate the country's military or veterans . For example, Armistice Day (11 November) is recognised in World War I Allied nations (and across the Commonwealth ) to memoralise those lost in the World Wars. National leaders will typically attend remembrance ceremonies at national memorial sites. Maybe surprisingly, World War II Armistice Day (and victory against Nazism ) day, on 8 May, is much less celebrated.

Religious holidays [ edit ] Many holidays are linked to faiths and religions (see etymology above).

Christian holidays are defined as part of the liturgical year , the chief ones being Easter and Christmas . The Orthodox Christian and Western-Roman Catholic patronal feast day or "name day" is celebrated on each place's patron saint's day, according to the calendar of saints .

Jehovah's Witnesses annually commemorate "The Memorial of Jesus Christ's Death", but do not celebrate other holidays with any religious significance such as Easter, Christmas or New Year. This holds especially true for those holidays that have combined and absorbed rituals, overtones or practices from non-Christian beliefs into the celebration, as well as those holidays that distract from or replace the worship of Jehovah.

[ 18 ] In Islam , the largest holidays are Eid al-Fitr (after Ramadan ) and Eid al-Adha (at the end of the Hajj ).

Ahmadi Muslims additionally celebrate Promised Messiah Day , Promised Reformer Day , and Khilafat Day , but contrary to popular belief, neither are regarded as holidays.

Hindus , Jains and Sikhs observe several holidays, one of the largest being Diwali (Festival of Light).

Japanese holidays as well as few Catholic holidays contain heavy references to several different faiths and beliefs. Celtic, Norse, and Neopagan holidays follow the order of the Wheel of the Year . For example, Christmas ideas like decorating trees and colors (green, red, and white) have very similar ideas to modern Wicca (a modern Pagan belief) Yule which is a lesser Sabbat of the wheel of the year. Some are closely linked to Swedish festivities . The Baháʼí Faith observes 11 annual holidays on dates determined using the Baháʼí calendar . Jews have two holiday seasons: the Spring Feasts of Pesach (Passover) and Shavuot (Weeks, called Pentecost in Greek); and the Fall Feasts of Rosh Hashanah (Head of the Year), Yom Kippur (Day of Atonement), Sukkot (Tabernacles), and Shemini Atzeret (Eighth Day of Assembly).

Secularisation [ edit ] Some religious holidays are also celebrated by many as secular holidays.  For example, 61% of Brits celebrate Christmas in an entirely secular way.

[ 7 ] 81% of non-Christian Americans also celebrate Christmas. A 2019 Gallup poll found that two-thirds of Americans still celebrate an at least somewhat religious Christmas.

[ 19 ] The claimed over-secularisation of particular holidays has caused controversy and claims of censorship of religion or political correctness . For example, in the 1990s, Birmingham City Council promoted a series of events in the Christmas season under the brand Winterval to create a more multi-cultural atmosphere about the seasonal festivities. The Bishop of Birmingham responded to the events, saying "the secular world, which expresses respect for all, is actually embarrassed by faith. Or perhaps it is Christianity which is censored".

[ 20 ] In the United States, conservative commentators have characterised the secularisation of Winter festivities as "the War on Christmas ".

[ 21 ] Unofficial holidays [ edit ] See also: List of minor secular observances These are holidays that are not traditionally marked on calendars. These holidays are celebrated by various groups and individuals. Some promote a cause, others recognize historical events not officially recognized, and others are "funny" holidays celebrated with humorous intent. For example, Monkey Day is celebrated on December 14, International Talk Like a Pirate Day is observed on September 19, and Blasphemy Day is held on September 30. Other examples are April Fools' Day on April 1 and World No Tobacco Day on May 31. Various community organizers and marketers promote odd social media holidays .

Commercialism [ edit ] In the United States, holidays have been drawn into a culture of consumption since the late 19th century. Many civic, religious and folk festivals have been commercialised . As such, traditions have been reshaped to serve the needs of industry. Leigh Eric Schmidt argues that the growth of consumption culture allowed the growth of holidays as an opportunity for increased public consumption and the orderly timing of it. Thus, after the Civil War, as department stores became the spatial expression of commercialism , holidays became the temporal expression of it.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Holidays portal Christmas and holiday season Holiday heart syndrome Public holiday List of holidays by country Commemoration (Anglicanism) Tribute References [ edit ] ^ a b Schmidt, Leigh Eric (1991).

"The Commercialization of the Calendar: American Holidays and the Culture of Consumption, 1870-1930" .

The Journal of American History .

78 (3): 887– 916.

doi : 10.2307/2078795 .

ISSN 0021-8723 .

JSTOR 2078795 .

^ "holiday – Origin and meaning of holiday" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved 20 February 2018 .

^ "New Year's" .

HISTORY . February 16, 2010 . Retrieved 2022-12-27 .

^ Crump, William D. (2014).

Encyclopedia of New Year's Holidays Worldwide . McFarland.

ISBN 978-0-7864-9545-0 .

^ "New Year's Day around the world in 2023" .

Office Holidays . Retrieved 2022-12-27 .

^ "Christmas Day around the world" .

Office Holidays Blog . 2022-12-19 . Retrieved 2022-12-27 .

^ a b "How Britons celebrate Christmas and Easter | YouGov" .

yougov.co.uk . Retrieved 2022-12-27 .

^ Kate Springer (24 December 2019).

"How KFC became a Christmas tradition in Japan" .

CNN . Retrieved 2022-12-27 .

^ Barton, Eric.

"Why Japan celebrates Christmas with KFC" .

www.bbc.com . Retrieved 2022-12-27 .

^ "International Women's Day 2023 campaign theme: Embrace Equity" .

International Women's Day . Retrieved 2022-12-27 .

^ "Earth Day Timeline" .

history.com . Retrieved 2022-12-27 .

^ Nations, United.

"List of International Days and Weeks" .

United Nations . Retrieved 2023-07-30 .

^ "Basic Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations of International Human Rights Law and Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law" . December 16, 2005 . Retrieved August 10, 2018 .

^ "UK bank holidays" .

gov.uk . Retrieved 7 February 2020 .

^ Smith, Bridget; Oldfield, Tim (3 May 2013).

"Happy holidays: the 'Mondayisation' of public holidays" . SBM Legal . Retrieved 7 February 2020 .

^ Fisher, Max (26 February 2013).

"A surprising map of the world's national holidays (only two countries have no national day)" .

The Washington Post .

^ "Ministers proposing 'Britain Day' " . BBC News. 2007-06-05 . Retrieved 2009-07-08 .

^ Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania.

Reasoning from the Scriptures . Watchtower, 1985, pp. 176–182 ^ Hrynowski, Zach (2019-12-20).

"More Americans Celebrating a Secular Christmas" .

Gallup . Retrieved 2022-12-27 .

^ "Winterval gets frosty reception" .

BBC News . November 9, 1998 . Retrieved 2022-12-27 .

^ Keck, Kristi (18 December 2009).

"Heated Debate Again over 'War on Christmas' Claims" .

CNN . Retrieved 25 December 2012 .

v t e Public holidays by country v t e Public holidays in Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Western Sahara v t e Public holidays in Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Public holidays in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Vatican City States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Other entities European Union v t e Public holidays in  North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands v t e Public holidays in Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna v t e Public holidays in South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands v t e Parties and festivals Sorted by occasions, purposes or attributes Types Wedding -related Bachelor party Bachelorette party Bridal shower Engagement party Wedding reception Eid al-Adha Eid al-Fitr Banquets Eid cuisine State banquet Ball Debutante ball Hunt ball Symposium House parties Family reunion Cocktail party Housewarming party Sleepover LAN party Rent party Public parties Festivals Holidays Spring break Mischief Night New Year's Eve Arts festival Film awards seasons Religious festival Christmas Carnival Feasts Fools Food festival Beer Wine Harvest festival Social season Garden Tulip Winter Light Solstice Heortology Fairs World's fair State fair County fair Trade fair Picnic Block party Subway party Tailgate party Anniversary Jubilee Ceremony Children's party Baby shower Class reunion Costume party Masquerade party Drag party Toga party Naked party Crayfish party Cuddle party Dance party Prom Homecoming Foam party Hurricane party Kitty party Pamper party Parade Marching Pizza party Quiet party Ritual Stop light party Tea party Clothing Western dress codes Formal White tie Morning dress Semi-formal Black tie Black lounge suit Informal Suit Casual Wedding dress Contemporary Bridal crown Dress Evening gown Ball gown Debutante Opera gloves Cocktail dress Garters Casual Equipment Balloon Balloon modelling Confetti Cotton candy Deely bobber Float Glow stick Groucho glasses Party hat New Year's glasses Party bus Party horn Party popper Serpentine streamer Society portal Media Category v t e Folklore genres and types Narrative Animal tale Fable Fairy tale list Legend Tall tales Parable Personal narrative Urban legend Oral tradition Folk etymology False Joke Nursery rhyme Proverb Repositories Riddle Saying Word game Folk belief Birthstone Folk religion Folk saint Ghostlore Legend tripping Luminous gemstones Mythology Old wives' tale Ritual Silver bullet Weather lore Folk arts Folk art Folk costume Folk epic Folk dance Folk instrument Folk music Folk play Folk poetry Folk wrestling Foodways Society Cunning folk Fakelore Folk devil Folk healer Folk hero See also Folklore studies Morphology (folkloristics) Aarne–Thompson–Uther Index Motif-Index of Folk-Literature Storytelling Tradition Knowledge Medicine Story Vernacular v t e Tourism Types Accessible Adventure Agritourism Alternative Astrotourism Atomic Backpacking Beachgoing Bicycle touring Birth Business Crime Culinary Enotourism Cultural Archaeological Film Literary Bookstore Tolkien Music Pop-culture Dark Disaster Holocaust War Domestic Ecotourism Shark Experiential Extreme Fashion Garden Genealogy Heritage Identity Geotourism Industrial Instagram tourism International Volunteering Jungle Justice LGBT Medical MICE (Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, Exhibitions) Nautical Orphanage Recreational drug Red Religious Christian Halal Kosher Pilgrimage Rural Science Sensory Sleep Slum Smart Space Lunar Sports Sustainable Urban Virtual Visiting friends and relatives Wellness Wildlife Safari Scuba Yoga Hospitality industry Bed and breakfast Boutique hotel Convention center Cruise ship Destination spa Front desk Guest house Guest ranch Heuhotel Homestay Hospitality management studies Hostel Hotel Manager Inn Motel Pension Referral chain Resort Hotel Island Seaside Ski Town Restaurant Terminology College tour Convention (meeting) Destination marketing organization Escorted tour Excursion Factory tour Gift shop Grand Tour Holiday Honeymoon Hypermobility Journey planner Package tour Passport Perpetual traveler Road trip Roadside attraction Souvenir Staycation Tour bus service Tour guide Tour operator Tourism geography Tourism minister Tourism region Tourist attraction Tourist gateway Tourist trap Touron Transport Travel Travel agency Travel behavior Travel document Travel insurance Travel medicine Travel survey Travel technology Travel visa Travel warning Vacation Visitor center Travel literature Guide book Outdoor literature Tourism journals Travel magazines Wikivoyage Trade associations American Bus Association American Hotel and Lodging Association American Hotel & Lodging Educational Institute BEST Education Network Caribbean Tourism Organization European Travel Commission Historical Archive on Tourism Life Beyond Tourism Musement Pacific Asia Travel Association South-East Asian Tourism Organisation Tourism Radio Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report World Federation of Travel Journalists and Writers World Tourism Organization World Tourism rankings World Travel and Tourism Council World Travel Monitor Trade fairs and events Akwaaba African Travel Market Arabian Travel Market Cruise of the Kings Festival del Viaggio FITUR ITB Berlin World Tourism Day Issues Heritage commodification Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on tourism Impacts of tourism Leakage effect Overtourism Tourism improvement district Tourist tax Lists Adjectival tourisms Attractions Bibliography Casino hotels Casinos Cities by international visitors Convention and exhibition centers Cruise lines Hotels Largest Motels Passenger airlines UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists World Heritage Sites by country Category Holiday at Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Textbooks from Wikibooks Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic 2 Latvia Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐jqgpb
Cached time: 20250817111830
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.966 seconds
Real time usage: 1.167 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 27122/1000000
Revision size: 19312/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 289153/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16386/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 27/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 136390/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.466/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7292769/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  929.683      1 -total
 62.53%  581.349     11 Template:Navbox
 38.71%  359.841      1 Template:Public_holidays_of_the_World
 23.01%  213.938    105 Template:Iso2country
 21.83%  202.969      1 Template:Reflist
 15.30%  142.233      1 Template:Asia_topic
 12.62%  117.321      1 Template:Public_holidays_in_Europe
 12.45%  115.759      1 Template:Europe_topic
  8.85%   82.288      1 Template:Multiple_image
  8.81%   81.908      1 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:13279:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817111830 and revision id 1287908292. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Holiday&oldid=1287908292 " Category : Observances Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 29 April 2025, at 05:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Holiday 95 languages Add topic

