Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Production 3 Use 4 Controversy 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Hide (skin) 20 languages Afrikaans العربية Dansk Deutsch Español Français Gàidhlig 한국어 हिन्दी Ido Igbo Bahasa Indonesia ქართული Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Animal skin treated for human use A hide or skin is an animal skin treated for human use. 
The word "hide" is related to the German word Haut , which means skin . The industry defines hides as "skins" of large animals e.g . cow, buffalo; while skins refer to "skins" of smaller animals: goat , sheep , deer , pig , fish , alligator , snake , etc.
Common commercial hides include leather from cattle and other livestock animals, buckskin , alligator skin and snake skin . All are used for shoes , clothes , leather bags, belts, or other fashion accessories . Leather is also used in cars , upholstery , interior decorating , horse tack and harnesses . Skins are sometimes still gathered from hunting and processed at a domestic or artisanal level but most leather making is now industrialized and large-scale. Various tannins are used for this purpose.   Hides are also used as processed chews for dogs or other pets.

The term "skin" is sometimes expanded to include furs , which are harvested from various species, including cats , mustelids , and bears .

History [ edit ] Main article: History of hide materials See also: Fur trade and Deerskin trade Archaeologists believe that animal hides provided an important source of clothing and shelter for numerous prehistoric humans. Hide use continues into modern times, where it remains especially important outside industrialized societies.

The Inuit , for example, traditionally use animal hides for summer tents , waterproof clothes, and kayaks . In early medieval Europe , hides were used to protect wooden castles and defend buildings from setting alight during a siege . Various American Indian tribes have extensively used hides in the construction of tepees and wigwams , moccasins , and buckskins . They were sometimes used as window coverings. Until the invention of plastic drum heads in the 1950s, animal hides or metal were usually used.

Parchment and vellum —a kind of paper made from processed skins—was introduced to the Eastern Mediterranean during the Iron Age , supposedly at Pergamon .

The Assize of Weights and Measures —one of the statutes of uncertain date from c.

1300 —mentions rawhide , gloves , parchment , and vellum among the principal items of England 's commerce. A standardized shipload of leather (a last ) consisted of 20 dicker of 10 cowhides.

Rabbit and squirrel skins were traded and taxed in timbers of 40 hides each. Skins were also traded in binds of 32 or 33 skins each, while gloves were sold in dickers of 10 pair and dozens of 12 pair. The parchment and vellum was traded based on dozens of the original sheepskins from which they were prepared.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Rare furs have been a notable status symbol throughout history.

Ermine fur is particularly associated with European nobility, with the black-tipped tails arranged around the edges of the robes to produce a pattern of black diamonds on a white field. Demand for beaver hats in the 17th and 18th century drove some of the initial exploration and colonization of North America , particularly in what is now Canada . High fur demand led to over-hunting of species like sea otters and even prompted wars [ citation needed ] among native tribes competing for the most productive areas. 
Natural leather continues to be used for many expensive products from limousine upholstery to designer cellular phone cases. There are, however, many forms of artificial leather and fur now available, which are usually cheaper alternatives.

Production [ edit ] Fresh tanned leather Finishgrading leather Animal hides and skins are usually processed fresh or salted and tanned. Skins sometimes are stretched, dried, and tanned. Most hides are processed from domesticated animals; the most common wild animals used for fur — mink and rabbit —are similarly raised in captivity and farmed. Some others—including lynx and wolves [ citation needed ] —are still trapped in the wild for their fur.

Use [ edit ] Currently, hides are mainly used for footwear , upholstery , leather goods; skins are used for clothing , particularly as coats , gloves , leather goods and footwear . It is also used for bookbinding .

Many traditional drums , especially hand drums like the pandeiro , continue to be made using natural skins. The alligator drum was formerly important in Chinese music . The Chinese sanxian and Okinawan sanshin are usually prepared from snakeskin , while their Japanese equivalent, the shamisen , is made from dogskin in the case of students and catskin in the case of professional players. The African-American banjo was originally made from skins but is now often synthetic. "Hides" is used as a slang term to refer to a drumset.

[ 3 ] Kangaroo leather is the most common material for the construction of bullwhips .

Stingray rawhide is a common material for the grips of Chinese , Japanese , and Scottish swords .

Pig skins are processed as pork rinds . Hides can also be used as chew toys for pets.

Rabbit fur is popular for hats, coats, and glove linings.

Controversy [ edit ] Animal rights activists generally protest the use of animal hides for human clothing. Forms of protest range from PETA 's "I would rather go naked than wear fur" campaign, although more shocking and direct action, like damaging furs with red paint in imitation of blood , has been toned down, like the "Ink, not Mink" campaign.
Roadblocking and break-ins against meat/fur/leather industry is also used and extends to personal campaigns against such companies and also hunters which have included arson and assault in some cases.

See also [ edit ] Alligator hunting Bating (leather) Buckskin (usually from deer ) Calfskin Caribou Crocodile farming Deerskin Fish leather Goatskin Leather Ostrich leather Rawhide (usually from cattle ) Snakeskin Taxidermy References [ edit ] ^ Ruffhead, Owen , ed. (1763a), The Statutes at Large , vol.  I: From Magna Charta to the End of the Reign of King Henry the Sixth. To which is prefixed, A Table of the Titles of all the Publick and Private Statutes during that Time, London: Mark Basket for the Crown, pp.

148–149 .

(in English) & (in Latin) & (in Norman) ^ Statutes of the Realm , vol. I, London: G. Eyre & A. Strahan, 1810, p. 204 ^ Sadie, Stanley ; Tyrrell, John , eds. (2001). "Hides".

The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians (2nd ed.). London: Macmillan Publishers .

ISBN 978-1-56159-239-5 .

‎ [ full citation needed ] External links [ edit ] Media related to Hides at Wikimedia Commons v t e Leather Types Aniline Bicast Boiled Bonded Buckskin Buff Chamois Corinthian Kidskin Law leather Morocco Napa Nubuck Patent Russia Shagreen Shearling Shell cordovan Suede Leather sources Alligator Bison Cattle Calfskin Slunk Crocodile Deer Eel Goat Horse Kangaroo Ostrich Pig Seal Sheep Snake Yak Processes Liming Deliming Bating Tanning Oiling Crafting Bookbinding Cuir de Cordoue Leather carving Substitutes Artificial leather / Leatherette Kirza Naugahyde Presstoff Ultrasuede Alcantara Clarino Pantasote Leather museums German Leather Museum Igualada Leather Museum Walsall Leather Museum Leather Archives and Museum British Museum leather dressing Related History of hide materials Leather subculture Rawhide v t e Clothing materials and parts Garment structures Armscye Collar Clerical collar Collar stays Detachable collar Cuff Dart Facing Fly Lapel Gore Hem Lining Placket Pleat Pocket Revers Ruffle Shoulder pad Strap Sleeve Train Waistband Yoke Textiles Natural Cotton Fur Linen Silk Wool Synthetic Artificial leather Elastic Nylon Polyester Rayon Spandex Animal hides / leather Calf Deer Goat Kangaroo Ostrich Seal Sheep Snake Stingray Fasteners Back closure Belt hook Buckle Button Buttonhole Frog Shank Hook-and-eye Hook-and-loop Velcro Snap Zipper Seams Neckline Bustline Waistline Hemline Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐gwlpb
Cached time: 20250814225320
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.437 seconds
Real time usage: 0.595 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1822/1000000
Revision size: 7987/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 46388/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2921/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 33315/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.292/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15824032/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  512.709      1 -total
 24.18%  123.967      1 Template:Reflist
 17.31%   88.764      1 Template:Lang
 16.80%   86.139      3 Template:Navbox
 15.21%   77.988      2 Template:Citation
 14.90%   76.377      1 Template:Leather
 11.96%   61.302      1 Template:Short_description
 10.79%   55.302      2 Template:Citation_needed
  9.98%   51.180      3 Template:Fix
  7.21%   36.973      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:575495:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814225320 and revision id 1303953510. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hide_(skin)&oldid=1303953510 " Categories : Hides (skin) Nonwoven fabrics Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with Latin-language sources (la) Articles with Norman-language sources (nrf) Wikipedia articles incorporating the Cite Grove template Wikipedia articles incorporating the Cite Grove template without a link parameter All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from July 2020 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2015 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 01:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hide (skin) 20 languages Add topic

