Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Conceptions Toggle Conceptions subsection 1.1 Early conceptions 1.2 More recent conceptions 2 Etymology 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Imperial China 3.2 Ancient Greece 3.3 Islamic World 3.4 17th century 3.5 18th century 3.6 19th century 3.7 20th century to today 4 Confucianism and meritocracy Toggle Confucianism and meritocracy subsection 4.1 Institutional design 4.2 Promotion system 4.3 Compatibility with liberalism and democracy 4.4 Critique of political meritocracy 5 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 5.1 By individuals 5.1.1 Michael Young 5.1.2 The Rise and Rise of the Meritocracy 5.1.3 Chris Hayes 5.1.4 Pope Francis 5.2 Books 5.2.1 The Meritocracy Trap 5.2.2 The Tyranny of Merit 5.2.3 Imagined Meritocracy 5.3 Practicality 5.3.1 Undesirable outcomes 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Meritocracy 66 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Lietuvių Magyar Македонски მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political system in which capital is assigned on the basis of competence It has been suggested that Discrimination of excellence be merged into this article. ( Discuss ) Proposed since July 2025.

Part of a series on Politics Outline Index Category Primary topics Outline of political science Index of politics articles Politics by country Politics by subdivision Political economy Political history Political history of the world Political philosophy Political systems Anarchy City-state Collective leadership Confessional system Democracy Dictatorship Directorial Federacy Feudalism Hybrid regime Meritocracy Monarchy Parliamentary Presidential Republic Semi-parliamentary Semi-presidential Theocracy Academic disciplines Political science ( political scientists ) International relations ( theory ) Comparative politics Election science Political analysis Political theory Policy studies Political psychology Political sociology Public administration Bureaucracy ( street-level ) Technocracy Adhocracy Service ( Public / Civil ) Policy Public policy ( doctrine ) Domestic policy Foreign policy Civil society Public interest Government branches Separation of powers Legislature Executive Judiciary Election commission Related topics Sovereignty Polity / State / Country Biology and political orientation Critique of political economy Political censorship Political organisations Theories of political behavior Subseries Electoral systems Elections voting Unitarism Federalism Government ( forms / Governance ) Ideology Culture Political campaigning Political parties Politics portal v t e Part of the Politics series Basic forms of government List of forms · List of countries Source of power Democracy ( rule by many ) Demarchy Direct Economic Liberal Representative Social Socialist Others Oligarchy (rule by few) Anocracy Aristocracy Broligarchy Gerontocracy Kleptocracy Kritarchy Meritocracy Noocracy Particracy Plutocracy Stratocracy Technocracy Theocracy Autocracy ( rule by one ) Despotism Dictatorship Military dictatorship Tyranny Anarchy (rule by none) Anarchism Free association Stateless Power ideology Monarchy Republic (socio-political ideologies) Absolute Communist Constitutional Directorial Legalist Parliamentary Presidential Semi-presidential Authoritarian Libertarian (socio-economic ideologies) Anarchism Colonialism Communism Despotism Distributism Fascism Feudalism Islamism Socialism Totalitarianism Tribalism Religious Secular State religion Secular state Separation of church and state State atheism Global Local (geo-cultural ideologies) City-state Intergovernmental organisation National government World government Nationalism Internationalism Globalism Power structure Unitarism Unitary state Empire Principality Client state Associated state Dependent territory Dominion Protectorate Puppet state Puppet monarch Satellite state Self-governing colony Tributary state Buffer state Vassal state Viceroyalty Federalism Confederation Devolution Federation Superstate Supranational union International relations Small power Middle power Regional power Emerging power Great power Superpower Related Administrative division Democracy indices Democratic transition Autocratization Democratisation Hybrid regimes Politics portal v t e Meritocracy ( merit , from Latin mereō , and -cracy , from Ancient Greek κράτος kratos 'strength, power') is the notion of a political system in which economic goods or political power are vested in individual people based on ability and talent, rather than wealth or social class .

[ 1 ] Advancement in such a system is based on performance, as measured through examination or demonstrated achievement. Although the concept of meritocracy has existed for centuries, the first known use of the term was by sociologist Alan Fox in the journal Socialist Commentary in 1956.

[ 2 ] It was then popularized by sociologist Michael Dunlop Young , who used the term in his dystopian political and satirical book The Rise of the Meritocracy in 1958.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] While the word was coined and popularized as a pejorative , its usage has ameliorated. Today, the term is often utilised to refer to social systems in which personal advancement and success primarily reflect an individual's capabilities and merits, [ 7 ] frequently seen as equality of opportunity .

[ 8 ] It thus challenges forms of nepotism or hereditary aristocracy.

Conceptions [ edit ] Early conceptions [ edit ] The "most common definition of meritocracy conceptualizes merit in terms of tested competency and ability, and most likely, as measured by IQ or standardized achievement tests".

[ 9 ] In government and other administrative systems, "meritocracy" refers to a system under which advancement within the system turns on "merits", like performance, intelligence, credentials , and education. These are often determined through evaluations or examinations.

[ 10 ] [ page needed ] In a more general sense, meritocracy can refer to any form of evaluation based on achievement. Like " utilitarian " and " pragmatic ", the word "meritocratic" has also developed a broader connotation, and is sometimes used to refer to any government run by "a ruling or influential class of educated or able people".

[ 11 ] This is in contrast to the original, condemnatory use of the term in 1958 by Michael Dunlop Young in his work The Rise of the Meritocracy , who was satirizing the ostensibly merit-based Tripartite System of education practiced in the United Kingdom at the time; he claimed that, in the Tripartite System, "merit is equated with intelligence-plus-effort, its possessors are identified at an early age and selected for appropriate intensive education, and there is an obsession with quantification, test-scoring, and qualifications".

[ 12 ] Meritocracy in its wider sense, may be any general act of judgment upon the basis of various demonstrated merits; such acts frequently are described in sociology and psychology .

In rhetoric , the demonstration of one's merit regarding mastery of a particular subject is an essential task most directly related to the Aristotelian term Ethos . The equivalent Aristotelian conception of meritocracy is based upon aristocratic or oligarchic structures, rather than in the context of the modern state .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] More recent conceptions [ edit ] To this day, the origin of the term meritocracy is widely attributed to the British sociologist Michael Young, who used it pejoratively in his book The Rise of the Meritocracy . For Young, merit is defined as intelligence plus effort. As a result, he portrays a fictional meritocratic society as a dystopia, in which social stratification is based solely on intelligence and individual merit, which creates a highly competitive and unequal society.

[ 7 ] Despite this initial negative connotation, the term meritocracy has gained some positive recognition more recently. As such, it is nowadays applied to merit-based systems of status and reward allocation in distinction to aristocratic or class-based systems, in which inherited factors are the primary determinant for the position of an individual in society.

[ 15 ] Yet, the concept of meritocracy as a social system has also attracted much criticism. In light of the rising social inequality in the 21st century, scholars have labelled meritocracy a political ideology and an illusion.

[ 16 ] [ 7 ] As Thomas Piketty notes in his book Capital in the Twenty-First Century "our democratic societies rest on a meritocratic worldview".

[ 17 ] Accordingly, restricted mobility and the significance of inherited wealth co-exist with the belief in a meritocratic system. Consequently, "the idea of meritocracy has become a key means of cultural legitimation for contemporary capitalist culture", [ 18 ] in which wealth and income inequalities are being perpetuated and reproduced.

[ 19 ] This is supported by recent research which shows that, the more unequal a society, the higher the tendency of members of that society to attribute success to meritocracy rather than non-meritocratic variables such as inherited wealth.

[ 20 ] This illustrates that the contemporary conception of meritocracy is at least twofold.

[ 21 ] On the one hand, it describes a social system based on the notion that individuals are rewarded and advance in society as a result of their talent and effort.

[ 15 ] This conception presupposes social mobility and equality of opportunity. On the other hand, meritocracy can be understood as an ideological discourse grounded in different belief systems, that manifest themselves in different forms such as social democratic and neoliberal conceptions of meritocracy.

[ 22 ] Most Americans, across nearly all demographics, believe college admissions, hiring and promotions should be based on qualifications and performance, not social factors. This is according to a private opinion research survey conducted by think-tank, Populace.

[ 23 ] The most common form of meritocratic screening found today is the college degree. Higher education is an imperfect meritocratic screening system for various reasons, such as lack of uniform standards worldwide, [ 24 ] [ 25 ] lack of scope (not all occupations and processes are included), and lack of access (some talented people never have an opportunity to participate because of the expenses, disasters or war, most especially in developing countries , health issues or disability).

[ 26 ] Etymology [ edit ] Although the concept has existed for centuries, the term "meritocracy" is relatively new. It was first used pejoratively by sociologist Alan Fox in 1956, [ 2 ] and then by British politician and sociologist Michael Dunlop Young in his 1958 satirical essay The Rise of the Meritocracy .

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Young's essay pictured the United Kingdom under the rule of a government favouring intelligence and aptitude (merit) above all else, being the combination of the root of Latin origin " merit " (from " mereō " meaning "earn") and the Ancient Greek suffix " -cracy " (meaning "power", "rule").

[ 31 ] The purely Greek word is axiocracy ( αξιοκρατία ), from axios ( αξιος , worthy) + " -cracy " ( -κρατία , power).

In this book the term had distinctly negative connotations as Young questioned both the legitimacy of the selection process used to become a member of this elite and the outcomes of being ruled by such a narrowly defined group. The essay, written in the first person by a fictional historical narrator in 2034, interweaves history from the politics of pre- and post-war Britain with those of fictional future events in the short (1960 onward) and long term (2020 onward).

[ 32 ] The essay was based upon the tendency of the then-current governments, in their striving toward intelligence, to ignore shortcomings and upon the failure of education systems to utilize correctly the gifted and talented members within their societies.

[ 33 ] Young's fictional narrator explains that, on the one hand, the greatest contributor to society is not the "stolid mass" or majority, but the "creative minority" or members of the "restless elite".

[ 34 ] On the other hand, he claims that there are casualties of progress whose influence is underestimated and that, from such stolid adherence to natural science and intelligence, arises arrogance and complacency.

[ 34 ] This problem is encapsulated in the phrase "Every selection of one is a rejection of many".

[ 34 ] It was also used by Hannah Arendt in her essay "Crisis in Education", [ 35 ] which was written in 1958 and refers to the use of meritocracy in the English educational system. She too uses the term pejoratively. It was not until 1972 that Daniel Bell used the term positively.

[ 36 ] M. Young's formula to describe meritocracy is: m = IQ + E. The formula of L. Ieva instead is: m = f (IQ, Cut, ex) + E. That is, for Young, meritocracy is the sum of intelligence and energy; while, for Ieva it is represented by the function between intelligence, culture and experience, to which energy is then added.

History [ edit ] Imperial China [ edit ] Further information: Chinese Legalism and Imperial examinations This article is part of a series on Conservatism in China Ideologies Authoritarian Capitalism Party-state Chiangism Communitarianism Cultural Dai Jitao Thought Monarchism Nationalist Han Neo Ultra Neoauthoritarianism Social Traditionalist Confucianism Neo New Legalism Ultra Principles Ancestral worship Asian values Authority Bureaucracy Civilization state Chinese culture Genealogy book Great Unity Duty Elitism Meritocracy Exceptionalism Familialism Filial piety Mandate of Heaven Hierarchy Humaneness Irredentism Law and order Rectification of names Respect Sinicization Sinocentrism Social order Sovereignty Tradition Technocracy Zhonghua minzu History 1992 Consensus Boluan Fanzheng Boxer Rebellion Chinese Civil War Chinese Cultural Renaissance Dang Guo Dynasties of China Han Empire of China (1915–1916) History of the Kuomintang Nationalist government Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Imperial China Imperial examination Tributary system Manchu Restoration Nanjing decade Martial law in Taiwan Language policy New Life Movement Project National Glory Reform and opening up Republic of China (1912–1949) Shanghai massacre Strike Hard Against Crime Campaign Tongzhi Restoration Self-Strengthening Movement White Terror in Taiwan Xueheng School Intellectuals Bell Chang (Ya-chung) Chen (Yuan) Chao Confucius Dai Dong Gan Gu Hu (Hanmin) Hu (Xijin) Jaw Jiang (Qing) Jiang (Shigong) Jin Kang Li (Ao) Li (Hongzhi) Li (Zehou) Liang Liu Pan Liu Shang Tam Tan Wang Wu Xiao Xiong Zhang (Weiwei) Zheng (Yongnian) Zhu Zou Politicians Imperial China Chao Duke Shao Wen Emperor Wu (Han) Yang Yongle Yuan Zhang Duke Zhou Republic of China (before 1949) Chen Chiang (Ching-kuo) Chiang (Kai-shek) Chiang (Wei-kuo) Dai (Jitao) Dai (Li) Hu (Hanmin) Li Lin Soong Yuan People's Republic of China (Mainland) Hu Huang Jiang Wang Xi Hong Kong Chan (Gary) Chan (Joephy) Chow Fok Ho Ip (Kwok-him) Ip (Regina) Kwok Lam Lee (Dominic) Lee (John) Lee (Starry) Leung Liao Quat Tsang (Donald) Tsang (Yok-sing) Tung Yung Macau Chui Ho (Edmund) Ho (Iat Seng) Sam Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chen Chiang (Ching-kuo) Chiang (Kai-shek) Chiang (Wan-an) Chiang (Wei-kuo) Chiu Chu Gou Han Hau (Lung-pin) Hau (Pei-tsun) Hung Jaw Lee Lien Lin Ma Soong (James) Soong (Mei-ling) Sun Yu Extant parties Mainland China Chinese Communist Party ( factions ) Hong Kong Business and Professionals Alliance Civil Force Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress Federation of Public Housing Estates Hong Kong Federation of Education Workers Hong Kong Federation of Trade Unions Kowloon West New Dynamic Liberal Party New Century Forum New People's Party New Prospect New Territories Association of Societies Politihk Social Strategic Roundtable Silent Majority Macau Alliance for Change Macau-Guangdong Union New Macau Development Union United Citizens Association Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chinese Nationalist Party Chinese New Party Chinese Unification Promotion Party For Public Good Party Patriot Alliance Association People First Party Young China Party Overseas Malaysian Chinese Association Historical parties Progressive Party Republican Party Royalist Party Unity Party Hong Kong Co-operative Resources Centre Federation for the Stability Hong Kong Alliance of Chinese and Expatriates Hong Kong Progressive Alliance Liberal Democratic Federation New Hong Kong Alliance Professional Forum Progressive Hong Kong Society Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Congress Party Alliance Republican Party The Motorists' Party of ROC Overseas Ryukyu Guomindang Tibet Improvement Party Alliances Pro-Kuomintang camp Republic of China mainland China Hong Kong Pro-Beijing camp Hong Kong Macau Literature America Against America Analects Classic of Filial Piety The China Wave Farewell to Revolution Organisations Active China Youth Service & Recreation Center Institute of Revolutionary Practice Defunct Blue Shirts Society Group of 89 National Revolutionary Army Tsotanhui Clique Western Hills Group Media Mainland China Economic Daily Global Times Guancha Hong Kong Headline Daily Hong Kong Economic Times Oriental Daily News Sing Tao Daily The Standard Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chung T'ien Television China Television China Times Commercial Times TVBS United Daily News Overseas The Epoch Times Former Central Daily News Shen Bao By region Hong Kong Taiwan (Republic of China) Variants and movements Anti-communism Conservative localism in Hong Kong Hanfu Movement Related ideologies Authoritarian capitalism Fascism Han chauvinism Hui pan-nationalism Imperialism State nationalism Related topics Anti-national sentiments Japanese Taiwanese Tibetan Baizuo Falun Gong Four big families of Hong Kong Liberalism in China (opposing) Pro-ROC sentiment " Straight man cancer " Taishang Taiwanese nationalism (opposing) World League for Freedom and Democracy Conservatism portal China portal Hong Kong portal Taiwan portal v t e Some of the earliest example of an administrative meritocracy, based on civil service examinations, dates back to Ancient China .

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ a ] The concept originates, at least by the sixth century BC, when it was advocated by the Chinese philosopher Confucius , who "invented the notion that those who govern should do so because of merit, not of inherited status. This sets in motion the creation of the imperial examinations and bureaucracies open only to those who passed tests".

[ 41 ] As the Qin and Han dynasties developed a meritocratic system in order to maintain power over a large, sprawling empire, it became necessary for the government to maintain a complex network of officials.

[ 42 ] Prospective officials could come from a rural background and government positions were not restricted to the nobility. Rank was determined by merit, through the civil service examinations , and education became the key for social mobility.

[ 42 ] After the fall of the Han dynasty, the nine-rank system was established during the Three Kingdoms period.

According to the Princeton Encyclopedia of American History : [ 43 ] One of the oldest examples of a merit-based civil service system existed in the imperial bureaucracy of China. Tracing back to 200 B.C., the Han dynasty adopted Confucianism as the basis of its political philosophy and structure, which included the revolutionary idea of replacing nobility of blood with one of virtue and honesty, and thereby calling for administrative appointments to be based solely on merit. This system allowed anyone who passed an examination to become a government officer, a position that would bring wealth and honor to the whole family. In part due to Chinese influence, the first European civil service did not originate in Europe, but rather in India by the British-run East India Company ... company managers hired and promoted employees based on competitive examinations in order to prevent corruption and favoritism.

Ancient Greece [ edit ] Both Plato and Aristotle advocated meritocracy, Plato in his The Republic , arguing that the wisest should rule, and hence the rulers should be philosopher kings .

[ 44 ] Islamic World [ edit ] The Rashidun caliphate succession rule was based on meritocracy (Most renown people for their merit would gather in a Shura assembly and choose the caliph based on merit). As the first caliph of the Rashidun caliphate, Abu Bakr was not a monarch and never claimed such a title; nor did any of his three successors. Rather, their election and leadership were based upon merit.

[ 45 ] After the reforms of Mehmed II , the Ottoman standing army was recruited from the devşirme , a group that took Christian subjects at a young age (8–20 yrs): they were converted to Islam, then schooled for administration or the military Janissaries . This was a meritocracy which "produced from among their alumni four out of five Grand Viziers from this time on".

[ 46 ] Mehmed II's first grand vizier was Zaganos Pasha , who was of devşirme background as opposed to an aristocrat, [ 47 ] and Zaganos Pasha's successor, Mahmud Pasha Angelović , was also of devşirme background. It is reported by Madeline Zilfi [ 48 ] that European visitors of the time commented "In making appointments, Sultan pays no regard to any pretensions on the score of wealth or rank. It is by merits that man rise.. Among the Turks, honours, high posts and Judgeships are rewards of great ability and good service." Safavid Persian society was also a meritocracy where officials were appointed on the basis of worth and merit, and not on the basis of birth. It was certainly not an oligarchy , nor was it an aristocracy . Sons of nobles were considered for the succession of their fathers as a mark of respect, but they had to prove themselves worthy of the position. This system avoided an entrenched aristocracy or a caste society.

[ 49 ] There are numerous recorded accounts of laymen that rose to high official posts as a result of their merits.

[ 50 ] And since the Safavid society was meritocratic, government offices constantly felt the pressure of being under surveillance and had to make sure they governed in the best interest of their leader, and not merely their own.

17th century [ edit ] The concept of meritocracy spread from China to British India during the seventeenth century.

[ 43 ] The first European power to implement a successful meritocratic civil service was the British Empire , in their administration of India: "company managers hired and promoted employees based on competitive examinations in order to prevent corruption and favoritism".

[ 43 ] British colonial administrators advocated the spread of the system to the rest of the Commonwealth , the most "persistent" of which was Thomas Taylor Meadows, Britain's consul in Guangzhou , China . Meadows successfully argued in his Desultory Notes on the Government and People of China , published in 1847, that "the long duration of the Chinese empire is solely and altogether owing to the good government which consists in the advancement of men of talent and merit only", and that the British must reform their civil service by making the institution meritocratic.

[ 51 ] This practice later was adopted in the late nineteenth century by the British mainland, inspired by the "Chinese mandarin system".

[ 52 ] 18th century [ edit ] The Ashanti King Osei Kwadwo , who ruled from c. 1764 to 1777, began the meritocratic system of appointing central officials according to their ability, rather than their birth.

[ 53 ] 19th century [ edit ] In 1813, U.S. Founding Father and President Thomas Jefferson declared that there exists a " natural aristocracy of men"  whose right to rule comes from their talent and virtue (merit), rather than their wealth or inherited status. He believed a successful republic must establish educational institutions that identify these natural aristocrats and train them to rule.

[ 54 ] The federal bureaucracy in the United States used the spoils system from 1828 until the assassination of United States President James A. Garfield by a disappointed office seeker in 1881 proved its dangers. Two years later in 1883, the system of appointments to the United States Federal Bureaucracy was revamped by the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act , partially based on the British meritocratic civil service that had been established years earlier. The act stipulated that government jobs should be awarded on the basis of merit, through competitive exams, rather than ties to politicians or political affiliation. It also made it illegal to fire or demote government employees for political reasons.

[ 55 ] To enforce the merit system and the judicial system, the law also created the United States Civil Service Commission .

[ 55 ] In the modern American meritocracy, the president may hand out only a certain number of jobs, which must be approved by the United States Senate .

Australia began establishing public universities in the 1850s with the goal of promoting meritocracy by providing advanced training and credentials. The educational system was set up to service urban males of middle-class background, but of diverse social and religious origins. It was increasingly extended to all graduates of the public school system, those of rural and regional background, and then to women and finally to ethnic minorities.

[ 56 ] Both the middle classes and the working classes have promoted the ideal of meritocracy within a strong commitment to "mate-ship" and political equality.

[ 57 ] The British philosopher and polymath John Stuart Mill advocated meritocracy in his book Considerations on Representative Government .

His model was to give more votes to the more educated voter. His views are explained in Estlund (2003:57–58): Mill's proposal of plural voting has two motives. One is to prevent one group or class of people from being able to control the political process even without having to give reasons in order to gain sufficient support. He calls this the problem of class legislation. Since the most numerous class is also at a lower level of education and social rank, this could be partly remedied by giving those at the higher ranks plural votes. A second, and equally prominent motive for plural voting is to avoid giving equal influence to each person without regard to their merit, intelligence, etc. He thinks that it is fundamentally important that political institutions embody, in their spirit, the recognition that some opinions are worth more than others. He does not say that this is a route to producing better political decisions, but it is hard to understand his argument, based on this second motive, in any other way.

So, if Aristotle is right that the deliberation is best if participants are numerous (and assuming for simplicity that the voters are the deliberators) then this is a reason for giving all or many citizens a vote, but this does not yet show that the wiser subset should not have, say, two or three; in that way something would be given both to the value of the diverse perspectives, and to the value of the greater wisdom of the few. This combination of the Platonic and Aristotelian points is part of what I think is so formidable about Mill's proposal of plural voting. It is also an advantage of his view that he proposes to privilege not the wise, but the educated. Even if we agreed that the wise should rule, there is a serious problem about how to identify them. This becomes especially important if a successful political justification must be generally acceptable to the ruled. In that case, privileging the wise would require not only their being so wise as to be better rulers, but also, and more demandingly, that their wisdom be something that can be agreed to by all reasonable citizens. I turn to this conception of justification below.

Mill's position has great plausibility: good education promotes the ability of citizens to rule more wisely. So, how can we deny that the educated subset would rule more wisely than others? But then why shouldn't they have more votes?

Estlund goes on to criticize Mill's education-based meritocracy on various grounds.

20th century to today [ edit ] Singapore describes meritocracy as one of its official guiding principles for domestic public policy formulation, placing emphasis on academic credentials as objective measures of merit.

[ 58 ] There is criticism that, under this system, Singaporean society is being increasingly stratified and that an elite class is being created from a narrow segment of the population.

[ 59 ] Singapore has a growing level of tutoring for children, [ 60 ] and top tutors are often paid better than school teachers.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] Defenders of this system recall the ancient Chinese proverb "Wealth never survives past three generations " ( Chinese : 富不过三代 ), suggesting that the nepotism or cronyism of elitists eventually will be, and often are, limited by those lower down the hierarchy.

Singaporean academics are continuously re-examining the application of meritocracy as an ideological tool and how it's stretched to encompass the ruling party's objectives. Professor Kenneth Paul Tan at the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy asserts that "meritocracy, in trying to 'isolate' merit by treating people with fundamentally unequal backgrounds as superficially the same, can be a practice that ignores and even conceals the real advantages and disadvantages that are unevenly distributed to different segments of an inherently unequal society, a practice that in fact perpetuates this fundamental inequality. In this way, those who are picked by meritocracy as having merit may already have enjoyed unfair advantages from the very beginning, ignored according to the principle of nondiscrimination".

[ 63 ] How meritocracy in the Singaporean context relates to the application of pragmatism as an ideological device, which combines strict adherence to market principles without any aversion to social engineering and little propensity for classical social welfarism , [ 64 ] is further illustrated by Kenneth Paul Tan in subsequent articles: There is a strong ideological quality in Singapore's pragmatism, and a strongly pragmatic quality in ideological negotiations within the dynamics of hegemony. In this complex relationship, the combination of ideological and pragmatic maneuvering over the decades has resulted in the historical dominance of government by the PAP in partnership with global capital whose interests have been advanced without much reservation.

[ 65 ] Within the Ecuadorian Ministry of Labor, the Ecuadorian Meritocracy Institute [ 66 ] was created under the technical advice of the Singaporean government.

With similar objections, John Rawls rejects the ideal of meritocracy as well.

[ 67 ] Confucianism and meritocracy [ edit ] 子曰：有教無類。 The Master said: "In teaching, there should be no distinction of classes." — Analects 15.39 (Legge translation).

Although Confucius claimed that he never invented anything but was only transmitting ancient knowledge ( Analects 7.1 ), he did produce a number of new ideas. Many European and American admirers such as Voltaire and Herrlee G. Creel point to the revolutionary idea of replacing nobility of blood with nobility of virtue.

[ 68 ] Jūnzǐ ( 君子 , lit. "lord's son"), which originally signified the younger, non-inheriting, offspring of a noble, became, in Confucius's work, an epithet having much the same meaning and evolution as the English "gentleman".

A virtuous commoner who cultivates his qualities may be a "gentleman", while a shameless son of the king is only a "petty person". That Confucius admitted students of different classes as disciples is a clear demonstration that he fought against the feudal structures that defined pre-imperial Chinese society.

[ 69 ] [ page needed ] Another new idea, that of meritocracy, led to the introduction of the imperial examination system in China. This system allowed anyone who passed an examination to become a government officer, a position which would bring wealth and honour to the whole family. The Chinese imperial examination system started in the Sui dynasty . Over the following centuries the system grew until finally almost anyone who wished to become an official had to prove his worth by passing a set of written government examinations.

[ 70 ] Confucian political meritocracy is not merely a historical phenomenon. The practice of meritocracy still exists across China and East Asia today, and a wide range of contemporary intellectuals—from Daniel Bell to Tongdong Bai, Joseph Chan, and Jiang Qing —defend political meritocracy as a viable alternative to liberal democracy.

[ 71 ] In Just Hierarchy , Daniel Bell and Wang Pei argue that hierarchies are inevitable.

[ 72 ] Faced with ever-increasing complexity at scale, modern societies must build hierarchies to coordinate collective action and tackle long-term problems such as climate change. In this context, people need not—and should not—want to flatten hierarchies as much as possible. They ought to ask what makes political hierarchies just and use these criteria to decide the institutions that deserve preservation, those that require reform, and those that need radical transformation. They call this approach "progressive conservatism", a term that reflects the ambiguous place of the Confucian tradition within the Left-Right dichotomy.

[ 72 ] : 8–21 Bell and Wang propose two justifications for political hierarchies that do not depend on a "one person, one vote" system. First is raw efficiency, which may require centralized rule in the hands of the competent few. Second, and most important, is serving the interests of the people (and the common good more broadly).

[ 72 ] : 66–93 In Against Political Equality , Tongdong Bai complements this account by using a proto-Rawlsian "political difference principle". Just as Rawls claims that economic inequality is justified so long as it benefits those at the bottom of the socioeconomic ladder, so Bai argues that political inequality is justified so long as it benefits those materially worse off.

[ 73 ] : 102–106 Bell, Wang, and Bai all criticize liberal democracy to argue that government by the people may not be government for the people in any meaningful sense of the term. They argue that voters tend to act in irrational, tribal, short-termist ways; they are vulnerable to populism and struggle to account for the interests of future generations. In other words, at a minimum, democracy needs Confucian meritocratic checks.

[ 73 ] : 32–47 In The China Model , Bell argues that Confucian political meritocracy provides—and has provided—a blueprint for China's development.

[ 74 ] For Bell, the ideal according to which China should reform itself (and has reformed itself) follows a simple structure: Aspiring rulers first pass hyper-selective examinations, then have to rule well at the local level to be promoted to positions as the provincial level, then have to excel at the provincial level to access positions at the national level, and so on.

[ 74 ] : 151–179 This system aligns with what Harvard historian James Hankins calls "virtue politics", or the idea that institutions should be built to select the most competent and virtuous rulers—as opposed to institutions concerned first and foremost with limiting the power of rulers.

[ 75 ] While contemporary defenders of Confucian political meritocracy all accept this broad frame, they disagree with each other on three main questions: institutional design, the means by which meritocrats are promoted, and the compatibility of Confucian political meritocracy with liberalism.

Institutional design [ edit ] Bell and Wang favour a system in which officials at the local level are democratically elected and higher-level officials are promoted by peers.

[ 72 ] : 66–93 As Bell puts it, he defends "democracy at the bottom, experimentation in the middle, and meritocracy at the top." [ 74 ] : 151–179 Bell and Wang argue that this combination conserves the main advantages of democracy—involving the people in public affairs at the local level, strengthening the legitimacy of the system, forcing some degree of direct accountability, etc.—while preserving the broader meritocratic character of the regime.

Jiang Qing, by contrast, imagines a tricameral government with one chamber selected by the people (the House of the Commoners 庶民院 ), one chamber composed of Confucian meritocrats selected via examination and gradual promotion (the House of Confucian Tradition 通儒院 ), and one body made up of descendants of Confucius himself (The House of National Essence 國體院 ).

[ 76 ] Jiang's aim is to construct a legitimacy that will go beyond what he sees as the atomistic, individualist, and utilitarian ethos of modern democracies and ground authority in something sacred and traditional. While Jiang's model is closer to an ideal theory than Bell's proposals, it represents a more traditionalist alternative.

Tongdong Bai presents an in-between solution by proposing a two-tiered bicameral system.

[ 73 ] : 52–110 At the local level, as with Bell, Bai advocates Deweyan participatory democracy. At the national level, Bai proposes two chambers: one of meritocrats (selected by examination, by examination and promotion, from leaders in certain professional fields, etc.), and one of representatives elected by the people. While the lower house does not have any legislative power per se, it acts as a popular accountability mechanism by championing the people and putting pressure on the upper house. More generally, Bai argues that his model marries the best of meritocracy and democracy. Following Dewey's account of democracy as a way of life, he points to the participatory features of his local model: citizens still get to have a democratic lifestyle, participate in political affairs, and be educated as "democratic men". Similarly, the lower house allows citizens to be represented, have a voice in public affairs (albeit a weak one), and ensure accountability. Meanwhile, the meritocratic house preserves competence, statesmanship, and Confucian virtues.

Promotion system [ edit ] Defenders of Confucian political meritocracy all champion a system in which rulers are selected on the basis of intellect, social skills, and virtue. Bell proposes a model wherein aspiring meritocrats take hyper-selective exams and prove themselves at the local levels of government before reaching the higher levels of government, where they hold more centralized power.

[ 74 ] : 151–179 In his account, the exams select for intellect and other virtues—for instance, the ability to argue three different viewpoints on a contentious issue may indicate a certain degree of openness.

[ 74 ] : 63–110 Tongdong Bai's approach incorporates different ways to select members of the meritocratic house, from exams to performance in various fields—business, science, administration, and so on. In every case, Confucian meritocrats draw on China's extensive history of meritocratic administration to outline the pros and cons of competing methods of selection.

[ 73 ] : 67–97 For those who, like Bell, defend a model in which performance at the local levels of government determines future promotion, an important question is how the system judges who "performs best". In other words, while examinations may ensure that early-career officials are competent and educated, how is it thereafter ensured that only those who rule well get promoted? The literature opposes those who prefer evaluation by peers to evaluation by superiors, with some thinkers including quasi-democratic selection mechanisms along the way. Bell and Wang favour a system in which officials at the local level are democratically elected and higher-level officials are promoted by peers.

[ 72 ] : 84–106 Because they believe that promotion should depend upon peer evaluations only, Bell and Wang argue against transparency—i.e. the public should not know how officials are selected, since ordinary people are in no position to judge officials beyond the local level.

[ 72 ] : 76–78 Others, like Jiang Qing, defend a model in which superiors decide who gets promoted; this method is in line with more traditionalist strands of Confucian political thought, which place a greater emphasis on strict hierarchies and epistemic paternalism—that is, the idea that older and more experienced people know more.

[ 76 ] : 27–44 Compatibility with liberalism and democracy [ edit ] Another key question is whether Confucian political thought is compatible with liberalism. Tongdong Bai, for instance, argues that while Confucian political thought departs from the "one person, one vote" model, it can conserve many of the essential characteristics of liberalism, such as freedom of speech and individual rights.

[ 73 ] : 97–110 In fact, both Daniel Bell and Tongdong Bai hold that Confucian political meritocracy can tackle challenges that liberalism wants to tackle, but cannot by itself. At the cultural level, for instance, Confucianism, its institutions, and its rituals offer bulwarks against atomization and individualism. At the political level, the non-democratic side of political meritocracy is—for Bell and Bai—more efficient at addressing long-term questions such as climate change, in part because the meritocrats do not have to worry about the whims of public opinion.

[ 74 ] : 14–63 Joseph Chan defends the compatibility of Confucianism with both liberalism and democracy. In his book Confucian Perfectionism , he argues that Confucians can embrace both democracy and liberalism on instrumental grounds; that is, while liberal democracy may not be valuable for its own sake, its institutions remains valuable—particularly when combined with a broadly Confucian culture—to serve Confucian ends and inculcate Confucian virtues.

[ 77 ] Critique of political meritocracy [ edit ] Other Confucians have criticized Confucian meritocrats like Bell for their rejection of democracy. For them, Confucianism does not have to be premised on the assumption that meritorious, virtuous political leadership is inherently incompatible with popular sovereignty, political equality and the right to political participation.

[ 78 ] These thinkers accuse the meritocrats of overestimating the flaws of democracy, mistaking temporary flaws for permanent and inherent features, and underestimating the challenges that the construction of a true political meritocracy poses in practice—including those faced by contemporary China and Singapore.

[ 79 ] Franz Mang claims that, when decoupled from democracy, meritocracy tends to deteriorate into an oppressive regime under putatively "meritorious" but actually "authoritarian" rulers; Mang accuses Bell's China model of being self-defeating, as—Mang claims—the Chinese Communist Party 's authoritarian modes of engagement with the dissenting voices illustrate.

[ 80 ] He Baogang and Mark Warren add that "meritocracy" should be understood as a concept describing a regime's character rather than its type, which is determined by distribution of political power—on their view, democratic institutions can be built which are meritocratic insofar as they favour competence.

[ 81 ] Roy Tseng, drawing on the New Confucians of the twentieth century, argues that Confucianism and liberal democracy can enter into a dialectical process, in which liberal rights and voting rights are rethought into resolutely modern, but nonetheless Confucian ways of life.

[ 82 ] This synthesis, blending Confucians rituals and institutions with a broader liberal democratic frame, is distinct from both Western-style liberalism—which, for Tseng, suffers from excessive individualism and a lack of moral vision—and from traditional Confucianism—which, for Tseng, has historically suffered from rigid hierarchies and sclerotic elites. Against defenders of political meritocracy, Tseng claims that the fusion of Confucian and democratic institutions can conserve the best of both worlds, producing a more communal democracy which draws on a rich ethical tradition, addresses abuses of power, and combines popular accountability with a clear attention to the cultivation of virtue in elites.

Another illustration of the Meritocracy Gap can be seen in the ways that nations, like China, choose to promote many of its government officials. What is very troubling is the ways in which Princelings in the Chinese Government contradict the ideas "equal social classes" and "inherent ability" presented in the ideal operations of a meritocratic government.

[ 83 ] The reality is that four out of the seven Community Party Officials of the Chinese Elite Government are Princelings.

[ 83 ] It has been widely noted that large numbers of prominent party leaders and families have used their political power to convert state assets into their own private wealth.

[ 83 ] In reality, the high number of Princelings in Chinese government contradicts the idea of "equal promotion of officials based on ability in a meritocracy government. The high presence of Princelings in Chinese government continues to illustrate that elite corruption still plays a significant role in the convergence and operation of state government.

[ 83 ] Criticism [ edit ] See also: Anti-intellectualism By individuals [ edit ] Michael Young [ edit ] Michael Young popularized the word "meritocracy" as a pejorative but it was adopted into the English language without the negative connotations that Young intended it to have.  It was embraced by supporters of the philosophy. Young expressed his disappointment in the embrace of this word and philosophy by the Labour Party under Tony Blair in The Guardian in an article in 2001, where he states: It is good sense to appoint individual people to jobs on their merit. It is the opposite when those who are judged to have merit of a particular kind harden into a new social class without room in it for others.

[ 84 ] The Rise and Rise of the Meritocracy [ edit ] Geoff Dench in The Rise and Rise of Meritocracy (2006) commented that the rise of the meritocracy was intended to help turn Labour away from meritocracy, by reminding it of the importance of communitarian values.  Curiously, though, half a century later we have a Labour government declaring the promotion of meritocracy as one its primary objectives.

[ 85 ] Chris Hayes [ edit ] In his 2012 book Twilight of the Elites: America After Meritocracy , Chris Hayes argues that the movement towards meritocracy has produced widespread inequality and corruption, which has led to a record decrease in the trust of American institutions.

Pope Francis [ edit ] Pope Francis referred to "mistaken notions" developed around the concept of meritocracy, warning that a healthy approach to the value of hard work, the development of one's native abilities and a praiseworthy spirit of initiative is one thing, but if one does not seek a genuine equality of opportunity, 'meritocracy' can easily become a screen that further consolidates the privileges of a few with great power.

[ 86 ] Books [ edit ] The Meritocracy Trap [ edit ] In his 2019 book The Meritocracy Trap , Daniel Markovits poses that meritocracy is responsible for the exacerbation of social stratification , to the detriment of much of the general population. He introduces the idea of "snowball inequality", a perpetually widening gap between elite workers and members of the middle class. While the elite obtain exclusive positions thanks to their wealth of demonstrated merit, they occupy jobs and oust middle class workers from the core of economic events. The elites use their high earnings to secure the best education for their own children, so that they may enter the world of work with a competitive advantage over those who did not have the same opportunities. Thus, the cycle continues with each generation.

In this case, the middle class suffers decreased opportunities for individual prosperity and financial success. While it is impossible to quantify the exact effects of this social divide on the middle class, the opioid epidemic , dramatic rises in " deaths of despair " [ 87 ] (suicides, mental health and alcoholism), and lowering life expectancy in these meritocratic societies are often listed as results of it. It is not only the middle class who suffer the negative effects of meritocracy, however. The societal elite have to pay a significant price for their hectic working life. Many admit suffering from physical and mental health issues, inability to sustain a good quality personal life and a lack of time spent with their families. Children of the social elite are often forced into a highly competitive educational environment from a young age, which continues throughout school, university, and into their work life. Through this argument, the author attacks the idea of a meritocracy as a fair means to evaluate and reward the most skilled and hard-working members of society.

Markovits proposes a different approach to meritocracy, one where socioeconomic life conveniences are freely distributed to the people who are sufficiently successful at the things they are doing rather than creating an environment of ongoing competition. He calls for reform of economic roles, organizations and institutions in order to include a wider population and hence narrow the increasing inequality gap by questioning the social hegemony of high-profile workers, and intervening with redistribution of earnings, working hours and social identity on behalf of middle class workers.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] The Tyranny of Merit [ edit ] In his book The Tyranny of Merit: What's Become of the Common Good?

, the American political philosopher Michael Sandel argues that the meritocratic ideal has become a moral and political problem for contemporary Western societies. He contends that the meritocratic belief that personal success is solely based on individual merit and effort has led to a neglection of the common good, the erosion of solidarity, and the rise of inequality. Sandel's criticism concerns the widespread notion that those who achieve success deserve it because of their intelligence, talent and effort. Instead, he argues that this belief is flawed since it ignores the role of luck and external circumstances, such as social and external factors, which are beyond an individual's control.

[ 90 ] As a consequence, Sandel attributes the increasing gap between economic "winners and losers", the decline of civic engagement and the rise of populism to the meritocratic ideal. In addition, he argues that the promise of meritocracy creates an elite that is disconnected from society and lacks empathy for those, who are left behind. Elite institutions including the Ivy League and Wall Street have corrupted the virtue, according to Sandel, and the sense of who deserves power.

[ 91 ] Ultimately, the argument of Michael Sandel is that "meritocracy today functions less as an alternative to inequality than as its primary justification".

[ 92 ] Thus, he makes the case for a reconsideration of our understanding of success and the common good including public debates regarding the extent of the welfare state . According to Sandel, this entails a deliberation about what constitutes a contribution to the common good and how these ought to be rewarded. Hence, he appeals to move beyond distributive justice towards contributive justice, that is "creating conditions to enable everyone to contribute to the common good and to receive honor and recognition for having done so".

[ 92 ] To this end, he suggest public policies such as more progressive taxation to reduce economic inequalities.

[ 90 ] Imagined Meritocracy [ edit ] Most of the criticism against meritocracy, including Sandel's argument in "The Tyranny of Merit", treats "meritocracy" as a mechanism that allocates rewards in accordance with one's abilities, but violates substantive equality . Casting doubt on this fundamental assumption, the Japanese sociologist Satoshi Araki examined whether economic outcomes are linked to individuals' skills levels in the United States. He found that the economic return to educational qualifications per se was significantly larger than that to cognitive skills and that intergenerational inequality had been substantially formed via credentials rather than abilities - that is why the unfair situation like "side doors" may exist. Araki therefore argues that contemporary America is a typical credential society, where credentialism prevails over skills-based meritocracy, but people are navigated to misbelieve that their society is meritocratic. Calling this situation "imagined meritocracy", he underscores the importance of examining the credential/meritocratic nature of a society by distinguishing the function of educational credentials as such and that of actual abilities both conceptually and empirically lest we mislead scholarly/policy discussion and public debate based on the imagined discourse of meritocracy.

[ 93 ] Practicality [ edit ] See also: Myth of meritocracy and Just-world hypothesis The term "meritocracy" was originally intended as a negative concept.

[ 3 ] One of the primary concerns with meritocracy is the unclear definition of "merit".

[ 94 ] What is considered as meritorious can differ with opinions as on which qualities are considered the most worthy, raising the question of which "merit" is the highest—or, in other words, which standard is the "best" standard. As the supposed effectiveness of a meritocracy is based on the supposed competence of its officials, this standard of merit cannot be arbitrary and has to also reflect the competencies required for their roles.

The reliability of the authority and system that assesses each individual's merit is another point of concern. As a meritocratic system relies on a standard of merit to measure and compare people against, the system by which this is done has to be reliable to ensure that their assessed merit accurately reflects their potential capabilities.

Standardized testing , which reflects the meritocratic sorting process, has come under criticism for being rigid and unable to accurately assess many valuable qualities and potentials of students. Education theorist Bill Ayers , commenting on the limitations of standardized testing, writes that "standardized tests can't measure initiative, creativity, imagination, conceptual thinking, curiosity, effort, irony, judgment, commitment, nuance, good will, ethical reflection, or a host of other valuable dispositions and attributes. What they can measure and count are isolated skills, specific facts and function, content knowledge, the least interesting and least significant aspects of learning".

[ 95 ] Merit determined through the opinionated evaluations of teachers, while being able to assess the valuable qualities that cannot be assessed by standardized testing, are unreliable as the opinions, insights, biases, and standards of the teachers vary greatly. If the system of evaluation is corrupt, non-transparent, opinionated or misguided, decisions regarding who has the highest merit can be highly fallible.

The level of education required in order to become competitive in a meritocracy may also be costly, effectively limiting candidacy for a position of power to those with the means necessary to become educated. Eight of the nine Supreme Court of the United States Justices, for example, attended  only Harvard or Yale and generally only consider clerkship candidates who attended a top-five university , while in the 1950s the two universities only accounted for around one fifth of the justices.

[ 96 ] An example of this was Chinese student self-declared messiah, Hong Xiuquan , who despite ranking first in a preliminary, nationwide imperial examination , was unable to afford further education. As such, although he did try to study in private, Hong was ultimately noncompetitive in later examinations and unable to become a bureaucrat. This economic aspect of meritocracies has been said to continue nowadays in countries without free educations. Even if free education were provided, the resources that the parents of a student are able to provide outside of the curriculum, such as tutoring, exam preparation, and financial support for living costs during higher education will influence the education the student attains and the student's social position in a meritocratic society. This limits the fairness and justness of any meritocratic system.

Similarly, feminist critics have noted that many hierarchical organisations actually favour individuals who have received disproportionate support of an informal kind (e.g. mentorship, word-of-mouth opportunities, and so on), such that only those who benefit from such supports are likely to understand these organisations as meritocratic.

[ 97 ] Cornell University economist Robert H. Frank rejects meritocracy in his book Success and Luck: Good Fortune and the Myth of Meritocracy .

[ 98 ] He describes how chance plays a significant role in deciding who gets what that is not objectively based on merit. He does not discount the importance of talent and hard work, but, using psychological studies, mathematical formulae, and examples, demonstrates that among groups of people performing at a high level, chance (luck) plays an enormous role in an individual's success.

Undesirable outcomes [ edit ] Another concern regards the principle of incompetence, or the " Peter principle ". As people rise in a meritocratic society through the social hierarchy through their demonstrated merit, they eventually reach, and become stuck, at a level too difficult for them to perform effectively; they are promoted to incompetence. This reduces the effectiveness of a meritocratic system, the supposed main practical benefit of which is the competence of those who run the society.

In his book Meritocratic Education and Social Worthlessness (Palgrave, 2012), the philosopher Khen Lampert argued that educational meritocracy is nothing but a post-modern version of Social Darwinism . Its proponents argue that the theory justifies social inequality as being meritocratic. This social theory holds that Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection is a model, not only for the development of biological traits in a population, but also as an application for human social institutions —the existing social institutions being implicitly declared as normative . Social Darwinism shares its roots with early progressivism , and was most popular from the late nineteenth century to the end of World War II . Darwin only ventured to propound his theories in a biological sense, and it is other thinkers and theorists who have applied Darwin's model normatively to unequal endowments of human ambitions.

See also [ edit ] Achievement ideology Civil service entrance examination Differential Education Achievement Discrimination of excellence Educational entrance examination Elitism Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome Epistemic democracy Merit, excellence, and intelligence (MEI) – framework that emphasizes selecting candidates based solely on their merit, achievements, skills, abilities, intelligence and contributions Merit (Buddhism) Merit (Christianity) Ownership society Social mobility Technocracy Notes [ edit ] ^ This is the history of the meritocracy in the technical sense. The vaguer definition of a meritocracy as a "rule by intelligence" has been applied to many ancient Greek, Indian, Chinese, and Jewish thinkers and statesmen. For example, the Sanhedrin, the legislature of Ancient Israel and Kingdom of Judah , is sometimes called as an "intellectual meritocracy", in the sense that its members were drawn from religious scribes and not the aristocracy.

[ 99 ] Appointment was self-perpetuating, however, and new members were chosen personally by existing members.

[ 100 ] These are not meritocracies in the administrative sense, in which merit is determined objectively as a "tested competency or ability." [ 101 ] References [ edit ] ^ "meritocracy" .

Dictionary.com .

Archived from the original on 6 March 2016 . Retrieved 14 February 2016 .

^ a b Littler, Jo (2018).

Against Meritocracy: Culture, Power, and Myths of Mobility . Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge. p. 32.

ISBN 978-1-138-88954-5 .

^ a b Fox, Margalit (25 January 2002).

"Michael Young, 86, Scholar; Coined, Mocked 'Meritocracy' " .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 7 November 2016 . Retrieved 19 February 2017 .

^ Mijs, Jonathan J.B.; Savage, Mike (2020).

"Meritocracy, Elitism and Inequality" .

The Political Quarterly .

91 (2): 397– 404.

doi : 10.1111/1467-923X.12828 .

hdl : 1765/135370 .

^ Sachs-Cobbe, Benjamin (2023).

"Recent Work on Meritocracy" .

Analysis .

83 (1): 171– 185.

doi : 10.1093/analys/anac091 .

hdl : 10023/28168 .

^ Allen, Ansgar (1 December 2011).

"Michael Young's The Rise of the Meritocracy: A Philosophical Critique" .

British Journal of Educational Studies .

59 (4): 367– 382.

doi : 10.1080/00071005.2011.582852 .

ISSN 0007-1005 .

^ a b c Chang, C.H. (2017).

"How meritocracy is defined today?: Contemporary aspects of meritocracy" .

Recent Issues in Sociological Research .

10 (1): 112– 121.

doi : 10.14254/2071-789X.2017/10-1/8 .

^ De Vos, M. (2020). The European Court of Justice and the march towards substantive equality in European Union anti-discrimination law. International Journal of Discrimination and the Law, 20(1), 62-87.

^ Levinson, David; Cookson, Peter W.; Sadovnik, Alan R. (2002).

Education and Sociology: An Encyclopedia . Taylor & Francis. p. 436.

Most common definition of meritocracy conceptualizes merit in terms tested competency and power, and most likely as measured by IQ or standardized achievement tests.

^ Young (1958) .

^ "Definition of Meritocracy" .

Oxford Dictionary . Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 10 September 2011 . Retrieved 12 September 2011 .

^ Fontana Dictionary of Modern Thought . Fontana Press. 1988. p. 521.

^ Aristot. Pol. 2.1261b ^ Aristotle, (351 BC) Politics . Book Three Part IV. (Jowett, B., Trans) ^ a b Scully, M.A. (2014). "Meritocracy".

Wiley Encyclopedia of Management .

^ Panayotakis, C. (2014). "Capitalism, Meritocracy, and Social Stratification: A Radical Reformulation of the Davis-Moore Thesis".

The American Journal of Economics and Sociology .

73 (1): 126– 151.

doi : 10.1111/ajes.12068 .

^ Piketty, Thomas (2014).

Capital in the Twenty-First Century . Harvard University Press. p. 297.

ISBN 978-0674430006 .

^ Litter, J. (2018).

Against Meritocracy: Culture, Power and Myths of Mobility . Routledge. p. 2.

ISBN 978-1-138-88954-5 .

^ Piketty, T. (2014).

Capital in the Twenty-First Century . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674430006 .

^ Mijs, J.J.B. (2021). "The paradox of inequality: income inequality and belief in meritocracy go hand in hand".

Socio-Economic Review .

19 (1): 7– 35.

doi : 10.1093/ser/mwy051 .

^ Littler, J. (2018).

Against Meritocracy: Culture, Power and Myths of Mobility . Routledge. pp.

8– 9.

ISBN 978-1-138-88954-5 .

^ Littler, J. (2018).

Against Meritocracy: Culture, Power and Myths of Mobility . Routledge. p. 10.

ISBN 978-1-138-88954-5 .

^ "Social Pressure Index - Private Opinion in America" . Populace.org. 16 May – 24 June 2024.

^ What's College For?: The Struggle To Define American Higher Education; Zachary Karabell; ISBN 978-0-465-09152-2 ^ Journal of College Teaching & Learning – May 2008 Volume 5, Number 5 AACSB Accreditation ^ Furlong, Andy; Cartmel, Fred (1 June 2009).

Higher education and social justice . Maidenhead: Open University Press.

ISBN 978-0-335-22362-6 .

^ Young, Michael (29 June 2001).

"Down with meritocracy: The man who coined the word four decades ago wishes Tony Blair would stop using it" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 5 January 2017 . Retrieved 15 December 2016 .

^ Ford, Boris (1992).

The Cambridge cultural history of Britain . Cambridge University Press. p.

34 .

ISBN 978-0-521-42889-7 .

^ Kamolnick, Paul (2005).

The just meritocracy: IQ, class mobility, and American social policy . Westport CT: Praeger. p. 87.

ISBN 978-0-275-97922-5 .

^ Best, Shaun (2005).

Understanding Social Divisions . London: Sage. p. 32.

ISBN 978-0-7619-4296-2 .

^ " "meritocracy" in the Online Etymology Dictionary" .

Archived from the original on 11 September 2016 . Retrieved 3 July 2013 .

^ Young, Michael (1958).

The rise of the meritocracy, 1870-2033: An essay on education and inequality . London: Thames & Hudson. p. 11.

OCLC 3943639 .

^ Young (1958) , p. 13.

^ a b c Young (1958) , p. 15.

^ "Crisis in Education" Archived 14 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine (p. 4).

^ Littler, Jo (20 March 2017).

"Meritocracy: the great delusion that ingrains inequality" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 13 July 2017 . Retrieved 14 July 2017 .

^ Kazin, Edwards, and Rothman (2010), 142.

One of the oldest examples of a merit-based civil service system existed in the imperial bureaucracy of China.

^ Tan, Chung; Geng, Yinzheng (2005).

India and China: twenty centuries of civilization interaction and vibrations . University of Michigan Press. p. 128.

China not only produced the world's first "bureaucracy", but also the world's first "meritocracy" ^ Konner, Melvin (2003).

Unsettled: an anthropology of the Jews . Viking Compass. p.

217 .

ISBN 9780670032440 .

China is the world's oldest meritocracy ^ Tucker, Mary Evelyn (2009). "Touching the Depths of Things: Cultivating Nature in East Asia".

Ecology and the Environment: Perspectives from the Humanities .

Harvard Divinity School : 51.

To staff these institutions, they created the oldest meritocracy in the world, in which government appointments were based on civil service examinations that drew on the values of the Confucian Classics ^ Sienkewicz, Thomas J. (2003).

Encyclopedia of the Ancient World . Salem Press. p. 434.

Confucius invented the notion that those who govern should so because of merit and not inherited status, setting in motion the creation of the imperial examinations and bureaucracies open only to those who passed tests.

^ a b Burbank and Cooper (2010), 51.

^ a b c Kazin, Edwards, and Rothman (2010), 142.

^ See Estlund (2003) for a summary and discussion.

^ Alkouatli, Claire (2007).

Islam . Marshall Cavendish.

ISBN 9780761421207 .

^ The Ottoman Centuries Lord Kinross ^ İnalcık, Halil (1991).

"Meḥemmed II" . In Bosworth, C. E.

; van Donzel, E.

& Pellat, Ch.

(eds.).

The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .

Volume VI: Mahk–Mid . Leiden: E. J. Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-08112-3 .

^ For more on this topic: Madeline C. Zilfi, Politics of Piety: The Ottoman Ulema in the Postclassical Age (1600–1800) ^ Roger Savory , Iran under the Safavids , p. 183.

^ Sir E. Denison Ross, Sir Anthony Sherley and his Persian Adventure, pp. 219–20.

^ Bodde, Derke.

"China: A Teaching Workbook" . Columbia University.

Archived from the original on 4 January 2012 . Retrieved 5 August 2012 .

^ Huddleston, Mark W. Boyer, William W.

The higher civil service in the United States: quest for reform . (University of Pittsburgh Press, 1996), 9-10.

^ Kevin Shillington , 1995 (1989), History of Africa , New York: St. Martin's Press. p. 195.

^ "Jefferson, Adams, and the SAT's New Adversity Factor" .

The New Yorker . 23 May 2019.

Archived from the original on 15 April 2023 . Retrieved 13 April 2023 .

^ a b "Civil Service Reform" .

Digital History .

University of Houston .

Archived from the original on 12 March 2016 . Retrieved 19 February 2016 .

^ Julia Horne, and Geoffrey Sherington, "Extending the educational franchise: the social contract of Australia's public universities, 1850-1890", Paedagogica Historica (2010) 46#1 pp 207-227 ^ Miriam Henry (1988).

Understanding Schooling: An Introductory Sociology of Australian Education . Psychology Press. p. 81.

ISBN 9780203135990 .

^ Speech by Singapore Ambassador to France , 28 August 2008.

Archived 2 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ Ngiam Tong Dow (28 October 2006).

"Singapore's elites" . Little Speck. Archived from the original on 1 November 2006.

^ a b "Growing trend of uplifting education business in Singapore" .

Free Library and Tuition . Archived from the original on 25 April 2017 . Retrieved 25 October 2016 .

^ "$1 billion spent on tuition in one year" .

AsiaOne . Archived from the original on 2 January 2017 . Retrieved 25 October 2016 .

^ "2015 Private Tuition Rates in Singapore | Epigami Blog" .

Epigami Blog . 21 January 2015. Archived from the original on 14 December 2016 . Retrieved 25 October 2016 .

^ Tan, Kenneth Paul (January 2008). "Meritocracy and Elitism in a Global City: Ideological Shifts in Singapore".

International Political Science Review .

29 ( 7– 27): 7– 27.

doi : 10.1177/0192512107083445 .

S2CID 143983490 .

^ "Opinion | How Singapore is fixing its meritocracy" .

Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 14 September 2017 . Retrieved 14 September 2017 .

^ Tan, Kenneth Paul (9 December 2011). "The Ideology of Pragmatism: Neo-liberal Globalisation and Political Authoritarianism in Singapore".

Journal of Contemporary Asia .

42 (1): 67– 92.

doi : 10.1080/00472336.2012.634644 .

S2CID 56236985 .

^ Web page of "Instituto Nacional de Meritocracia de Ecuador" [ usurped ] , 12 March 2013.

^ Rawls, John (1999).

A Theory of Justice . Harvard University Press. pp.

91– 92.

^ Creel, Herlee G.

(1960).

Confucius and the Chinese Way . New York: Harper & Brothers.

ISBN 0-06-130063-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Chin, Annping (2008).

Confucius: a Life of Thought and Politics . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-15118-3 .

^ Bai, Tongdong (2012).

China: The Political Philosophy of the Middle Kingdom . Zed Books. pp.

60– 82.

ISBN 978-1-78032-075-5 .

^ Kim, Sungmoon (2020). "The challenge of Confucian political meritocracy: A critical introduction".

Philosophy & Social Criticism .

46 (9): 1005– 1016.

doi : 10.1177/0191453720948380 .

S2CID 225056920 .

^ a b c d e f Daniel A. Bell; Wang Pei (2020).

Just Hierarchy . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

^ a b c d e Bai, Tongdong (2019).

Against Political Equality: The Confucian Case . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

^ a b c d e f Daniel A. Bell (2016).

The China Model: Political Meritocracy and the Limits of Democracy . Princeton: Princeton University Press. pp.

63– 110, 151– 179.

^ Hankins, James (2019).

Virtue Politics: Soulcraft and Statecraft in Renaissance Italy . Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-23755-1 .

^ a b Jiang Qing (2013).

A Confucian Constitutional Order: How China's Ancient Past Can Shape Its Political Future . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691154602 .

^ Joseph Chan, Confucian Perfectionism: A Political Philosophy For Modern Times (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2013).

^ Kim, Sungmoon (2014).

Confucian Democracy in East Asia: Theory and Practice . New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-107-04903-1 .

^ Tan, Sor-hoon (2003).

Confucian Democracy: A Deweyan Reconstruction . Albany: State University of New York Press.

ISBN 0-7914-5889-X .

^ Mang, Franz (2020).

"Political meritocracy and its betrayal" .

Philosophy & Social Criticism .

46 (9): 1113– 1126.

doi : 10.1177/0191453720948386 .

S2CID 225056766 .

^ He Baogang; Warren, Mark (2020). "Can meritocracy replace democracy? A conceptual framework".

Philosophy & Social Criticism .

46 (9): 1093– 1112.

doi : 10.1177/0191453720948388 .

S2CID 225056621 .

^ Tseng, Roy (2020). "Political meritocracy versus ethical democracy: The Confucian political ideal revisited".

Philosophy & Social Criticism .

46 (9): 1033– 1052.

doi : 10.1177/0191453720948398 .

S2CID 224941702 .

^ a b c d "Rule of the Princelings" .

^ "Young, Michael, "Down with meritocracy" . The Guardian; 28 June 2001" .

The Guardian . 29 June 2001 . Retrieved 16 May 2024 .

^ Dench, Geoff (2006).

The Rise and Rise of Meritocracy . Oxford: Blackwell.

^ Pope Francis (2023), Laudate Deum , paragraphs 32, accessed 10 June 2024 ^ Case, Anne; Angus, Deaton (2020).

Deaths of Despair and the Future of Capitalism . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691190785 .

^ Markovits, Daniel (10 September 2019).

The Meritocracy Trap . Penguin Random House.

Archived from the original on 30 April 2021 . Retrieved 30 April 2021 .

^ Karma, Roge (2019), "The Meritocracy Trap, explained" , Vox , archived from the original on 14 May 2021 , retrieved 30 April 2021 ^ a b Sandel, M. (2020).

The Tyranny of Merit: What's Become of the Common Good?

. Allan Lane.

ISBN 9780241407608 .

^ "Michael Sandel: Why the elites don't deserve their status" .

UnHerd .

Archived from the original on 19 May 2022 . Retrieved 24 May 2022 .

^ a b Sandel, Michael (2021). "How Meritocracy fuels Inequality - Part I".

American Journal of Law and Equality (1).

^ Araki, S. (2023). "Beyond 'Imagined Meritocracy': Distinguishing the Relative Power of Education and Skills in Intergenerational Inequality".

Sociology .

57 (4): 975– 992.

doi : 10.1177/00380385231156093 .

S2CID 257382308 .

^ Arrow, Bowles and Durlauf.

Meritocracy and Economic Inequality . Princeton, 1999.

^ To teach: the journey of a teacher, by William Ayers, Teachers College Press, 1993, ISBN 0-8077-3985-5 , ISBN 978-0-8077-3985-3 , pg. 116 ^ "Death by Degrees" .

n+1 . n+1 Foundation, Inc. 25 June 2012.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2019 . Retrieved 20 January 2015 .

^ Laurie, Timothy; Stark, Hannah; Walker, Briohny (2019), "Critical Approaches to Continental Philosophy: Intellectual Community, Disciplinary Identity, and the Politics of Inclusion" , Parrhesia: A Journal of Critical Philosophy , 30 : 4, archived from the original on 11 December 2019 , retrieved 17 February 2019 ^ Princeton University Press, 2016 ^ Elazar, Daniel Judah (1985).

The Jewish polity: Jewish political organization from Biblical times to the present . Indiana University Press. p. 127.

ISBN 978-0253331564 .

^ Novak, David (2005).

The Jewish social contract: an essay in political theology . Princeton University Press. p. 134.

ISBN 9780691122106 .

The Sanhedrin were appointed by those who were members when there was a vacancy ^ Levinson, David; Cookson, Peter W.; Sadovnik, lan R. (2002).

Education and sociology: an encyclopedia . Taylor & Francis. p. 436.

ISBN 9780815316152 .

Further reading [ edit ] Library resources about Meritocracy Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Burbank, Jane and Cooper, Frederick. (2010).

Empires in World History: Power and the Politics of Difference . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-12708-5 .

Kazin, Michael, Edwards, Rebecca, and Rothman, Adam. (2010).

The Princeton Encyclopedia of American Political History Volume 2 . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-12971-1 .

Kett, Joseph F.

Merit: The History of a Founding Ideal From the American Revolution to the Twenty-First Century.

Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2012.

ISBN 978-0801451225 Lampert, Khen.

Meritocratic Education and Social Worthlessness , Palgrave-Macmillan, UK, 24 December 2012; ISBN 1137324880 Mulligan, Thomas. (2018).

Justice and the Meritocratic State . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9781138283800 .

Schwarz, Bill. (1996).

The expansion of England: race, ethnicity and cultural history . Psychology Pres.

ISBN 0-415-06025-7 .

Ieva, Lorenzo. (2018).

Fondamenti di meritocrazia . Rome: Europa edizioni.

ISBN 978-88-9384-875-6 .

Sandel, Michael .

The Tyranny of Merit: What's Become of the Common Good?

. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 2020.

ISBN 9780374289980 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Meritocracy .

Look up meritocracy in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Quinion, Michael (21 July 2001).

"World Wide Words: Meritocracy" .

World Wide Words . Retrieved 17 February 2016 .

Bent, Nick.

"Time for a more inclusive and progressive definition of meritocracy" .

Progress Online . Archived from the original on 5 June 2008 . Retrieved 17 February 2016 .

Markovits, Daniel (19 August 2019).

"How Life Became an Endless, Terrible Competition" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 26 August 2019 .

v t e Capitalism Aspects and perspectives General Anarchy of production Business cycle Centralization Competition Competition law Depression definitions of capitalism Deregulation Economic bubble Economic development Economic liberalism Economic planning Entrepreneurship Ecopreneurship Externality Financial crisis Financial Revolution Globalization Global labor arbitrage History of capitalist theory Industrial Revolution Invention Market economy Market failure Merchantilism Meritocracy Multinational corporation Nationalization Oligopoly Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Privatization Profit Property rights Recession Regulation Wage labour Wealth Ideology Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Conservative Corporate Democratic Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neo Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social State State-sponsored Welfare Cultural aspects Advertising American Dream Black Friday Consumerism Decentralization Economic freedom Economic mobility Individualism Liberalism Liberty Mainstream Philanthropy Private foundation Private property Rule of law Social alienation Spontaneous order Social aspects Corporatism Economic inequality Employment Freedom of association Labour market flexibility Labour supply Productivity Prosperity Syndicate Social venture capital Unemployment Criticism Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Critique of political economy Critique of work Market fundamentalism Marxism Wage slavery Antithesis Anarchism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-syndicalism Collectivist anarchism Communalism Communism Economic democracy Eco-socialism Free-market socialism Green anarchism Individualist anarchism Libertarian socialism Market anarchism Market socialism Mutualism Post-capitalism Post-scarcity economy Sharing economy Social anarchism Socialism Syndicalism v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Portal : Society Authority control databases : National Japan Czech Republic Latvia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Meritocracy&oldid=1305632452 " Categories : 1950s neologisms Affirmative action Liberalism Political neologisms Political philosophy Social philosophy Socio-economic mobility Hidden categories: Articles containing Chinese-language text Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles to be merged from July 2025 All articles to be merged Use dmy dates from February 2020 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2019 Articles containing Greek-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2023 Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 05:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Meritocracy 66 languages Add topic

