Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Current use 3 Example usage 4 References 5 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Geisteswissenschaft 15 languages Alemannisch العربية Boarisch Dansk Deutsch Español Français Jawa Latina Lëtzebuergesch Nederlands 日本語 Polski Српски / srpski 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of human sciences Geisteswissenschaft ( German pronunciation: [ˈɡaɪstəsˌvɪsənʃaft] ; plural : Geisteswissenschaften [ˈɡaɪstəsˌvɪsənʃaftən] ; "science of mind"; lit.

"spirit science") is a set of human sciences such as philosophy , history , philology , musicology , linguistics , theater studies , literary studies , media studies , religious studies and sometimes even jurisprudence , that are traditional in German universities . Most of its subject matter would come under Humanities in the typical English-speaking university .

History [ edit ] The concept of Geist dates back to eighteenth- and nineteenth-century German idealism , in particular to Herder's and Hegel's concept of a Volksgeist , the alleged common "spirit", or rather, mind, of a people. To understand the term Geisteswissenschaften , one should bear in mind that the continental faculty of philosophy inherited the medieval faculty of arts .  Besides philosophy itself it encompassed the natural sciences with mathematics as well as the philological and historical disciplines and later on psychology and the social sciences. The term Geisteswissenschaften first was used as translation of John Stuart Mill ’s term “ moral sciences ”. The historian, philosopher and sociologist Wilhelm Dilthey popularised the term, arguing that psychology and the emerging field of sociology – like the philological and historical disciplines – should be considered as Geisteswissenschaft rather than as Naturwissenschaft ( natural science ), and that their methodology should reflect this classification. His arguments were very influential in the theories of the prominent German sociologist Max Weber , though Weber preferred the term Kulturwissenschaft , which has been promoted by his neo-Kantian colleagues ( Wilhelm Windelband and Heinrich Rickert ).

Current use [ edit ] Since the times of Dilthey it became common to speak of the Naturwissenschaften on the one hand and the Geisteswissenschaften on the other – not particularly considering the status of mathematics and of philosophy itself. After the separation of the natural sciences and mathematics into a particular faculty (in some universities not until the 1950s), the Geisteswissenschaften were left alone in the philosophical faculty and even philosophy often was subsumed under the term Geisteswissenschaften . Meanwhile, many of the German universities have split up these faculties in smaller departments, so that the old common interests and the old borders are less visible.

The term is now used irregularly. In administrative contexts it is used broadly to discuss how to organise the academic institutions and describe the culture of academic discussions, so that the faculties of Theology and Law are added to the Geisteswissenschaften. In some contexts of science policy the Geisteswissenschaften are described as non-empirical sciences, drawing them near philosophy and excluding the social sciences from their area.

[ 1 ] In the context of methodology on the contrary it has been emphasised, that Geisteswissenschaften such as history and the philological disciplines, relying on empirical data (documents, books and utterances), along with psychology and the social sciences , have a common empirical character , which is essentially based on comprehension ( Verstehen ) or understanding of expressions of meaning.

[ 2 ] Other authors, like Rudolf Steiner , used the term Geisteswissenschaft in a historically quite distinct sense to refer to a proposed "Science of Spirit".

Example usage [ edit ] From Kulturgeschichte Frankreichs , Suchanek-Fröhlich, p. 633: [ 3 ] Man hat Taine vorgeworfen, dass er, dessen Hauptziel die Einführung naturwissenschaftlicher Methoden in die Geisteswissenschaften war, selbst nicht induktiv, sondern deduktiv vorging.

Translation: Some reproach Taine in that he himself, whose goal was the introduction of the methods of natural science into the Geisteswissenschaften , proceeded from methods which were not inductive but rather deductive.

References [ edit ] ^ Carl Friedrich Gethmann, Dieter Langewiesche, Jürgen Mittelstraß, Dieter Simon, Günter Stock, Manifest Geisteswissenschaft , ed. by Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Berlin 2005 Welche Religion braucht die Gesellschaft?

Archived 2016-06-24 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Bernward Grünewald: Geist – Kultur – Gesellschaft. Versuch einer Prinzipientheorie der Geisteswissenschaften auf transzendentalphilosophischer Grundlage . Berlin: Duncker und Humblot 2009.

^ Kulturgeschichte Frankreichs Suchanek-Fröhlich, Stefan Kröner Verlag, Stuttgart, 1966 Bibliography [ edit ] Gunter Scholz, Zwischen Wissenschaftsanspruch und Orientierungsbedürfnis. Zu Grundlage und Wandel der Geisteswissenschaften Frankfurt am Main, Suhrkamp 1991, ISBN 3-518-28566-1 Bernward Grünewald, Geist – Kultur – Gesellschaft. Versuch einer Prinzipientheorie der Geisteswissenschaften auf transzendentalphilosophischer Grundlage , Berlin, Duncker & Humblot, 2009, ISBN 978-3-428-13160-0 .

Albrecht Behmel , Erfolgreich im Studium der Geisteswissenschaften , Francke, Tübingen 2005, ISBN 3-7720-3371-7 v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more...

Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Antihumanism Philistinism Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Renaissance humanism Studia Humanitatis v t e Social sciences Outline History Index Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural social physical Economics microeconomics macroeconomics econometrics mathematical Geography physical human technical integrated History cultural auxiliary sciences economic human military political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems public law private law Linguistics semiotics Political science international relations comparative philosophy public policy public administration Psychology abnormal cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Administration business public Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Criminology Critical animal studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental social science studies Food studies Gender studies Global studies Historical sociology History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Linguistics Management Media studies Philosophies science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Political sociology Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Quantum social science Social work Vegan studies List List of social science journals Other categorizations Behavioural sciences Geisteswissenschaft Human science Humanities Category Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geisteswissenschaft&oldid=1276686186 " Categories : Human sciences Humanities education Education in Germany Wilhelm Dilthey German words and phrases Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with German IPA This page was last edited on 20 February 2025, at 06:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geisteswissenschaft 15 languages Add topic

