Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Formation of the department 1.2 Controversies 2 American Indians 3 Operating units 4 Awards 5 Regions 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents United States Department of the Interior 36 languages العربية Aragonés Беларуская Български Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English کوردی Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°53′40″N 77°02′33″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.89444°N 77.04250°W ﻿ / 38.89444; -77.04250 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Department of the US federal government "Department of the Interior" redirects here. For other uses, see Department of the Interior (disambiguation) .

"USDOI" redirects here. For the precursor to the FBI, see United States Division of Investigation . For the statement, see United States Declaration of Independence .

United States Department of the Interior Seal of the U.S. Department of the Interior Flag of the U.S. Department of the Interior Exterior of the main Interior Building Agency overview Formed March 3, 1849 Type Department Jurisdiction Federal Government of the United States Headquarters Main Interior Building 1849 C Street NW Washington, D.C.

, U.S.

20240 38°53′40″N 77°02′33″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.89444°N 77.04250°W ﻿ / 38.89444; -77.04250 Employees 67,026 Annual budget $17.6 billion (2022) [ 1 ] Agency executives Doug Burgum , Secretary Katharine MacGregor , Deputy Secretary Website doi .gov The United States Department of the Interior ( DOI ) is an executive department of the U.S. federal government responsible for the management and conservation of most federal lands and natural resources . It also administers programs relating to Native Americans , Alaska Natives , Native Hawaiians , and four of the five inhabited insular areas of the United States, [ 2 ] as well as programs related to historic preservation. About 75% of federal public land is managed by the department, with most of the remainder managed by the Department of Agriculture 's Forest Service .

[ 3 ] The department was created on March 3, 1849. It is headquartered at the Main Interior Building , located at 1849 C Street NW in Washington, D.C.

The department is headed by the secretary of the interior , who reports directly to the president of the United States and is a member of the president's Cabinet . The current interior secretary is Doug Burgum , who was sworn in on February 1, 2025.

As of mid-2004, the department managed 507 million acres (2,050,000 km 2 ) of surface land, or about one-fifth of the land in the United States. It manages 476 dams and 348 reservoirs through the Bureau of Reclamation , 433 national parks , monuments, historical sites, etc. through the National Park Service , and 544 national wildlife refuges through the Fish and Wildlife Service . The largest land management agency is the Bureau of Land Management , managing about one-eighth of the land in the United States.

Despite its name, the Department of the Interior has a different role from that of the interior ministries of other nations, which are usually responsible for police matters and internal security. In the United States, national security and immigration functions are performed by the Department of Homeland Security primarily and the Department of Justice secondarily. The Department of the Interior has often been humorously called "the Department of Everything Else" because of its broad range of responsibilities.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Formation of the department [ edit ] A department for domestic concern was first considered by the 1st United States Congress in 1789, but those duties were placed in the Department of State . The idea of a separate domestic department continued to percolate for a half-century and was supported by presidents from James Madison to James Polk . The 1846–48 Mexican–American War gave the proposal new steam as the responsibilities of the federal government grew. Polk's secretary of the treasury , Robert J. Walker , became a vocal champion of creating the new department.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] In 1849, Walker stated in his annual report that several federal offices were placed in departments with which they had little to do. He noted that the United States General Land Office had little to do with the Treasury and also highlighted the Indian Affairs office , part of the Department of War , and the Patent Office , part of the Department of State . Walker argued that these and other bureaus should be brought together in a new Department of the Interior.

[ citation needed ] A bill authorizing its creation of the department passed the House of Representatives on February 15, 1849, and spent just over two weeks in the Senate . The department was established on March 3, 1849 (9 Stat.

395 ), the eve of President Zachary Taylor 's inauguration, when the Senate voted 31 to 25 to create the department. Its passage was delayed by Democrats in Congress who were reluctant to create more patronage posts for the incoming Whig administration to fill. The first secretary of the interior was Thomas Ewing .

Several of the domestic concerns the department originally dealt with were gradually transferred to other departments. For example, the Department of Interior was responsible for water pollution control prior to the creation of the Environmental Protection Agency .

[ 8 ] Other agencies became separate departments, such as the Bureau of Agriculture , which later became the Department of Agriculture . However, land and natural resource management, American Indian affairs, wildlife conservation, and territorial affairs remain the responsibilities of the Department of the Interior.

Controversies [ edit ] Secretary of the Interior Albert B. Fall was implicated in the Teapot Dome scandal of 1921. He was convicted of bribery in 1929, and served one year in prison, for his part in the controversy. A major factor in the scandal was a transfer of certain oil leases from the jurisdiction of the Department of the Navy to that of the Department of the Interior, at Fall's behest.

Secretary of the Interior James G. Watt faced criticism for his alleged hostility to environmentalism, for his support of the development and use of federal lands by foresting, ranching, and other commercial interests, and for banning the Beach Boys from playing a 1983 Independence Day concert on the National Mall out of concerns of attracting "an undesirable element". His 1983 resignation was prompted by a speech in which he said about his staff: "I have a black, a woman, two Jews and a cripple. And we have talent." [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Under the Administration of President George W. Bush , the Interior Department's maintenance backlog climbed from $5 billion to $8.7 billion, despite Bush's campaign pledges to eliminate it completely. Of the agency under Bush's leadership, Interior Department Inspector General Earl Devaney has cited a " culture of fear " and of "ethical failure." Devaney has also said, "Simply stated, short of a crime, anything goes at the highest levels of the Department of Interior." [ 11 ] Launched in June of 2021, the Federal Indian Boarding School Initiative intended to investigate federal Indian boarding school policies and multi-generational impacts of trauma on American Indian, Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian children. Released in two volumes, the three year investigation produced the first report [ 12 ] in May 2022 and the second and final [ 13 ] volume in June 2024. The final report details the severe trauma and cultural disruption inflicted on Native American communities through these schools, which operated from the late 19th century to the mid-20th century. It highlights the systemic abuse and neglect endured by students, finding 973 children died at the schools and calls for accountability and measures to address the ongoing impact on Native American families and communities to include working closely with tribal nations on the identification and repatriation of the remains.

[ 14 ] American Indians [ edit ] Within the Interior Department, the Bureau of Indian Affairs handles some federal relations with American Indians, while others are handled by the Office of Special Trustee. The current acting assistant secretary for Indian affairs is Bryan Newland, an enrolled member of the Bay Mills Indian Community .

The department has been the subject of disputes over proper accounting for American Indian Trusts set up to track the income and distribution of monies that are generated by the trust and specific American Indian lands, which the government leases for fees to companies that extract oil, timber, minerals, and other resources. Several cases have sought an accounting of such funds from departments within the Interior and Treasury (such as the Minerals Management Service), in what has been a 15-year-old lawsuit. Some American Indian nations have also sued the government over water-rights issues and their treaties with the US. In 2010 Congress passed the Claims Settlement Act of 2010 (Public Law 111-291), which provided $3.4 billion for the settlement of the Cobell v. Salazar class-action trust case and four American Indian water rights cases.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] On March 16, 2021, Deb Haaland , serving at that time as a member of Congress for New Mexico, took the oath of office as secretary, becoming the first American Indian to lead an executive department, and the third woman to lead the department.

[ 17 ] Operating units [ edit ] The hierarchy of the U.S. Department of the Interior Logo of the National Invasive Species Council Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization Deputy Director, Michelle E. Warren, leading an awards ceremony in Washington, D.C.

Deputy Assistant Secretary for Fish, Wildlife and Parks, Michael Bean (third from left), at the dedication of San Antonio Missions UNESCO World Heritage Site Eastern entry station to Yosemite National Park Fish and Wildlife Service personnel in Texas A Bureau of Indian Affairs firefighter at the La Jolla Indian Reservation 2016 map of Bureau of Indian Education schools A Bureau of Land Management Wilderness Study Area in northern Alaska Assistant Secretary for Policy, Management, and Budget Deputy Assistant Secretary for Policy and International Affairs Office of Environmental Policy and Compliance Office of International Affairs Office of Native Hawaiian Relations Office of Restoration and Damage Assessment Office of Policy Analysis National Invasive Species Council Deputy Assistant Secretary for Budget, Finance, Performance and Acquisition Office of Budget Office of Financial Management Office of Planning and Performance Management Business Integration Office [administers the Financial and Business Management System (FBMS)] Office of Acquisition and Property Management Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Capital and Diversity Office of Human Resources Office of Occupational Safety and Health Office of Strategic Employee and Organizational Development Office of Civil Rights Deputy Assistant Secretary for Technology, Information and Business Services Office of Collaborative Action and Dispute Resolution Appraisal and Valuation Services Office Interior Business Center Office of Hearings and Appeals Office of Facilities and Administrative Services Office of the Chief Information Officer Deputy Assistant Secretary for Public Safety, Resources Protection and Emergency Services (DAS-PRE) Office of Emergency Management (OEM) Office of Law Enforcement and Security (OLES) Office of Wildland Fire Office of Aviation Services (OAS) Interagency Borderlands Coordinator Deputy Assistant Secretary for Natural Resources Revenue Management Office of Natural Resources Revenue Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks National Park Service United States Fish and Wildlife Service Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs Deputy Assistant Secretary for Management Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) Office of Human Capital Management (OHCM) Office of Planning and Policy Analysis (OPPA) Office of Facilities, Environmental and Cultural Resources (OFECR) Deputy Assistant Secretary for Policy and Economic Development Office of Indian Energy and Economic Development (IEED) Office of Indian Gaming (OIG) Office of Self-Governance (OSG) Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) Office of Indian Services (OIS) Office of Field Operations (OFO) Office of Justice Services (OJS) Office of Trust Services (OTS) Bureau of Indian Education (BIE) Office of External Affairs Office of Congressional and Legislative Affairs (OCLA) Office of Public Affairs (OPA) Office of Federal Acknowledgment (OFA) Office of Regulatory Management (ORM) Assistant Secretary for Land and Minerals Management Bureau of Land Management Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement Bureau of Ocean Energy Management Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement Assistant Secretary for Water and Science United States Geological Survey Bureau of Reclamation Central Utah Project Completion Act Office Assistant Secretary for Insular and International Affairs Office of Insular Affairs Office of International Affairs Ocean, Great Lakes and Coastal Activities Program Office Solicitor Office of the Solicitor (SOL) Office of the Inspector General (OIG) Office of General Counsel Assistant Inspector General for Investigations Office of Investigations Assistant Inspector General for Audits, Inspections, and Evaluations Office of Audits, Inspections, and Evaluations Assistant Inspector General for Management Office of Management Associate Inspector General for External Affairs Associate Inspector General for Whistleblower Protection Strategy Management Office Associate Inspector General for Communications Chief Information Officer Special Trustee for American Indians Federal Executive Boards Interior Museum National Indian Gaming Commission (NIGC) Awards [ edit ] DOI Convocation Honor Award is the most prestigious recognition that can be granted by the department.

The following awards are presented at the Honor Awards Convocation: [ 18 ] Safety and Health Award of Excellence & Aviation Safety Award Distinguished Service Award Citizen's Award for Bravery Valor Award Regions [ edit ] In 2018, DOI established 12 organizational regions to be used across the department. These superseded the previous 49 regions used across 8 agencies.

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] United States portal Politics portal America's Great Outdoors Initiative Environmental policy of the United States USA.gov References [ edit ] ^ "Departmental Overview" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 16, 2022 . Retrieved May 25, 2022 .

^ "Who We Are | U.S. Department of the Interior" .

www.doi.gov . January 31, 2025 . Retrieved June 19, 2025 .

^ GAO, "Federal Land Management: Observations on a Possible Move of the Forest Service into the Department of the Interior" Archived July 3, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , February 11, 2009 ^ "History" , National Park Service web page. Retrieved May 20, 2010.

^ "U.S. Department of the Interior: The Department of Everything Else" .

National Park Service .

Archived from the original on June 17, 2021 . Retrieved February 24, 2023 .

^ "Robert J Walker Secretary of the Treasury 1845-1849" .

Treasury Department .

Archived from the original on October 3, 2022 . Retrieved October 3, 2022 .

^ "History of the Department of the Interior" .

www.doi.gov . July 1, 2015.

Archived from the original on March 17, 2022 . Retrieved February 24, 2023 .

^ Elkins, Chuck (October 2013).

"Transcript of "Behind the Scenes at the Creation of the EPA" Video" (PDF) .

EPA Alumni Association .

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 12, 2019 . Retrieved August 20, 2018 .

^ 556. James G Watt, US Secretary of the Interior.

, "Simpson's Contemporary Quotations" (1988) via bartleby.com and Wayback Machine .

^ "RMOA – Document" . Archived from the original on January 8, 2009 . Retrieved October 29, 2008 .

^ Cart, Julie .

"Bush legacy leaves uphill climb for U.S. parks" , Los Angeles Times , January 25, 2009.

^ Newland, Bryan (May 2022).

"Federal Indian Boarding School Initiative Investigative Report" (PDF) .

^ Newland, Bryan (July 2024).

"Federal Indian Boarding School Initiative Investigative Report Vol. II" (PDF) .

^ Kavi, Aishvarya (July 30, 2024).

"Nearly 1,000 Native Children Died at Boarding Schools, Interior Dept. Finds" .

New York Times .

^ Curtis, Mary C.

, "Obama Hails Passage of Settlement for Native Americans, Black Farmers" Archived February 1, 2011, at the Wayback Machine , The Huffington Post , November 30, 2010. Accessed December 1, 2011.

^ Warren, James, "A Victory for Native Americans?" Archived February 27, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , The Atlantic , 7 June 2010.

^ Chavez, Aliyah (March 16, 2021).

"Deb Haaland swearing in details announced" .

Indian Country Today .

Archived from the original on March 17, 2021 . Retrieved March 17, 2021 .

^ "Department of Interior Awards & Recognition" .

Department of Interior . September 12, 2019.

Archived from the original on May 22, 2021 . Retrieved June 19, 2021 .

^ "Unified Interior Regional Boundaries" .

www.doi.gov . February 22, 2018.

Archived from the original on August 21, 2021 . Retrieved January 29, 2023 .

Further reading [ edit ] Black, Megan.

The Global Interior: Mineral Frontiers and American Power . Harvard University Press, 2018.

Utley, Robert M. and Barry Mackintosh; The Department of Everything Else: Highlights of Interior History ; Dept. of the Interior, Washington, D.C.; 1989 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Department of the Interior .

U.S. Department of the Interior records are archived at the American Heritage Center , University of Wyoming .

Official website Department of the Interior on USAspending.gov Department of the Interior in the Federal Register Works by United States Department of the Interior at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) The Department of Everything Else: Highlights of Interior History Archived December 23, 2005, at the Wayback Machine "Sex, Drug Use and Graft cited in Interior Department" , The New York Times , September 10, 2008 v t e United States Department of the Interior Headquarters: Main Interior Building Doug Burgum , Secretary of the Interior Vacant , Deputy Secretary of the Interior Bureau of Indian Affairs Bureau of Indian Education Bureau of Land Management Bureau of Ocean Energy Management Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement Bureau of Reclamation Bureau of Trust Funds Administration National Indian Gaming Commission National Park Service Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement United States Fish and Wildlife Service United States Geological Survey Office of the Assistant Secretary for Insular and International Affairs Office of the Solicitor Office of Natural Resources Revenue Central Utah Project Completion Act Office Indian Arts and Crafts Board National Invasive Species Council v t e United States government agencies involved in environmental science Environmental Protection Agency Global Change Research Program National Aeronautics and Space Administration National Science Foundation Smithsonian Institution Department of the Interior Bureau of Indian Affairs Bureau of Land Management Bureau of Ocean Energy Management Bureau of Reclamation National Park Service United States Fish and Wildlife Service United States Geological Survey Office of the Assistant Secretary for Insular and International Affairs Office of Surface Mining, Reclamation, and Enforcement Department of Commerce National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Geodetic Survey Marine Fisheries Service Ocean Service Oceanic and Atmospheric Research UxSRTO Weather Service Department of Energy Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Office of Environmental Management Office of Science National Laboratories and Technology Centers Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service Farm Service Agency Food and Nutrition Service Foreign Agricultural Service Natural Resources Conservation Service ( National Water and Climate Center ) Rural Utilities Service Forest Service Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate United States Coast Guard Department of Health and Human Services Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences Department of Defense Air Force Research Laboratory Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Joint Typhoon Warning Center Office of Naval Research Combat Capabilities Development Command Executive Office of the President Climate Policy Office Clean Energy Innovation and Implementation U.S. Special Presidential Envoy for Climate Council on Environmental Quality Defunct Environmental Science Services Administration United States Fish Commission United States Coast and Geodetic Survey White House Office of Energy and Climate Change Policy v t e Federal executive departments of the United States of America Current Agriculture Commerce Defense Education Energy Health and Human Services Homeland Security Housing and Urban Development Interior Justice Labor State Transportation Treasury Veterans Affairs Former Air Force Army Commerce and Labor Health, Education, and Welfare Navy Post Office War Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Portugal Norway Croatia Greece Korea 2 Poland Israel Academics CiNii Artists ULAN People Trove Other IdRef RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Department_of_the_Interior&oldid=1297248130 " Categories : United States Department of the Interior 1849 establishments in the United States Government agencies established in 1849 United States federal executive departments Land management ministries Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from March 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from July 2021 Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 25 June 2025, at 01:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents United States Department of the Interior 36 languages Add topic

