Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 1.1 Scientific applications 1.2 Protein nutrition 1.3 Other applications 2 Liebig's barrel 3 Biotechnology 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Liebig's law of the minimum 27 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Italiano עברית Кыргызча Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Seeltersk Simple English Slovenščina Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Growth is limited by the scarcest resource Liebig's law of the minimum , often simply called Liebig's law or the law of the minimum , is a principle developed in agricultural science by Carl Sprengel (1840) and later popularized by Justus von Liebig . It states that growth is dictated not by total resources available, but by the scarcest resource ( limiting factor ). The law has also been applied to biological populations and ecosystem models for factors such as sunlight or mineral nutrients .

Applications [ edit ] This  was originally applied to plant or crop growth, where it was found that increasing the amount of plentiful nutrients did not increase plant growth. Only by increasing the amount of the limiting nutrient (the one most scarce in relation to "need") was the growth of a plant or crop improved. This principle can be summed up in the aphorism, "The availability of the most abundant nutrient in the soil is only as good as the availability of the least abundant nutrient in the soil." Or the rough analog, "A chain is only as strong as its weakest link." Though diagnosis of limiting factors to crop yields is a common study, the approach has been criticized.

[ 1 ] Scientific applications [ edit ] Liebig's law has been extended to biological populations (and is commonly used in ecosystem modelling ). For example, the growth of an organism such as a plant may be dependent on a number of different factors, such as sunlight or mineral nutrients (e.g., nitrate or phosphate ). The availability of these may vary, such that at any given time one is more limiting than the others. Liebig's law states that growth only occurs at the rate permitted by the most limiting factor.

[ 2 ] For instance, in the equation below, the growth of population O {\displaystyle O} is a function of the minimum of three Michaelis-Menten terms representing limitation by factors I {\displaystyle I} , N {\displaystyle N} and P {\displaystyle P} .

d O d t = O ( min ( μ μ I I k I + I , μ μ N N k N + N , μ μ P P k P + P ) − − m ) {\displaystyle {\frac {dO}{dt}}=O\left(\min \left({\frac {\mu _{I}I}{k_{I}+I}},{\frac {\mu _{N}N}{k_{N}+N}},{\frac {\mu _{P}P}{k_{P}+P}}\right)-m\right)} Where
O is the biomass concentration or population density.
μI,μN,μP are the specific growth rates in response to the concentrations of three different limiting nutrients, represented by I,N,P respectively.
kI,kN,kP are the half-saturation constants for the three nutrients I,N,P respectively. These constants represent the concentration of the nutrient at which the growth rate is half of its maximum.
I,N,P are the concentrations of the three nutrients /factors.
m is the mortality rate or decay constant.

The use of the equation is limited to a situation where there are steady state ceteris paribus conditions, and factor interactions are tightly controlled.

Protein nutrition [ edit ] In human nutrition , the law of the minimum was used by William Cumming Rose to determine the essential amino acids . In 1931 he published his study "Feeding experiments with mixtures of highly refined amino acids".

[ 3 ] Knowledge of the essential amino acids has enabled vegetarians to enhance their protein nutrition by protein combining from various vegetable sources. One practitioner was Nevin S. Scrimshaw fighting protein deficiency in India and Guatemala.

Frances Moore Lappé published Diet for a Small Planet in 1971 which popularized protein combining using grains, legumes, and dairy products.

The law of the minimum was tested at University of Southern California in 1947.

[ 4 ] "The formation of protein molecules is a coordinated tissue function and can be accomplished only when all amino acids which take part in the formation are present at the same time." It was further  concluded, that "'incomplete' amino acid mixtures are not stored in the body, but are irreversibly further metabolized." Robert Bruce Merrifield was a laboratory assistant for the experiments. When he wrote his autobiography he recounted in 1993 the finding: We showed that no net growth occurred when one essential amino acid was omitted from the diet, nor did it  occur if that amino  acid was fed several hours after the main feeding with the deficient diet.

[ 5 ] Other applications [ edit ] More recently Liebig's law is starting to find an application in natural resource management where it surmises that growth in markets dependent upon natural resource inputs is restricted by the most limited input. As the natural capital upon which growth depends is limited in supply due to the finite nature of the planet, Liebig's law encourages scientists and natural resource managers to calculate the scarcity of essential resources in order to allow for a multi-generational approach to resource consumption .

Neoclassical economic theory has sought to refute the issue of resource scarcity by application of the law of substitutability and technological innovation . The substitutability "law" states that as one resource is exhausted—and prices rise due to a lack of surplus—new markets based on alternative resources appear at certain prices in order to satisfy demand. Technological innovation implies that humans are able to use technology to fill the gaps in situations where resources are imperfectly substitutable .

A market-based theory depends on proper pricing. Where resources such as clean air and water are not accounted for, there will be a " market failure ". These failures may be addressed with Pigovian taxes and subsidies, such as a carbon tax . While the theory of the law of substitutability is a useful rule of thumb, some resources may be so fundamental that there exist no substitutes. For example, Isaac Asimov noted, "We may be able to substitute nuclear power for coal power, and plastics for wood ... but for phosphorus there is neither substitute nor replacement." [ 6 ] Where no substitutes exist, such as phosphorus, recycling will be necessary. This may require careful long-term planning and governmental intervention, in part to create Pigovian taxes to allow efficient market allocation of resources, in part to address other market failures such as excessive time discounting.

Liebig's barrel [ edit ] Liebig's barrel Dobenecks used the image of a barrel — often called "Liebig's barrel" — to explain Liebig's law.

[ 7 ] Just as the maximum practical capacity of a barrel with staves of unequal length is limited by the length of the shortest stave. Similarly, a plant's growth is limited by the nutrient in shortest supply.

If a system satisfies the law of the minimum then adaptation will equalize the load of different factors because the adaptation resource will be allocated for compensation of limitation.

[ 8 ] Adaptation systems act as the cooper of Liebig's barrel and lengthens the shortest stave to improve barrel capacity. Indeed, in well-adapted systems the limiting factor should be compensated as far as possible. This observation follows the concept of resource competition and fitness maximization.

[ 9 ] Due to the law of the minimum paradoxes, if we observe the Law of the Minimum in artificial systems, then under natural conditions adaptation will equalize the load of different factors and we can expect a violation of the law of the minimum. Inversely, if artificial systems demonstrate significant violation of the law of the minimum, then we can expect that under natural conditions adaptation will compensate this violation. In a limited system life will adjust as an evolution of what came before.

[ 8 ] Biotechnology [ edit ] One example of technological innovation is in plant genetics whereby the biological characteristics of species can be changed by employing genetic modification to alter biological dependence on the most limiting resource.

Biotechnological innovations are thus able to extend the limits for growth in species by an increment until a new limiting factor is established, which can then be challenged through technological innovation.

Theoretically there is no limit to the number of possible increments towards an unknown productivity limit.

[ 10 ] This would be either the point where the increment to be advanced is so small it cannot be justified economically or where technology meets an invulnerable natural barrier. It may be worth adding that biotechnology itself is totally dependent on external sources of natural capital .

See also [ edit ] Bottleneck (disambiguation) Critical chain – Method of planning and managing projects Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Critical path method – Method of scheduling activities Iron fertilization – Ecological concept Keystone species – Species with a large effect on its environment Limiting factor – Bottleneck variable limiting the evolution of a system Random walk – Process forming a path from many random steps Rate determining step – Slowest step of a chemical reaction Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Sustainability – Societal goal and normative concept Theory of Constraints – Management paradigm Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets References [ edit ] ^ Sinclair, Thomas R.; Park, Wayne R. (1993). "Inadequacy of the Liebig limiting-factor paradigm for explaining varying crop yields".

Agronomy Journal .

85 (3): 472– 6.

Bibcode : 1993AgrJ...85..742S .

doi : 10.2134/agronj1993.00021962008500030040x .

^ Sinclair, Thomas R. (1999).

"Limits to Crop Yield" .

Plants and Population: is there time?

. Colloquium. Washington DC: National Academy of Sciences.

doi : 10.17226/9619 .

ISBN 978-0-309-06427-9 . Archived from the original on 2011-07-03.

^ Rose, W.C. (1931).

"Feeding Experiments" (PDF) .

Journal of Biological Chemistry .

94 : 155– 65.

^ Geiger, E. (1947). "Experiments with delayed supplementation of incomplete amino acid mixtures".

Journal of Nutrition .

34 (1): 97– 111.

doi : 10.1093/jn/34.1.97 .

PMID 20244454 .

^ Merrifield, Robert Bruce (1993).

Life During a Golden Age of Peptide Chemistry .

American Chemical Society . p. 19.

ISBN 0-8412-1842-0 .

^ Asimov, Issac (1972) [1962].

"Life's Bottleneck" .

Fact and Fancy . Doubleday.

ISBN 978-0-380-01174-2 .

^ Whitson, A.R.; Walster, H.L. (1912).

Soils and soil fertility . St. Paul, MN: Webb. p.

73 .

OCLC 1593332 .

100. Illustration of Limiting Factors. The accompanying illustration devised by Dr. Dobenecks is intended to illustrate this principle of limiting factors.

^ a b Gorban, A.N.; Pokidysheva, L.I.; Smirnova, E.V.; Tyukina, T.A. (2011).

"Law of the Minimum Paradoxes" .

Bull Math Biol .

73 (9): 2013– 44.

arXiv : 0907.1965 .

doi : 10.1007/s11538-010-9597-1 .

PMID 21088995 .

S2CID 1671637 .

^ Tilman, D. (2020) [1982].

Resource Competition and Community Structure . Monographis in population biology. Vol. 17. Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-380-01174-2 .

^ Reilly, J.M.; Fuglie, K.O. (6 July 1998). "Future yield growth in field crops: what evidence exists?".

Soil and Tillage Research .

47 ( 3– 4): 275– 290.

Bibcode : 1998STilR..47..275R .

doi : 10.1016/S0167-1987(98)00116-0 .

v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Trophic components General Abiotic component Abiotic stress Behaviour Biogeochemical cycle Biomass Biotic component Biotic stress Carrying capacity Competition Ecosystem Ecosystem ecology Ecosystem model Green world hypothesis Keystone species List of feeding behaviours Metabolic theory of ecology Productivity Resource Restoration Producers Autotrophs Chemosynthesis Chemotrophs Foundation species Kinetotrophs Mixotrophs Myco-heterotrophy Mycotroph Organotrophs Photoheterotrophs Photosynthesis Photosynthetic efficiency Phototrophs Primary nutritional groups Primary production Consumers Apex predator Bacterivore Carnivores Chemoorganotroph Foraging Generalist and specialist species Intraguild predation Herbivores Heterotroph Heterotrophic nutrition Insectivore Mesopredators Mesopredator release hypothesis Omnivores Optimal foraging theory Planktivore Predation Prey switching Decomposers Chemoorganoheterotrophy Decomposition Detritivores Detritus Microorganisms Archaea Bacteriophage Lithoautotroph Lithotrophy Marine Microbial cooperation Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial intelligence Microbial loop Microbial mat Microbial metabolism Phage ecology Food webs Biomagnification Ecological efficiency Ecological pyramid Energy flow Food chain Trophic level Example webs Lakes Rivers Soil Tritrophic interactions in plant defense Marine food webs cold seeps hydrothermal vents intertidal kelp forests North Pacific Gyre San Francisco Estuary tide pool Processes Ascendency Bioaccumulation Cascade effect Climax community Competitive exclusion principle Consumer–resource interactions Copiotrophs Dominance Ecological network Ecological succession Energy quality Energy systems language f-ratio Feed conversion ratio Feeding frenzy Mesotrophic soil Nutrient cycle Oligotroph Paradox of the plankton Trophic cascade Trophic mutualism Trophic state index Defense, counter Animal coloration Anti-predator adaptations Camouflage Deimatic behaviour Herbivore adaptations to plant defense Mimicry Plant defense against herbivory Predator avoidance in schooling fish v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Other components Population ecology Abundance Allee effect Consumer-resource model Depensation Ecological yield Effective population size Intraspecific competition Logistic function Malthusian growth model Maximum sustainable yield Overpopulation Overexploitation Population cycle Population dynamics Population modeling Population size Predator–prey (Lotka–Volterra) equations Recruitment Small population size Stability Resilience Resistance Random generalized Lotka–Volterra model Species Biodiversity Density-dependent inhibition Ecological effects of biodiversity Ecological extinction Endemic species Flagship species Gradient analysis Indicator species Introduced species Invasive species / Native species Latitudinal gradients in species diversity Minimum viable population Neutral theory Occupancy–abundance relationship Population viability analysis Priority effect Rapoport's rule Relative abundance distribution Relative species abundance Species diversity Species homogeneity Species richness Species distribution Species–area curve Umbrella species Species interaction Antibiosis Biological interaction Commensalism Community ecology Ecological facilitation Interspecific competition Mutualism Parasitism Storage effect Symbiosis Spatial ecology Biogeography Cross-boundary subsidy Ecocline Ecotone Ecotype Disturbance Edge effects Foster's rule Habitat fragmentation Ideal free distribution Intermediate disturbance hypothesis Insular biogeography Land change modeling Landscape ecology Landscape epidemiology Landscape limnology Metapopulation Patch dynamics r / K selection theory Resource selection function Source–sink dynamics Niche Ecological trap Ecosystem engineer Environmental niche modelling Guild Habitat Marine Semiaquatic Terrestrial Limiting similarity Niche apportionment models Niche construction Niche differentiation Ontogenetic niche shift Other networks Assembly rules Bateman's principle Bioluminescence Ecological collapse Ecological debt Ecological deficit Ecological energetics Ecological indicator Ecological threshold Ecosystem diversity Emergence Extinction debt Kleiber's law Liebig's law of the minimum Marginal value theorem Thorson's rule Xerosere Other Allometry Alternative stable state Balance of nature Biological data visualization Ecological economics Ecological footprint Ecological forecasting Ecological humanities Ecological stoichiometry Ecopath Ecosystem based fisheries Endolith Evolutionary ecology Functional ecology Industrial ecology Macroecology Microecosystem Natural environment Regime shift Sexecology Systems ecology Urban ecology Theoretical ecology Outline of ecology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liebig%27s_law_of_the_minimum&oldid=1304455123 " Categories : Agronomy Ecological theories Systems ecology Justus von Liebig Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 04:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liebig's law of the minimum 27 languages Add topic

