Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 In the Trotskyist movement 3 Posadista Fourth International 4 Atomic war 5 Outlook towards the Soviet-Bloc regimes 6 Cuba 7 Extraterrestrial life 8 Long live Posadas!

9 Scholarly discourse on Posadism 10 Publications 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents J. Posadas 14 languages Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français 한국어 Italiano مصرى Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian-Argentine Trotskyist (1912–1981) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "J. Posadas" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) J. Posadas Posadas in 1980 Born January 20, 1912 Argentina Died May 14, 1981 (1981-05-14) (aged 69) Rome, Italy Philosophical work Main interests Politics , economics , law Notable ideas Posadism Homero Rómulo Cristalli Frasnelli (January 20, 1912 – May 14, 1981), better known under the pseudonym J. Posadas or sometimes Juan Posadas ( Spanish: [ˈxwan poˈsaðas] ), was an Argentine Trotskyist whose personal vision is usually described as Posadism . Originally a collective pen name of the leadership of the Grupo Cuarta Internacional (GCI) in Argentina in the 1940s, it was also used by Dante Minazzoli initially.

[ 1 ] Part of a series on Trotskyism Concepts Anti-fascism Anti-Stalinism Bureaucratic collectivism Critique of political economy Cross-class alliance Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state Democratic centralism Decentralized economic planning Entryism Leninism Permanent revolution Political revolution Proletarian internationalism Social revolution Soviet democracy State capitalism Substitutionism Transitional demand Uneven and combined development Union democracy United front Vanguard party World communism World revolution Variants Orthodox Trotskyism Third camp Posadism Pabloism People Trotsky Abern Ali Antonov-Ovseenko Bensaïd Blanco Callinicos Cannon Deutscher Dowson Draper Duxiu Cliff Frank Grant Hallas Hansen Healy James Khan Lambert Maitan Mandel Moreno North Novack Pablo Posadas Preobrazhensky Rakovsky Sedov Shachtman Smirnov Tạ Thu Thâu Taaffe Woods Works 1905 (1908) Terrorism and Communism (1920) Trotsky's Military Writings (1923-1925) Literature and Revolution (1924) New Course (1924) Lessons of October (1924) Towards Socialism or Capitalism?

(1925) Leon Trotsky on China (1925) History of the Russian Revolution (1930) The Spanish Revolution, 1931-1939 (1931-1939) The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany (1931-40) The Revolution Betrayed (1936) Their Morals and Ours (1938) Transitional Program (1938) In Defence of Marxism (1942) Thesis of Pulacayo (1946) The Stalinist Legacy (1984) The Dilemmas of Lenin (2017) History Russian Revolution October Revolution Joseph Stalin's rise to power The Declaration of 46 Left Opposition Lenin's Testament Bloc of Soviet Oppositions French Turn Minneapolis general strike of 1934 Great Purge Moscow trials Proletarian Military Policy New York Intellectuals May 68 1968–1969 Japanese university protests 1970s Hong Kong student protests Militant in Liverpool Parties Active Internationalist Workers' Left (Greece) Lanka Sama Samaja Party Lutte Ouvrière People Before Profit Socialist Action (Hong Kong) Socialist Alternative (Australia) Socialist Alternative (U.S.) Socialist Equality Party Socialist Party (England and Wales) Socialist Workers Party (UK) Solidarity The Struggle Pakistan Trade Unionist and Socialist Coalition Workers' Cause Party Workers' Left Front Workers Revolutionary Party (UK) Defunct Bolshevik–Leninist Party of India, Ceylon and Burma Communist League of America International Marxist Group International Socialist Organization League for Socialist Action (Canada) Militant tendency Revolutionary Communist Party (UK, 1944) Socialist Appeal (UK, 1992) Socialist Workers Party (U.S.) Young Socialist Alliance Workers Party of the United States Internationals Current Committee for a Workers' International (refounded) Fourth International (post-reunification) International Committee of the Fourth International International Communist League International Revolutionary Left International Socialist Alternative International Socialist Tendency International Workers' League Internationalist Communist Union League for the Fourth International Revolutionary Communist International Trotskyist Fraction – Fourth International Historical Committee for a Workers' International (1974–2019) Fourth International Fourth International–Posadist Permanent Revolution Revolutionary Workers Ferment By country Argentina Australia China Denmark France Greece Ireland Japan Pakistan Russia Soviet Union United Kingdom United States Vietnam Related topics Betrayal thesis Campism Chavismo Democracy in Marxism Fifth International Johnson–Forest Tendency Leon Trotsky bibliography Maoism Marxism–Leninism Orthodox Marxism Shachtmanism Socialist economics Socialist Equality Party Socialist Worker Stalinism Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Early life [ edit ] Born in Argentina to Italian immigrants from the Southern town of Matera , Cristalli grew up in intense poverty in Buenos Aires with at least nine siblings.

[ 1 ] After the death of his mother, he and his brothers and sisters had to beg from neighbours and do odd jobs for pennies in order to survive. Malnourishment left him with permanent health problems but also influenced his views of capitalism.

[ 1 ] He gained fame playing football for Estudiantes de La Plata in his youth. In the 1930s, he worked as a  shoemaker  and organised a shoemakers’ and leather workers’ union in Córdoba , Argentina.

During this period he stood as a candidate for election in Buenos Aires province for the Partido Socialista Obrero [ es ] . He then joined the Partido de la Revolución Socialista, which affiliated to the Fourth International in 1941 but the party quickly declined. In 1947, Cristalli and Dante Minazzoli founded the Grupo Cuarta Internacional (GCI) as a small circle of working class militants committed to Trotskyism.

[ 1 ] In the Trotskyist movement [ edit ] Posadas did initially organize the Latin America Bureau of the Fourth International for the International Secretariat faction of the Fourth International in the 1950s.

[ 2 ] Under his guidance, the movement gained some influence in the region, particularly among Cuban railway workers, Bolivian tin miners and agricultural workers in Brazil .

When the Fourth International split in 1953, Posadas and his followers sided with Michel Pablo and the International Secretariat of the Fourth International . By 1959, however, he and his followers were quarrelling with the leadership of the ISFI accusing them of lacking confidence in the possibility of revolution. They also differed over the issue of nuclear war with Posadas taking the view that "War–Revolution" would "settle the hash of Stalinism and Capitalism" and that nuclear war was inevitable as a socialist society would rise from the ashes.

[ citation needed ] With Luis Naguill, Posadas directed the "subversive apparatus" founded according to instructions from the Tri-Continental – the Peasant Workers Alliance in 1966.

[ 3 ] Conflicts between Posadas and the ISFI started to get worse. The man Homero, who is known as Posadas today, received his new name as it was used as the penname for the letters written to the ISFI.

[ 4 ] In those letters, Posadas and his followers made bold criticisms such as Trotskyist movements worldwide were largely influenced by the Bureau of Latin America (BLA) of the Fourth International at that time, and that the Europeans had become a passive force.

[ 5 ] Despite the alleged efforts of both the BLA and ISFI to reconcile, in the April of 1962, Posadas made a daring move as he called for a congress and completely reorganized the executive committee of the ISFI, now led by BLA leaders.

[ 6 ] The ISFI responded to this action in June by suspending BLA from the Fourth International.

[ 2 ] Posadas and his international followers, who were concentrated in Latin America , decided to split from the ISFI in 1962 (prior to its reunification with the International Committee of the Fourth International which formed the United Secretariat of the Fourth International ) and founded a new group.

[ 7 ] Posadista Fourth International [ edit ] The "Posadists" founded their own Fourth International in 1962 after having called an Emergency Conference.

[ 2 ] The first regular international meeting of the Posadists should only happen in March 1964. It was announced as the "Seventh Congress of the Fourth International". Said Congress was - according to a post conference communique - held "in Europe" without giving further elaboration, and the communique claimed that "delegates representing thirteen countries of Africa, Europe, and Latin America" were in attendance.

[ 2 ] The new International only started using the name Fourth International (Posadist) at a later time (in the early 1970s).

[ citation needed ] The Posadist Fourth International developed a concept of its organizational nature, with changes that were introduced in 1966 which varied substantially from the rest of the Trotskyist movement. Posadas commented on their "Tenth World Congress" in 1975: [ 2 ] [ 8 ] There was not a single dispute. It is the most homogeneous Congress, not because we put disputes aside, but because there was no room for disputes. [... I]f the movement is not monolithic and centralizedly monolithic, it leaves the condition open to insecurity, to doubt, to preoccupation with irrelevant problems or secondary problems: then it distracts attention. [sic] Atomic war [ edit ] At their 1964 "Seventh World Congress" the following resolution was adopted: “We are preparing ourselves for a stage in which before the atomic war, we shall struggle for power, during the atomic war we shall struggle for power and we shall be in power, and immediately after the atomic war we shall be in power. There is no beginning, there is an end to atomic war, because atomic war is simultaneous. Simultaneity doesn't mean the same day and the same hour. Great historic events should not be measured by hours or days, but by periods. The working class alone will maintain itself, will immediately have to seek its cohesion and centralization".

[ 2 ] This stance was made more specific at a 1966 meeting of the International Secretariat, where a manifesto written by Posadas was adopted: [ 9 ] [ 2 ] After destruction commences, the masses are going to emerge in all countries – in a short time, in a few hours. Capitalism cannot defend itself in an atomic war except by putting itself in caves and attempting to destroy all that it can. The masses, in contrast, are going to come out, will have to come out, because it is the only way to survive, defeating the enemy… The apparatus of capitalism, police, army, will not be able to resist… It will be necessary to organise the workers' power immediately.

One of the best-known positions of J. Posadas was his enthusiasm for nuclear war . More precisely, at the height of the Cold War , Posadas thought that nuclear war was inevitable. His idea was that rather than wait for the forces of capitalism, the nuclear-armed socialist states should launch a preemptive attack that would destroy the nuclear capabilities of capitalist countries. Additionally, he believed that this sort of catastrophe could spark the world revolution .

[ 2 ] [ 10 ] Posadas vocally opposed the Partial Test Ban Treaty signed in 1963 by the United States, the Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom , believing that a nuclear war between the US and the Soviet Union was inevitable and desirable, and would create the conditions for socialism, with the "workers' states" winning and resetting society.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Outlook towards the Soviet-Bloc regimes [ edit ] The Posadists held to mainstream Trotskyist notions of describing the Soviet Republics that were established with the end of World War 2 as "deformed workers' states" based on the existence of generally nationalized means of production, but unlike the rest of the Trotskyist movement, Posadas went further, declaring other Regimes (such as "Syria, Egypt, Iraq, Mali, Guinea, Congo Brazzaville etc.") – sometimes with, sometimes without clarifying adjectives – to be "workers' states".

[ 2 ] The justifications for these classifications as well as the explanations for the supposed progressive role of these regimes were compiled into Posadas' 1969 book The Revolutionary State .

[ 13 ] [ citation needed ] Cuba [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Posadist group in Cuba, the Revolutionary Workers' Party (Trotskyist) or POR(T), gained importance due to the Cuban Revolution , in which it had a minor role. Posadist guerrillas fought alongside Fidel Castro and Che Guevara in 1959. When the Posadists split from the Fourth International in 1962, they took the Cuban section with them, leaving no other Trotskyist group represented in Cuba in the 1960s.

In 1961 the POR(T) argued that the Cuban government should forcibly expel the American military base at Guantanamo Bay . According to state media, the Posadists organised workers in the town of Guantanamo to march on the nearby military base. The POR(T) denied the allegation, but it was repeated by the Trotskyist Socialist Workers Party in the US, which was pro-Castro and denounced the Posadists as ultra-left. Cuban officials affiliated with the Popular Socialist Party , then raided the headquarters of the Posadist group and smashed its printing press, which was in the process of printing an edition of Trotsky 's The Permanent Revolution (1930).

Guevara, when asked in an interview about this event, commented: That did happen. It was an error. It was an error committed by an official of second rank. They smashed the plates. It should not have been done. However, we consider the Trotskyist party to be acting against the revolution. For example, they were taking the line that the Revolutionary Government is petty bourgeois , and were calling on the proletariat to exert pressure on the government and even to carry out another revolution in which the proletariat would come to power. This was prejudicing the discipline necessary at this stage.

The Cuban Posadist section became increasingly militant and was banned by the government; Castro denounced them as "pestilential" at the Tricontinental Conference held in January 1966. Cuban Posadists went on to claim that Castro had Guevara killed when, it turned out, he was actually in Bolivia fighting with the guerrilla movement there. Conversely, after Guevara was executed by Bolivian authorities, Posadas claimed in 1967 that it was unclear how Che Guevara was killed.

Extraterrestrial life [ edit ] Beginning in 1968, Posadas also became known for his theories concerning UFOs and extraterrestrial life . If anything like UFOs existed, they could demonstrate the existence of agents able to master a very sophisticated technology, something that would be compatible with what in this planet was advocated by socialism . If UFOs existed, they could be allied in addressing some of the major problems in the earth.

One of his most well-known works is a 1968 pamphlet called Les Soucoupes Volantes, le processus de la matiere et de l'energie, la science et le socialisme ( Flying Saucers, the process of matter and energy, science and socialism ). Here, he connects the existence of extraterrestrial life and UFOs to communism . He argues that the UFOs being spotted at that time indicates the advancements of life in other planets and that can be only possible due to communist ideologies.

[ 14 ] He also writes that capitalism tends to make people self-centered and focus on profits, rather than work on the scientific and civilizational progress of mankind. Since extraterrestrial beings have developed technology advanced enough to visit other planets, this indicates that they have surpassed the bane of a capitalistic society. Along with that, they have also surpassed their impulsion – the need to kill or control to assert dominance. Posadas shows enthusiasm to collaborate with extraterrestrial beings. He writes, "We must appeal to the beings on other planets, when they come here, to intervene and collaborate with Earth's inhabitants in suppressing poverty." [ 14 ] With his argument, Posadas defines communism as a civilizational progress rather than an alternative political system. Although this is a single work of Posadas on extraterrestrial life, this idea has gained much popularity among his followers and later Trotskyists .

Posadas remarks that aliens "have no aggressive impulse, they have no need to kill in order to live: they come only to observe. We can foresee the existence of such beings, even taking into account the fantasies that exist among the reports, stories, observations, and statements".

[ 14 ] Long live Posadas!

[ edit ] Posadist newspapers such as Red Flag , published by the Revolutionary Workers Party (Trotskyist) in Britain , ran headlines praising Soviet cosmonauts and the launching of Chinese rockets as well as articles on local industrial disputes.

Posadas was thought to have a large ego as indicated by his habit of ending his articles by exclaiming "Long live Posadas!" This actually stemmed from the way he "wrote" his documents. They were usually the transcript of speeches delivered at party events, whether with a small group of closest collaborators, or larger activities. In the early years, after Posadas ended his speeches with " ¡Viva la Revolución Mundial!

" and " ¡Viva la Cuarta Internacional!

" ("Long live world revolution! Long live the Fourth International!"), someone else would traditionally yell " ¡Viva el camarada Posadas!

" ("Long live comrade Posadas!") – all this would be duly reported in print.

[ citation needed ] Scholarly discourse on Posadism [ edit ] Due to the radical nature of the Posadist theories and the egocentric administration of the Fourth International Posadist , there were many backlashes against it soon after its foundation.

[ 15 ] Joan Benevant, an Argentine militant, compared the organization to a church where Posadas acted as "the pope". Several member nations quit, the prominent ones being Brazil and Argentina. With the loss of several members and lack of support from scholars, Posadas continued to practice his principles nonetheless. Many scholars during at that time viewed his work in a satirical way, as seen in Teresa Hayter 's autobiography Hayter of the bourgeoisie , where she describes Posadas as "the craziest of all deviators from Trotskyism ." A work on Posadism was written by A. M. Gittlitz called I Want to Believe: Posadism, UFOs and Apocalypse Communism . The author reviews the history of Posadism and its ultimate collapse, and analyzes the significance of the current rise of interest on this topic. Taking the theme of approaching Posadism as a "crazy subfield" of Trotskyism like earlier scholars, Gittlitz expands on it by exploring the current thoughts on Posadism, how that has changed from its previous cult-like nature in the late 20th century.

Publications [ edit ] Articles "The Argentine Elections and the Tasks of the Proletariat." Fourth International ( Amsterdam ), no. 2 (March 1958), pp. 17–21.

Full issue.

"For Support and Extension of the Cuban Revolution." Fourth International ( Amsterdam ), no. 10 (June 1960), pp. 28–31.

Full issue.

Pamphlets Les soucoupes volantes, le processus de la matière et de l’énergie, la science, la lutte de classes et revolutionnaire et le future socialiste de l’humanité . [ Flying Saucers, the Process of Matter and Energy, Science, the Revolutionary and Working-Class Struggle and the Socialist Future of Mankind.

] (in French). Paris: Éditions Réed (June 26, 1968).

Audiobook available.

Translated into English and transcribed by David Broder.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Broder, David (April 5, 2020).

"J. Posadas, the Trotskyist Who Believed in Intergalactic Communism: An Interview with A.M. Gittlitz." Jacobin . Archived from the original.

^ a b c d e f g h i Alexander, Robert J. (1991). "Posadista Fourth International".

International Trotskyism, 1929-1985 : a documented analysis of the movement . Durham: Duke University Press. pp. 659, 662– 664.

ISBN 0-8223-0975-0 .

OCLC 21594038 .

^ "Who’s Who in Subversion in Latin America." Life Lines , vol. 9, no. 86 (July 19, 1967), p. 3. Dallas, Texas: Life Line Foundation.

ISSN 0024-3167 .

JSTOR community.28146082 .

OCLC 5018803 .

^ A. M. Gittlitz, "The Flying International", I Want to Believe: Posadism, UFOs and Apocalypse Communism , Pluto Press (2020): 75–76.

^ Gittlitz, 76.

^ Gittlitz, 77.

^ Gittlitz, 78.

^ Internacional., Quarta Internacional. Secretariado (1976).

Revista marxista latinoamericana : órgano del SI de la IV Internacional . Luis Naguil. p. 80.

OCLC 892158226 .

^ Cuarta, Anraoi Mac; Cuarta, hAnraoi Mac (November 1973).

"Saor Dhoire" .

Comhar .

32 (11): 4– 9.

doi : 10.2307/20553451 .

ISSN 0010-2369 .

JSTOR 20553451 .

^ Hayter, Teresa (1971).

Hayter of the Bourgeoisie .

Sidgwick and Jackson . p. 144.

ISBN 9780283978005 – via Google Books .

^ Woods, Alan (2013).

Ted Grant: Permanent Revolutionary . London and Minneapolis, MN: Wellred Publications.

ISBN 9781900007474 .

^ Hodges, Donald Clark (1974).

The Latin American Revolution: Politics and Strategy from Apro-Marxism to Guevarism . W. Morrow. p. 120.

ISBN 9780688003159 – via Google Books .

^ Posadas, J. (2014).

Revolutionary state and transition to socialism . London: Scientific, Cultural and Political Editions.

ISBN 978-0-907694-08-3 .

OCLC 948947961 .

^ a b c Posadas, J.

"Flying Saucers ... and the Socialist Future of Mankind, 1968" .

Accessed February 16th, 2025.

^ A. M. Gittlitz, "Flying Saucers, the Process of Matter and Energy, Science, the Revolutionary and Working-Class Struggle, and the Socialist Future of Mankind", I Want to Believe: Posadism, UFOs and Apocalypse Communism , Pluto Press (2020): 105–106.

Further reading [ edit ] Almeyra, Guillermo, and Anaté Almeyra, Adolfo Gilly.

A Critical Assessment of the Former Latin American Bureau Tendency Within the Fourth International .

Translated by Nicolas Allen. Introduction and annotations by A.M. Gittlitz.

Salusbury, Matt.

"Trots in Space." Fortean Times , no. 183 (April 2, 2004).

Full issue.

Gittlitz, A.M.

I Want to Believe: Posadism, UFOs and Apocalypse Communism .

London: Pluto Press (2020).

https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctvzsmdvh.15 ISBN 978-0745340777 .

doi : 10.2307/j.ctvzsmdvh .

JSTOR j.ctvzsmdvh .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to J. Posadas .

Ufology Posadist International Posadas archive collection at Senate House Library , University of London Works by J. Posadas at Marxists Internet Archive v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Poland Belgium People Trove DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐n7n99
Cached time: 20250817084247
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.809 seconds
Real time usage: 1.013 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4634/1000000
Revision size: 22916/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 167425/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7622/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 76133/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.539/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 29096320/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  836.164      1 -total
 18.06%  150.981      1 Template:Reflist
 15.26%  127.612      1 Template:Trotskyism
 14.89%  124.466      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.61%  122.137      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 13.82%  115.561      1 Template:IPA
 12.74%  106.501      6 Template:Cite_book
 10.07%   84.209      3 Template:Navbox
  9.04%   75.563      1 Template:Socialism
  7.23%   60.469      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:422901:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817084247 and revision id 1301084895. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=J._Posadas&oldid=1301084895 " Categories : 1912 births 1981 deaths Argentine conspiracy theorists Argentine people of Italian descent Marxist theorists UFO writers Argentine communists Argentine socialists Argentine Marxists Argentine Trotskyists Fourth International Posadist Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2010 All articles needing additional references Articles with hCards Pages with Spanish IPA Articles containing Spanish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles needing additional references from January 2022 This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 00:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents J. Posadas 14 languages Add topic

