Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Recognition under international law 2 Related concepts and disambiguation 3 Scholarly interpretation and advocacy 4 Official interpretations 5 Relationship to intellectual property 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Right to science and culture 6 languages العربية বাংলা Español Hausa Монгол Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Human right The right to science and culture is one of the economic, social and cultural rights claimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and related documents of international human rights law . It recognizes that everyone has a right to freely participate in culture , to freely share in (to participate and to benefit from) science and technology , and to protection of authorship .

Recognition under international law [ edit ] The right to science and culture is expressed in Article 27 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights : (1) Everyone has the right freely to participate in the cultural life of the community, to enjoy the arts and to share in scientific advancement and its benefits.
(2) Everyone has the right to the protection of the moral and material interests resulting from any scientific, literary or artistic production of which he is the author.

The right to science and culture also appears in Article 15 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights : (1) The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the right of everyone: (a) To take part in cultural life; (b) To enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and its applications; (c) To benefit from the protection of the moral and material interests resulting from any scientific, literary or artistic production of which he is the author.

(2) The steps to be taken by the States Parties to the present Covenant to achieve the full realization of this right shall include those necessary for the conservation, the development and the diffusion of science and culture.

(3) The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to respect the freedom indispensable for scientific research and creative activity.

(4) The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the benefits to be derived from the encouragement and development of international contacts and co-operation in the scientific and cultural fields.

Related concepts and disambiguation [ edit ] The right to science and culture is often broken into rights such as "the right to take part in cultural life" or "the right to cultural participation" or "the right to culture," and "the right to benefit from scientific progress and its applications" or "the right to benefit from science" or "the right to science" or "the right to share in science".

The term "cultural rights" may be used in at least three senses. It is most often used to refer to the concept protected by Article 15 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights , which assures minority groups the right to practice and preserve their languages, religions, art forms, and ways of life. Alternatively, the term "cultural rights" may be used to group both minority rights and the right to science and culture, which have a common origin in Article 27 of the Universal Declaration. Even more broadly, "cultural rights" may refer to a larger category of economic, social and cultural rights , which may be understood to refer to the right to science and culture as well as the right to education and other rights, such as the protection of authorship.

The "right to science" includes both a right to participate in science (the activity) and a right to access to the body of knowledge ("benefits" or "progress" or "advances") that is a result of science.

Scholarly interpretation and advocacy [ edit ] All human rights found in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights require a process of interpretation to translate the broad principles into specific state obligations. This takes place through United Nations processes and in national courts . The process is strongly influenced by human rights scholars and human rights activists .

The rights found in Article 27 in some ways remain at a relatively early stage in this process, in contrast to other human rights such as the right to health or the right to education that have already been the subject of more extensive elaboration and litigation.

[ 1 ] The right to authorship has however benefitted from very strong legal development.

Common global standards for application of the right to science were set out by a UN agreement called the Recommendation on Science and Scientific Researchers, adopted by consensus of some 195 governments meeting in Paris on 13 November 2017, after four years of global consultations.

[ 2 ] Some authors particularly active in this area include: Samantha Besson , Audrey R. Chapman, Yvonne Donders, Laurence Helfer , Lea Shaver, William Schabas , Jessica Wyndham, and Peter Yu.

The American Association for the Advancement of Science is active in advocacy around the right to science and culture, with a particular focus on the rights and responsibilities of professional scientists.

[ 3 ] Official interpretations [ edit ] The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights has issued two General Comments interpreting portions of the right to science and culture as it appears in the International Covenant on Economic Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR). General Comment 17 and General Comment 21. The Special Rapporteur in the Field of Cultural Rights, Farida Shaheed , addressed the right to science and culture in several reports between 2010 and 2015.

[ 4 ] At the General Conference of UNESCO in 2017, some 195 states agreed by consensus with no abstentions to common global standards relating to the right to science, in a Recommendation on Science and Scientific Researchers , which interprets the right to science as it appears in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

[ 5 ] Relationship to intellectual property [ edit ] In 2000 the United Nations Economic and Social Council Sub-commission on Human Rights suggested that the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights may violate the right to science and therefore conflict with international human rights law .

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Academic freedom Cultural genocide Free culture movement Welfare rights References [ edit ] ^ Shaver, Lea Bishop (March 6, 2009). "The Right to Science and Culture". Wisconsin Law Review: 126– 127.

SSRN 1354788 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "Recommendation on Science and Scientific Researchers" .

portal.unesco.org . Retrieved 2019-06-19 .

^ "AAAS Report Helps Define "Right to Science" for UN Treaty" .

American Association for the Advancement of Science . Retrieved 2019-06-19 .

^ "Africa: Farida Shaheed On the Human Right to Science" . Retrieved 2020-03-05 .

^ "Recommendation on Science and Scientific Researchers" .

UNESCO . 2019-05-21 . Retrieved 2020-03-24 .

^ Suoranta, Juha; Vadén, Tere (June 2009).

Wikiworld . Pluto Press. p. 42.

ISBN 9780745328928 .

v t e Substantive human rights What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights Civil and political Equality before the law Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention Freedom of assembly Freedom of association Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Freedom from discrimination Freedom of information Freedom of movement Freedom of religion Freedom from slavery Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from torture LGBT rights Liberty Nationality Personhood Presumption of innocence Access to justice Right of asylum Right to die Right to a fair trial Right to counsel Right to family life Right to keep and bear arms Right to life Right to petition Right to privacy Right to protest Right to refuse medical treatment Right to resist Right of return Right of self-defense Right to truth Security of person Speedy trial Suffrage right to be a candidate Right to homeland Economic, social and cultural Digital rights Equal pay for equal work Fair remuneration Labor rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to clothing Right to development Right to education Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to Internet access Right to property Right to public participation Right of reply Right to rest and leisure Right of return Right to science and culture Right to social security Right to water Right to work Sexual and reproductive Abortion Family planning Family rights Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation Freedom from forced circumcision Intersex human rights LGBT rights Sexual and reproductive health Right to sexuality v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐74cbc45b88‐45xm2
Cached time: 20250812012928
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.287 seconds
Real time usage: 0.384 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1001/1000000
Revision size: 7842/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 47881/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5006/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 38633/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.169/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4562048/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  315.765      1 -total
 37.08%  117.071      1 Template:Reflist
 25.65%   80.992      1 Template:Particular_human_rights
 23.66%   74.716      1 Template:Cite_journal
 21.96%   69.354      1 Template:Short_description
 11.46%   36.190      2 Template:Pagetype
 10.38%   32.788      8 Template:Main_other
  7.13%   22.519      1 Template:Science_and_technology_studies
  6.66%   21.031      1 Template:SDcat
  6.49%   20.507      1 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:26207472:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812012928 and revision id 1217149635. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Right_to_science_and_culture&oldid=1217149635 " Category : Human rights by issue Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 April 2024, at 03:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Right to science and culture 6 languages Add topic

