Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Methodology 3 Standardization of measurement units Toggle Standardization of measurement units subsection 3.1 Standards 4 Units and systems Toggle Units and systems subsection 4.1 Imperial and US customary systems 4.2 Metric system 4.2.1 International System of Units 4.2.1.1 Converting prefixes 4.3 Length 4.4 Time 4.5 Mass 4.6 Economics 4.7 Survey research 4.8 Exactness designation 5 Difficulties 6 Definitions and theories Toggle Definitions and theories subsection 6.1 Classical definition 6.2 Representational theory 6.3 Theory 6.4 Quantum mechanics 6.5 Biology 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Measurement 132 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Gaeilge Galego 贛語 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Къарачай-малкъар Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingála Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya संस्कृतम् Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Tyap Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Volapük 文言 Winaray 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Yerwa Kanuri Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Measuring ) Process of assigning numbers to objects or events For the scientific journal, see Measurement (journal) .

Four measuring devices having metric calibrations Measurement is the quantification of attributes of an object or event, which can be used to compare with other objects or events.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In other words, measurement is a process of determining how large or small a physical quantity is as compared to a basic reference quantity of the same kind.

[ 3 ] The scope and application of measurement are dependent on the context and discipline. In natural sciences and engineering , measurements do not apply to nominal properties of objects or events, which is consistent with the guidelines of the International Vocabulary of Metrology (VIM) published by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM).

[ 2 ] However, in other fields such as statistics as well as the social and behavioural sciences , measurements can have multiple levels , which would include nominal, ordinal, interval and ratio scales.

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] Measurement is a cornerstone of trade , science , technology and quantitative research in many disciplines. Historically, many measurement systems existed for the varied fields of human existence to facilitate comparisons in these fields. Often these were achieved by local agreements between trading partners or collaborators. Since the 18th century, developments progressed towards unifying, widely accepted standards that resulted in the modern International System of Units (SI). This system reduces all physical measurements to a mathematical combination of seven base units. The science of measurement is pursued in the field of metrology .

Measurement is defined as the process of comparison of an unknown quantity with a known or standard quantity.

History [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from History of measurement .

[ edit ] Detail of a cubit rod in the Museo Egizio of Turin The earliest recorded systems of weights and measures originate in the 3rd or 4th millennium BC.

[ 5 ] Even the very earliest civilizations needed measurement for purposes of agriculture, construction and trade. Early standard units might only have applied to a single community or small region, with every area developing its own standards for lengths, areas, volumes and masses. Often such systems were closely tied to one field of use, so that volume measures used, for example, for dry grains were unrelated to those for liquids, with neither bearing any particular relationship to units of length used for measuring cloth or land. With development of manufacturing technologies, and the growing importance of trade between communities and ultimately across the Earth, standardized weights and measures became critical. Starting in the 18th century, modernized, simplified and uniform systems of weights and measures were developed, with the fundamental units defined by ever more precise methods in the science of metrology . The discovery and application of electricity was one factor motivating the development of standardized internationally applicable units.

Methodology [ edit ] The measurement of a property may be categorized by the following criteria: type , magnitude , unit , and uncertainty .

[ citation needed ] They enable unambiguous comparisons between measurements.

The level of measurement is a taxonomy for the methodological character of a comparison. For example, two states of a property may be compared by ratio, difference, or ordinal preference. The type is commonly not explicitly expressed, but implicit in the definition of a measurement procedure.

The magnitude is the numerical value of the characterization, usually obtained with a suitably chosen measuring instrument .

A unit assigns a mathematical weighting factor to the magnitude that is derived as a ratio to the property of an artifact used as standard or a natural physical quantity.

An uncertainty represents the random and systemic errors of the measurement procedure; it indicates a confidence level in the measurement. Errors are evaluated by methodically repeating measurements and considering the accuracy and precision of the measuring instrument.

Standardization of measurement units [ edit ] Measurements most commonly use the International System of Units (SI) as a comparison framework. The system defines seven fundamental units : kilogram , metre , candela , second , ampere , kelvin , and mole . All of these units are defined without reference to a particular physical object which would serve as a standard. Artifact-free definitions fix measurements at an exact value related to a physical constant or other invariable natural phenomenon, in contrast to reliance on standard artifacts which are subject to deterioration or destruction. Instead, the measurement unit can only ever change through increased accuracy in determining the value of the constant it is tied to.

The seven base units in the SI system. Arrows point from units to those that depend on them.

The first proposal to tie an SI base unit to an experimental standard independent of fiat [ clarification needed ] was by Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914), [ 6 ] who proposed to define the metre in terms of the wavelength of a spectral line .

[ 7 ] This directly influenced the Michelson–Morley experiment ; Michelson and Morley cite Peirce, and improve on his method.

[ 8 ] Standards [ edit ] See also: Metrology § Standards With the exception of a few fundamental quantum constants, units of measurement are derived from historical agreements. Nothing inherent in nature dictates that an inch has to be a certain length, nor that a mile is a better measure of distance than a kilometre . Over the course of human history, however, first for convenience and then out of necessity, standards of measurement evolved so that communities would have certain common benchmarks. Laws regulating measurement were originally developed to prevent fraud in commerce.

Units of measurement are generally defined on a scientific basis, overseen by governmental or independent agencies, and established in international treaties, pre-eminent of which is the General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM), established in 1875 by the Metre Convention , overseeing the International System of Units (SI).  For example, the metre was redefined in 1983 by the CGPM in terms of the speed of light, the kilogram was redefined in 2019 in terms of the Planck constant and the international yard was defined in 1960 by the governments of the United States, United Kingdom, Australia and South Africa as being exactly 0.9144 metres.

In the United States, the National Institute of Standards and Technology ( NIST ), a division of the United States Department of Commerce , regulates commercial measurements. In the United Kingdom, the role is performed by the National Physical Laboratory (NPL), in Australia by the National Measurement Institute , [ 9 ] in South Africa by the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research and in India the National Physical Laboratory of India .

Units and systems [ edit ] Main articles: Unit of measurement and System of measurement A unit is a known or standard quantity in terms of which other physical quantities are measured.

A baby bottle that measures in three measurement systems — metric , imperial (UK) , and US customary Imperial and US customary systems [ edit ] Main article: Imperial and US customary measurement systems Before SI units were widely adopted around the world, the British systems of English units and later imperial units were used in Britain, the Commonwealth and the United States.  The system came to be known as U.S. customary units in the United States and is still in use there and in a few Caribbean countries.  These various systems of measurement have at times been called foot-pound-second systems after the Imperial units for length, weight and time even though the tons, hundredweights, gallons, and nautical miles, for example, have different values in the U.S. and imperial systems. Many Imperial units remain in use in Britain, which has officially switched to the SI system, with a few exceptions such as road signs, where road distances are shown in miles (or in yards for short distances) and speed limits are in miles per hour. Draught beer and cider must be sold by the imperial pint, and milk in returnable bottles can be sold by the imperial pint. Many people measure their height in feet and inches and their weight in stone and pounds, to give just a few examples. Imperial units are used in many other places: for example, in many Commonwealth countries that are considered metricated, land area is measured in acres and floor space in square feet, particularly for commercial transactions (rather than government statistics). Similarly, gasoline is sold by the gallon in many countries that are considered metricated.

Metric system [ edit ] The metric system is a decimal system of measurement based on its units for length, the metre and for mass, the kilogram. It exists in several variations, with different choices of base units , though these do not affect its day-to-day use. Since the 1960s, the International System of Units (SI) is the internationally recognised metric system. Metric units of mass, length, and electricity are widely used around the world for both everyday and scientific purposes.

International System of Units [ edit ] The International System of Units (abbreviated as SI from the French language name Système International d'Unités ) is the modern revision of the metric system . It is the world's most widely used system of units , both in everyday commerce and in science . The SI was developed in 1960 from the metre–kilogram–second (MKS) system, rather than the centimetre–gram–second (CGS) system, which, in turn, had many variants. The SI units for the seven base physical quantities are: [ 10 ] Base quantity Base unit Symbol Defining constant time second s hyperfine splitting in caesium-133 length metre m speed of light , c mass kilogram kg Planck constant , h electric current ampere A elementary charge , e temperature kelvin K Boltzmann constant , k amount of substance mol mol Avogadro constant , N A luminous intensity candela cd luminous efficacy of a 540 THz source, K cd In the SI, base units are the simple measurements for time, length, mass, temperature, amount of substance, electric current and light intensity. Derived units are constructed from the base units: for example, the watt , i.e. the unit for power, is defined from the base units as m 2 ·kg·s −3 . Other physical properties may be measured in compound units, such as material density, measured in kg·m −3 .

Converting prefixes [ edit ] The SI allows easy multiplication when switching among units having the same base but different prefixes. To convert from metres to centimetres it is only necessary to multiply the number of metres by 100, since there are 100 centimetres in a metre. Inversely, to switch from centimetres to metres one multiplies the number of centimetres by 0.01 or divides the number of centimetres by 100.

Length [ edit ] Main article: Length measurement See also: List of length, distance, or range measuring devices A two-metre carpenter's ruler A ruler or rule is a tool used in, for example, geometry , technical drawing , engineering, and carpentry, to measure lengths or distances or to draw straight lines.  Strictly speaking, the ruler is the instrument used to rule straight lines and the calibrated instrument used for determining length is called a measure , however common usage calls both instruments rulers and the special name straightedge is used for an unmarked rule.  The use of the word measure , in the sense of a measuring instrument, only survives in the phrase tape measure , an instrument that can be used to measure but cannot be used to draw straight lines.  As can be seen in the photographs on this page, a two-metre carpenter's rule can be folded down to a length of only 20 centimetres, to easily fit in a pocket, and a five-metre-long tape measure easily retracts to fit within a small housing.

Time [ edit ] Main article: Time Time is an abstract measurement of elemental changes over a non-spatial continuum.  It is denoted by numbers and/or named periods such as hours , days , weeks , months and years . It is an apparently irreversible series of occurrences within this non spatial continuum.  It is also used to denote an interval between two relative points on this continuum.

Mass [ edit ] Main article: Weighing scale Mass refers to the intrinsic property of all material objects to resist changes in their momentum.

Weight , on the other hand, refers to the downward force produced when a mass is in a gravitational field. In free fall (no net gravitational forces) objects lack weight but retain their mass. The Imperial units of mass include the ounce , pound , and ton . The metric units gram and kilogram are units of mass.

One device for measuring weight or mass is called a weighing scale or, often, simply a "scale". A spring scale measures force but not mass, a balance compares weight; both require a gravitational field to operate. Some of the most accurate instruments for measuring weight or mass are based on load cells with a digital read-out, but require a gravitational field to function and would not work in free fall.

Economics [ edit ] Main article: Measurement in economics The measures used in economics are physical measures, nominal price value measures and real price measures. These measures differ from one another by the variables they measure and by the variables excluded from measurements.

Survey research [ edit ] Main article: Survey methodology Measurement station C of EMMA experiment situated at the depth of 75 meters in the Pyhäsalmi Mine In the field of survey research, measures are taken from individual attitudes, values, and behavior using questionnaires as a measurement instrument. As all other measurements, measurement in survey research is also vulnerable to measurement error , i.e. the departure from the true value of the measurement and the value provided using the measurement instrument.

[ 11 ] In substantive survey research, measurement error can lead to biased conclusions and wrongly estimated effects. In order to get accurate results, when measurement errors appear, the results need to be corrected for measurement errors .

Exactness designation [ edit ] The following rules generally apply for displaying the exactness of measurements: [ 12 ] All non-0 digits and any 0s appearing between them are significant for the exactness of any number. For example, the number 12000 has two significant digits, and has implied limits of 11500 and 12500.

Additional 0s may be added after a decimal separator to denote a greater exactness, increasing the number of decimals. For example, 1 has implied limits of 0.5 and 1.5 whereas 1.0 has implied limits 0.95 and 1.05.

Difficulties [ edit ] Since accurate measurement is essential in many fields, and since all measurements are necessarily approximations, a great deal of effort must be taken to make measurements as accurate as possible. For example, consider the problem of measuring the time it takes an object to fall a distance of one metre (about 39 in ).  Using physics, it can be shown that, in the gravitational field of the Earth, it should take any object about 0.45 second to fall one metre. However, the following are just some of the sources of error that arise: This computation used for the acceleration of gravity 9.8 metres per second squared (32 ft/s 2 ). But neither of these two figures is exact, but only precise to two significant digits.

The Earth's gravitational field varies slightly depending on height above sea level and other factors.

The computation of 0.45 seconds involved extracting a square root , a mathematical operation that required rounding off to some number of significant digits, in this case two significant digits.

Additionally, other sources of experimental error include: carelessness, determining of the exact time at which the object is released and the exact time it hits the ground, measurement of the height and the measurement of the time both involve some error, air resistance , posture of human participants.

[ 13 ] Scientific experiments must be carried out with great care to eliminate as much error as possible, and to keep error estimates realistic.

Definitions and theories [ edit ] Classical definition [ edit ] In the classical definition, which is standard throughout the physical sciences, measurement is the determination or estimation of ratios of quantities.

[ 14 ] Quantity and measurement are mutually defined: quantitative attributes are those possible to measure, at least in principle. The classical concept of quantity can be traced back to John Wallis and Isaac Newton , and was foreshadowed in Euclid's Elements .

[ 14 ] Representational theory [ edit ] In the representational theory, measurement is defined as "the correlation of numbers with entities that are not numbers".

[ 15 ] The most technically elaborated form of representational theory is also known as additive conjoint measurement . In this form of representational theory, numbers are assigned based on correspondences or similarities between the structure of number systems and the structure of qualitative systems. A property is quantitative if such structural similarities can be established. In weaker forms of representational theory, such as that implicit within the work of Stanley Smith Stevens , [ 16 ] numbers need only be assigned according to a rule.

The concept of measurement is often misunderstood as merely the assignment of a value, but it is possible to assign a value in a way that is not a measurement in terms of the requirements of additive conjoint measurement.  One may assign a value to a person's height, but unless it can be established that there is a correlation between measurements of height and empirical relations, it is not a measurement according to additive conjoint measurement theory. Likewise, computing and assigning arbitrary values, like the "book value" of an asset in accounting, is not a measurement because it does not satisfy the necessary criteria.

Three type of representational theory Empirical relation In science, an empirical relationship is a relationship or correlation based solely on observation rather than theory. An empirical relationship requires only confirmatory data irrespective of theoretical basis.

The rule of mapping The real world is the Domain of mapping, and the mathematical world is the range. when we map the attribute to mathematical system, we have many choice for mapping and the range.

The representation condition of measurement Theory [ edit ] All data are inexact and statistical in nature.  Thus the definition of measurement is: "A set of observations that reduce uncertainty where the result is expressed as a quantity." [ 17 ] This definition is implied in what scientists actually do when they measure something and report both the mean and statistics of the measurements.  In practical terms, one begins with an initial guess as to the expected value of a quantity, and then, using various methods and instruments, reduces the uncertainty in the value.  In this view, unlike the positivist representational theory, all measurements are uncertain, so instead of assigning one value, a range of values is assigned to a measurement.  This also implies that there is not a clear or neat distinction between estimation and measurement.

Quantum mechanics [ edit ] In quantum mechanics , a measurement is an action that determines a particular property (such as position, momentum , or energy) of a quantum system. Quantum measurements are always statistical samples from a probability distribution ; the distribution for many quantum phenomena is discrete, not continuous.

[ 18 ] : 197 Quantum measurements alter quantum states and yet repeated measurements on a quantum state are reproducible. The measurement appears to act as a filter, changing the quantum state into one with the single measured quantum value.

[ 18 ] The unambiguous meaning of the quantum measurement is an unresolved fundamental problem in quantum mechanics ; the most common interpretation is that when a measurement is performed, the wavefunction of the quantum system " collapses " to a single, definite value.

[ 19 ] Biology [ edit ] In biology, there is generally no well established theory of measurement. However, the importance of the theoretical context is emphasized.

[ 20 ] Moreover, the theoretical context stemming from the theory of evolution leads to articulate the theory of measurement and historicity as a fundamental notion.

[ 21 ] Among the most developed fields of measurement in biology are the measurement of genetic diversity and species diversity.

[ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Main article: Outline of metrology and measurement Conversion of units Electrical measurements History of measurement ISO 10012 , Measurement management systems Levels of measurement List of humorous units of measurement List of unusual units of measurement Measurement in quantum mechanics Measurement uncertainty NCSL International Observable quantity Orders of magnitude Quantification (science) Standard (metrology) Timeline of temperature and pressure measurement technology Timeline of time measurement technology Weights and measures References [ edit ] ^ a b Pedhazur, Elazar J.; Schmelkin, Leora and Albert (1991).

Measurement, Design, and Analysis: An Integrated Approach (1st ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. pp.

15 –29.

ISBN 978-0-8058-1063-9 .

^ a b International Vocabulary of Metrology – Basic and General Concepts and Associated Terms (VIM) (PDF) (3rd ed.). International Bureau of Weights and Measures. 2008. p. 16.

^ Young, Hugh D; Freedman, Roger A. (2012).

University Physics (13 ed.). Pearson Education Inc.

ISBN 978-0-321-69686-1 .

^ Kirch, Wilhelm, ed. (2008). "Level of measurement".

Encyclopedia of Public Health . Vol. 2. Springer. p. 81.

ISBN 978-0-321-02106-9 .

^ "A Brief History of Metrology - bowersUK" .

bowers rest of world . Retrieved 2024-10-10 .

^ Crease 2011 , pp. 182–4 ^ C.S. Peirce (July 1879) "Note on the Progress of Experiments for Comparing a Wave-length with a Metre" American Journal of Science , as referenced by Crease 2011 , p. 203 ^ Crease, Robert P. (2011).

World in the Balance: The Historical Quest for an Absolute System of Measurement . New York & London: W. W. Norton. p. 203.

ISBN 978-0-393-34354-0 .

^ "About Us" .

National Measurement Institute of Australia . 3 December 2020.

^ The International System of Units (PDF) , V3.01 (9th ed.), International Bureau of Weights and Measures, Aug 2024, ISBN 978-92-822-2272-0 ^ Groves, Robert (2004).

Survey Methodology . New Jersey: Wiley.

ISBN 9780471483489 .

"By measurement error we mean a departure from the value of the measurement as applied to a sample unit and the value provided. "  pp. 51–52 .

^ Page 41 in: VanPool, Todd (2011).

Quantitative analysis in archaeology . Chichester Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1-4443-9017-9 .

OCLC 811317577 .

^ Gill, Simeon; Parker, Christopher J. (2017).

"Scan posture definition and hip girth measurement: the impact on clothing design and body scanning" .

Ergonomics .

60 (8): 1123– 1136.

doi : 10.1080/00140139.2016.1251621 .

PMID 27764997 .

S2CID 23758581 .

^ a b Michell, J. (1999). Measurement in psychology: a critical history of a methodological concept. New York: Cambridge University Press.

^ Ernest Nagel: "Measurement", Erkenntnis, Volume 2, Number 1 / December 1931, pp. 313–335, published by Springer , the Netherlands ^ Stevens, S.S.

On the theory of scales and measurement 1946. Science. 103, 677–80.

^ Douglas Hubbard: "How to Measure Anything", Wiley (2007), p. 21 ^ a b Messiah, Albert (1966).

Quantum Mechanics . North Holland, John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 0486409244 .

^ Penrose, Roger (2007).

The road to reality : a complete guide to the laws of the universe . New York: Vintage Books.

ISBN 978-0-679-77631-4 .

"The jumping of the quantum state to one of the eigenstates of Q is the process referred to as state-vector reduction or collapse of the wavefunction .  It is one of quantum theory's most puzzling features ..."  "[T]he way in which quantum mechanics is used in practice is to take the state indeed to jump in this curious way whenever a measurement is deemed to take place." p 528 Later Chapter 29 is entitled the Measurement paradox.

^ Houle, David; Pélabon, Christophe; Wagner, Günter P.; Hansen, Thomas F. (2011).

"Measurement and Meaning in Biology" (PDF) .

The Quarterly Review of Biology .

86 (1): 3– 34.

doi : 10.1086/658408 .

ISSN 0033-5770 .

PMID 21495498 .

S2CID 570080 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-05-29.

^ Montévil, Maël (2019).

"Measurement in biology is methodized by theory" .

Biology & Philosophy .

34 (3).

doi : 10.1007/s10539-019-9687-x .

ISSN 0169-3867 .

S2CID 96447209 .

^ Magurran, A.E. & McGill, B.J. (Hg.) 2011: Biological Diversity: Frontiers in Measurement and Assessment Oxford University Press.

External links [ edit ] Look up measurement in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Measurement .

Library resources about Measurement Resources in your library Media related to Measurement at Wikimedia Commons Schlaudt, Oliver 2020: "measurement". In: Kirchhoff, Thomas (ed.): Online Encyclopedia Philosophy of Nature . Heidelberg: Universitätsbibliothek Heidelberg, measurement .

Tal, Era 2020: "Measurement in Science". In: Zalta, Edward N. (ed.): The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2020 ed.), Measurement in Science .

Ball, Robert Stawell (1883).

"Measurement" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. XV (9th ed.). pp.

659– 668.

A Dictionary of Units of Measurement Archived 2018-10-06 at the Wayback Machine 'Metrology – in short' 3rd ed., July 2008 ISBN 978-87-988154-5-7 v t e Systems of measurement Current General International System of Units (SI) UK imperial system US customary units (USCS/USC) Chinese Hong Kong Specific Apothecaries' Avoirdupois Troy Astronomical Electrical English Engineering Units (US) Natural Atomic Geometrised Heaviside–Lorentz Planck Quantum chromodynamical Stoney Background Metric Overview Outline History Metrication UK/US Overview Comparison Foot–pound–second (FPS) Historic Metric metre–kilogram–second (MKS) metre–tonne–second (MTS) centimetre–gram–second (CGS) gravitational Europe Cornish Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch English Winchester Exchequer Estonian Finnish French Traditional Mesures usuelles German Greek Byzantine Hungarian Icelandic Irish Italian Latvian Luxembourgian Maltese Norwegian Ottoman Polish Portuguese Romanian Russian Scottish Serbian Slovak Spanish Swedish Swiss Welsh Asia Afghan Cambodian Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Mongolian Myanmar Nepalese Omani Pakistani Philippine Pegu Singaporean Sri Lankan Syrian Taiwanese Tatar Thai Vietnamese Africa Algerian Ethiopian Egyptian Eritrean Guinean Libyan Malagasy Mauritian Moroccan Seychellois Somali South African Tunisian Tanzanian North and Central America Costa Rican Cuban Haitian Honduran Mexican Nicaraguan Puerto Rican South America Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Paraguayan Peruvian Uruguayan Venezuelan Ancient Arabic Biblical and Talmudic Egyptian Greek Hindu Indian Mesopotamian Persian Roman List articles Humorous Obsolete Unusual Other Absolute scale N-body Modulor Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐5cf8f5fb49‐276l7
Cached time: 20250811235628
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.564 seconds
Real time usage: 0.705 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3106/1000000
Revision size: 28925/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 104931/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2616/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 86341/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.347/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10174852/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  591.022      1 -total
 30.84%  182.265      1 Template:Reflist
 16.39%   96.841      8 Template:Cite_book
 12.04%   71.177      4 Template:Navbox
 11.57%   68.364      1 Template:Systems_of_measurement
 10.92%   64.545      1 Template:Short_description
  7.62%   45.041      1 Template:Excerpt
  5.74%   33.913      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.54%   26.847      2 Template:Harvnb
  4.37%   25.852      1 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:19022:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235628 and revision id 1288800982. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Measurement&oldid=1288800982 " Categories : Measurement Accuracy and precision Metrology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from November 2014 Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 20:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Measurement 132 languages Add topic

