Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Origins 3 Education 4 Science 5 Arts 6 Literature 7 Spirituality 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Bengal Renaissance 24 languages العربية অসমীয়া বাংলা Български Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu پنجابی Polski Português Русский தமிழ் తెలుగు Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1800s–1930s socio-cultural and religious reform movement in West Bengal and Bangladesh Part of a series on the Culture of Bengal History People Bangal Bengali Muslims Bengali Hindus Bengali Buddhists Bengali Christians Bhadralok Dhakaiyas Ghoti Mahimal Sylhetis List of Bengalis Languages Script Dialects Vocabulary Grammar Bengali language movement Bengali Language Movement (Manbhum) Bengali Language Movement (Barak Valley) Bengali language Movement (North Dinajpur) Traditions Bengali Muslim wedding Walima Bengali Hindu wedding Panjika Gaye holud Mala badal Bodhu Boron Bou Bhat Annaprashana Jamai Sasthi Sadhbhakshan Mythology and folklore Myths Chand Sadagar Bonbibi Oladevi Satya Pir Manasa Lores Thakurmar Jhuli Cuisine Festivals Barsha Utsab Ekushey Book Fair Kolkata Book Fair Nabanna Pohela Boishakh Basanta Uṯsab Pahela Falgun Shakrain Art Bangladesh West Bengal Bengal School of Art Literature Bengal Renaissance Charyapada Shreekrishna Kirtana Mangal-Kāvya Vaishnava Padavali Laila Majnu Puthi Yusuf-Zulekha Genres Poetry Novels Science fiction Folk literature Tarja Institutions Literary institutions Bangiya Sahitya Parishad Paschimbanga Bangla Akademi Bangla Academy Awards Literary awards Rabindra Puraskar Bangla Academy Literary Award Ananda Puraskar Music and performing arts Folk genres Agamani-Vijaya Bhatiali Bhawaiya Gombhira Kavigan Maimansingha Gitika Devotional Baul Bhandari Ghazal Hamd Naat Nasheed Shreekrishna Kirtana Qawwali Zari Classical genres Bishnupur Gharana Maihar gharana Modern genres Bengali band Bangladeshi rock Rock music of West Bengal People Rabindra Sangeet Nazrul Geeti Dwijendralal Ray Ramprasad Sen Lalon Hason Raja Polligeeti Instruments Bansuri Dotara Dhak Harmonium Ploong Dance Alkap Chhau Theater Jatra Group theatre of Kolkata Organizations Indian People's Theatre Association People Gerasim Lebedev Media Cinema of Bangladesh Cinema of West Bengal Sport Kabaddi Boli Khela Lathi khela Chaturaṅga Kho kho v t e Part of a series on Bengalis Bengali history Vanga kingdom Gangaridai Gauda Kingdom Pala Empire Bengal Sultanate Bengal Subah Bengal Presidency Partition of Bengal (1905) Eastern Bengal and Assam Partition of Bengal (1947) East Bengal East Pakistan Names of Bengal Bengali homeland Bengal Bangladesh West Bengal Tripura Barak Valley Assam Bengali people Social group: Bangal Ghotis Diaspora Religious community: Hindus Buddhists Christians Muslims Bengali name Subgroups: Dhakaiyas Sylhetis Bengali culture Bangaliana Language Dialects Alphabet Romanisation Literature Poetry Science fiction Novels Folklore Art Music Cinema West Bengal Bangladesh Theatre Weddings Bengali Hindu wedding Cuisine Architecture Bengal Temple Calendar Festivals New Year Spring Monsoon Harvest Bengali symbols Bangamata Joy Bangla Bengal tiger Bengal cat Bungalow Bengal fire Bengal Renaissance Amar Sonar Bangla National symbols of Bangladesh Fish and rice Ilish Chingri malai curry Rasgulla Chomchom Jamdani Ganges Suvarnabhumi Bay of Bengal Bengali nationalism List of rulers of Bengal United Bengal Bangabhumi v t e The Bengal Renaissance ( Bengali : বাংলার নবজাগরণ , romanized : Bāṅlār Nôbôjāgôrôṇ ), also known as the Bengali Renaissance , was a cultural, social, intellectual, and artistic movement that took place in the Bengal region of the British Raj , from the late 18th century to the early 20th century.

[ 1 ] Historians have traced the beginnings of the movement to the victory of the British East India Company at the 1757 Battle of Plassey , as well as the works of reformer Raja Rammohan Roy , considered the "Father of the Indian Renaissance," born in 1772.

[ 2 ] Nitish Sengupta stated that the movement "can be said to have … ended with Rabindranath Tagore ," Asia's first Nobel laureate .

[ 3 ] For almost two centuries, the Bengal renaissance saw the radical transformation of Indian society, and its ideas have been attributed to the rise of Indian anticolonialist and nationalist thought and activity during this period.

[ 4 ] The philosophical basis of the movement was its unique version of liberalism and modernity.

[ 5 ] According to Sumit Sarkar , the pioneers and works of this period were revered and regarded with nostalgia throughout the 19th and 20th centuries, however, due to a new focus on its colonialist origins, a more critical view emerged in the 1970s.

[ 6 ] The Bengali renaissance was predominantly led by Bengali Hindus , [ 7 ] who at the time were socially and economically more affluent in colonial Bengal, and therefore better placed for higher education as a community. Well-known figures include the social reformer Raja Rammohan Roy , philanthropist Rani Rashmoni , writer Rabindranath Tagore , and the physicist Satyendra Nath Bose . The main Muslim figures in the movement include members of the Suhrawardy family , poet and musician Kazi Nazrul Islam , and writer Rokeya Sakhawat Hussain .

[ 8 ] Background [ edit ] The Bengal Renaissance was a movement characterised by a sociopolitical awakening in the arts, literature, music, philosophy, religion, science, and other fields of intellectual inquiry.

[ 1 ] The movement questioned the existing customs and rituals in Indian society – most notably, the caste system, and the practice of sati, idolatry – as well as the role of religion and colonial governance. In turn, the Bengal Renaissance advocated for societal reform – the kind that adhered to secularist, humanist and modernist ideals.

[ 9 ] From Rabindranath Tagore to Satyendra Nath Bose , the movement saw the emergence of important figures, whose contributions still influence cultural and intellectual works today.

[ 10 ] Although the Bengal Renaissance was led and dominated by upper caste Hindus, Bengali Muslims played a transformative role in the movement, as well as the shaping of colonial and postcolonial Indian society.

[ 8 ] Examples of Bengali Muslim renaissance men and women include Kazi Nazrul Islam , Ubaidullah Al Ubaidi Suhrawardy , and Rokeya Sakhawat Hussain .

[ 8 ] When it came to cultural and religious reform, the Freedom of Intellect Movement was established in 1926 to challenge the social customs and dogmas in Bengali Muslim society.

[ 11 ] From the mid-eighteenth century, the Bengal Province , and more specifically, its capital city of Calcutta , was the centre of British power in India. The region was the base for British imperial rule until the capital was moved to Delhi in 1911.

[ 12 ] Prior to Crown control, British power was in the hands of the East India Company, which in course of time, became increasingly profitable and influential, politically, establishing diplomatic relations with local rulers as well as building armies to protect its own interests.

[ 12 ] During this time, partly through the 1757 Battle of Plassey against the Nawab of Bengal and his French allies, and in part through the fall of the Mughal Empire , the company was able to acquire extensive territory in the Bengal and Ganges basin .

[ 12 ] The expense of these wars, however, threatened the company's financial situation, and the Regulating Act 1773 was passed to stabilise the EIC as well as subject it to some parliamentary control.

[ 12 ] Further legislation over the next several decades progressively brought about tighter controls over the company, but the Indian Rebellion of 1857 forced the British parliament to pass the Government of India Act 1858 , which saw the liquidation of the EIC and the transfer of power to the British Crown.

[ 12 ] Origins [ edit ] Ram Mohan Roy is considered the Father of the Bengali Renaissance The Bengali Renaissance originated in the Bengal Presidency of the British Indian Empire, but more specifically, its capital city of Kolkata , then known as Calcutta.

[ 13 ] This colonial metropolis was the first non-Western city to use British methods of teaching in their school system.

[ 13 ] In 1817, the urban elite led by Raja Ram Mohan Roy cofounded the Hindu or Presidency College in Kolkata, now known as the Presidency University , the only European-style institution of higher learning in Asia at the time.

[ 14 ] The city was also home to a public library, the Imperial Library, now the National Library of India , and newspapers and books were being published regularly in both Bengali and English.

[ 15 ] "Print language and literature played a vital role in shaping ideas and identities in colonial Bengal from the 18th century onwards," writes Anindita Ghosh, continuing that "… commercial print cultures that emanated from numerous cheap presses in Calcutta and its suburbs disseminated wide-ranging literary preferences that afforded a space to different sections of the Bengali middle classes to voice their own distinctive concerns." [ 15 ] The Bengal Province was the base for British East India Company rule until the overthrow of the Nawab of Bengal at the Battle of Plassey in 1757, which marked the Crown's consolidation of power in India.

[ 16 ] Many postcolonial historians source the origins of the Bengal Renaissance to these events, arguing that the movement was both a reaction to the violence and exploitation by the British Raj , as well as a product of the Empire's promotion of English education in the region as part of its " civilising missions ".

[ 14 ] For instance, Sivanath Sastri notes that Charles Grant , a British politician influential in Indian affairs who also served as Chairman of the East India Company, "moved "that a thorough education be given to the different races inhabiting the country, [and] that the Gospel be preached to them… ."" [ 17 ] Moreover, Arabinda Poddar contends that the English education of Bengalis was intended to create "mere political slaves," arguing that, "the civilising role of English education, stressed the need of creating a class of Anglophiles who would have a somewhat in-between existence between the rulers and the ruled." [ 18 ] Other historians cite the works of "Father of the Bengal Renaissance," Raja Rammohun Roy, as the start of the Bengal Renaissance.

[ 2 ] Roy, by 1829, co-founded the Brahmo Sabha movement, which was later renamed the Brahmo Samaj by Debendranath Tagore .

[ 19 ] It was an influential socioreligious reform movement that made significant contributions to the renaissance, as well as the makings of modern Indian society.

Education [ edit ] Begum Rokeya with her husband, Sakhawat Hossain in 1898. Rokeya, was a prominent Bengali feminist thinker, writer, educator and political activist from British India. She is widely regarded as a pioneer of women's liberation in South Asia Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar was a prominent Indian educator and social reformer of the nineteenth century Among the many changes brought about by the Bengal Renaissance in India was the development of education, both in the Bengali language and in English. Colonial provisions at the time consisted mainly of village schools teaching literacy and numeracy, Arabic and Islamic studies being taught to Muslims in madrasas , and tols, where pandits instructed Sanskrit texts to Brahmins , which were supported by endowments.

[ 20 ] These institutions were exclusively male, and in the rare cases where girls could get an education, it was in the home.

[ 21 ] The work of Christian missions also had more of an influence on Indian students than the initiatives of the government.

[ 21 ] While the East India Company Act 1813 (the Charter Act) allotted 100,000 rupees from the government's surplus to be "applied to the revival and improvement of literature, and the encouragement of the learned natives of India, and for the introduction and promotion of a knowledge of the sciences," it did not lead to any coherent provision of public education.

[ 22 ] According to Dermot Killingley, the surplus mentioned in this Charter Act was "an aspiration, not a budget item," and even if the money had been provided for, there was uncertainty about how it should be spent.

[ 21 ] Recurring questions arose over whether to invest on a few advanced institutions or to promote widespread elementary education, what language to use, and particularly whether to support traditional methods of learning in India, which had declined due to the loss of patronage, or to introduce a new system based on Western education.

[ 21 ] Rammohan Roy contributed to this last debate by writing to the Governor-General in 1823 expressing his opposition to the establishment of a Sanskrit College that would foster traditional learning and advocating for Western scientific education; this effort failed without effect.

[ 23 ] Missionaries began teaching young women in 1816, but a systematic education policy was not established until 1854.

[ 21 ] However, Sengupta and Purkayastha point out that even during the 1860s and 1870s, "the project of female education was wholly tied to the purpose of enabling women to better discharge their domestic duties." [ 21 ] Despite the East India Company's initial hostility to missionaries, the colonial government later saw the advantages of their contribution to educating and training the local population. This was especially because, as Killingley noted, "in the innovations of the early nineteenth century, government initiative had less impact than the work of Christian missions, and of individuals … who responded to the demand for literacy, numeracy and related skills created by growing commercial and administrative activity." [ 21 ] In 1800, the Baptist Missionary Society established a centre in Srirampur , West Bengal, from which it ran a network of schools that taught literacy, mathematics, physics, geography, and other so-called "useful knowledge." [ 24 ] Other missionary societies followed soon after, working along similar lines.

[ 25 ] These missionaries, which were largely dependent on local, indigenous teachers and families, and the colonial government, which sometimes supported them with grants, were also cautious about introducing Christian teachings or the Bible.

[ 25 ] Education was also believed to be necessary in reversing the apparent moral decline many colonial administrators saw in Bengal society. To give an example, a British judge in Bengal recommended the London Missionary Society's schools, "for the dissemination of morality and general improvement of society among natives of all persuasion without interfering with their religious prejudices." [ 25 ] Missionaries, however, were not the only channels through which education was promoted. For instance, individuals in Calcutta such as Rammohan Roy , the conservative Hindu scholar, Radhakanta Deb , Shib Chandra Sarkar to the atheist philanthropist, David Hare , and other British officials often collaborated in the Calcutta School Book Society and the Calcutta School Society.

[ 25 ] Some of the other institutions of learning established during this period include the Chittagong College ; Indian Statistical Institute ; the Hindu School , the oldest modern educational institution in Asia; Jadavpur University ; Presidency University, Kolkata ; the University of Calcutta , the University of Dhaka , the oldest university in Bangladesh; and Visva-Bharati University .

Science [ edit ] Jagadish Chandra Bose was one of the fathers of radio science.

Satyendra Nath Bose was one of the pioneers of quantum mechanics .

Prafulla Chandra Ray was an eminent Bengali chemist, educationist, historian, industrialist and philanthropist.

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( August 2022 ) During the Bengal Renaissance, science was integrated into the broader intellectual and educational reforms. Institutions such as Presidency University , Calcutta Medical College , the University of Calcutta , and the IACS were pivotal in spreading modern scientific thought in British India.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Lectures, Bengali-language textbooks, and the establishment of high schools such as the Hindu School contributed to making science more accessible to urban and upper middle-class families.

Major advancements were made during this time by scientists such as Satyendra Nath Bose , Ashutosh Mukherjee , Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis , Anil Kumar Gain , Prafulla Chandra Ray , Debendra Mohan Bose , Jagadish Chandra Bose , Jnan Chandra Ghosh , Gopal Chandra Bhattacharya , Kishori Mohan Bandyopadhyay , Jnanendra Nath Mukherjee , Sisir Kumar Mitra , Upendranath Brahmachari , and Meghnad Saha , among others.

Jagadish Chandra Bose (1858–1937) was a polymath : a physicist , biologist , botanist , archaeologist , and writer of science fiction.

[ 28 ] He pioneered the investigation of radio and microwave optics , made very significant contributions to botany, and laid the foundations of experimental science in the Indian subcontinent .

[ 29 ] He is considered one of the fathers of radio science, and is also considered the father of Bengali science fiction . He also invented the crescograph .

Arts [ edit ] Satyajit Ray was an Indian motion-picture director, writer, and illustrator who brought the Indian cinema to world recognition with Pather Panchali .He was one of the pioneers of Parallel Cinema .

Main articles: Bengal School of Art and Music of Bengal This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( August 2022 ) The Bengal School of Art was an art movement and a style of Indian painting that originated in Bengal and flourished throughout British India in the early 20th century. Also known as 'Indian style of painting' in its early days, it was associated with Indian nationalism ( swadeshi ) and led by Abanindranath Tagore .

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Following the influence of Indian spiritual ideas in the West, the British art teacher Ernest Binfield Havell attempted to reform the teaching methods at the Calcutta School of Art by encouraging students to imitate Mughal miniatures . This caused controversy, leading to a strike by students and complaints from the local press, including from nationalists who considered it to be a retrogressive move. Havell was supported by the artist Abanindranath Tagore .

[ 32 ] Literature [ edit ] Rabindranath Tagore was a poet and artist. Awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1913 Kazi Nazrul Islam , the national poet of Bangladesh Bankim Chandra Chatterjee was the first successful novelist in the history of Bengali Literature Main article: Bengali literature This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( August 2022 ) According to historian Romesh Chunder Dutt : The conquest of Bengal by the English was not only a political revolution, but ushered in a greater revolution in thoughts and ideas, in religion and society ... From the stories of gods and goddesses, kings and queens, princes and princesses, we have learnt to descend to the humble walks of life, to sympathise with the common citizen or even common peasant … Every revolution is attended with vigour, and the present one is no exception to the rule. Nowhere in the annals of Bengali literature are so many or so bright names found crowded together in the limited space of one century as those of Ram Mohan Roy, Akshay Kumar Dutt, Isvar Chandra Vidyasagar, Isvar Chandra Gupta, Michael Madhusudan Dutt, Hem Chandra Banerjee, Bankim Chandra Chatterjee and Dina Bandhu Mitra. Within the three quarters of the present century, prose, blank verse, historical fiction and drama have been introduced for the first time in the Bengali literature.

Spirituality [ edit ] Swami Vivekananda Paramahansa Yogananda Sri Aurobindo Sarada Devi Ramakrishna Lahiri Mahasaya The Bengali Renaissance also led to religious reform movements. Some notable religious and spiritual leaders associated with these reform movements are Ram Mohan Roy , Rani Rashmoni , Debendranath Tagore , Keshab Chandra Sen , Bijoy Krishna Goswami , Ramakrishna , Sarada Devi , Mathurmohan Biswas , Swami Vivekananda , Aurobindo , Bamakhepa , Lokenath Brahmachari, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati , Bhaktivinoda Thakur , Paramahansa Yogananda , Lahiri Mahasaya , Nigamananda Paramahansa , Ram Thakur , Sitaramdas Omkarnath , and Anandamayi Ma .

The religious reform movements and organizations associated with the Bengali Renaissance are: Brahmoism ( Brahmo Samaj ) [ 33 ] Adi Brahmo Samaj Sadharan Brahmo Samaj Gaudiya Math Mahanam Sampraday Ramakrishna Mission Ramakrishna Math Sri Aurobindo Ashram Yogoda Satsanga Society of India Self-Realization Fellowship References [ edit ] ^ a b Dasgupta, Subrata (2011).

Awakening: The Story of the Bengal Renaissance . Random House India. p. 2.

ISBN 978-81-8400-183-9 .

^ a b Samanta, Soumyajit (2008).

The Bengal Renaissance : a critique (PDF) . 20th European Conference of Modern South Asian Studies Manchester (UK), 8th – 11th July 2008. p. 2.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 February 2022.

^ Sengupta, Nitish (2001).

History of the Bengali-speaking People . New Delhi, Delhi: UBS Publishers' Distributors. p. 211.

ISBN 978-81-7476-355-6 .

^ Panikkar, K N (3 March 2017).

"Three phases of Indian renaissance" .

Frontline . Publishing Private Limited. The Hindu Group.

Archived from the original on 28 April 2021 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 .

^ Sartori, Andrew (2009).

Bengal in Global Concept History . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 68.

^ Sarkar, Sumit (1997).

Writing Social History . Delhi: Oxford University Press. p. 104.

^ Naranyan Dhar, Pulak (1987). "Bengal Renaissance: A Study in Social Contradictions".

Social Scientist .

15 (1): 26– 45.

doi : 10.2307/3517400 .

JSTOR 3517400 .

^ a b c De, Amalendu (April–June 1995). "The Social Thoughts and Consciousness of the Bengali Muslims in the Colonial Period".

Social Scientist .

23 (4/6): 16– 37.

doi : 10.2307/3520213 .

JSTOR 3520213 .

^ Chakraborty, Aishik; Purkayastha, Rahul (May 2020).

"Bengal Renaissance and its Impact on the Common Law System" (PDF) .

International Journal of Legal Developments and Allied Issues .

6 (3): 241.

ISSN 2454-1273 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 May 2021 .

^ Dasgupta, Subrata (2009).

The Bengal Renaissance: Identity and Creativity from Rammohun Roy to Rabindranath Tagore . Permanent Black. p. 1.

ISBN 978-81-7824-177-7 .

^ Khan, Shahadat H. (1997).

The Freedom of Intellect Movement (Buddhir Mukt Andolan) in Bengali Muslim Thought, 1926–1938 (PhD thesis). University of Toronto.

^ a b c d e Killingley, Dermot (2019). "Rammohun Roy and the Bengal Renaissance". In Brekke, Torkel (ed.).

The Oxford History of Hinduism: Modern Hinduism . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 38.

ISBN 978-0-19-879083-9 .

^ a b Sarkar, Sumit (1990). "Calcutta and the Bengal Renaissance". In Chaudhury, Sukanta (ed.).

Calcutta: The Living City, Volume I: The Past . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-563696-3 .

^ a b Sastri, Sivanath; Lethbridge, R (1972). "The Introduction of English Education into Bengal; and the Early History of the Hindu College".

A History of the Renaissance in Bengal: Ramtanu Lahiri: Brahman and Reformer (Indian ed.). pp.

40– 52.

^ a b Ghosh, Anindita (2002). "Revisiting the 'Bengal Renaissance': Literary Bengali and Low-Life Print in Colonial Calcutta".

Economic and Political Weekly .

42 (37): 4329– 4338.

JSTOR 4412747 .

^ Dalrymple, William (2019).

Anarchy: The East India Company, Corporate Violence, and the Pillage of an Empire . London: Bloomsbury Publishing.

^ Sastri, Sivanath (1907). Lethbridge, Roper (ed.).

A History of the Renaissance in Bengal: Ramtanu Lahiri: Brahman and Reformer . Swan Sonnenschein & Co. p. 56.

^ Poddar, Arabinda (1970). "IV. Education and Social Mobility".

Renaissance in Bengal: Quests and Confrontations, 1800–1860 . Simla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study. p. 89.

^ Kopf, David (1979).

The Brahmo Samaj and the Shaping of the Modern Indian Mind . Princeton University Press. p. 15.

ISBN 978-0-691-03125-5 .

^ Killingley, Dermot (2019). "Rammohun Roy and the Bengal Renaissance".

The Oxford History of Hinduism: Modern Hinduism . New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

36– 53.

doi : 10.1093/oso/9780198790839.003.0003 .

ISBN 978-0198790839 .

^ a b c d e f g Killingley (2019).

Rammohun Roy and the Bengal Renaissance . p. 41.

^ Laird, M. A. (1972).

Missionaries and Education in Bengal 1793–1837 . Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 68.

^ Banerjee, Lyric (2020). "Religious Reformation in the Bengal Renaissance: Prelude to Science Museums in India".

Marburg Journal of Religion .

22 (2): 3.

^ Killingley (2019).

Rammohun Roy and the Bengal Renaissance . pp.

41– 42.

^ a b c d Killingley (2019).

Rammohun Roy and the Bengal Renaissance . p. 42.

^ "Presidency University" .

www.presiuniv.ac.in . Retrieved 15 July 2025 .

^ Science and Society . Concept Publishing Company. 1978.

^ A versatile genius Archived 3 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine , Frontline 21 (24), 2004.

^ Chatterjee, Santimay; Chatterjee, Enakshi (1976).

Satyendra Nath Bose . New Delhi: National Book Trust. p. 6.

OCLC 3017431 .

^ "Bengal School" .

National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi .

Archived from the original on 22 October 2018 . Retrieved 13 February 2019 .

^ Dey, Mukul.

"Which Way Indian Art?" .

chitralekha.org .

Archived from the original on 14 February 2019 . Retrieved 13 February 2019 .

^ Cotter, Holland (19 August 2008).

" 'Rhythms of India' Exhibition at the Philadelphia Museum of Art: Indian Modernism Via an Eclectic, Elusive Artist" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 3 October 2022 . Retrieved 13 February 2019 .

^ McDermott, Rachel Fell (2005). "Bengali religions". In Lindsay Jones (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Religion: 15 Volume Set . Vol. 2 (2nd ed.). Detroit, Mi: MacMillan Reference USA. p. 828.

ISBN 0-02-865735-7 .

Further reading [ edit ] Chatterjee, Pranab (2010).

A Story of Ambivalent Modernization in Bangladesh and West Bengal: The Rise and Fall of Bengali Elitism in South Asia . Peter Lang.

ISBN 978-1-4331-0820-4 .

Fraser, Bashabi edited Special Issue on Rabindranath Tagore, Literary Compass , Wiley Publications. Volume 12, Issue 5, May 2015.

See Fraser's Introduction pp. 161–172.

ISSN 1741-4113 .

Kabir, Abulfazal M. Fazle (2011).

The Libraries of Bengal, 1700–1947: The Story of Bengali Renaissance . Promilla & Co. Publishers.

ISBN 978-8185002071 .

Kopf, David (1969).

British Orientalism and the Bengal Renaissance: The Dinamics of Indian Modernization, 1773–1835 . Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-00665-2 .

Kumar, Raj (2003).

Essays on Indian Renaissance . Discovery Publishing House.

ISBN 978-81-7141-689-9 .

Mandal, Mahitosh (2022).

"Dalit Resistance during the Bengal Renaissance: Five Anti-Caste Thinkers from Colonial Bengal, India" .

Caste: A Global Journal on Social Exclusion .

3 (1): 11– 30.

doi : 10.26812/caste.v3i1.367 .

S2CID 249027627 .

Archived from the original on 9 August 2022 . Retrieved 19 August 2022 .

Marshall, P. J. (2006).

Bengal: The British Bridgehead: Eastern India 1740–1828 (The New Cambridge History of India) .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0521028226 .

Mittra, Sitansu Sekhar (2001).

Bengal's Renaissance . Academic Publishers.

ISBN 978-81-87504-18-4 .

Archived from the original on 28 February 2017 . Retrieved 30 March 2017 .

Pal, Bipin Chandra; Cakrabartī, Jagannātha (1977).

Studies in the Bengal renaissance (2nd ed.). the University of California: National Council of Education, Bengal.

OCLC 5945802 .

Sen, Amit (2011).

Notes on the Bengal Renaissance . Nabu Press.

ISBN 978-1-179-50139-0 .

Travers, Robert (2007).

Ideology and Empire in Eighteenth-Century India: The British in Bengal .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0521059688 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bengali renaissance .

Copf, David (2012).

"Bengal Renaissance" . In Islam, Sirajul ; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.).

Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.).

Asiatic Society of Bangladesh .

v t e Bengal Renaissance People Sri Aurobindo Atul Prasad Sen Rajnarayan Basu Debendra Mohan Bose Jagadish Chandra Bose Subhash Chandra Bose Satyendra Nath Bose Madhusudan Gupta Bethune Upendranath Brahmachari Bankim Chandra Chatterjee Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay Akshay Kumar Datta Henry Derozio Alexander Duff Michael Madhusudan Dutt Romesh Chunder Dutt Anil Kumar Gain Kadambini Ganguly Monomohun Ghose Ramgopal Ghosh David Hare Kazi Nazrul Islam Eugène Lafont Mahanambrata Brahmachari Ashutosh Mukherjee Kalikrishna Mitra Harish Chandra Mukherjee Ramakrishna Paramahamsa Upendrakishore Ray Chowdhury Raja Ram Mohan Roy Meghnad Saha Akshay Chandra Sarkar Mahendralal Sarkar Brajendra Nath Seal Girish Chandra Sen Keshub Chandra Sen Haraprasad Shastri Debendranath Tagore Rabindranath Tagore Satyendranath Tagore Jnanadanandini Devi Fanindra Nath Gooptu Sitanath Tattwabhushan Brahmabandhav Upadhyay Ram Chandra Vidyabagish Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar Swami Vivekananda Paramahansa Yogananda Begum Rokeya Culture Bengali literature Bengali poetry Bengali music Bangiya Sahitya Parishad Bhadralok Brahmoism Brahmo Samaj Gaudiya Math Mahanam Sampraday Nazrul geeti Rabindra Nritya Natya Rabindra Sangeet Sambad Prabhakar Satyagraha Self-Realization Fellowship Yogoda Satsanga Swadeshi Tattwabodhini Patrika Young Bengal Education Chittagong College Indian Statistical Institute Hindu School Jadavpur University Presidency University University of Calcutta Bethune College University of Dhaka Visva-Bharati University Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine v t e State of West Bengal Capital : Kolkata State symbols Emblem : Emblem of West Bengal Anthem : Banglar Mati Banglar Jol Animal : Fishing cat Bird : White-throated kingfisher Flower : Night-flowering jasmine (Shiuli) Tree : Devil's tree (Saptaparni) Fish: Ilish History Gauda Kingdom Shashanka Pala Empire Sena dynasty Mallabhum kingdom Cooch Behar State Sher Shah Suri Mughal Empire Nawabs of Bengal East India Company Battle of Plassey Bengal Presidency Great Bengal famine of 1770 Indian Rebellion of 1857 Bengal Renaissance Bardhaman Raj Nadia Raj Jhargram Raj Sovabazar Raj Partition of Bengal (1905) Revolutionary movement for Indian independence Anushilan Samiti Jugantar Bengal famine of 1943 Direct Action Day Noakhali riots Partition of Bengal (1947) Bengali Language Movement (Manbhum) Bangladesh Liberation War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Maritime history of Bengal Geography Bengal Basin Darjeeling Himalayan hill region Terai North Bengal plains Dooars Rarh region Sundarbans Western plateau and high lands Ganges Delta Climate Sandakphu (Highest point) Protected areas of West Bengal Rivers of West Bengal Ganga Damodar River Brahmaputra River Teesta River Hooghly River Khoai Tiger Hill, Darjeeling Siliguri Corridor Governance Chief Ministers Governor Legislative Assembly Human Rights Commission Political parties ( All India Trinamool Congress Communist Party of India (Marxist) Indian National Congress Bharatiya Janata Party ) Parliamentary constituencies Assembly constituencies CID West Bengal Kolkata Police Rights groups Matua Mahasangha Bangla Pokkho Divisions and districts Burdwan division Birbhum Hooghly Paschim Bardhaman Purba Bardhaman Jalpaiguri division Alipurduar Cooch Behar Darjeeling Jalpaiguri Kalimpong Malda division Berhampore (declared) Dakshin Dinajpur Jangipur (declared) Malda Murshidabad Uttar Dinajpur Medinipur division Bankura Bishnupur (declared) Jhargram Paschim Medinipur Purba Medinipur Purulia Presidency division Basirhat (declared) Howrah Ichamati (declared) Kolkata Nadia North 24 Parganas Ranaghat (declared) South 24 Parganas Sundarbans (declared) Cities and towns Alipore Asansol Berhampore Balurghat Bankura Barasat Bardhaman Bishnupur Hugli-Chuchura Cooch Behar Darjeeling Durgapur Haldia Howrah Jalpaiguri Jaynagar Majilpur Jiaganj Azimganj Kalimpong Kharagpur Kolkata Krishnanagar Kurseong Malda Midnapore Murshidabad Purulia Raiganj Siliguri Siuri Tamluk List of cities in West Bengal by population Cities and towns by district Culture Bengal Renaissance Bengali calendars Patachitra Chalchitra Arts of West Bengal Baul Bhadu Gombhira Chhau dance Cuisine Bengali Rabindra Sangeet Rabindra Nritya Natya Holi Dol Purnima Prostitution in Kolkata Pohela Boishakh Durga Puja Bhai Dooj Raksha Bandhan Ratha Yatra Architecture of Bengal Bengal temples Bengali language Bengali literature Feluda Lalmohan Ganguly Professor Shonku Tarini Khuro Kakababu Kiriti Roy Pather Panchali (novel) Bengali cinema Jatra Ghosts in Bengali culture GI products Baluchari sari Banglar Rosogolla Banglar Muslin Banglar Nolen Gur Sandesh Bankura horse Baruipur Guava Bengal Patachitra Bishnupur Motichur Laddu Chhau mask Darjeeling tea Dhaniakhali Sari Dhokra Fazli (mango) Garad Saree Gobindobhog Himsagar Jaynagarer Moa Kamarpukur Sada Bode Madurkathi Malda Nistari Silk Yarn Manasa chali Mihidana Murshidabad Chhanabora Nakshi kantha Radhunipagal rice Santiniketan Leather Goods Shantipuri sari Sitabhog Sundarban Honey Tangail Saree Tulaipanji Demographics Bengali people Bihari people Economy of West Bengal Gurkha Adivasi Rajbanshi Anglo-Indian people Ethnic communities in Kolkata List of West Bengal districts ranked by literacy rate Discrimination against Bengalis in India People Rabindranath Tagore Satyajit Ray Kazi Nazrul Islam Anil Kumar Gain Ritwik Ghatak Subhas Chandra Bose Jamini Roy Bidhan Chandra Roy Jyoti Basu Nandalal Bose Jagadish Chandra Bose Meghnad Saha Bankim Chandra Chatterjee Sarat Chandra Bose Jnanadanandini Devi Abanindranath Tagore Satyendranath Tagore Satyendranath Dutta Raja Ram Mohan Roy Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar Rani Rashmoni Ramakrishna Swami Vivekananda Sarada Devi Dwarkanath Tagore Sukumar Ray Upendrakishore Ray Chowdhury Michael Madhusudan Dutt Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay Sister Nivedita Mother Teresa Amartya Sen Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay Nihar Ranjan Gupta Image gallery at Wikimedia Commons v t e Bangladesh articles History Timeline Outline Topics : Bengal Aviation Literature Military Maritime Postal Rulers Cyclones Years Ancient Vedic period Anga Vanga Pundra Suhma kingdom Magadha Pradyota Shaishunaga Nanda Gangaridai Maurya Empire Shunga Empire Kanva dynasty Gupta Empire Classical and Medieval Founding kingdom: Gauda Kingdom Classical empires: Pala Kamboja Sena Sultanates: Islamic rulers Delhi Sultanate Khalji dynasty Bengal Sultanate Sur Empire Baro-Bhuyan Mughal period: Bengal Subah Nawabs of Bengal Battle of Plassey Colonial and Pakistan era Portuguese Bengala British Bengal: Famine of 1770 Sepoy Rebellion Bengal Renaissance Partition of Bengal (1905) Prime Minister of Bengal Lahore Resolution Famine of 1943 Direct Action Day Partition of Bengal (1947) East Pakistan : Language Movement Legislative election in 1954 Six point movement 1969 Uprising General election in 1970 Proclamation of Independence Bangladesh Liberation War : Provisional Government Genocide Rape Timeline Republic of Bangladesh Famine of 1974 Military coups 1975 1981 1982 1990 Uprising Political crisis in 2006–08 Bangladesh Rifles revolt Battle of Begums Protests in 2013 Student–People's uprising Quota reform movement Non-cooperation movement Massacre Regional Chittagong Dhaka Jessore Noakhali Rangpur Sylhet Geography Administrative: Divisions Districts Sub-districts Cities and towns Borders Nature: Islands Lakes Mountains National parks Rivers Places: Bay of Bengal Bengal Fan Chittagong Hill Tracts Cox's Bazar Ganges Basin Ganges Delta Hatirjheel Sundarbans World Heritage Sites Politics Government Executive: President List Prime Minister List Cabinet Elections : Election Commission General elections Presidential elections Political parties Foreign relations Foreign policies Jatiya Sangsad (parliament) : Constituencies Speaker Local government : City corporations Municipalities Upazila Parishads Union councils Law : Constitution Supreme Court High Court Division International Crimes Tribunal Chief Justice Attorney General Human rights : Forced disappearance Freedom of religion LGBT rights Women Military and enforcement Armed Forces : Army Navy Air Force Paramilitary : Border Guard Coast Guard Ansar Village Defence Party President Guard Regiment Special Security Force Intelligence : NSI DGFI CTIB Special Branch Police : APBn CID CTTC PBI RAB SPBn Economy Bangladesh Planning Commission Industries: Automotive Ceramics Electronics Food Pharmaceutical Textile Shipbuilding Steel Tea production Finance sectors: Banking Bangladesh Bank (central bank) Bangladeshi taka (currency) Financial system Stock Exchange: Chittagong Dhaka 2011 scam Energy and resources: Energy policy Electricity Natural gas and petroleum Nuclear energy Renewable energy Export Processing Zones Agriculture : Rice Poultry Fishing Forestry Tourism Poverty Infrastructure: Post Telecommunications Real estate Water supply and sanitation Transport : Airports Airlines Railway Roads Ports Society Demographics Ethnic groups Bangladeshis Bengalis Names Crime Corruption Human trafficking Terrorism Education Schools Universities Health Hunger Religion Society Culture Architecture Bangaliana Baul Bangladeshi nationalism Bengalization Calendars Cinema Cuisine Language Bengal studies Literature Music Public holidays Sports Traditional Theatre Radio stations Television Sexuality Marriage Symbols Amar Shonar Bangla Bangamata Bengal fire Bengal tiger Bungalow Flag Government Seal Ilish Jackfruit Kabaddi Bengal cat Mango tree National Emblem National Martyrs' Memorial Notuner Gaan Oriental magpie-robin Water lily Inventions and discoveries Outline Index Category Portal v t e Renaissance General Renaissance Greek scholars in the Renaissance High Renaissance Mannerism Northern Mannerism Outline of the Renaissance Renaissance studies By field Architecture Brick Central and Eastern Europe French Italian domes Palladian Plateresque Portuguese Purism Spanish Venetian Art Early Netherlandish painting Dutch and Flemish painting Italian painting Sculpture Italian sculpture Dance Humanism France Northern Europe Latin Literature Dutch French Spanish Magic Medicine Music Philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Science Scientific Revolution Technology Theatre Warfare By region Italian Renaissance Bergamo and Brescia Ferrara Florence Lombardy Rome Papacy Sicily Urbino Venice Northern Renaissance England France Germany Saxony Weser Low Countries Poland Scotland Iberian peninsula Portugal Spain Spanish Golden Age Lists Composers Figures Humanists Structures Related Cloak and dagger Medieval renaissances Carolingian Ottonian 12th century Reenactment v t e India topics History Overviews Timeline Years Astronomy Clothing Coinage Economics LGBTQ Linguistics Maritime Mathematics Metallurgy Military Paper currency Postal Science and technology Ancient Stone Age Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic period Mahajanapadas Mauryas Indo-Greek Kingdom Achaemenid conquest of the Indus Valley Indo-Parthian kingdom Kushan Empire Alchon Huns Seleucid–Mauryan war Middle Kingdoms Middle kingdoms Chola Middle Ages Medieval India Hoysala Pala Kakatiya Delhi Sultanate Vijayanagara Early Modern Mughals Marathas European trade Bengal War Late modern Colonial Princely state East India Company Plassey 1857 rebellion British Raj Railways Economy Army Commander-in-Chief Zamindari Bengal Renaissance Political reforms Partition of Bengal Independence movement 1943 famine World War II Partition Republic Integration Non-Aligned Movement Five-Year Plans Sino-Indian War Indo-Pakistani wars Green Revolution White Revolution Naxal Insurgency Smiling Buddha Space programme The Emergency Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) Contemporary History of India (1947–present) Economic liberalisation Pokhran-II COVID-19 pandemic Geography Geology Fossil Parks Geology of India Indian Plate Heritage National Geological Monuments of India Sacred groves of India Sacred mountains of India Sacred rivers of India Stones of India Environment Biogeographic classification Biosphere reserves Climate Climate change Earthquakes Ecoregions Environmental issues Fauna Forests Flora Geology National parks Protected areas Wildlife sanctuaries Landforms Beaches Canals Coasts Desert ECZ Extreme points Glaciers Highest point by states Islands Lakes Mountains Mountain passes Plains Indo-Gangetic Eastern coastal Western coastal Rivers Valleys Volcanoes Waterfalls Regions Central East North Northwest Northeast South Southwest Southeast West Subdivisions Autonomous administrative divisions Borders Towns Cities Districts Municipalities States and union territories See also National monuments of India National parks of India Nature worship in Indian-origin religions World Heritage Sites in India Culture of India History of India Tourism in India Politics Government Agencies Energy policy Foreign relations Parliament Lok Sabha Rajya Sabha President Vice President Prime Minister Union Council of Ministers Civil Services Cabinet Secretary State governments State legislative assemblies State legislative councils Governors, Lieutenant Governors and Administrators Chief Ministers Chief Secretaries Law Constitution Penal Code Fundamental rights, principles and duties Human rights Supreme Court Chief Justice High Courts District Courts Enforcement Federal Border Security Force (BSF) Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) National Security Guard (NSG) Railway Protection Force (RPF) Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) Special Protection Group (SPG) Intelligence Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) Enforcement Directorate (ED) Intelligence Bureau (IB) Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC) Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) National Investigation Agency (NIA) Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW) Military Army Navy Air Force Politics Censorship Citizenship Elections Democracy Nationalism Political parties Reservations Scandals Scheduled groups Secularism Women in politics Economy Companies BSE SENSEX NIFTY 50 NIFTY Next 50 NIFTY 500 GIFT Nifty Governance Ministry of Finance Finance ministers Ministry of Commerce and Industry Finance Commission Economic Advisory Council Central Statistical Office Securities and Exchange Board of India Enforcement Directorate External debt Foreign trade Foreign direct investment Foreign exchange reserves Remittances Taxation Subsidies Industrial licensing Voluntary guidelines NITI Aayog Make in India Atmanirbhar Bharat Currency Indian rupee Sign History Historical Forex Digital rupee Coinage Paisa Reserve Bank of India Governor Mint Inflation Financial services Banking Insurance Multi Commodity Exchange Bullion BSE NSE India INX History COVID-19 impact Economic development Liberalisation Licence Raj Green revolution Government initiatives Numbering system People By net worth Demography Income Poverty Labour law Pensions EPFO NPS PPF States Andhra Pradesh Assam Bihar Delhi Goa Gujarat Haryana Himachal Pradesh Jammu and Kashmir Jharkhand Karnataka Kerala Ladakh Madhya Pradesh Maharashtra Mizoram Odisha Punjab Rajasthan Tamil Nadu Telangana Uttarakhand Uttar Pradesh West Bengal Sectors Agriculture Livestock Fishing Automotive Chemical Construction Defence Education Energy Electricity Nuclear Oil and gas Solar Wind Electronics and semiconductor Entertainment Forestry Gambling Healthcare Hospitals Information technology Media Cinema FM Radio Television Printing Mining Coal Iron and Steel Pharmaceuticals Pulp and paper Retail Science and technology Biotechnology Space Telecommunications Textiles Tourism Transport Aviation Civil Ports Rail Roads Electricity Water Power Regulator IRDAI RBI SEBI IBBI PFRDA Other NCLT NCLAT BIFR IBBI IBC SARFESI Act Income Tax Act Companies Act Banking Act Insurance Act FEMA Mumbai Consensus Society and culture Society Caste system Corruption Crime Demographics Indians Education Universities in India Medical colleges in India Law colleges in India Engineering colleges in India Ethnic relations Health Languages Life expectancy Literacy Poverty Prisons Religion Socio-economic issues Standard of living Water supply and sanitation Women Sexuality Youth Culture Arts and entertainment Architecture Blogging Cinema Comics Webcomics Cuisine wine Dance Dress Folklore Festivals Literature Media television Martial arts Music Painting Physical culture Public holidays Sculpture tallest Sport Traditional NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐7d7vx
Cached time: 20250817221201
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.056 seconds
Real time usage: 1.355 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6486/1000000
Revision size: 33421/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 474268/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 41518/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 61/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 219492/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.595/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20688592/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1011.795      1 -total
 26.19%  264.952      1 Template:Reflist
 21.37%  216.229     29 Template:Cite_book
 12.88%  130.321      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.72%  128.709      1 Template:Culture_of_Bengal
 12.52%  126.667      1 Template:Culture_of_region
 10.45%  105.697      1 Template:Bangladesh_topics
 10.01%  101.292      1 Template:Country_topics
 10.01%  101.255      1 Template:Langx
  6.85%   69.349     16 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2376655:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817221201 and revision id 1300557901. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bengal_Renaissance&oldid=1300557901 " Categories : Bengal Renaissance Brahmoism Culture of Bengal Culture of Bangladesh Culture of West Bengal Hindu movements Bengal Presidency Indian independence movement History of social movements 19th century in India 20th century in India National revivals Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Indian English from December 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Use dmy dates from February 2015 Articles containing Bengali-language text Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles to be expanded from August 2022 All articles to be expanded Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 02:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bengal Renaissance 24 languages Add topic

