Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of the term Toggle History of the term subsection 1.1 The rise of social epistemology 1.2 Kuhn, Foucault, and the sociology of scientific knowledge 2 Social epistemology as a field 3 Major philosophers who influenced social epistemology 4 Present and future concerns 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Social epistemology 10 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Português Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Field of study in analytic philosophy This article is about the discipline. For the journal, see Social Epistemology (journal) .

Part of a series on Epistemology Outline Category Schools Coherentism Contextualism Dogmatism Empiricism Fallibilism Fideism Foundationalism Infallibilism Infinitism Naturalism Perspectivism Pragmatism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Solipsism Structuralism Concepts Action Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Belief Credence Certainty Data Experience Information Justification Induction Knowledge Meaning Rationality Reason Truth Wisdom Domains Applied epistemology Evolutionary epistemology Formal epistemology Historical epistemology Metaepistemology Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Epistemologists Aristotle Sextus Empiricus Edmund Gettier Wang Yangming René Descartes David Hume Immanuel Kant W. V. O. Quine more...

Related fields Epistemic cognition Epistemic logic Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science v t e Social epistemology refers to a broad set of approaches that can be taken in epistemology (the study of knowledge ) that construes human knowledge as a collective achievement. Another way of characterizing social epistemology is as the evaluation of the social dimensions of knowledge or information.

[ 1 ] As a field of inquiry in analytic philosophy , social epistemology deals with questions about knowledge in social contexts, meaning those in which knowledge attributions cannot be explained by examining individuals in isolation from one another. The most common topics discussed in contemporary social epistemology are testimony (e.g. "When does a belief that x is true which resulted from being told 'x is true' constitute knowledge?"), peer disagreement (e.g. "When and how should I revise my beliefs in light of other people holding beliefs that contradict mine?"), and group epistemology (e.g. "What does it mean to attribute knowledge to groups rather than individuals, and when are such knowledge attributions appropriate?").

[ 1 ] Social epistemology also examines the social justification of belief.

[ 1 ] One of the enduring difficulties with defining "social epistemology" that arises is the attempt to determine what the word "knowledge" means in this context. There is also a challenge in arriving at a definition of "social" which satisfies academics from different disciplines.

[ 1 ] Social epistemologists may exist working in many of the disciplines of the humanities and social sciences , most commonly in philosophy and sociology . In addition to marking a distinct movement in traditional and analytic epistemology , social epistemology is associated with the interdisciplinary field of science and technology studies (STS).

History of the term [ edit ] The consideration of social dimensions of knowledge in relation to philosophy started in 380 B.C.E with Plato’s dialogue: Charmides .

[ 2 ] This dialogue included Socrates' argument about whether anyone is capable of examining if another man's claim that he knows something, is true or not.

[ 1 ] In it he questions the degree of certainty an unprofessional in a field can have towards a person’s claim to be a specialist in that same field. Charmides also explored the tendency of the utopian vision of social relations to degenerate into dystopian fantasy.

[ 3 ] As the exploration of a dependence on authoritative figures constitutes a part of the study of social epistemology, it confirms the existence of the ideology in minds long before it was given its label.

In 1936, Karl Mannheim turned Karl Marx ‘s theory of ideology (which interpreted the “social” aspect in epistemology to be of a political or sociological nature) into an analysis of how the human society develops and functions in this respect. Particularly, this Marxist analysis prompted Mannheim to write Ideology and Utopia, which investigated the classical sociology of knowledge and the construct of ideology.

[ 4 ] The term “social epistemology” was first coined by the library scientists Margaret Egan .

[ 5 ] and Jesse Shera [ 6 ] in a Library Quarterly paper at the University of Chicago Graduate Library School in the 1950s.

[ 7 ] The term was used by Robert K. Merton in a 1972 article in the American Journal of Sociology and then by Steven Shapin in 1979. However, it was not until the 1980s that the current sense of “social epistemology” began to emerge.

The rise of social epistemology [ edit ] In the 1980s, there was a powerful growth of interest amongst philosophers in topics such as epistemic value of testimony, the nature and function of expertise, proper distribution of cognitive labor and resources among individuals in the communities and the status of group reasoning and knowledge.

In 1987, the philosophical journal Synthese published a special issue on social epistemology which included two authors that have since taken the branch of epistemology in two divergent directions: Alvin Goldman and Steve Fuller .

[ 8 ] Fuller founded a journal called Social Epistemology: A journal of knowledge, culture, and policy in 1987 and published his first book, Social Epistemology , in 1988. Goldman’s Knowledge in a Social World came out in 1999. Goldman advocates for a type of epistemology which is sometimes called “veritistic epistemology” because of its large emphasis on truth.

[ 9 ] This type of epistemology is sometimes seen to side with “ essentialism ” as opposed to “ multiculturalism ”.

[ 9 ] But Goldman has argued that this association between veritistic epistemology and essentialism is not necessary.

[ 9 ] He describes Social Epistemology as knowledge derived from one’s interactions with another person, group or society.

Goldman looks into one of the two strategies of the socialization of epistemology. This strategy includes the evaluation of social factors that impact knowledge formed on true belief. In contrast, Fuller takes preference for the second strategy that defines knowledge influenced by social factors as collectively accepted belief. The difference between the two can be simplified with exemplars e.g.: the first strategy means analyzing how your degree of wealth (a social factor) influences what information you determine to be valid whilst the second strategy occurs when an evaluation is done on wealth’s influence upon your knowledge acquired from the beliefs of the society in which you find yourself.

[ 10 ] Fuller's position supports the conceptualization that social epistemology is a critique of context, particularly in his approach to " knowledge society " and the "university" as integral contexts of modern learning.

[ 11 ] It is said that this articulated a reformulation of the Duhem-Quine thesis , which covers the underdetermination of theory by data.

[ 11 ] It explains that the problem of context will assume this form: "knowledge is determined by its context".

[ 11 ] In 2012, on the occasion of the 25th anniversary of Social Epistemology , Fuller reflected upon the history and the prospects of the field, including the need for social epistemology to re-connect with the larger issues of knowledge production first identified by Charles Sanders Peirce as ‘’cognitive economy’’ and nowadays often pursued by library and information science . As for the “analytic social epistemology”, to which Goldman has been a significant contributor, Fuller concludes that it has “failed to make significant progress owing, in part, to a minimal understanding of actual knowledge practices, a minimised role for philosophers in ongoing inquiry, and a focus on maintaining the status quo of epistemology as a field.” [ 12 ] Kuhn, Foucault, and the sociology of scientific knowledge [ edit ] The basic view of knowledge that motivated the emergence of social epistemology as it is perceived today can be traced to the work of Thomas Kuhn and Michel Foucault , which gained acknowledgment at the end of the 1960s. Both brought historical concerns directly to bear on problems long associated with the philosophy of science . Perhaps the most notable issue here was the nature of truth , which both Kuhn and Foucault described as a relative and contingent notion. On this background, ongoing work in the sociology of scientific knowledge (SSK) and the history and philosophy of science (HPS) was able to assert its epistemological consequences, leading most notably to the establishment of the strong programme at the University of Edinburgh . In terms of the two strands of social epistemology, Fuller is more sensitive and receptive to this historical trajectory (if not always in agreement) than Goldman, whose “veritistic” social epistemology can be reasonably read as a systematic rejection of the more extreme claims associated with Kuhn and Foucault.

Social epistemology as a field [ edit ] In the standard sense of the term today, social epistemology is a field within analytic philosophy . It focuses on the social aspects of how knowledge is created and disseminated. What precisely these social aspects are, and whether they have beneficial or detrimental effects upon the possibilities to create, acquire and spread knowledge is a subject of continuous debate. The most common topics discussed in contemporary social epistemology are testimony (e.g. "When does a belief that 'x is true' which resulted from being told that 'x is true' constitute knowledge?"), peer disagreement (e.g. "When and how should I revise my beliefs in light of other people holding beliefs that contradict mine?"), and group epistemology (e.g. "What does it mean to attribute knowledge to groups rather than individuals, and when are such knowledge attributions appropriate?").

[ 1 ] Within the field, "the social" is approached in two complementary and not mutually exclusive ways: "the social" character of knowledge can either be approached through inquiries in inter-individual epistemic relations or through inquiries focusing on epistemic communities . The inter-individual approach typically focuses on issues such as testimony, epistemic trust as a form of trust placed by one individual in another, epistemic dependence, epistemic authority, etc. The community approach typically focuses on issues such as community standards of justification, community procedures of critique, diversity, epistemic justice, and collective knowledge.

[ 1 ] Social epistemology as a field within analytic philosophy has close ties to, and often overlaps with philosophy of science . While parts of the field engage in abstract, normative considerations of knowledge creation and dissemination, other parts of the field are "naturalized epistemology" in the sense that they draw on empirically gained insights---which could mean natural science research from, e.g., cognitive psychology , be that qualitative or quantitative social science research. (For the notion of "naturalized epistemology" see Willard Van Orman Quine .) And while parts of the field are concerned with analytic considerations of rather general character, case-based and domain-specific inquiries in, e.g., knowledge creation in collaborative scientific practice, knowledge exchange on online platforms or knowledge gained in learning institutions play an increasing role.

Important academic journals for social epistemology as a field within analytic philosophy are, e.g., Episteme , Social Epistemology , and Synthese . However, major works within this field are also published in journals that predominantly address philosophers of science and psychology or in interdisciplinary journals which focus on particular domains of inquiry (such as, e.g., Ethics and Information Technology ).

Major philosophers who influenced social epistemology [ edit ] Plato in his dialogue Charmides John Locke in Problem of Testimony David Hume in Problem of Testimony Thomas Reid in Problem of Testimony Karl Marx in interrelating Ideology and Knowledge.

used by Karl Mannheim who concentrated on the social conditioning of knowledge with the reasoning that a knowledge claim's validity is restricted by the social conditions with regard to which the claim was initially made.

Miranda Fricker in Problem of Testimony Present and future concerns [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( June 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In both stages, both varieties of social epistemology remain largely "academic" or "theoretical" projects. Yet both emphasize the social significance of knowledge and therefore the cultural value of social epistemology itself. A range of journals publishing social epistemology welcome papers that include a policy dimension.

More practical applications of social epistemology can be found in the areas of library science , academic publishing , guidelines for scientific authorship and collaboration, knowledge policy and debates over the role of the Internet in knowledge transmission and creation.

Social epistemology is still considered a relatively new addition to philosophy, with its problems and theories still fresh and in rapid movement.

[ 13 ] Of increasing importance is social epistemology developments within transdisciplinarity as manifested by media ecology.

See also [ edit ] Bayesian epistemology Collaborative intelligence Collective intelligence Distributed cognition Double hermeneutic Epistemic democracy Epistemology Feminist epistemology Group cognition Intersubjectivity Knowledge falsification Shared intentionality Situated cognition Sociology of knowledge Social constructionism Social philosophy Reflexivity (social theory) Media ecology Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Goldman, Alvin; Blanchard, Thomas (2015).

"Social Epistemology" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Goldman, Alvin; Whitcomb, Dennis (2011).

Social Epistemology: Essential Readings . New York, NY: Oxford University Press. p. 109.

ISBN 978-0-19-533461-6 .

^ Schmid, Walter T. (1998).

Plato's Charmides and the Socratic Ideal of Rationality . Albany, NY: SUNY Press. pp. x.

ISBN 978-0-7914-3763-6 .

^ Fricker, Miranda; Graham, Peter J.; Henderson, David; Pedersen, Nikolaj J. L. L. (2020).

The Routledge Handbook of Social Epistemology . Oxon: Routledge. p. 31.

ISBN 978-1-138-85851-0 .

^ Furner, Jonathan. 2004. “‘A Brilliant Mind’: Margaret Egan and Social Epistemology.” Library Trends 52 (4): 792–809 ^ Zandonade, T. (2004). Social Epistemology from Jesse Shera to Steve Fuller.

Library Trends , 52(4), 810–832.

^ Egan, Margaret and Jesse Shera. 1952. "Foundations of a Theory of Bibliography." Library Quarterly 44:125-37.

^ A comparison of Goldman and Fuller can be found in Legitimizing Scientific Knowledge: An Introduction to Steve Fuller’s Social Epistemology , Francis Remedios, Lexington Books, 2003. pp. 106 –112.

http://social-epistemology.com/2013/07/12/orienting-social-epistemology-francis-remedios/ ^ a b c www .ed .uiuc .edu /EPS /PES-Yearbook /95 _docs /goldman .html [ dead link ] ^ Rimkutė, Audronė (2014).

"The Problem of Social Knowledge in Contemporary Social Epistemology: Two Approaches" .

Problemos (in Lithuanian) (65): 4– 19.

doi : 10.15388/Problemos.2004.65.6645 .

ISSN 1392-1126 .

^ a b c Collier, James H. (2016).

On Twenty-Five Years of Social Epistemology: A Way Forward . Oxon: Routledge. p. 106.

ISBN 978-0-415-71103-6 .

^ Fuller, Steve (2012). "Social Epistemology: A Quarter-Century Itinerary".

Social Epistemology .

26 ( 3– 4): 267– 283.

doi : 10.1080/02691728.2012.714415 .

S2CID 144024192 .

^ Schmitt, Frederick F.; Scholz, Oliver R. (2010).

"Introduction: The History of Social Epistemology" .

Episteme .

7 (1): 1– 6.

doi : 10.3366/E174236000900077X .

ISSN 1750-0117 .

References [ edit ] Berlin, James A.

Rhetorics, Poetics, and Cultures: Refiguring College English Studies , Indiana: Parlor Press, 2003.

ISBN 0-9724772-8-4 Egan, Margaret and Jesse Shera . 1952. "Foundations of a Theory of Bibliography." Library Quarterly 44:125-37.

Goldman, Alvin ; Blanchard, Thomas (2016-01-01). Zalta, Edward N., ed. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Goldman, Alvin,. "Social Epistemology". stanford.library.sydney.edu.au. Retrieved 2017-02-22.

Longino, Helen . 1990.

Science as Social Knowledge . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-02051-5 Longino, Helen. 2001.

The Fate of Knowledge .  Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-08876-4 Remedios, Francis. 2003.

Legitimizing Scientific Knowledge: An Introduction to Steve Fuller’s Social Epistemology . Lexington Books.

ISBN 0-7391-0667-8 Rimkutė, Audronė (2014-09-28). "The Problem of Social Knowledge in Contemporary Social Epistemology: Two Approaches". Problemos (in Lithuanian). 0 (65): 4–19. doi:10.15388/Problemos.2004.65.6645. ISSN 1392-1126.

Schmitt, Frederick F. 1994.

Socializing Epistemology . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 0-8476-7959-4 Schmitt, Frederick F.; Scholz, Oliver R. (2010-02-01). "Introduction: The History of Social Epistemology". Episteme. 7 (1): 1–6. doi:10.3366/E174236000900077X. ISSN 1750-0117.

Solomon, Miriam. 2001.

Social Empricism . Cambridge: MIT Press.

ISBN 0-262-19461-9 Further reading [ edit ] Goldman, Alvin I. (2002). "What Is Social Epistemology? a Smorgasbord of Projects".

Pathways to Knowledge: Private and Public . Oxford University Press. pp.

182– 204.

doi : 10.1093/0195138791.003.0009 .

ISBN 978-0-19-513879-5 .

Muñoz, Braulio (1986). "On Relativity, Relativism, and Social Theory". In Margolis, J.; Krausz, M.; Burian, R.M. (eds.).

Rationality, Relativism and the Human Sciences . Springer, Dordrecht. pp.

209– 222.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-009-4362-9_11 .

ISBN 978-94-009-4362-9 .

Fuller, Steve (2002).

Social Epistemology (2nd ed.). Bloomington, Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.

ISBN 9780253215154 .

Goldman, Alvin I.; Whitcomb, Dennis, eds. (2011).

Social Epistemology: Essential Readings . Oxford: Oxford university Press.

ISBN 9780195334616 .

Fricker, Miranda; Graham, Peter J.; Henderson, David; Pedersen, Nikolaj J. L. L., eds. (2021).

The Routledge Handbook of Social Epistemology (1st ed.). New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9781032090986 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Social epistemology .

Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Social Epistemology" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Social epistemology at PhilPapers Social epistemology at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project The journal Social Epistemology v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Social_epistemology&oldid=1301745618 " Categories : Social epistemology Interdisciplinary subfields of sociology Epistemology Philosophy of science Social philosophy Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2018 CS1 Lithuanian-language sources (lt) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2020 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 12:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Social epistemology 10 languages Add topic

