Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sullivan and the neo-Freudians 2 Selective inattention 3 Personifications 4 Criticism 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Interpersonal psychoanalysis 8 languages العربية Български 한국어 עברית Polski Русский Српски / srpski Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series of articles on Psychoanalysis Sigmund Freud's couch Concepts Psychosexual development Psychosocial development (Erikson) Unconscious Preconscious Consciousness Psychic apparatus Id, ego and superego Ego defenses Projection Introjection Libido Drive Transference Countertransference Resistance Denial Dreamwork Cathexis Important figures Abraham Adler Balint Bion Breuer Chodorow Erikson Fairbairn Ferenczi Freud (Anna) Freud (Sigmund) Fromm Guattari Horney Irigaray Jacobson Jones Jung Kohut Klein Kristeva Lacan Laing Laplanche Mahler Rank Reich Spielrein Stekel Strachey Sullivan Winnicott Žižek Important works The Interpretation of Dreams (1899) The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901) Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905) Psychology of the Unconscious (1912) Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920) The Ego and the Id (1923) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933) The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis (1964) Anti-Oedipus (1972) The Sublime Object of Ideology (1989) Schools of thought Adlerian Ego psychology Jungian Lacanian Interpersonal Intersubjective Marxist Object relations Reichian Relational Self psychology Training Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis British Psychoanalytic Council British Psychoanalytical Society Columbia University Center for Psychoanalytic Training and Research International Psychoanalytical Association World Association of Psychoanalysis List of schools of psychoanalysis See also Child psychoanalysis Depth psychology Psychodynamics Psychoanalytic theory Psychology portal v t e Interpersonal psychoanalysis is based on the theories of American psychiatrist Harry Stack Sullivan (1892–1949). Sullivan believed that the details of a patient's interpersonal interactions with others can provide insight into the causes and cures of mental disorder .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Current practitioners stress such features as the detailed description of clinical experience, the mutuality of the interpersonal process, and the not-knowing of the analyst.

[ 3 ] Sullivan and the neo-Freudians [ edit ] Along with other neo-Freudian practitioners of interpersonal psychoanalysis, such as Horney , Fromm , Thompson and Fromm-Reichman , Sullivan repudiated Freudian drive theory.

[ 4 ] They, like Sullivan, also shared the interdisciplinary emphasis that was to be an important part of the legacy of interpersonal psychoanalysis, influencing counsellors, clergymen, social workers and more.

[ 5 ] Selective inattention [ edit ] Sullivan proposed that patients could keep certain aspects or components of their interpersonal relationships out of their awareness by a psychological behavior described as selective inattention - a term that has to a degree passed into common usage.

A defence mechanism that functions prior to psychological repression , and acts by way of blocking all notice of the threat in question, selective inattention can also be accompanied by selective non-participation.

[ 6 ] Both defences as used by patients may be usefully identified by the analyst through examination of his/her countertransference .

[ 7 ] Personifications [ edit ] Sullivan emphasized that psychotherapists ' analyses should focus on patients' relationships and personal interactions in order to obtain knowledge of what he called personifications – one's internalised views of self and others, one's internal schemata.

[ 8 ] Such analyses would consist of detailed questioning regarding moment-to-moment personal interactions, even including those with the analyst himself.

Personifications can form the basis for what Sullivan called parataxic distortions of the interpersonal field – distortions similar to those described as the products of transference and projective identification in orthodox psychoanalysis.

[ 9 ] As with the latter, parataxic distortion can, if identified by the analyst, prove fruitful clues to the nature of the patient's inner world.

[ 10 ] Criticism [ edit ] See also: Psychoanalysis § Criticism , and Psychotherapy § General critiques Sullivan has been criticised for inventing (sometimes opaque) neologisms for established psychoanalytic concepts, to claim a perhaps spurious intellectual independence.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Elephant in the room Interpersonal psychotherapy Intersubjective psychoanalysis Family therapy Relational psychoanalysis Relationship counseling Transactional analysis References [ edit ] ^ Sullivan, H. S. (1953).

The interpersonal theory of psychiatry.

New York: Norton.

^ Evans, F. Barton (1996).

Harry Stack Sullivan: Interpersonal Theory and Psychotherapy.

London: Routledge.

^ Arthur H. Feiner, Interpersonal Psychoanalytic Perspectives on Relevance (2000) p. 22-6 and p. 44 ^ Paul Brinich/Christopher Shelley, The Self and Personality Structure (Buckingham 2002) p. 65 ^ Brinich, Self p. 64 ^ A. & J. Rosen, Frozen Dreams (2005) p. 108 and 115 ^ Rosen, p. 104 ^ Paul Brinich/Christopher Shelley, The Self and Personality Structure (Buckingham 2002) p. 65 ^ Brinich, Self p. 65 ^ S. R. Welt/W. G. Herron, Narcissism and the Psychotherapist (1990) p. 121-2 ^ B. F. Evans, in Brinich, Self p. 65 Further reading [ edit ] Curtis, R. C. & Hirsch, I. (2003). Relational Approaches to Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy.  In Gurman, A. G. & Messer, S. B. Essential Psychotherapies.  NY: Guilford.

Curtis, R. C. (2008). Desire, Self, Mind & the Psychotherapies.  Unifying Psychological Science and Psychoanalysis.  Lanham, MD & New York: Jason Aronson.

D. B. Stern/C. H. Mann eds., Pioneers of Interpersonal Psychoanalysis (1995) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Interpersonal_psychoanalysis&oldid=1057614000 " Category : Psychoanalytic schools This page was last edited on 28 November 2021, at 17:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Interpersonal psychoanalysis 8 languages Add topic

