Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 What type of thing is civil law?

2 Branches of civil law Toggle Branches of civil law subsection 2.1 Substantive civil law 2.2 Procedural civil law 3 History of civil law 4 Lawsuits 5 Civil procedure Toggle Civil procedure subsection 5.1 Civil procedure by region 6 Civil law publications 7 Persons influential in civil law 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Outline of civil law (common law) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Topical guide to civil law in common law countries Civil law – a branch of the law. In common law countries such as England, Wales, and the United States, the term refers to non-criminal law. The law relating to civil wrongs and quasi-contracts is part of the civil law. The law of property is embraced by civil law. Civil law can, like criminal law, be divided into substantive law and procedural law. The rights and duties of individuals amongst themselves is the primary concern of civil law. It is often suggested that civil proceedings are taken for the purpose of obtaining compensation for injury, and may thus be distinguished from criminal proceedings, whose purpose is to inflict punishment. However, exemplary or punitive damages may be awarded in civil proceedings.

What type of thing is civil law?

[ edit ] Civil law (in common law countries) can be described as all of the following: Branch of law dealing with non-criminal cases Branches of civil law [ edit ] Substantive civil law [ edit ] Substantive law Art and culture law Civil rights Commercial law Contract law Australian contract law Canadian contract law English contract law Scots contract law United States contract law Labor law Environmental law Family law Property law Cultural property law Intellectual property law Trust law Tort law Personal injury Tort law by common law country Tort law in Australia Canadian tort law English tort law Scots tort law United States tort law Procedural civil law [ edit ] Procedural law Civil procedure History of civil law [ edit ] History of company law in the United Kingdom History of competition law History of English contract law History of equity and trusts History of labour law History of labor law in the United States History of labour law in the United Kingdom Lawsuits [ edit ] Lawsuit – suit, action, or cause instituted or depending between two private persons in the courts of law.

Civil procedure [ edit ] Civil procedure – body of law that sets out the rules and standards that courts follow when adjudicating civil lawsuits (as opposed to procedures in criminal law matters). These rules govern how a lawsuit or case may be commenced, what kind of service of process (if any) is required, the types of pleadings or statements of case, motions or applications, and orders allowed in civil cases, the timing and manner of depositions and discovery or disclosure, the conduct of trials, the process for judgment, various available remedies, and how the courts and clerks must function.

Service of process Pleading – as practiced in countries that follow the English models, a pleading is a formal written statement of a party's claims or defenses to another party's claims in a civil action . The parties' pleadings in a case define the issues to be adjudicated in the action.

pleading in England and Wales pleading in United States federal courts Motions Motion in United States law Court orders Depositions Discovery Trial Judgments Legal remedies Civil procedure by region [ edit ] Civil procedure in Brazil Civil procedure in Canada Civil procedure in England and Wales Civil Procedure Rules (CPR) Civil procedure in South Africa Civil procedure in the United States Federal Rules of Civil Procedure Civil law publications [ edit ] Journal of Tort Law Persons influential in civil law [ edit ] Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

William Blackstone See also [ edit ] Outline of corporate finance Outline of law References [ edit ] External links [ edit ] Civil law at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Differences between Civil and Criminal Law in the USA Civil Cases in US Courts Civil Procedure Rules applying to England and Wales Complete text of Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (Cornell Univ.) v t e Wikipedia outlines General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places Health and fitness History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences People and self Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Outline_of_civil_law_(common_law)&oldid=1228099526 " Categories : Outlines of laws and legal topics Outlines Civil law (common law) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 9 June 2024, at 13:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Outline of civil law (common law) Add languages Add topic

