Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Collections 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Houghton Library 5 languages Azərbaycanca Deutsch Français Polski Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′23.5″N 71°06′57.4″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.373194°N 71.115944°W ﻿ / 42.373194; -71.115944 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Library of Harvard University This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Houghton Library Location Cambridge , Massachusetts, United States Type University library Established 28 February 1942 Branch of Harvard University Library Other information Website https://library.harvard.edu/libraries/houghton The Ancient of Days in Europe a Prophecy by William Blake , 1795, copy H Houghton Library , on the south side of Harvard Yard adjacent to Widener Library , Lamont Library , and Loeb House, is Harvard University 's primary repository for rare books and manuscripts.

[ 1 ] It is part of the Harvard College Library, the library system of Harvard's Faculty of Arts and Sciences . The collections of Houghton Library include the Harvard Theatre Collection and the Woodberry Poetry Room , as well as the personal papers and archives of major American and English writers.

History [ edit ] Bookplates from the Houghton collection Harvard's first special collections library began as the Treasure Room of Gore Hall in 1908.

[ 2 ] The Treasure Room moved to the newly built Widener Library in 1915. In 1938, looking to supply Harvard's most valuable holdings with more space and improved storage conditions, Harvard College Librarian Keyes DeWitt Metcalf made a series of proposals which eventually led to the creation of Houghton Library, Lamont Library , and the New England Deposit Library . Funding for Houghton was raised privately, with the largest portion coming from Arthur A. Houghton Jr.

, in the form of stock in Corning Glass Works . Construction was largely completed by the fall of 1941, and the library opened on February 28, 1942.

[ citation needed ] Along with much else, Houghton holds collections of papers of Samuel Johnson , Emily Dickinson , Henry Wadsworth Longfellow , Margaret Fuller , John Keats , Ralph Waldo Emerson and his family, Amos Bronson Alcott and his daughter Louisa May Alcott , along with the papers of other notable transcendentalists . Significant collections include those relating to Theodore Roosevelt , T.S. Eliot , E.E. Cummings , Henry James , William James , James Joyce , John Updike , Jamaica Kincaid , Tennessee Williams , The Cockettes , John Lithgow , Gore Vidal , and many others.

[ citation needed ] Houghton also holds the letters of Colonel Robert Gould Shaw , who commanded the 54th Massachusetts during the Civil War, and was killed during the assault on Fort Wagner .

[ citation needed ] Houghton mounts periodic exhibitions, open to the public, of various of its holdings.

Collections [ edit ] The Edison and Newman Room at Houghton Houghton has five main curatorial departments: Early Books and Manuscripts Archived 2007-06-06 at the Wayback Machine , which includes a large collection of Medieval and Renaissance manuscripts and over 2,500 incunabula .

Early Modern Books and Manuscripts , featuring the Donald and Mary Hyde Collection of Dr. Samuel Johnson, one of the largest collections of books and manuscripts relating to Samuel Johnson and his circle.

Modern Books and Manuscripts Archived 2007-06-09 at the Wayback Machine , which collects material from 1800 to the present, including the papers and libraries of Emily Dickinson , John Keats , Leon Trotsky , Gore Vidal , John Updike , Amy Lowell , and collector Julio Mario Santo Domingo, Jr.

, among many others.

Modern Books & Manuscripts New Acquisitions Blog Printing & Graphic Arts Archived 2007-06-09 at the Wayback Machine which documents the history and art of book production. It was founded in 1938 by Philip Hofer .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The Harvard Theatre Collection Archived 2007-07-01 at the Wayback Machine covering the history of the performing arts.

References [ edit ] ^ "Harvard University Houghton Library" .

www.annumarchitects.com . 2022.

^ "Preservation Services: 1905-1911" .

Harvard Library . Retrieved July 2, 2022 .

^ Jackson, William A. (1960). "Philip Hofer" The Book Collector 9, no 2 (summer): 151-164.

^ Jackson, William A. (1960). "Philip Hofer" The Book Collector 9, no.3 (autumn): 292-300.

A Houghton Library Chronicle, 1942–1992 . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard College Library. 1992.

OCLC 26633110 .

Centuries of books & manuscripts : collectors and friends, scholars and librarians build the Harvard College Library : an exhibition on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of Houghton Library, 1942–1992 . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard College Library. 1992.

OCLC 26024581 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Houghton Library .

Houghton Library home page Archived 2007-07-15 at the Wayback Machine Houghton 75: Celebrating Houghton Library's 75th Anniversary Online exhibition: Public Poet, Private Man: Henry Wadsworth Longfellow at 200 Archived 2008-11-23 at the Wayback Machine Online exhibition: Books in Books: Reflections on Reading and Writing in the Middle Ages Online exhibition: Harvard's Lincoln Archived 2010-06-26 at the Wayback Machine Online exhibition: A Monument More Durable Than Brass: The Donald and Mary Hyde Collection of Dr. Samuel Johnson Archived 2010-06-26 at the Wayback Machine Online exhibition: History of the Harry Elkins Widener Memorial Collection Archived 2014-05-02 at the Wayback Machine Online exhibition: "I shall ever be your dearest love": John Keats and Fanny Brawne Archived 2013-04-17 at the Wayback Machine Online exhibition: "Such a Curious Dream!: Alice's Adventures in Wonderland at 150 Houghton Library Blog Department of Modern Books & Manuscripts new acquisitions blog v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons 42°22′23.5″N 71°06′57.4″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.373194°N 71.115944°W ﻿ / 42.373194; -71.115944 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Norway Latvia Croatia Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii Artists ULAN Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Houghton_Library&oldid=1277877461 " Categories : Research libraries in the United States Literary archives in the United States Archives in the United States Harvard Library Harvard University buildings 1938 establishments in Massachusetts Libraries in Middlesex County, Massachusetts Libraries established in 1938 Library buildings completed in 1941 Rare book libraries in the United States Special collections libraries in the United States University and college buildings completed in 1941 Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from October 2024 All articles lacking in-text citations Use mdy dates from February 2025 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 27 February 2025, at 06:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Houghton Library 5 languages Add topic

