Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Development 2 Arguments for 3 Arguments against 4 See also 5 Notes 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Epiphenomenalism 25 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Position on the mind–body problem Epiphenomenalism is a philosophical theory on the mind–body problem in the philosophy of mind . It holds that subjective mental events are completely dependent for their existence on corresponding physical and biochemical events within the human body, but do not themselves influence physical events. According to epiphenomenalism, the appearance that subjective mental states (such as thoughts and intentions ) are causally effective themselves and directly influence physical events is an illusion generated by brain regions such as the prefrontal cortex, with consciousness itself being a by-product of physical states of the world. For instance, the emotion of fear seems to make the heart beat faster, but according to epiphenomenalism the biochemical secretions of the brain and nervous system (such as the stress hormone adrenaline )—not the subjective experience of fear itself—is what causes the rapid rise in heartbeat. Because mental events are a kind of overflow that cannot cause anything physical, yet have non-physical properties, epiphenomenalism has traditionally been viewed as a form of property dualism . In contemporary thought, there are a number of epiphenomenalistic questions that arise within a broadly materialist monism .

[ 1 ] Development [ edit ] During the 17th century, René Descartes argued that animals are subject to mechanical laws of nature . He defended the idea of automatic behavior , or the performance of actions without conscious thought. Descartes questioned how the immaterial mind and the material body can interact causally.

[ 2 ] His interactionist model (1649) held that the body relates to the mind through the pineal gland .

[ 3 ] La Mettrie , Leibniz , and Spinoza all in their own way began this way of thinking. The idea that even if the animal were conscious nothing would be added to the production of behavior, even in animals of the human type, was first voiced by La Mettrie (1745), and then by Cabanis (1802), and was further explicated by Hodgson (1870) [ 4 ] and Thomas Henry Huxley (1874).

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Huxley agreed with Descartes that behavior is determined solely by physical mechanisms, but he also believed that humans enjoy an intelligent life. In 1874, Huxley argued, in the Presidential Address to the British Association for the Advancement of Science , that animals are conscious automata based on his experiments showing that movement was still possible without certain parts of the central nervous system being intact. Based on these results, Huxley proposed that consciousness itself was not in control of an animal's behavior, concluding that psychical changes are collateral products of physical changes. Like the bell of a clock that has no role in keeping the time, consciousness has no role in determining behavior.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Huxley defended automatism by testing reflex actions, originally supported by Descartes. Huxley hypothesized that frogs that undergo lobotomy would swim when thrown into water, despite being unable to initiate actions. He argued that the ability to swim was solely dependent on the molecular change in the brain, concluding that consciousness is not necessary for reflex actions. According to epiphenomenalism, animals experience pain only as a result of neurophysiology .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In 1870, Huxley conducted a case study on a French soldier who had sustained a shot in the Franco-Prussian war that fractured his left parietal bone . Every few weeks the soldier would enter a trance-like state, smoking, dressing himself, and aiming his cane like a rifle all while being insensitive to pins, electric shocks, odorous substances, vinegar, noise, and certain light conditions. Huxley used this study to show that consciousness was not necessary to execute these purposeful actions, justifying the assumption that humans are insensible machines. Huxley's mechanistic attitude towards the body convinced him that the brain alone causes behavior.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In the early 1900s, scientific behaviorists such as Ivan Pavlov , John B. Watson , and B. F. Skinner began the attempt to uncover laws describing the relationship between stimuli and responses, without reference to inner mental phenomena. Instead of adopting a form of eliminativism or mental fictionalism , positions that deny that inner mental phenomena exist, a behaviorist was able to adopt epiphenomenalism in order to allow for the existence of mind.

George Santayana (1905) believed that all motion has physical causes. Because consciousness is accessory to life and not essential to it, natural selection is responsible for ingraining tendencies to avoid certain contingencies without any conscious achievement involved.

[ 7 ] By the 1960s, scientific behaviorism met substantial difficulties and eventually gave way to the cognitive revolution . Participants in that revolution, such as Jerry Fodor , reject epiphenomenalism and insist upon the efficacy of the mind. Fodor even speaks of "epiphobia"—fear that one is becoming an epiphenomenalist.

However, since the cognitive revolution, there have been several who have argued for a version of epiphenomenalism. In 1970, Keith Campbell proposed his "new epiphenomenalism", which states that the body produces a spiritual mind that does not act on the body. How the brain causes a spiritual mind, according to Campbell, is destined to remain beyond our understanding forever.

[ 8 ] In 2001, David Chalmers and Frank Jackson argued that claims about conscious states should be deduced a priori from claims about physical states alone. They offered that epiphenomenalism bridges, but does not close, the explanatory gap between the physical and the phenomenal realms.

[ 9 ] These more recent versions maintain that only the subjective, qualitative aspects of mental states are epiphenomenal. Imagine both Pierre and a robot eating a cupcake. Unlike the robot, Pierre is conscious of eating the cupcake while the behavior is under way. This subjective experience is often called a quale (plural qualia ), and it describes the private "raw feel" or the subjective " what-it-is-like " that is the inner accompaniment of many mental states. Thus, while Pierre and the robot are both doing the same thing, only Pierre has the inner conscious experience.

Frank Cameron Jackson (1982), for example, once espoused the following view: I am what is sometimes known as a "qualia freak". I think that there are certain features of bodily sensations especially, but also of certain perceptual experiences, which no amount of purely physical information includes. Tell me everything physical there is to tell about what is going on in a living brain... you won't have told me about the hurtfulness of pains, the itchiness of itches, pangs of jealousy....

[ 10 ] Some thinkers draw distinctions between different varieties of epiphenomenalism. In Consciousness Explained , Daniel Dennett distinguishes between a purely metaphysical sense of epiphenomenalism, in which the epiphenomenon has no causal impact at all, and Huxley's "steam whistle" epiphenomenalism, in which effects exist but are not functionally relevant.

Arguments for [ edit ] Some neurophysiological data has been proffered in support of epiphenomenalism, [ by whom?

] [ citation needed ] suggesting that at least some choices and actions appear to be actually controlled by subconscious brain processes for which the conscious mind later takes credit. Some of the oldest such data is the Bereitschaftspotential or "readiness potential" in which electrical activity related to voluntary actions can be recorded up to two seconds before the subject is aware of making a decision to perform the action. More recently Benjamin Libet , et al. (1979) have shown that it can take 0.5 seconds before a stimulus becomes part of conscious experience even though subjects can respond to the stimulus in reaction time tests within 200 milliseconds. The methods and conclusions of this experiment have received much criticism (e.g., see the many critical commentaries in Libet's (1985) target article), including fairly recently by neuroscientists such as Peter Tse , who claim to show that the readiness potential has nothing to do with consciousness at all.

[ 11 ] Arguments against [ edit ] The most powerful argument against epiphenomenalism is that it is self-contradictory: if we have knowledge about epiphenomenalism, then our brains know about the existence of the mind, but if epiphenomenalism were correct, then our brains should not have any knowledge about the mind, because the mind does not affect anything physical.

[ 12 ] However, some philosophers do not accept this as a rigorous refutation. For example, philosopher Victor Argonov states that epiphenomenalism is a questionable, but experimentally falsifiable theory. He argues that the personal mind is not the only source of knowledge about the existence of mind in the world. A creature (even a philosophical zombie ) could have knowledge about the mind and the mind-body problem by virtue of some innate knowledge.

[ 13 ] The information about the mind (and its problematic properties such as qualia and the hard problem of consciousness ) could have been, in principle, implicitly "written" in the material world since its creation. Epiphenomenalists can say that God created an immaterial mind and a detailed "program" of material human behavior that makes it possible to speak about the mind–body problem . That version of epiphenomenalism seems highly exotic, but it cannot be excluded from consideration by pure theory. However, Argonov suggests that experiments could refute epiphenomenalism. In particular, epiphenomenalism could be refuted if neural correlates of consciousness can be found in the human brain, and it is proven that human speech about consciousness is caused by them.

Some philosophers, such as Daniel Dennett , reject both epiphenomenalism and the existence of qualia with the same charge that Gilbert Ryle leveled against a Cartesian " ghost in the machine ", that they too are category mistakes . A quale or conscious experience would not belong to the category of objects of reference on this account, but rather to the category of ways of doing things.

Functionalists assert that mental states are well described by their overall role, their activity in relation to the organism as a whole. "This doctrine is rooted in Aristotle's conception of the soul, and has antecedents in Hobbes's conception of the mind as a 'calculating machine', but it has become fully articulated (and popularly endorsed) only in the last third of the 20th century." [ 14 ] In so far as it mediates stimulus and response, a mental function is analogous to a program that processes input/output in automata theory . In principle, multiple realisability would guarantee platform dependencies can be avoided, whether in terms of hardware and operating system or, ex hypothesi , biology and philosophy. Because a high-level language is a practical requirement for developing the most complex programs, functionalism implies that a non-reductive physicalism would offer a similar advantage over a strictly eliminative materialism.

Eliminative materialists believe " folk psychology " is so unscientific that, ultimately, it will be better to eliminate primitive concepts such as mind, desire and belief, in favor of a future neuroscientific account. A more moderate position such as J. L. Mackie 's error theory suggests that false beliefs should be stripped away from a mental concept without eliminating the concept itself, the legitimate core meaning being left intact.

Benjamin Libet's results are quoted [ 15 ] in favor of epiphenomenalism, but he believes subjects still have a "conscious veto", since the readiness potential does not invariably lead to an action. In Freedom Evolves , Daniel Dennett argues that a no-free-will conclusion is based on dubious assumptions about the location of consciousness, as well as questioning the accuracy and interpretation of Libet's results.

[ 16 ] Similar criticism of Libet-style research has been made by neuroscientist Adina Roskies and cognitive theorists Tim Bayne and Alfred Mele .

Others have argued that data such as the Bereitschaftspotential undermine epiphenomenalism for the same reason, that such experiments rely on a subject reporting the point in time at which a conscious experience and a conscious decision occurs, thus relying on the subject to be able to consciously perform an action. That ability would seem to be at odds with early epiphenomenalism, which according to Huxley is the broad claim that consciousness is "completely without any power… as the steam-whistle which accompanies the work of a locomotive engine is without influence upon its machinery".

[ 17 ] Mind–body dualists reject epiphenomenalism on the same grounds. Some philosophers [ who?

] have also pointed out how strange it is that the brain expends copious amounts of energy and glucose maintaining the state of consciousness, but the conscious mind may not have any role to play in making the final decision. It remains difficult to provide a coherent mechanistic explanation of how a non-physical mind could actually influence any part of the physical body or the physical world at large.

[ citation needed ] Adrian G. Guggisberg and Annaïs Mottaz have also challenged those findings.

[ 18 ] A study by Aaron Schurger and colleagues published in PNAS [ 19 ] challenged assumptions about the causal nature of the readiness potential itself (and the "pre-movement buildup" of neural activity in general), thus denying the conclusions drawn from studies such as Libet's [ 20 ] and Fried's.

[ 21 ] In favor of interactionism, Celia Green (2003) argues that epiphenomenalism does not even provide a satisfactory solution to the problem of interaction posed by substance dualism. Although it does not entail substance dualism, according to Green, epiphenomenalism implies a one-way form of interactionism that is just as hard to conceive of as the two-way form embodied in substance dualism. Green suggests the assumption that it is less of a problem may arise from the unexamined belief that physical events have some sort of primacy over mental ones.

A number of scientists and philosophers, including William James , Karl Popper , John C. Eccles and Donald Symons , dismiss epiphenomenalism from an evolutionary perspective.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] They point out that the view that mind is an epiphenomenon of brain activity is not consistent with evolutionary theory, because if mind were functionless, it would have disappeared long ago, as it would not have been favoured by evolution.

See also [ edit ] Anomalous monism Emergentism Frank Jackson George Santayana Mind–body dualism Non-reductive physicalism Philosophy of mind Problem of mental causation Property dualism Specious present Supervenience Qualia Notes [ edit ] ^ Robinson, William, "Epiphenomenalism", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2023 Edition), Edward N. Zalta & Uri Nodelman (eds.), URL = < https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2023/entries/epiphenomenalism/ > ^ a b c d Walter, Sven.

"Epiphenomenalism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . University of Bielefeld.

Archived from the original on 23 September 2013 . Retrieved 10 October 2013 .

^ a b c d Robinson, William.

"Epiphenomenalism" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 1 November 2013 .

^ Hodgson, Shadworth (1870).

The Theory of Practice . London: Longmans, Green, Reader, & Dyer.

^ Huxley, T. H. (1874). "On the Hypothesis that Animals are Automata, and its History", The Fortnightly Review , n.s.16:555–580. Reprinted in Method and Results: Essays by Thomas H. Huxley (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1898) ^ Gallagher, S. 2006. "Where's the action?: Epiphenomenalism and the problem of free will". In W. Banks, S. Pockett, and S. Gallagher.

Does Consciousness Cause Behavior? An Investigation of the Nature of Intuition (109–124). Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

^ Scott, Alwyn (1995).

Stairway to the Mind . New York, New York: Copernicus. p.

109 .

ISBN 9780387943817 .

^ Griffin, David (1998).

Unsnarling the World-Knot . Berkeley, California: University of California Press. p. 5.

ISBN 9781556357558 .

^ Polger, Thomas (2004).

Natural Minds . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Massachusetts Institute of Technology. pp.

37– 38.

ISBN 9780262661966 .

^ Jackson, 1982, p. 127.

^ Schlegel, Alexander; Alexander, Prescott; Sinnott-Armstrong, Walter; Roskies, Adina; Ulric Tse, Peter; Wheatley, Thalia (May 2015).

"Hypnotizing Libet: Readiness potentials with non-conscious volition" (PDF) .

Consciousness and Cognition .

33 : 196– 203.

doi : 10.1016/j.concog.2015.01.002 .

PMID 25612537 .

S2CID 3847731 .

^ Robinson, William (2015).

"Epiphenomenalism" . In Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Vol. 1 (Fall 2015 ed.). pp.

539– 547.

doi : 10.1002/wcs.19 .

PMID 26271501 .

S2CID 239938469 .

^ Argonov, Victor (2014).

"Experimental Methods for Unraveling the Mind-body Problem: The Phenomenal Judgment Approach" .

Journal of Mind and Behavior .

35 : 51– 70.

Archived from the original on 2016-10-20.

^ Levin, Janet (2010).

"Functionalism" . In Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2010 ed.).

^ Wegner D.

, 2002. The Illusion of Conscious Will. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

^ Dennett, Daniel. (2003) Freedom evolves .

^ Flanagan, O.J. (1992).

Consciousness Reconsidered . Bradford Books. MIT Press. p. 131.

ISBN 978-0-262-56077-1 .

LCCN lc92010057 .

^ Guggisberg, AG; Mottaz, A (2013).

"Timing and awareness of movement decisions: does consciousness really come too late?" .

Front Hum Neurosci .

7 : 385.

doi : 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00385 .

PMC 3746176 .

PMID 23966921 .

^ Schurger, Aaron; Sitt, Jacobo D.; Dehaene, Stanislas (16 October 2012).

"An accumulator model for spontaneous neural activity prior to self-initiated movement" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

109 (42): 16776– 16777.

Bibcode : 2012PNAS..109E2904S .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1210467109 .

PMC 3479453 .

PMID 22869750 .

^ Libet, Benjamin; Gleason, Curtis A.; Wright, Elwood W.; Pearl, Dennis K. (1983). "Time of Conscious Intention to Act in Relation to Onset of Cerebral Activity (Readiness-Potential)".

Brain .

106 (3): 623– 42.

doi : 10.1093/brain/106.3.623 .

PMID 6640273 .

^ Fried, Itzhak; Mukamel, Roy; Kreiman, Gabriel (2011).

"Internally Generated Preactivation of Single Neurons in Human Medial Frontal Cortex Predicts Volition" .

Neuron .

69 (3): 548– 62.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.11.045 .

PMC 3052770 .

PMID 21315264 .

^ James, William (1879).

"Are we automata?" .

Mind .

4 (13): 1– 22.

doi : 10.1093/mind/os-4.13.1 .

^ Popper, Karl Raimund; Eccles, John Carew (1983).

The Self and Its Brain: An Argument for Interactionism . London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

doi : 10.4324/9780203537480 .

ISBN 9780203537480 .

^ Symons, Donald (1979).

The Evolution of Human Sexuality . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

^ Georgiev, Danko D. (2017-12-06).

Quantum Information and Consciousness: A Gentle Introduction (1st ed.). Boca Raton: CRC Press. p. 362.

doi : 10.1201/9780203732519 .

ISBN 9781138104488 .

OCLC 1003273264 .

Zbl 1390.81001 .

^ Georgiev, Danko D. (2020). "Inner privacy of conscious experiences and quantum information".

BioSystems .

187 104051.

arXiv : 2001.00909 .

Bibcode : 2020BiSys.18704051G .

doi : 10.1016/j.biosystems.2019.104051 .

PMID 31629783 .

S2CID 204813557 .

Further reading [ edit ] Chalmers, David. (1996) The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory , Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Green, Celia. (2003) The Lost Cause: Causation and the Mind-Body Problem , Oxford: Oxford Forum.

Online text Jackson, Frank. (1982) "Epiphenomenal Qualia", The Philosophical Quarterly , 32, pp. 127–136. Online text James, William. (1890) The Principles of Psychology , Henry Holt And Company.

Online text Libet, Benjamin; Wright, E. W.; Feinstein, B.; Pearl, D. K. (1979). "Subjective Referral of the Timing for a Conscious Sensory Experience".

Brain .

102 (1): 191– 221.

doi : 10.1093/brain/102.1.193 .

PMID 427530 .

Libet, Benjamin (1985). "Unconscious Cerebral Initiative and the Role of Conscious Will in Voluntary Action".

Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

8 (4): 529– 566.

doi : 10.1017/s0140525x00044903 .

S2CID 6965339 .

Robinson, William (2019) Epiphenomenal Mind: An Integrated Outlook on Sensations, Beliefs, and Pleasure , New York and London: Routledge.

External links [ edit ] Look up epiphenomenalism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Consciousness studies Epiphenomenalism Explained , an article by Norman Bacrac in Philosophy Now v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Epiphenomenalism&oldid=1305722704 " Categories : Concepts in the philosophy of mind Consciousness Dualism (philosophy of mind) Free will Metaphysics of mind Mind–body problem Phenomenology Qualia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2025 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 18:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Epiphenomenalism 25 languages Add topic

