Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Origins of ecopsychology 1.1.1 Sigmund Freud 1.1.2 Robert Greenway 1.1.3 Theodore Roszak 2 Beliefs Toggle Beliefs subsection 2.1 Fundamental principles 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ecopsychology 10 languages العربية Deutsch Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano Kurdî Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Psychological relationship between humans and the natural world The neutrality of this article is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( May 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards .

You can help . The talk page may contain suggestions.

( May 2024 ) Placement of clinical ecopsychology between clinical psychology and ecopsychology Ecopsychology is an interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary field that focuses on the synthesis of ecology and psychology and the promotion of sustainability .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] It is distinguished from conventional psychology as it focuses on studying  the emotional bond between humans and the Earth.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] Instead of examining personal pain solely in the context of individual or family pathology , it is analyzed in its wider connection to the more-than-human world .

[ 5 ] A central premise is that while the mind is shaped by the modern world, its underlying structure was created in a natural non-human environment.

[ 6 ] Ecopsychology seeks to expand and remedy the emotional connection between humans and nature, treating people psychologically by bringing them spiritually closer to nature .

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Origins of ecopsychology [ edit ] Sigmund Freud [ edit ] In his 1929 book Civilization and Its Discontents ("Das Unbehagen in der Kultur"), Sigmund Freud discussed the basic tensions between civilization and the individual.

[ 7 ] He recognized the interconnection between the internal world of the mind and the external world of the environment , stating: [ 7 ] [ page needed ] Our present ego-feeling is, therefore, only a shrunken residue of a much more inclusive—indeed, an all-embracing—feeling which corresponded to a more intimate bond between the ego and the world about it.

Robert Greenway [ edit ] Influenced by the philosophies of noted ecologists Walles T. Edmondson and Loren Eiseley , Robert Greenway began researching and developing a concept that he described as "a marriage" between psychology and ecology in the early 1960s.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] He theorized that "the mind is nature, and nature, the mind," and called its study psychoecology .

[ citation needed ] Greenway published his first essay on the topic at Brandeis University in 1963.

[ 8 ] [ 10 ] In 1969, he began teaching the subject at Sonoma State University .

[ 10 ] One of Greenway's students founded a psychoecology study group at University of California, Berkeley , which was joined by Theodore Roszak in the 1990s.

[ 8 ] [ 10 ] In the 1995 book Ecopsychology: Restoring the Earth, Healing the Mind , Greenway wrote: [ 8 ] [ page needed ] Ecopsychology is a search for language to describe the human-nature relationship. It is a tool for better understanding the relationship, for diagnosing what is wrong with that relationship, and for suggesting paths to healing.

Theodore Roszak [ edit ] Theodore Roszak is credited with coining the term "ecopsychology" in his 1992 book The Voice of the Earth , although a group of psychologists and environmentalists, including Mary Gomes and Allen Kanner, were independently using the term at the same time. Roszak, Gomes and Kanner later expanded the idea in the 1995 anthology Ecopsychology . Two other books were especially formative, Paul Shepard 's 1982 volume, Nature and Madness , which explored the effect that our diminishing engagement with nature had upon psychological development, and David Abram 's 1996 The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More-than-Human World . The latter was one of the first books to bring phenomenology fully to bear on ecological issues, looking closely at the cosmo-vision (or the traditional ecological knowledge systems) of diverse indigenous, oral cultures, and analyzing the curious effect that the advent of formal writing systems, like the phonetic alphabet, has had upon the human experience of the more-than-human natural world.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Roszak mentions the biophilia hypothesis of biologist E.O. Wilson ; that humans have an instinct to emotionally connect with nature.

[ 4 ] [ 13 ] Beliefs [ edit ] Roszak states that an individual's connection to nature can improve their interpersonal relationships and emotional wellbeing.

[ citation needed ] An integral part of this practice is treating patients outdoors.

[ 4 ] According to ecopsychology, humans are meant to take walks in parks.

[ citation needed ] It considers the psyche of non-humans to be relevant.

[ clarification needed ] It examines why people continue environmentally damaging behaviour, and motivates them to adopt sustainability .

[ 4 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 10 ] Fundamental principles [ edit ] According to Roszak, some of the principles of ecopsychology are: [ 14 ] [ page needed ] "There is a synergistic interplay between planetary and personal well-being." "The core of the mind is the ecological unconscious." "The goal of ecopsychology is to awaken the inherent sense of environmental reciprocity that lies within the ecological unconscious." "The contents of the ecological unconscious represent ... the living record of evolution." "The crucial stage of development is the life of the child." "The ecological ego matures toward a sense of ethical responsibility with the planet." "Whatever contributes to small scale social forms and personal empowerment nourish the ecological ego." See also [ edit ] Conservation psychology Eco-anxiety Ecological grief Ecospirituality Environmental psychology Exercise prescription Nature connectedness References [ edit ] ^ Fisher, Andy (2012).

Radical ecopsychology: Psychology in the service of life . New York: Albany State University of New York Press. p. 3.

ISBN 978-0791453049 .

^ a b Roszak, Theodore (1992).

Voice of the earth - an exploration of ecopsychology . Grand Rapids, MI: Phanes Press.

ISBN 1890482803 .

^ a b Anderson, G.

"About eco-psychology" . Archived from the original on 2019-05-13 . Retrieved 2012-03-08 .

^ a b c d Roszack, Theodore (1 January 1996).

"The nature of sanity" .

Psychology Today . Retrieved 8 March 2012 .

^ Conn, Sarah A. (August 16, 2010).

"Living in the earth: Ecopsychology, health and psychotherapy" .

The Humanistic Psychologist .

26 ( 1– 3): 179– 198.

doi : 10.1080/08873267.1998.9976972 . Retrieved February 10, 2021 .

^ Roszak, Theodore (1995). "A new therapy [Letter to the editor]".

BioScience .

45 (1): 3.

doi : 10.2307/1312526 .

JSTOR 1312526 .

^ a b c Freud, Sigmund (1929).

"Civilization And Its Discontents" (PDF) .

Narcissistic Abuse Rehab .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-10-12 . Retrieved February 10, 2021 .

^ a b c d e Greenway, Robert (1995).

"The Wilderness Effect and Ecopsychology" (PDF) .

Narcissistic Abuse Rehab .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-10-12 . Retrieved February 10, 2021 .

^ Liebert, Mary Ann (March 2009).

"Robert Greenway: The Ecopsychology Interview" .

Ecopsychology .

1 : 47– 52.

doi : 10.1089/eco.2009.0008 . Retrieved February 10, 2021 .

^ a b c d Attfield, Nicci (February 7, 2021).

"What is Ecopsychology?" .

Mindsplain .

Archived from the original on 2021-02-07 . Retrieved February 10, 2021 .

^ Abram, David (1996).

The spell of the sensuous: perception and language in a more-than-human world . New York: Pantheon Books.

ISBN 978-0-679-43819-9 .

^ Vakoch, Douglas; Castrillón, Fernando, eds. (2014).

Ecopsychology, Phenomenology, and the Environment: The Experience of Nature . New York: Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 9781461496182 .

^ Wilson, E. O. (1995). Kellert, Stephen R. (ed.).

The biophilia hypothesis . Washington, DC: Island Press / Shearwater Books.

ISBN 978-1-55963-147-1 .

^ Roszak, Theodore; Gomes, Mary E., eds. (1995).

Ecopsychology: Restoring the earth, healing the mind . USA: Counterpoint. pp.

320– 321.

ISBN 0871564068 .

Further reading [ edit ] M. Day. "Ecopsychology and the Restoration of Home" .

1998.

The Humanistic Psychologist . Vol. 26. Issue 1-3.

T. Roszak .

The Voice of the Earth: An Exploration of Ecopsychology.

1993 Touchstone, New York.

T. Roszak , M.E. Gomes, A.D. Kanner (Eds).

Ecopsychology, restoring the earth healing the mind.

1995 Sierra Club Books, San Francisco.

Renée G. Soule, "Ecopsychology" in Nigel Young (editor) The Oxford International Encyclopedia of Peace.

2010, Oxford University Press , Oxford.

A. Fisher.

Radical Ecopsychology: Psychology in the Service of Life . 2013 Suny Press, Albany.

J. Phoenix Smith, "Ecopsychology: Toward a New Story of Cultural and Racial Diversity" 2013.

Journal of Ecopsychology .Vol. 5. No.4.

Matthew R. Jamnik, Faith Corbin, McKenna H. Grimm, and Riley Jo H. Hobbs, " Ecopsychology " in Dana S. Dunn (Ed.) Oxford Bibliographies in Psychology.

2024, Oxford University Press , Oxford. doi: 10.1093/obo/9780199828340-0328 External links [ edit ] International Community for Ecopsychology v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt William James Ivan Pavlov Sigmund Freud Edward Thorndike Carl Jung John B. Watson Clark L. Hull Kurt Lewin Jean Piaget Gordon Allport J. P. Guilford Carl Rogers Erik Erikson B. F. Skinner Donald O. Hebb Ernest Hilgard Harry Harlow Raymond Cattell Abraham Maslow Neal E. Miller Jerome Bruner Donald T. Campbell Hans Eysenck Herbert A. Simon David McClelland Leon Festinger George A. Miller Richard Lazarus Stanley Schachter Robert Zajonc Albert Bandura Roger Brown Endel Tulving Lawrence Kohlberg Noam Chomsky Ulric Neisser Jerome Kagan Walter Mischel Elliot Aronson Daniel Kahneman Paul Ekman Michael Posner Amos Tversky Bruce McEwen Larry Squire Richard E. Nisbett Martin Seligman Ed Diener Shelley E. Taylor John Anderson Ronald C. Kessler Joseph E. LeDoux Richard Davidson Susan Fiske Roy Baumeister Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Category Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks v t e Environmental social science Fields Ecological anthropology Ecological economics Environmental anthropology Environmental crime Environmental economics Environmental communication Environmental history Environmental politics Environmental psychology Environmental sociology Human ecology Human geography Political ecology Regional science Related Agroecology Anthrozoology Behavioral geography Community studies Demography Design ecological environmental Ecological humanities Economics energy thermo Environmental education ethics law science studies justice racism Ethnobiology botany ecology zoology Forestry Industrial ecology Integrated geography Permaculture Political representation of nature Rural sociology Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Sustainability science studies Systems ecology Urban ecology geography metabolism studies Applied Architecture landscape sustainable Ecopsychology Engineering ecological environmental Green criminology Health environmental epidemiology occupational public Management environmental fisheries forest natural resource waste Planning environmental land use regional spatial urban Policy energy environmental Environment portal Category Concepts Degrees Journals Research institutes Scholars Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecopsychology&oldid=1296962695 " Categories : Deep ecology Environmental social science Interdisciplinary branches of psychology Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from May 2024 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from May 2024 All articles needing rewrite Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2022 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 10:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ecopsychology 10 languages Add topic

