Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Philosophy 3 Notes 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Archelaus (philosopher) 26 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 5th-century BC Greek philosopher For other uses, see Archelaus .

Archelaus Born c.

5th century BC Athens or Miletus Died c. 5th century BC Philosophical work Era Ancient philosophy Region Western philosophy School Pluralist school Archelaus ( / ɑːr k ɪ ˈ l eɪ ə s / ; Greek : Ἀρχέλαος ; fl. 5th century BC) was an Ancient Greek philosopher , a pupil of Anaxagoras , and may have been a teacher of Socrates . He asserted that the principle of motion was the separation of hot from cold, from which he endeavoured to explain the formation of the Earth and the creation of animals and humans .

Life [ edit ] Archelaus was a philosopher of the Ionian School , called Physicus from having been the first to teach natural philosophy at Athens . This statement of Diogenes Laërtius , [ 1 ] is contradicted by Clement of Alexandria , [ 2 ] but the two may be reconciled by supposing that Archelaus was the first Athenian who did so. According to Simplicius , [ 3 ] who probably got his information from Theophrastus , Archelaus was a native of Athens , even though Diogenes Laërtius [ 1 ] says it is unclear if he was born in Athens or Miletus . He was the son of Apollodorus, or as some say, of Mydon, Midon, [ 4 ] or Myson; was a pupil of Anaxagoras ; and is said to have taught at Lampsacus before he established himself at Athens . He is commonly reported to have taught Socrates and Euripides . If he was the instructor of Socrates, he is never mentioned by Xenophon , Plato , or Aristotle , and this story may have been an attempt to connect Socrates with the Ionian School.

[ 5 ] However, Diogenes Laërtius does report, on the authority of Ion of Chios , a contemporary of Socrates, that Socrates went with Archelaus on a trip to Samos.

[ 6 ] Also, some scholars have seen in Socrates' "autobiographical" sketch in Plato's Phaedo [ 7 ] a reference to Archelaus' theory about the generation and nourishment of the first animals.

[ 8 ] The tradition which connects Archelaus with Euripides may have arisen from a confusion with Euripides' patron, Archelaus I , king of Macedonia .

Philosophy [ edit ] No fragments of Archelaus have survived; his doctrines have to be extracted from Diogenes Laërtius , Simplicius , Pseudo-Plutarch , and Hippolytus .

[ 5 ] Archelaus held that air and infinity are the principle of all things, by which Pseudo-Plutarch [ 9 ] supposes that he meant infinite air; and we are told, that by this statement he intended to exclude Mind from the creation of the world.

[ 10 ] If so, he abandoned the doctrine of Anaxagoras at its most important point; and it seems safer to conclude that while he wished to teach the materialist notion that the mind is formed of air, he still held infinite Mind to be the cause of all things. This explanation has the advantage of agreeing with Simplicius .

[ 3 ] Beginning with primitive Matter, (identical with air mingled with Mind), by a process of thickening and thinning, arose cold and warmth, or water and fire, the one passive, the other active.

[ 5 ] Archelaus deduced motion from the opposition of heat and cold, caused by the will of the material Mind. This opposition separated fire and water, and produced a slimy mass of earth. While the earth was hardening, the action of heat upon its moisture gave birth to animals, which at first were nourished by the mud from which they sprang, and gradually acquired the power of propagating their species. Humans also appear, at first in lower forms. All these animals were endowed with mind, but humans separated from the others, and established laws and societies. It was just from this point of his physical theory that he seems to have passed into ethical speculation, by the proposition, that right and wrong are "not by nature but by custom" ( Greek : οὐ φύσει ἀλλὰ νόμῳ ) [ 1 ] —dogma possibly suggested to him by the contemporary Sophists .

Of the other doctrines of Archelaus, he asserted that the Earth was flat, but that the surface must be depressed towards the centre; for if it were absolutely level, the sun would rise and set everywhere at the same time.

[ 11 ] He also said that the Sun was the largest of the stars . He accounted for speech by the motion of the air ; for this, he seems to have adopted the views of Anaxagoras.

[ 12 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Laërtius, Diogenes .

"Socrates, with predecessors and followers: Archelaus" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 1:2. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library.

^ Clement of Alexandria, Stromata , i.

^ a b Simplicius, in Phys. Aristot.

fol. 6, b.

^ Suda , Archelaos ^ a b c Chisholm 1911 .

^ Diogenes Laërtius, ii. 23 Archived 2010-03-02 at the Wayback Machine ^ Plato, Phaedo , 96b ^ John Burnet 1911, Plato: Phaedo , p. 100.

^ Pseudo-Plutarch, Plac. Phil.

i. 3.

^ Stobaeus , Ecl. Phys.

i. 1, 2.

^ Hippolytus 1886 , Chapter 8 .

^ Pseudo-Plutarch, Plac. Phil.

iv. 19.

Sources [ edit ] Hippolytus (1886). "Chapter 8. Archelaus; System Akin to that of Anaxagoras; His Origin of the Earth and of Animals; Other Systems".

Refutation of All Heresies (Book I) . Translated by John Henry MacMahon .

— From Roberts, Alexander; Donaldson, James; Coxe, A. Cleveland, eds. (1886).

Ante-Nicene Fathers . Vol. 5. Buffalo, NY: Christian Literature Publishing Company.

Attribution This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Archelaus of Miletus ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 2 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 362.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870). "Archelaus".

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .

External links [ edit ] Archelaus: Fragments v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Archelaus_(philosopher)&oldid=1290097531 " Categories : 5th-century BC Greek philosophers Ancient Greek metaphysicians Metic philosophers in Classical Athens Philosophers of ancient Ionia Presocratic philosophers Pluralist philosophers Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Greek-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 20:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Archelaus (philosopher) 26 languages Add topic

