Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 See also 2 References Toggle the table of contents Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems 3 languages Azərbaycanca فارسی Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS) is an integrated compendium of twenty one encyclopedias .

One of the largest database repositories on the web, dedicated to the health, maintenance and future of the web of life on planet Earth, focusing on the complex connections among all the myriad aspects from natural and social sciences through water, energy, land, food, agriculture, environment, biodiversity, health, education, culture, engineering and technology, management, development and environmental security carrying knowledge for our times. It has been developed under the auspices of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO ). The EOLSS body of knowledge is a virtual compendium of Twenty One component encyclopedias (Subject Categories). It is regarded as the world’s largest comprehensive professional publication carrying state-of-the-art, high-quality, peer-reviewed, thematically organized archival content in many traditional disciplines and interdisciplinary subjects including the coverage of transdisciplinary pathways. The contributions are from thousands of scholars from over 100 countries and edited by more than 395 subject experts. It also includes up-to-date coverage of various aspects of sustainable development that are relevant to the current state of the world. The objectives are Education for Sustainable Development and Promotion of Life Support Systems Culture of Peace and Social Justice. In light of the global crisis and the imperative need for sustainable development, it's crucial to recognize the growing fragility of Earth's life support systems. This urgency was underscored by significant events such as the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (the "Earth Summit") in Rio de Janeiro in 1992.

[ 1 ] It can be regarded as an 'encyclopedia of encyclopedias', presenting a wide range of major foundation subjects in a process of gradual development, from a broad overview to great detail under the following categories: - Earth and Atmospheric Sciences - Mathematical Sciences - Biological , Physiological and Health Sciences - Biotechnology - Tropical Biology and Conservation Management - Social Sciences and Humanities - Physical Sciences , Engineering and Technology Resources - Control Systems , Robotics and Automation - Chemical Sciences Engineering and Technology Resources - Water sciences , Engineering and Technology Resources - Desalination and Water Resources (DESWARE) [ 2 ] - Energy sciences and Engineering and Technology Resources - Environmental and Ecological sciences , Engineering and Technology Resources - Food and Agricultural Sciences , Engineering and Technology Resources - Human Resources Policy, Development and Management - Natural Resources Policy and Management - Development and Economic Sciences - Institutional and Infrastructural Resources - Technology, Information and System Management Resources - Land Use , Land Cover and Soil Sciences - Area Studies (Africa, Brazil, Canada And USA, China, Europe, Japan, Russia) Within these twenty one on-line encyclopedias, there are hundreds of Themes, each of which has been compiled under the editorial supervision of a recognized world expert or a team of experts such as an International Commission specially appointed for the purpose. Each of these 'Honorary Theme Editors' was responsible for selection and appointment of authors to produce the material specified by EOLSS. On average each Theme contains about thirty chapters. It deals in detail with interdisciplinary subjects, but it is also disciplinary, as each major core subject is covered in great depth by world experts. The EOLSS is different from traditional encyclopedias. It is the result of an unprecedented global effort that has attempted to forge pathways between disciplines in order to address contemporary problems" said UNESCO Director General Koïchiro Matsuura . "A source-book of knowledge that links together our concern for peace, progress, and sustainable development, the EOLSS draws sustenance from the ethics, science and culture of peace. At the same time, it is a forward-looking publication, designed as a global guide to professional practice, education, and heightened social awareness of critical life support issues. In particular, the EOLSS presents perspectives from regions and cultures around the world, and seeks to avoid geographic, racial, cultural, political, gender, age, or religious bias." It is regarded as the largest comprehensive professional publication carrying state-of-the-art, thematically organized subject matter for a wide audience at the university level with contributions from thousands of experts from over 101 countries.  It is an authoritative resource for education, research and policy making in the 21st century.

See also [ edit ] List of online encyclopedias References [ edit ] ^ UNESCO Encyclopedia of life Support Systems - Introduction ^ DESWARE website – https://www.desware.net NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐b4b5c6b87‐2j67f
Cached time: 20250728213219
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: []
CPU time usage: 0.046 seconds
Real time usage: 0.059 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 129/1000000
Revision size: 5668/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 3283/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 100/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 0/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 2188/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.011/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 638233/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   42.001      1 -total
 58.40%   24.527      1 Template:Unbulleted_list
 41.08%   17.255      1 Template:Reflist
  3.68%    1.544      1 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1065199:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250728213219 and revision id 1303055550. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Encyclopedia_of_Life_Support_Systems&oldid=1303055550 " Categories : UNESCO Encyclopedias of science French online encyclopedias Encyclopedias in English Environmental non-fiction books Biology books Ecology books Systems theory books Globalization 20th-century encyclopedias 21st-century encyclopedias This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 21:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems 3 languages Add topic

