Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Dive sites Toggle Dive sites subsection 1.1 Bodies of water commonly used for recreational diving 1.1.1 Coastal dive sites 1.1.2 Inland dive sites 1.2 Names of sites 1.3 Popular features of dive sites 1.4 Rating of sites 2 Scuba diving tourism 3 Regions of notable biodiversity Toggle Regions of notable biodiversity subsection 3.1 Tropical 3.2 Temperate 3.3 Polar 4 Types of dive sites Toggle Types of dive sites subsection 4.1 Reef dive sites 4.1.1 Wall dive sites 4.1.2 Artificial reefs 4.2 Cave dive sites 4.3 Quarry dive sites 4.4 Wreck dive sites 5 Environmental impact of recreational diving 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Recreational dive sites 3 languages Deutsch עברית Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Places that divers go to enjoy the underwater environment "Underwater diving sites" redirects here. For the main article about the activity, see Recreational diving .

Recreational diver over a coral reef in the Red Sea Recreational dive sites are specific places that recreational scuba divers go to enjoy the underwater environment or for training purposes. They include technical diving sites beyond the range generally accepted for recreational diving . In this context all diving done for recreational purposes is included.

Professional diving tends to be done where the job is, and with the exception of diver training and leading groups of recreational divers, does not generally occur at specific sites chosen for their easy access, pleasant conditions or interesting features.

Recreational dive sites may be found in a wide range of bodies of water, and may be popular for various reasons, including accessibility , biodiversity , spectacular topography, historical or cultural interest and artifacts (such as shipwrecks ), and water clarity . Tropical waters of high biodiversity and colourful sea life are popular recreational diving tourism destinations. South-east Asia, the Caribbean islands, the Red Sea and the Great Barrier Reef of Australia are regions where the clear, warm, waters, reasonably predictable conditions and colourful and diverse sea life have made recreational diving an economically important tourist industry.

Recreational divers may accept a relatively high level of risk to dive at a site perceived to be of special interest.

Wreck diving and cave diving have their adherents, and enthusiasts will endure considerable hardship, risk and expense to visit caves and wrecks where few have been before. Some sites are popular almost exclusively for their convenience for training and practice of skills, such as flooded quarries. They are generally found where more interesting and pleasant diving is not locally available, or may only be accessible when weather or water conditions permit.

While divers may choose to get into the water at any arbitrary place that seems like a good idea at the time, a popular recreational dive site will usually be named, and a geographical position identified and recorded, describing the site with enough accuracy to recognise it, and hopefully, find it again.

Dive sites [ edit ] The term dive site (from "dive" and "site", meaning "the place, scene, or point of an occurrence or event" [ 1 ] ) is used differently depending on context. In professional diving in some regions it may refer to the surface worksite from which the diving operation is supported and controlled by the diving supervisor. This may alternatively be called the diving operation control site, dive base, or control point. The professional dive site may also legally include the underwater work site and the area between the surface control area and underwater work site.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] In recreational diving it generally refers to the underwater environment of a dive. Where a site is named, it generally refers to the locality around a specific feature, which may be reasonably conveniently visited during a dive centred or focused on that feature. Conventions may vary regionally. In some places a named dive site may refer to a specific route with a given starting point, in others it may refer more loosely to a larger region which is far bigger than a diver could reasonably visit on dives with a common point.

[ citation needed ] Such regions may later be specified in more detail as they become better known, and what was originally referred to as a single site may become several sites when they are identified and described. Where a site is named for a shipwreck, it generally refers to the known extent of the wreckage, regardless of size. Synonyms include dive spot, dive location and diving site.

Bodies of water commonly used for recreational diving [ edit ] Coastal dive sites [ edit ] Coastal dive site scan be in the sea or inland waters, but unless specified, generally refer to coastal areas on a continental shelf , or near an island in the sea.

Sea and ocean shorelines , reefs and shoals are salt water sites and may support high biodiversity of life forms. Tropical coral reefs are the most popular diving tourism destinations.

Rocky reefs are more widespread, and support a greater variety of ecosystems, though the local biodiversity is usually more limited.

Shipwrecks are also common on some coasts, and are very popular attractions for a large number of divers. Unconsolidated sediment is less likely to be visited intentionally, though there are some muck diving sites known for interesting animals.

Most dive sites are in coastal waters. Mainly because that is where most of the shallow water is, and also because they are more accessible from places suitable for human habitation. However, there are a significant number of regions known for good diving, which are relatively inaccessible to the traveller.

Inland dive sites [ edit ] Inland dive sites are in bodies of water within the coastline of a land mass, usually beyond the influence of perceptible tides.

Lakes usually contain fresh water. Large lakes have many features of seas including wrecks and a variety of aquatic life. Depths may vary considerably, though they are shallow compared to the open ocean, and while surface water level may vary over the long term, they do not have noticeable tides, and seldom have significant currents. Some lakes are at high altitude and may require special considerations for altitude diving .

Artificial lakes, such as clay pits , gravel pits , quarries and dams often have low visibility. Flooded quarries are popular in inland areas for diver training and sometimes also recreational diving. Rock quarries may have reasonable underwater visibility if there is not so much mud or silt to cause low visibility. As they are not entirely natural environments and usually privately owned, quarries often contain features intentionally placed for divers to explore, such as sunken boats, automobiles, aircraft, and abandoned machinery and structures. Flooded mines may provide the equivalent of flooded caves with an overhead environment , though generally with a known extent.

Rivers generally contain fresh water but are often shallow and turbid and may have strong currents.

Caves containing water provide exotic and interesting, though relatively hazardous, opportunities for exploration , and are found both inland and at the coast.

Names of sites [ edit ] Divers may choose to get into the water to explore any arbitrary place where conditions appear to be good enough to justify the effort, but do not necessarily record what is there, or even that the site exists, but a popular recreational dive site will usually be named, and a geographical position identified and recorded, describing the site with enough accuracy to recognise it, and hopefully, find it again.

Names for the sites themselves range from descriptive through quixotic to pretentious, as they are chosen at the whim of whoever dives there and names the site. There is often no standardisation, and the same site may be known by different names to different divers. Few sites are reliably mapped or have a published description with an accurate position, and many of these are caves or wrecks of identified ships. It is also common for a dive site to be named after a charted feature, such as a reef, exposed rock, promontory, or other navigational landmark, and like landmarks, the same name may be used for more than one dive site. Other sites are named for ecological features, like a species common at the site, or one that was seen there on an exploration dive. Sites that are frequently used by commercial service providers may be given names which are intended to promote the site to potential customers.

Popular features of dive sites [ edit ] See also: Recreational diving § Reasons to dive NASA image [1] showing locations of significant coral reefs , which are often sought out by divers for their abundant, diverse life forms.

There are a wide range of underwater features which may contribute to the popularity of a dive site: Accessibility is important, but not critical. Some divers will travel long distances at considerable cost to get to a site with exceptional features.

Biodiversity at the site: Popular examples are coral , sponges , fish , sting rays , molluscs , cetaceans , seals , sharks and crustaceans . Colourful organisms generally increase popularity of a site.

The topography of the site: Coral reefs , rocky reefs , walls (underwater cliffs ), pinnacles , gullies, caves , overhangs and swim-throughs (short tunnels or arches) can be spectacular. Terminology for the topography of dive sites is generally consistent with oceanographic practice, with occasional more eccentric usage.

Historical or cultural items at the site: Shipwrecks , sunken aircraft and archaeological sites, apart from their historical value, form artificial habitats for marine life making them more attractive as dive sites.

Underwater visibility : This can vary widely between sites and with time and other conditions. Poor visibility is caused by suspended particles in the water, such as mud , silt , suspended organic matter and plankton. Currents and surge can stir up the particles. Rainfall runoff can carry particulate matter from the shore. Diving close to the sediments on the bottom can result in the particles being kicked up by the divers fins. Sites which generally have good visibility are preferred, but poor visibility will often be tolerated if the site is sufficiently attractive for other reasons.

Water temperature: Warm water diving is comfortable and convenient, and requires less equipment. Although cold water is uncomfortable and can cause hypothermia , cold water sites can be interesting because different species of underwater life thrive in cold conditions, and many interesting wrecks, caves and other features happen to be in cold water.

Currents and tidal flows can transport nutrients to underwater environments increasing the variety and biomass of life at a site. Currents can also be dangerous to divers as they can carry the diver away from the surface support or the planned exit point. Currents that flow over large obstructions can cause strong local vertical currents and turbulence that are dangerous because they may cause the diver to lose buoyancy control risking barotrauma , or impact against the bottom terrain.

Rating of sites [ edit ] Sites are generally rated for quality by people who do not have an exhaustive experience of the full range of sites throughout the world, and preferences differ. Criteria used for rating may differ, and are seldom specified. It is unlikely that any published ratings are unbiased, and they are not usually accompanied by a conflict of interest disclaimer. Conditions at most sites vary from day to day, often considerably, depending on various factors, particularly recent weather. The quality of the diving experience will also vary depending on the conditions at the time.

Scuba diving tourism [ edit ] Main article: Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving tourism is the industry based on servicing the requirements of recreational divers at destinations other than where they live. It includes aspects of training, equipment sales, rental and service, guided experiences and environmental tourism .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Customer satisfaction is largely dependent on the quality of services provided, and personal communication has a strong influence on the popularity of specific service providers in a region.

[ 7 ] Motivations to travel for scuba diving are complex and may vary considerably during the diver's development and experience. Participation can vary from once off to multiple dedicated trips per year over several decades. The popular destinations fall into several groups, including tropical reefs, shipwrecks and cave systems, each frequented by its own group of enthusiasts, with some overlap. Temperate and inland open water reef sites are generally dived by people who live relatively nearby.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Scuba diving tourism services are usually focused on providing visiting recreational divers with access to local dive sites, or organising group tours to regions where desirable dive sites exist.

The motivations of scuba divers to travel have been attributed to adventure, learning, escape, social interaction, stature, challenge and excitement, and while these are probably valid for most novice divers and some long term divers, the motivation of long term enthusiasts may be more complex. The development of a recreational diver from novice to experienced diver is usually associated with acquisition and improvement of skills, and is often accompanied by a shift in motivations to dive. Similarly, expectations of the diving experience, satisfaction with the experience available at different dive sites, and attitudes towards the underwater environment will change in divers who continue to dive over the longer term and relatively frequently. The desire to improve and learn for personal growth and the long term satisfaction and fulfilment derived from this learning is common in such divers. This could be an important factor informing the planning and management of diving tourism.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Regions of notable biodiversity [ edit ] Tropical [ edit ] Global map of sea surface temperature, showing warmer areas around the equator and colder areas around the poles (20 December 2013 at 1-km resolution).

From a geographical point of view, the tropics (tropical regions) are defined as lying between the Tropic of Cancer in the Northern Hemisphere, and the Tropic of Capricorn in the Southern Hemisphere. These limits are well defined, but do not accurately indicate what the water temperature will be. Another way of loosely defining tropical diving is by arbitrarily selecting a limiting temperature, such as 24 °C (75 °F) [ 11 ] but there are places outside the tropics with water in thus range, and places in the tropics with colder water, and water temperature can change with the season, weather, and multi-seasonal variations such as El Niño–Southern Oscillation .

Image of part of the Great Barrier Reef adjacent to Queensland , taken from the International Space Station The Great Barrier Reef is the world's largest coral reef system, [ 12 ] [ 13 ] composed of over 2,900 individual reefs [ 14 ] and 900 islands stretching for over 2,300 kilometres (1,400 mi) over an area of approximately 344,400 square kilometres (133,000 sq mi).

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] The reef is located in the Coral Sea , off the coast of Queensland , Australia , separated from the coast by a channel 160 kilometres (100 mi) wide in places and over 61 metres (200 ft) deep.

[ 17 ] The Great Barrier Reef can be seen from outer space and is the world's biggest single structure made by living organisms.

[ 18 ] This reef structure is composed of and built by billions of tiny organisms, known as coral polyps .

[ 19 ] It supports a wide diversity of life and was selected as a World Heritage Site in 1981.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] CNN labelled it one of the Seven Natural Wonders of the World in 1997.

[ 20 ] A large part of the reef is protected by the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park , which helps to limit the impact of human use, such as fishing and tourism.Tourism is an important economic activity for the region, generating over AUD$ 3 billion per year.

[ 21 ] A diver in Raja Ampat With more than 17,508 islands , Indonesia has many regions suitable for recreational diving. With 20% of the world's coral reefs, over 3,000 different species of fish and about 600 coral species, deep water trenches, volcanic sea mounts, World War II wrecks, and a very large variety of macro life , scuba diving in Indonesia is excellent and relatively inexpensive.

[ 22 ] Bunaken National Marine Park , at the northern tip of Sulawesi , claims to have seven times more genera of coral than Hawaii , [ 23 ] and has more than 70% of all the known fish species of the Western Indo-Pacific .

[ 24 ] Other popular dive sites are on Bali at Candidasa and Menjangan . Across the Badung Strait from Bali, there are several popular dive sites on Nusa Lembongan and Nusa Penida .

Lombok 's three Gilis ( Gili Air , Gili Meno and Gili Trawangan ) are popular, as is Bangka .

Saronde Island is also a  popular area in Gorontalo , Sulawesi. Some of the most famous diving sites in Indonesia are also the most difficult to reach, like Biak off the coast of Papua and the Alor Archipelago .

The Red Sea Caribbean sea The iSimangaliso Marine Protected Area is a coastal and offshore marine protected area in KwaZulu-Natal from the South Africa-Mozambique border in the north to Cape St Lucia lighthouse in the south.

[ 25 ] There is a diving resort area serving this MPA at Sodwana Bay . The recreational diving area is in the tropical Delagoa ecoregion in the north of kwaZulu-Natal, which extends from Cape Vidal northwards into Mozambique. There are some species endemic to South Africa along this coastline, but most of the species are tropical Indo-Pacific.

[ 26 ] This is one of the very few places that coelacanths have been seen in their natural habitat by divers.

Temperate [ edit ] The temperate regions, or middle latitudes are between the tropics and the polar circles in each hemisphere, but are even less clearly an indication of water temperature. The water temperature range for temperate diving has also been rather arbitrarily specified, as between 10 and 24 °C (50 and 75 °F), [ 11 ] but actual sea surface temperatures in the middle latitudes go outside this range in both directions, and are also significantly affected by major surface currents, season and weather.

Recreational dive sites of the greater Cape Town region. The yellow lines indicate the boundary of the Table Mountain National Park MPA.

Marine bioregions of the South African coast The Table Mountain National Park Marine Protected Area around the Cape Peninsula is a popular diving region in the Atlantic Ocean , in the vicinity of Cape Town , South Africa , with more than 250 named dive sites, many of which have been surveyed and mapped. The Cape Peninsula marks the boundary between the cool temperate Benguela ecoregion , which extends from Namibia to Cape Point , and is dominated by the cold Benguela Current , and the warm temperate Agulhas ecoregion to the east of Cape Point which extends eastwards to the Mbashe River . The break at Cape Point is very distinct in the inshore depth ranges, and the waters of the east and west sides of the peninsula support noticeably different ecologies, though there is a significant overlap of resident organisms . There are a large proportion of species endemic to South Africa along this coastline.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 26 ] The Tsitsikamma Marine Protected Area in the south coast of South Africa is another temperate region of high biodiversity and endemism, but the tourism infrastructure is not optimised for diving, as the sea conditions are somewhat unpredictable.

Polar [ edit ] From a diving perspective, polar diving includes all diving within the polar zones, and the water is generally below 10 °C (50 °F), and much of it is often at or slightly below 0 °C (32 °F) and covered by ice.

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( July 2024 ) Types of dive sites [ edit ] See also: Index of recreational dive sites Dive sites may be classified under various types, and some sites fall under more than one of these types.

Reef dive sites [ edit ] See also: Outline of recreational dive sites § Reef dive sites , and List of reefs In the context of recreational diving, a reef may be a coral reef or a bottom of predominantly consolidated inorganic material, like rocky reef , and in the broader sense includes artificial structures and even ships sunk as artificial reefs . Reef dive sites are the most numerous type as there is a very large amount of reef, widely distributed in most coastal waters, and it provides more topographical and visible biological diversity than unconsolidated sediment, so is more attractive to recreational divers.

Reef diving regions are geographical regions of arbitrary size known for including more than one named reef dive site, while a reef dive site is a specific part of a reef known by a name, which recreational divers visit to dive.

Coral reef areas generally refer to reefs built by tropical stony corals, but soft corals and other non-reef-building corals may be found over a much wider range of sea temperatures and depths, and in many cases are more colourful than the reef-building corals. The attractions of tropical reef building corals are more in the structure of the reef, which can be very complex, and the high biodiversity of animals of these reefs.

Rocky reefs are more widespread, and though the structure is usually relatively simple, they may support a wide variety of seaweed and benthic invertebrates, some of which may be very colourful, and form a dense layer on the geological reef structure, to the extent that the actual rock may seldom be visible. Much depends on the biological productivity of the reef, which can be strongly affected by currents, river inflow, and particularly areas subject to deep-water upwellings , such as on the temperate west coasts of several continents and islands. The topography of rocky reefs can be massively spectacular. The finer detail is usually less complex than on coral reefs, but the large scale structure can be impressive, particularly when visibility is good enough to appreciate the landforms. The reef structure is also usually relatively robust, and while brittle and fragile organisms may be equally vulnerable to contact by clumsy divers, the rock structure tends to be virtually indestructible.

Wall dive sites [ edit ] See also: Wall diving Wall diving is reef diving where the main characteristic of the site is that the terrain is predominantly near vertical. It is basically an underwater cliff . The height of the wall can vary from a few metres to hundreds of metres. The top of the wall must be within diving depth, but the bottom may be far below or reasonably close to the surface.

The wall face may be anything from a relatively smooth face, at a steep slope, through vertical to a moderate overhang, and may be a single cliff face, or stepped, or have overhangs, caves, ledges, gullies, and cracks. In plan it can be anything from nearly straight to highly convoluted, with gullies, curves, sudden changes of direction, transverse canyons, and offshore stacks . A wall may be a few tens of metres long or may extend for several kilometres.

[ 29 ] The structure of the wall face can be virtually any kind of sufficiently durable rock, or coral reef, and artificial structures may also be considered walls for recreational diving.

[ 29 ] Local biodiversity may be higher than average for the region due to wide depth range and variety of habitats. Both pelagic and benthic organisms  may be present. Much of the marine benthic life will usually be relatively delicate and sensitive to impact by divers and their equipment, making it undesirable ton use the wall face as place to hold onto for position and depth control, though some divers routinely use reef hooks for this purpose.

[ 30 ] The most universal skill requirement is good buoyancy control , which is needed to avoid excessive depth and rapid depth changes in either direction, particularly in the presence of turbulence and vertical flow.

[ 29 ] [ 31 ] Walls suitable for diving are usually relatively close to the shore, and in some cases are a continuation of a shoreline cliff face. Most wall dive sites are in the sea, but they can also be found inland in sinkholes, caves, and flooded quarries and mines.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Specific regions known for wall dive sites include the Cayman Islands , Palau , Indonesia , Papua New Guinea , [ 29 ] Turks & Caicos , Bahamas , Honduras , Belize , Hawaii , Red Sea , Fiji , [ 30 ] and others, including many outside the tropics. Inshore dive sites in North America with vertical rock faces include Puget Sound in Washington, Monterey Bay , and Catalina Island in California.

[ 31 ] Artificial reefs [ edit ] See also: Artificial reef and Outline of recreational dive sites § Reef dive sites Constructing an artificial reef using concrete breeze blocks [ 32 ] An artificial reef is a human-created underwater structure, typically built to promote marine life in areas with a generally featureless bottom, to control erosion , block ship passage, block the use of trawling nets, [ 33 ] or improve surfing .

Many reefs are built using objects that were built for other purposes, such as by sinking oil rigs (through the Rigs-to-Reefs program), scuttling ships , or by deploying rubble or construction debris . Other artificial reefs are purpose-built (e.g. the reef balls ) from PVC or concrete. Shipwrecks may become artificial reefs when preserved on the seafloor. Jetties and breakwaters are secondarily artificial reefs. Regardless of construction method, artificial reefs generally provide hard surfaces where algae and sessile ebibenthic invertebrates such as barnacles , corals , and oysters attach; the accumulation of attached marine life in turn provides intricate habitat and food for mobile benthic invertebrates and assemblages of fish. In addition to shipwrecks, there are artificial reefs made from decommissioned subway cars, concrete, electrified steel, and even the cremated remains of divers.

[ 34 ] Occasionally sculpture works have been placed underwater singly or in groups, as attractions for divers, and they also function as artificial reefs.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] Cave dive sites [ edit ] See also: Outline of recreational dive sites § Cave dive sites , and Cave diving § Cave diving venues Cave diving is underwater diving in water-filled caves. It may be considered an extreme sport due to the range of hazards and the difficulty of mitigating them to an acceptable level. The equipment used varies depending on the circumstances, and ranges from breath hold to surface supplied, but almost all cave diving is done using scuba equipment, often in specialised configurations. Recreational cave diving is generally considered to be a type of technical diving due to the lack of a free surface during large parts of the dive, and often involves decompression.

A distinction is made by recreational diver training agencies between cave diving and cavern diving, where cavern diving is deemed to be diving in those parts of a cave where the exit to open water can be seen by natural light. An arbitrary distance limit to the open water surface may also be specified.

[ 39 ] There are relatively few practitioners of cave diving. This is due in part to the specialized equipment and skill sets required, and in part because of the high potential risks due to the specific environment. Despite these risks, water-filled caves attract scuba divers, cavers , and speleologists due to their often unexplored nature, and present divers with a technical diving challenge. Underwater caves have a wide range of physical features, and can contain fauna not found elsewhere.

Quarry dive sites [ edit ] Wazee Lake near Black River Falls, Wisconsin is a former iron mining quarry now used for scuba diving and other uses.

See also: Outline of recreational dive sites § Flooded quarries Scuba diving quarries are depleted or abandoned rock quarries that have been allowed to fill with ground water, and rededicated to the purpose of scuba diving . 
They may offer deep, clean, clear, still, fresh water with excellent visibility, or low visibility in turbid water from surface runoff . They have no currents or undertow. They are often used as training sites for new divers, where classes and certification dives are carried out. Many have a dive shop on site to rent out equipment and sell air fills and diving equipment. Lodging or camping areas may be available on site.

[ citation needed ] Quarries in stone may have clear water, with greater visibility than in many inland lakes. Ground water is the primary source of the water that fills these quarries once they are no longer pumped out for mining operations. Many quarry mining operations are located in areas where filling from other, less clean sources, such as rivers and surface runoff of rainwater is not as likely.

Over time, most quarries tend to be contaminated with erosion products and nutrients from surface runoff, causing many to develop a green tint due to algae growth, and accumulations of silt on the bottoms and other surfaces.

Fresh water scuba diving does not require much difference in equipment from diving in the sea. Water temperatures generally decrease as depth increases, and may be as low as 4 °C (39 °F) at depth. In those temperatures dry suit diving is recommended, but in warmer temperatures, wetsuits may be sufficient. Diving in clean fresh water generally requires less post dive maintenance.

The operators of scuba diving quarries may add objects or debris fields to the bottom of the quarry for divers to explore while scuba diving. Mostly these are man made objects such as boats, cars, and trucks. Some quarries have such large objects as school buses, small buildings, or commercial airliners on the bottom. These sites may be mapped out and marked with guide lines under the water, particularly if visibility is poor.

[ citation needed ] The owners or operators of quarries may stock the quarry with fish to provide entertainment for divers. These are commonly the same species of fish that thrive naturally in local lakes and rivers, but some quarries are stocked with more exotic fish. The ecology is usually very limited.

Wreck dive sites [ edit ] See also: Outline of recreational dive sites § Wreck dive sites , and Wreck diving Wreck diving is recreational diving where the wreckage of ships , aircraft and other artificial structures is visited.

[ 40 ] Although most wreck dive sites are the remains of ships sunk by accident or enemy action in times of war, there are a large number of ships scuttled to create dive sites at places where the conditions are more suitable for recreational diving.

[ 41 ] The recreation of wreck diving makes no distinction as to how the vessel ended up on the bottom, though this may be of importance to the individual diver, and some wreck hunters spend large amounts of time and money in searches for unlocated wrecks. There is a large overlap between recreational and archaeological wreck hunting and diving, and in some cases between recreational wreck diving and unauthorised recovery of artifacts. Some wreck diving involves penetration of the wreckage, making a direct ascent to the surface impossible for a part of the dive. Only a small fraction of the world's shipwrecks are in known positions suitable for access by divers, and their condition deteriorates over time.

[ 42 ] Environmental impact of recreational diving [ edit ] Main article: Environmental impact of recreational diving The environmental impact of recreational diving is the effects of diving tourism on the marine environment. Usually these are considered to be adverse effects, and include damage to reef organisms by incompetent and ignorant divers, but there may also be positive effects when the environment is recognised by the local communities to be worth more in good condition than degraded by inappropriate use, which encourages conservation efforts.

During the 20th century recreational scuba diving was considered to have generally low environmental impact, and was consequently one of the activities permitted in most marine protected areas. Since the 1970s diving has changed from an elite activity to a more accessible recreation, marketed to a very wide demographic. To some extent better equipment has been substituted for more rigorous training, and the reduction in perceived risk has shortened minimum training requirements by several training agencies. Training has concentrated on an acceptable risk to the diver, and paid less attention to the environment. The increase in the popularity of diving and in tourist access to sensitive ecological systems has led to the recognition that the activity can have significant environmental consequences.

[ 43 ] Scuba diving has grown in popularity during the 21st century, as is shown by the number of certifications issued worldwide, which has increased to about 23 million by 2016 at about one million per year.

[ 44 ] Scuba diving tourism is a growth industry, and it is necessary to consider environmental sustainability , as the expanding impact of divers can adversely affect the marine environment in several ways, and the impact also depends on the specific environment. Tropical coral reefs are more easily damaged by poor diving skills than some temperate reefs, where the environment is more robust due to rougher sea conditions and fewer fragile, slow-growing organisms. The same pleasant sea conditions that allow development of relatively delicate and highly diverse ecologies also attract the greatest number of tourists, including divers who dive infrequently, exclusively on vacation and never fully develop the skills to dive in an environmentally friendly way.

[ 7 ] Low impact diving training has been shown to be effective in reducing diver contact.

[ 43 ] Environmental impact can expand in scope when a destination is commercially developed to provide more facilities to encourage the expansion of tourism.

References [ edit ] ^ "Site" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 12 April 2024 .

^ Diving Advisory Board (10 November 2017).

NO. 1235 Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993: Diving regulations: Inclusion of code of practice inshore diving 41237. Code of Practice Inshore Diving (PDF) . Department of Labour, Republic of South Africa. pp.

72– 139. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 October 2019 . Retrieved 24 December 2018 .

^ Diving Advisory Board.

Code Of Practice for Scientific Diving (PDF) . Pretoria: The South African Department of Labour. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 November 2016 . Retrieved 16 September 2016 .

^ "Drilling Lexicon" . IADC. 27 June 2013.

Archived from the original on 24 December 2018 . Retrieved 24 December 2018 .

^ "Definitions".

Ontario Regulation 629/94, Amended to O. Reg. 155/04 Diving Operations .

Archived from the original on 2018-12-26 . Retrieved 2018-12-25 .

^ "Dive Site and Dive Base".

A Guide to the Occupational Diving Regulations for the Seafood Harvesting Industry (PDF) . Nova Scotia Environment and Labour Occupational Health and Safety Division. p. 4.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-09-24 . Retrieved 2018-12-25 .

^ a b c Dimmock, Kay; Cummins, Terry; Musa, Ghazali (2013).

"Chapter 10: The business of Scuba diving" . In Musa, Ghazali; Dimmock, Kay (eds.).

Scuba Diving Tourism . Routledge. pp.

161– 173.

Archived from the original on 2021-07-23 . Retrieved 2019-12-29 .

^ Dimmock, Kay; Musa, Ghazali, eds. (2015).

Scuba diving tourism system: a framework for collaborative management and sustainability . Southern Cross University School of Business and Tourism.

Archived from the original on 2016-03-26 . Retrieved 2019-12-29 .

^ a b Kler, Balvinder Kaur; Tribe, John (2012).

"Flourishing Through Scuba: Understanding the Pursuit of Dive Experiences" .

Tourism in Marine Environments .

8 (1/2): 19– 32.

doi : 10.3727/154427312X13262430524027 .

Archived from the original on 2021-09-21 . Retrieved 2021-09-21 .

^ a b Lucrezi, S; Milanese, M; Cerrano, C; Palma, M. (5 July 2019).

"The influence of scuba diving experience on divers' perceptions, and its implications for managing diving destinations" .

PLOS ONE .

14 (7): e0219306.

Bibcode : 2019PLoSO..1419306L .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0219306 .

PMC 6611629 .

PMID 31276482 .

^ a b Davis, Andy (15 April 2023).

"Tropical and cold water diving: What is the difference?" .

scubatechphilippines.com . Retrieved 28 July 2024 .

^ a b UNEP World Conservation Monitoring Centre (1980).

"Protected Areas and World Heritage – Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area" .

Department of the Environment and Heritage . Archived from the original on 11 May 2008 . Retrieved 14 March 2009 .

^ a b "The Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Values" .

Archived from the original on 9 May 2013 . Retrieved 3 September 2008 .

^ The Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area , which is 348,000 km squared, has 2900 reefs. However, this does not include the reefs found in the Torres Strait , which has an estimated area of 37,000 km squared and with a possible 750 reefs and shoals. ( Hopley, David; Smithers, Scott G.; Parnell, Kevin (2007).

The Geomorphology of the Great Barrier Reef: Development, Diversity and Change . Cambridge University Press. p. 1.

ISBN 978-1-139-46392-8 .

Archived from the original on 31 December 2023 . Retrieved 15 October 2016 .

) ^ Fodor's.

"Great Barrier Reef Travel Guide" .

Archived from the original on 14 May 2013 . Retrieved 8 August 2006 .

^ Department of the Environment and Heritage.

"Review of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975" . Archived from the original on 18 October 2006 . Retrieved 2 November 2006 .

^ Leong, Goh Cheng (1995).

Certificate Physics And Human Geography; Indian Edition . Oxford University Press. p. 81.

ISBN 978-0-19-562816-6 .

Archived from the original on 20 June 2022 . Retrieved 21 January 2022 .

^ Sarah Belfield (8 February 2002).

"Great Barrier Reef: no buried treasure" . Geoscience Australia (Australian Government). Archived from the original on 1 October 2007 . Retrieved 11 June 2007 .

^ Sharon Guynup (4 September 2000).

"Australia's Great Barrier Reef" .

Science World . Archived from the original on 8 July 2012 . Retrieved 11 June 2007 .

^ "The Seven Natural Wonders of the World" . CNN. 1997. Archived from the original on 21 July 2006 . Retrieved 6 August 2006 .

^ Access Economics Pty Ltd (2005).

"Measuring the economic and financial value of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 April 2013 . Retrieved 2 March 2013 .

^ "Scuba Diving in Indonesia: Komodo, Bali, Sulawesi and More" .

Dive-the-world.com . Retrieved 11 June 2015 .

^ "North Sulawesi: Bunaken" . Official Website of the North Sulawesi Tourism Promotion Board. Archived from the original on 11 April 2011.

^ "Bunaken Diving Sites" . Dive The World. 29 April 2021. Archived from the original on 3 April 2014 . Retrieved 12 July 2024 .

^ "R118. Draft Regulations for the management of the Isimangaliso Marine Protected Area" (PDF) .

Regulation Gazette No. 10553 .

608 (39646). Pretoria: Government Printer. 3 February 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2017 . Retrieved 29 December 2019 .

^ a b Sink, K.; Harris, J.; Lombard, A. (October 2004).

Appendix 1. South African marine bioregions (PDF) .

South African National Spatial Biodiversity Assessment 2004: Technical Report Vol. 4 Marine Component DRAFT (Report). pp.

97– 109.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-05-26 . Retrieved 2019-12-29 .

^ Pfaff, Maya C.; Logston, Renae C.; Raemaekers, Serge J. P. N.; Hermes, Juliet C.; Blamey, Laura K.; Cawthra, Hayley C.; Colenbrander, Darryl R.; Crawford, Robert J. M.; Day, Elizabeth; du Plessis, Nicole; Elwen, Simon H.; Fawcett, Sarah E.; Jury, Mark R.; Karenyi, Natasha; Kerwath, Sven E.; Kock, Alison A.; Krug, Marjolaine; Lamberth, Stephen J.; Omardien, Aaniyah; Pitcher, Grant C.; Rautenbach, Christo; Robinson, Tamara B.; Rouault, Mathieu; Ryan, Peter G.; Shillington, Frank A.; Sowman, Merle; Sparks, Conrad C.; Turpie, Jane K.; van Niekerk, Lara; Waldron, Howard N.; Yeld, Eleanor M.; Kirkman, Stephen P. (2019).

"A synthesis of three decades of socio-ecological change in False Bay, South Africa: setting the scene for multidisciplinary research and management" .

Elementa: Science of the Anthropocene .

7 (32).

Bibcode : 2019EleSA...7...32P .

doi : 10.1525/elementa.367 .

hdl : 2263/75633 .

Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC-BY 4.0) ^ "Government Notice 695: Marine Living Resources Act (18/1998): Notice declaring the Table Mountain National Park Marine Protected Area under section 43" (PDF) .

Government Gazette : 3– 9. 4 June 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 February 2019 . Retrieved 29 December 2019 .

^ a b c d e Laymon, Lynn.

"Off the Wall: The Thrill of Wall Diving" .

Dive Training Magazine . Retrieved 26 July 2024 .

^ a b c "Wall Diving Essentials" .

www.liveaboard.com . Retrieved 27 July 2024 .

^ a b "Wall Diving: How To Explore, Skills and Tips" .

La Galigo liveaboard . 23 December 2023 . Retrieved 28 July 2024 .

^ Aspinall, Richard (2016-09-20).

"From concrete to coral: breeze blocks make a splash regenerating reefs" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 2020-12-23 . Retrieved 2021-01-04 .

^ Gray, Denis D. (2 June 2018).

"Cambodia volunteers step up battle against illegal fishing" .

asia.nikkei.com .

Archived from the original on 23 July 2021 . Retrieved 23 July 2021 .

^ Denny, Megan (2018-06-25).

"Diving Artificial Reefs" .

blog.padi.com . Retrieved 2024-11-01 .

^ Perdomo, Gabriela (12 March 2012). "Is Art Better down Where It's Wetter?".

Maclean's . Vol. 125, no. 9. p. 82.

^ Mackley, Brian (5 August 2019).

"The first underwater veterans memorial is open for divers" . Sightline Media Group: Military Times.

Archived from the original on 13 November 2019 . Retrieved 2 November 2019 .

^ Vance, Erik (August 2013). "The Art of Distraction".

Scientific American .

309 (2): 16.

Bibcode : 2013SciAm.309b..16V .

doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican0813-16 .

PMID 23923197 .

^ "Underwater sculpture saving coral reefs" . BBC World Service. 14 October 2010.

Archived from the original on 23 July 2021 . Retrieved 23 July 2021 .

^ "How cavern and cave diving differ" .

cavediving.com .

Archived from the original on 22 September 2022 . Retrieved 17 June 2022 .

^ "Wreck Diving Essentials" .

www.liveaboard.com . Retrieved 12 April 2024 .

^ "Wreck Diver" .

www.padi.com . Retrieved 12 April 2024 .

^ Cancelmo, Jesse.

"Sunken Treasures: What Makes Divers Love Wreck Diving" .

dtmag.com . Dive Training Magazine . Retrieved 12 April 2024 .

^ a b Hammerton, Zan (2014).

SCUBA-diver impacts and management strategies for subtropical marine protected areas (Thesis). Southern Cross University.

Archived from the original on 2020-05-26 . Retrieved 2019-12-29 .

^ Lucrezi, Serena (18 January 2016).

"How scuba diving is warding off threats to its future" .

The Conversation .

Archived from the original on 25 November 2020 . Retrieved 5 September 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Scuba diving .

Media related to Recreational dive sites at Wikimedia Commons v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal v t e Recreational dive sites Reef diving regions Akumal Aliwal Shoal Marine Protected Area Aliwal Shoal Amed (Bali) Anilao Apo Island Apo Reef Arrecifes de Cozumel National Park Bay of Pigs Belize Barrier Reef Biscayne National Park Bohol Sea Bowie Seamount Bunaken Bunaken National Park Cahuita National Park Calve Island Capurganá Ċirkewwa Cliff Villa Peninsula Cozumel Dhilba Guuranda-Innes National Park Edmonds Underwater Park El Ikhwa Islands False Bay Għar Qawqla Gili Islands Great Barrier Reef Great Southern Reef Guadalupe Island Biosphere Reserve Haql Hol Chan Marine Reserve iSimangaliso Marine Protected Area Sodwana Bay John Pennekamp Coral Reef State Park Kadmat Island Ko Tao Lighthouse Reef Mantanani Islands Malapascua Martin's Haven Marsa Alam Mengalum Molasses Reef Molokini Neptune Islands Osprey Reef Palancar Reef Panglao, Bohol Pescador Island Petit Saint Vincent Poor Knights Islands Porteau Cove Provincial Park Puerto Galera Punta Cana Ras Muhammad National Park Rondo Island Rottnest Island San Andrés (island) San Pedro Nolasco Island Shaʽb Abu Nuħas Shadwan Island Similan Islands Sipadan Socorro Island Sound of Mull St. Crispin's Reef Table Mountain National Park Marine Protected Area Taganga Tiga Tsitsikamma Marine Protected Area Tubbataha Reef Utila Wakatobi Regency Weh Island Whittle Rock Reef dive sites Azure Window Cod Hole Daedalus Reef Darwin's Arch Devil's Throat at Punta Sur Elphinstone Reef Eyemouth Fanadir Frederiksted Pier French Reef Fowey Rocks Light Gamul Kebir Hilsea Point Rock Inland Sea, Gozo Kennack Sands The Manacles Magic Point Octopus Hole Pope's Eye Portsea Hole Second Valley Sund Rock St Abbs Stingray City, Grand Cayman Wolf Rock Artificial reefs Edithburgh jetty Gibraltar Artificial Reef Merkanti Reef Port Hughes jetty Port Noarlunga jetty Rapid Bay jetty Shark River Reef South Channel Fort Osborne Reef Underwater artworks Cancún Underwater Museum Christ of the Abyss Circle of Heroes Kristu tal-Baħħara Molinere Underwater Sculpture Park Snorkelling sites Fungus Rock Wreck diving regions Bullhead Point Historical and Archeological District Calve Island Chuuk Lagoon Coron Bay Edmonds Underwater Park Shipwrecks of Isle Royale Loch Long Maritime Heritage Trail – Battle of Saipan Michigan Underwater Preserves Pearl and Hermes Atoll Porteau Cove Provincial Park Robben Island Marine Protected Area Scapa Flow Shipwrecks of Cape Town Table Mountain National Park Marine Protected Area Tulagi Tulamben Thunder Bay National Marine Sanctuary List of shipwrecks in the Thunder Bay National Marine Sanctuary Ve Skerries Wardang Island Western Rocks, Isles of Scilly Whitefish Point Underwater Preserve Wisconsin Shipwreck Coast National Marine Sanctuary List of shipwrecks in the Wisconsin Shipwreck Coast National Marine Sanctuary Wreck Alley, San Diego Wreck dive sites 115 (barge) A HMS A1 HMS A3 USS Aaron Ward Abessinia USS Accokeek HMAS Adelaide Admiral Sampson Adolphus Busch Aeolian Sky USS Aeolus Agat World War II Amtrac Ajax Akka Albert C. Field USS Algol Algoma Al Munassir Amaryllis America USS Anderson Andrea Doria Antilla Antilles USS Apogon Appomattox Aquila Aratama Maru Arctic USS Arkansas Arratoon Apcar USS Arthur W. Radford Atlanta USS Atlanta Australasia B Bärenfels HMAS Bayonet Ben Doran Benwood Bianca C.

USCGC Bibb Binnendijk USS Blenny HMS Boadicea Booya HMSAS Bloemfontein Breda Brian Davis HMAS Brisbane HMHS Britannic Bud Bar Bungsberg Byron C HMAS Canberra HMCS Cape Breton USCGC Cape Henlopen Captain Keith Tibbetts Carl D. Bradley USS Carlisle Carnatic Carthaginian II Cayuga Cedarville Chaudière Christina Nilsson ROCS Chen Hai Chester A. Congdon City of Bangor City of Everett City of Launceston Clan Ranald Clifton USCGC Comanche Comet Constandis HMAS Coogee SMS Cormoran Cornelia B. Windiate HMS Coronation Crusader Cuba Cumberland USS Curb USCGC Cuyahoga D Dania Daniel Lyons David Tucker SMS Dresden D.R. Hanna USCGC Duane Dunraven Dwight L. Moody E Eagle Eastfield Eber Ward Edgar E. Clark HMT Elk Ellengowan USS Emmons SS Emperor RMS Empress of Ireland Erie L. Hackley Espagne Etruria F HMS Falmouth Fifi Fleetwing SS Francisco Morazan Francis Hinton Frank O'Connor F. T. Barney Fujikawa Maru Fumizuki G Gallinipper SATS General Botha USNS General Hoyt S. Vandenberg George A. Marsh George Dewey George M. Cox Georg Thiele HMS Ghurka USS Gilliam Glenlyon Glen Strathallan SAS Good Hope HMAS Goorangai Gothenburg Grace A. Channon Grecian Green Bay Gregory Poole Gunilda H MT Haven SS Henry Chisholm MT Hephaestus Hermann Künne HMS Hermes Herzogin Cecilie SS Hesper Hilma Hooker Hispania Home HMS Hood HMAS Hobart I Igara USS Indra SS Ironsides SS Isaac M. Scott Island City J HMAS J1 HMAS J2 HMAS J4 HMAS J5 James Eagan Layne J.S. Seaverns SS John B. Cowle John M. Osborn SS John Mitchell Jura K SS Kamloops Kashi Maru PS Keystone State King Cruiser USS Kittiwake Kizugawa Maru SMS Kronprinz Kyarra Kyle Spangler L PS Lady Elgin Lady Thetis HMS Laforey SS Lakeland USS Lamson USAT Liberty SS Louisiana Louis Sheid SS L.R. Doty USS LST-507 Lumberman M HMS M2 HMCS Mackenzie Madeira SMS Markgraf SS Marquette Mayflower (scow) Mikhail Lermontov Maine Maloja HMS Maori SS Maori SS Margaret Olwill Marguerite SS Mauna Loa USAT Meigs Mendi MV Mercedes I USCGC Mesquite Metamora SS Midland City USS Mindanao Minnedosa SS Miowera SS Milwaukee USS Mizpah Miztec USCGC Mohawk Mohegan RMS Moldavia SS Monarch SS Monrovia HMS Montagu SS M.M. Drake MV RMS Mulheim USS Muliphen SS Myron N Nagato Niagara Niagara (tug) HMCS Nipigon SS Norman Northerner O Oceana SS Onoko USS Oriskany Oslofjord Ozone P P29 P31 SS Panay SS Papoose Pedernales Persier HMAS Perth SS Pewabic SAS Pietermaritzburg USS Pilotfish Piłsudski SS Pioneer USCGC Point Swift Pool Fisher SS Port Kembla HMS Port Napier Preußen President Coolidge HMS Prince of Wales Q Queen Victoria R R.P. Resor Radaas USS Rankin Rainbow Warrior Regina HMS Repulse RMS Rhone Riva Palacio Robert C. Pringle Robert Wallace USS Rochester Rondo Rosehill Rosinco Rotorua Rouse Simmons Royal Adelaide Royal Charter Rozi Russia S HMS Safari Sagamore HMCS Saguenay Sakawa Salem Express Samuel Mather Samuel P. Ely Sanko Harvest USS Saratoga HMCS Saskatchewan S.C. Baldwin USS Schurz USS Scuffle USS Scrimmage HMS Scylla Selah Chamberlain HMS Sidon USCGC Spar South Australian USS Spiegel Grove Sport Stanegarth Stanwood Stella Stepas Darius HMS St Lawrence Superior City HMAS Swan Sweepstakes T Tahoe USCGC Tamaroa USS Tarpon Thesis Thistlegorm Thomas Friant Thomas Wilson Thunderbolt Toa Maru HMAS Tobruk Tokai Maru Torrey Canyon SAS Transvaal Treasure HMNZS Tui U U-40 U-352 U-1195 Um El Faroud V V 1605 Mosel Varvassi USS Vermilion Vernon Vienna W HMNZS Waikato Walter L M Russ HMS Warrior Washingtonian Waubuno HMNZS Wellington Wexford William C. Moreland Wisconsin USS Wilkes-Barre Y USS Yancey YO-257 Yongala HMCS Yukon Z Zenobia Zealandia Zingara Cave dive sites Cave diving regions of the world Cave dive sites: Blauhöhle Blue hole Blue Hole (Red Sea) Great Blue Hole Blue Hole (Guam) Boesmansgat Cenote Dzibilchaltun Chinhoyi Caves Cocklebiddy, Western Australia Devil's Throat at Punta Sur Engelbrecht Cave Fossil Cave Hranice Abyss Jordbrugrotta Kilsby sinkhole Molnár János Cave Nereo Cave Piccaninnie Ponds Pluragrotta Pollatoomary Ricks Spring The Shaft Sistema Dos Ojos Sistema Huautla Sistema Nohoch Nah Chich Sistema Ox Bel Ha Sistema Sac Actun Uamh an Claonaite Vortex Spring Wakulla Springs Wondergat Zacatón Freshwater dive sites Blue Hole (New Mexico) Blue Lake (Utah) Dinorwic quarry Dorothea quarry Dutch Springs Ewens Ponds Homestead caldera Little Blue Lake Logue Brook Dam Ponce de Leon Spring Rum Jungle Silfra Vortex Spring Wast Water Wazee Lake Training sites Blue Abyss Capernwray Dive Centre Deep Dive Dubai Deepspot Eccleston Quarry Hotel Terme Millepini National Diving and Activity Centre Nemo 33 Seacrest Cove 2 Slickstones Quarry, Cromhall Stoney Cove Swanage Pier Related topics Black-water diving Blue-water diving Low impact diving Recreational diving Scuba diving Scuba diving tourism Underwater archaeology Underwater diving Wall diving Outline of recreational dive sites Category: Underwater diving sites Index of recreational dive sites Portal:Underwater diving Authority control databases : National Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐q9bhj
Cached time: 20250818114409
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.522 seconds
Real time usage: 2.018 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9062/1000000
Revision size: 57921/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 750597/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6887/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 196522/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.872/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11363743/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1516.312      1 -total
 56.74%  860.429      2 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 50.07%  759.214     37 Template:Navbox
 46.71%  708.216      1 Template:Recreational_dive_sites
 21.73%  329.429      1 Template:Reflist
 15.80%  239.579     88 Template:SS
 11.16%  169.151     25 Template:Cite_web
 10.57%  160.296      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  6.80%  103.057     29 Template:Ship
  4.50%   68.228     25 Template:USS Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:35571934:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818114409 and revision id 1306511326. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Recreational_dive_sites&oldid=1306511326 " Category : Underwater diving sites Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 Articles to be expanded from July 2024 All articles to be expanded Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 03:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Recreational dive sites 3 languages Add topic

