Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Work Toggle Work subsection 2.1 Social physics 2.2 Criminology 2.3 Anthropometry 3 Awards and honours 4 Publications 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Adolphe Quetelet 40 languages العربية تۆرکجه Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lëtzebuergesch Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська Walon 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Belgian astronomer, mathematician, and sociologist (1796–1874) Adolphe Quetelet Born Lambert Adolphe Jacques Quetelet ( 1796-02-22 ) 22 February 1796 Ghent , French Republic (now Ghent, Belgium ) Died 17 February 1874 (1874-02-17) (aged 77) Brussels , Belgium Nationality Belgian Alma mater University of Ghent Known for contributions to social physics Awards ForMemRS (1839) [ 1 ] Scientific career Fields astronomer mathematician statistician sociologist Institutions Brussels Observatory Lambert Adolphe Jacques Quetelet FRSF or FRSE ( French: [kətlɛ] ⓘ ; 22 February 1796 – 17 February 1874) [ 1 ] was a Belgian - French astronomer , mathematician , statistician and sociologist who founded and directed the Brussels Observatory and was influential in introducing statistical methods to the social sciences . His name is sometimes spelled with an accent as Quételet .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] He also founded the science of anthropometry and developed the body mass index (BMI) scale, originally called the Quetelet Index.

[ 4 ] His work on measuring human characteristic to determine the ideal l'homme moyen ("the average man"), played a key role in the origins of eugenics .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Biography [ edit ] Adolphe was born in Ghent (which, at the time was a part of the new French Republic ). He was the son of François-Augustin-Jacques-Henri Quetelet, a Frenchman and Anne Françoise Vandervelde, a Flemish woman. His father was born at Ham , Picardy , and being of a somewhat adventurous spirit, he crossed the English Channel and became both a British citizen and the secretary of a Scottish nobleman. In that capacity, he traveled with his employer on the Continent, particularly spending time in Italy. At about 31, he settled in Ghent and was employed by the city, where Adolphe was born, the fifth of nine children, several of whom died in childhood.

Francois died when Adolphe was only seven years old. Adolphe studied at the Ghent Lycée, where he afterwards started teaching mathematics in 1815 at the age of 19.  In 1819, he moved to the Athenaeum in Brussels and in the same year he completed his dissertation ( De quibusdam locis geometricis, necnon de curva focal – Of some new properties of the focal distance and some other curves ).

Quetelet received a doctorate in mathematics in 1819 from the University of Ghent . Shortly thereafter, the young man set out to convince government officials and private donors to build an astronomical observatory in Brussels ; he succeeded in 1828.
He became a member of the Royal Academy in 1820. He lectured at the museum for sciences and letters and at the Belgian Military School. In 1825, he became a correspondent of the Royal Institute of the Netherlands, in 1827 he became a member. In 1839, he was elected as a member of the American Philosophical Society .

[ 8 ] From 1841 to 1851, he was a supernumerary associate in the institute, and when it became Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences he became foreign member.

[ 9 ] In 1850, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences .

Quetelet also founded several statistical journals and societies, and was especially interested in creating international cooperation among statisticians. He encouraged the creation of a statistical section of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BA), which later became the Royal Statistical Society , of which he became the first overseas member. In 1853 he chaired both the International Maritime Conference and the first International Statistical Congress . He was a founding member of the first Société des douze .

In 1855, Quetelet developed apoplexy , which diminished but did not end his scientific activity.

[ citation needed ] He died in Brussels on 17 February 1874, and is buried in the Brussels Cemetery .

In 1825, he married Cécile-Virginie Curtet.

[ 10 ] Work [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Eugenics Historical trajectory Ancient Jus trium liberorum Lex Papia Poppaea Jewish views on incest Incest in the Bible British eugenics Malthusian League Eugenic feminism Nazi eugenics " Racial hygiene " Law for the Prevention of Hereditarily Diseased Offspring Hereditary Health Court Lebensborn Romani Holocaust Aktion T4 Doctors' Trial US eugenics Slave breeding in the US Eugenics Survey of Vermont Oneida stirpiculture Immigration Act of 1924 US birth control movement Sterilization law in the United States Buck v. Bell Doe ex. rel. Tarlow v. District of Columbia Madrigal v. Quilligan Poe v. Lynchburg Training School & Hospital Skinner v. Oklahoma Stump v. Sparkman Virginia Sterilization Act of 1924 Canadian eugenics The Famous Five Sexual Sterilization Act French Eugenics Japanese eugenics Hispanic eugenics Mexican eugenics Swedish sterilization program (1906–1975) Peruvian sterilization program (1990–2000) Population planning in Singapore Neo-eugenics He Jiankui genome editing incident Human genetic enhancement Religious response to assisted reproductive technology Pre-war academic proponents Bell Brigham Burbank Carrell Davenport Darwin (Leonhard) DeCourcy Ward von Ehrenfels Elderton Evang Fisher Galton Gates Goldscheid Grant Gruber Günther Guyer Haldane Herseni Holmes Hrdlička Jennings Jordan Kang Key Kraepelin Lenz Lewis London Magnussen Manuilă Mittmann Moreira Munro Nordau Osborn Pan Pearson (Karl) Perkins Pérez Ploetz Quetelet Rainer Relgis Ross Schallmayer Scharffenberg Serebrovsky Sergi Slater Southard Stoddard Taussig Terman Tesla Thorndike Vacher de Lapouge Verschuer Yerkes Post-war academic remnants Agar Bell (Julia) Blacker Carl Carter Cattell Coleman Darlington Fleischman Garrett Glad Hardin Haldane Hanania Herndon Huxley Ingle Itzkoff José Figueredo Kallmann Kirkconnell Koch Laski Lederberg Lorenz Ludovici Lundman Lynn MacEachran Magnussen Miller Muller Murray Nijenhuis Nyborg Osborn Pearson (Roger) Pendell Pitt-Rivers Popenoe Rostand Savulescu Shapiro Shockley Verschuer Vining Jr.

Weiss Pamphlets and manifestos Hereditary Genius (1869) Degeneration (1892–1893) Gallia (1895) " The Blood of the Nation " (1901/1910) Anticipations (1901) The Training of the Human Plant (1907) Essays in Eugenics (1909) Heredity in Relation to Eugenics (1911) Mankind at the Crossroads (1923) Daedalus (1924) La raza cósmica (1925) Marriage and Morals (1929) The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection (1930) " Charter for Rationalists " (1932) Man, the Unknown (1935) After Us (1936) " Eugenics manifesto " (1939) New Bottles for New Wine (1950) The Marching Morons (1951) The Dance with the Devil (1958) Civilized Man's Eight Deadly Sins (1973) Beyondism (1987) Dysgenics (1996) Eugenics: A Reassessment (2001) Jewish Eugenics (2011) Selective Breeding and the Birth of Philosophy (2023) Organizations Without significant post-war activity ABCL Alberta Eugenics Board AASPIM AES Carnegie Institution for Science Carrel Foundation CSHL Co-operative Women's Guild EBNC ERO Fabian Society Galton Laboratory German Society for Racial Hygiene Heredity Commission HBF Human Betterment League Immigration Restriction League INED IAAEE International Eugenics Conference IFEO Kaiser Wilhelm Institute Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry PAA Progressive League Race Betterment Foundation RHA Rockefeller Foundation State Institute for Racial Biology With significant post-war activity Annals of Eugenics (1954) CIS The Eugenics Review (1968) FREED HDF J. Soc. Political Econ. Stud.

LCI Mankind Quarterly OpenPsych Project Prevention Repository for Germinal Choice Ulster Institute for Social Research Related Demographic engineering Dysgenics Fujimorism Genetic discrimination History of eugenics Idiocracy Pedigree chart Political views of Bertrand Russell Political views of H. G. Wells Raymond Cattell bibliography Ronald Fisher bibliography Selective breeding History of Science portal v t e His scientific research encompassed a wide range of different scientific disciplines: meteorology , astronomy, mathematics, statistics, demography , sociology, criminology and history of science.  He made significant contributions to scientific development, but he also wrote several monographs directed to the general public. He founded the Royal Observatory of Belgium , founded or co-founded several national and international statistical societies and scientific journals, and presided over the first series of the International Statistical Congresses.  Quetelet was a liberal and an anticlerical , but not an atheist or materialist nor a socialist .

Social physics [ edit ] The new science of probability and statistics was mainly used in astronomy at the time, where it was essential to account for measurement errors around means. This was done using the method of least squares . Quetelet was among the first to apply statistics to social science, planning what he called "social physics". He was keenly aware of the overwhelming complexity of social phenomena, and the many variables that needed measurement. His goal was to understand the statistical laws underlying such phenomena as crime rates, marriage rates or suicide rates . He wanted to explain the values of these variables by other social factors. These ideas were rather controversial among other scientists at the time who held that it contradicted the concept of freedom of choice.

His most influential book was Sur l'homme et le développement de ses facultés, ou Essai de physique sociale , published in 1835 (In English translation, it is titled Treatise on Man , but a literal translation would be "On Man and the Development of his Faculties, or Essay on Social Physics"). In it, he outlines the project of a social physics and describes his concept of the "average man" ( l'homme moyen ) who is characterized by the mean values of measured variables that follow a normal distribution . He collected data about many such variables. Quetelet wrote about these values as "ideals" with deviations from them as being less than or more than ideal. He saw the average body as an ideal beauty and something to be desired and his work was influential on Francis Galton who coined the term eugenics .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Quetelet's student Pierre François Verhulst developed the logistic function in the 1830s as a model of population growth ; see Logistic function § History for details.

[ 11 ] When Auguste Comte discovered that Quetelet had appropriated the term 'social physics', which Comte had originally introduced, Comte found it necessary to invent the term 'sociologie' ( sociology ) because he disagreed with Quetelet's notion that a theory of society could be derived from a collection of statistics.

Adolphe Quetelet also had a significant influence on Florence Nightingale who shared with him a religious view of statistics which saw understanding statistics as revealing the work of God in addition to statistics being a force of good administration. Nightingale met Quetelet in person at the 1860 International Statistical Congress in London, and they corresponded for years afterwards.

[ 12 ] Criminology [ edit ] Quetelet was an influential figure in criminology .  Along with Andre-Michel Guerry , he helped to establish the cartographic school and positivist schools of criminology which made extensive use of statistical techniques.  Through statistical analysis, Quetelet gained insight into the relationships between crime and other social factors.  Among his findings were strong relationships between age and crime, as well as gender and crime .  Other influential factors he found included climate , poverty , education , and alcohol consumption, with his research findings published in Of the Development of the Propensity to Crime .

[ 13 ] Anthropometry [ edit ] In his 1835 text on social physics, he presented his theory of human variance around the average , showing human traits were distributed according to a normal curve . The existence of such variation provided the basis for later writers, including Darwin, to argue that natural populations contained sufficient variability for artificial or natural selection to operate.

[ 14 ] In terms of influence over later public health agendas, one of Quetelet's lasting legacies was the establishment of a simple measure for classifying people's weight relative to an ideal for their height. His proposal, the body mass index (or Quetelet index), has endured with minor variations to the present day.

[ 15 ] Anthropometric data is used in modern applications and referenced in the development of every consumer-based product.

Awards and honours [ edit ] Quetelet was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1839 .

[ 1 ] The asteroid 1239 Queteleta is named after him. The title of Quetelet professor at Columbia University is awarded in his name.

Publications [ edit ] 1823.

Relation d'un voyage fait à la grotte de Han au mois d'août 1822'. 'With M.M. Kickx.

1827.

Recherches sur la population, les naissances, les décès, les prisons, les dépôts de mendicité, etc., dans le royaume des Pays-Bas .

1829.

Recherches statistiques sur le royaume des Pays-Bas .

1831.

The Propensity to Crime .

1834.

Astronomie élémentaire .

1835.

Sur l'homme et le développement de ses facultés, ou Essai de physique sociale . 2 volumes.

Translated into English under the direction of Robert Knox as A Treatise on Man and the Development of His Faculties (Edinburgh, William and Robert Chambers, 1842) [ 16 ] 1838.

De l'influence des saisons sur la mortalité aux différens âges dans la Belgique .

1839.

Catalogue des principales apparitions d'étoiles filantes .

1843.

Sur l'emploi de la boussole dans les mines .

1845–1851.

Sur le climat de la Belgique . 2 volumes.

1848.

Du système social et des lois qui le régissent .

1848.

Sur la statistique morale et les principes qui doivent en former la base .

1850.

Mémoire sur les lois des naissances et de la mortalité à Bruxelles .

1853.

Mémoire sur les variations périodiques et non périodiques de la température, d'après les observations faites, pendant vingt ans, à l'observatoire royal de Bruxelles .

1864.

Histoire des sciences mathématiques et physiques chez les Belges .

1867.

Météorologie de la Belgique comparée à celle du globe .

1867.

Sciences mathématiques et physiques au commencement du XIXe siècle .

1869.

Sur la physique du globe en Belgique .

1870.

Anthropométrie, ou Mesure des différentes facultés de l'homme .

References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Fellows of the Royal Society" . London: Royal Society . Archived from the original on 16 March 2015.

^ Tylor, Edward Burnett (May 1872).

"Quetelet on the Science of Man" .

Popular Science Monthly . Vol. 1.

ISSN 0161-7370 – via Wikisource .

[ scan ] ^ O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Adolphe Quetelet" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews ^ Biographical Index of Former Fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh 1783–2002 (PDF) . The Royal Society of Edinburgh. July 2006.

ISBN 0-902-198-84-X . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 27 January 2018 .

^ a b Grue; Heiberg (2006).

"Notes on the History of Normality – Reflections on the Work of Quetelet and Galton" .

Scandinavian Journal of Disability Research .

8 (4): 232– 246.

doi : 10.1080/15017410600608491 .

^ a b Kubergovic (2013).

"Quetelet, Adolphe" .

Eugenics Archive . Retrieved 31 January 2022 .

^ a b Beirne (March 1987).

"Adolphe Quetelet and the Origins of Positivist Criminology" .

American Journal of Sociology .

92 (5): 1140– 69.

doi : 10.1086/228630 .

JSTOR 2779999 .

S2CID 144091497 .

^ "APS Member History" .

search.amphilsoc.org . Retrieved 9 April 2021 .

^ "Lambert Adolphe Jacques Quetelet (1796–1874)" .

Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences . Retrieved 20 July 2015 .

^ "Cecile Virginie Curtet (1801-1858) » Magnum Opus » Genealogie Online" . Archived from the original on 15 June 2018 . Retrieved 15 June 2018 .

^ Cramer 2002 , pp. 3–5.

^ Jahoda, Gustav (4 September 2015).

"Quetelet and the emergence of the behavioral sciences" .

SpringerPlus .

4 (1): 473.

doi : 10.1186/s40064-015-1261-7 .

PMC 4559562 .

PMID 26361574 .

^ Piers Beirne (1987). "Adolphe Quetelet and the Origins of Positivist Criminology". In; American Journal of Sociology 92(5): pp. 1140–1169.

^ Eiseley, Loren (1961).

Darwin's Century . Anchor Books (Doubleday). p.

227 .

ISBN 9780385081412 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Garabed Eknoyan (2008).

"Adolphe Quetelet (1796–1874) – the average man and indices of obesity".

In: Nephrol. Dial. Transplant . 23 (1): 47–51.

^ Treatise on Man on Google Books.

Further reading [ edit ] English Wikisource has original works by or about: Lambert Adolphe Jacques Quetelet Wikiquote has quotations related to Adolphe Quetelet .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Adolphe Quetelet .

Kevin Donnelly (2015).

Adolphe Quetelet, Social Physics and the Average Men of Science, 1796–1874 . University of Pittsburgh Press.

Ian Hacking (1990).

The Taming of Chance . Cambridge University Press, chapters 13–15.

Alain Desrosières (1998).

The Politics of Large Numbers: A History of Statistical Reasoning . Harvard University Press, chapter 3.

Stephen Stigler (1999).

Statistics on the Table . Harvard University Press, chapter 2.

Philip Ball (2005).

Critical Mass: How One Thing Leads to Another . Arrow Books 2005, chapter 3.

Fabien Locher (2007). "The observatory, the land-based ship and the crusades: earth sciences in european context, 1830–1850", British Journal for History of Science , 40(4), 2007, pp. 491–504 (On the leading role of Adolphe Quetelet in the fields of meteorology and geomagnetism in early nineteenth-century).

v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering v t e Fellows of the Royal Society elected in 1839 Fellows Thomas Dyke Acland George Barker Beriah Botfield Robert Carrington Arthur Conolly Charles Darwin Edward Davies Davenport Henry Mangles Denham Richard Drew Henry Drummond Arthur Farre Thomas William Fletcher William James Frodsham Thomas Gaskin George Godwin John T. Graves Edwin Guest George Gulliver James Halliwell-Phillipps Peter Hardy James Heywood John Hilton John Hogg Gilbert Wakefield Mackmurdo Samuel Roffey Maitland Henry Moseley H. Alexander Ormsby William Reid Robert Rigg John Rogers George Leith Roupell William Sharpey Clement Tudway Swanston James Joseph Sylvester Charles Thorp Charles Turnor John Wesley Williams James Yates Foreign Christopher Hansteen Macedonio Melloni Adolphe Quetelet Félix Savart Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii International Plant Names Index Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet Leopoldina Artists Musée d'Orsay People Netherlands Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adolphe_Quetelet&oldid=1294405528 " Categories : 1796 births 1874 deaths 19th-century Belgian astronomers 19th-century Belgian mathematicians Belgian sociologists Belgian statisticians Belgian criminologists Ghent University alumni Members of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences Members of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences Corresponding members of the Saint Petersburg Academy of Sciences Information graphic designers Data and information visualization experts Foreign members of the Royal Society Burials at Brussels Cemetery Scientists from Ghent Eugenicists Belgian anthropologists International members of the American Philosophical Society Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2020 Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 14:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Adolphe Quetelet 40 languages Add topic

