Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Science goals Toggle Science goals subsection 2.1 Targets 3 Missions 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Ocean Worlds Exploration Program 1 language 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia NASA program for the exploration of water worlds in the Solar System Two possible models of Europa The Ocean Worlds Exploration Program ( OWEP ) is a NASA program [ 1 ] to explore ocean worlds in the outer Solar System that could possess subsurface oceans to assess their habitability and to seek biosignatures of simple extraterrestrial life .

Prime targets include moons that harbor hidden oceans beneath a shell of ice: Europa , Enceladus , and Titan . A host of other bodies in the outer Solar System are inferred by a single type of observation or by theoretical modeling to have subsurface oceans.

The US House Appropriations Committee approved the bill on May 20, 2015, and directed NASA to create the Ocean Worlds Exploration Program.

[ 2 ] The "Roadmaps to Ocean Worlds" (ROW) was started in 2016, [ 3 ] [ 4 ] and was presented in January 2019.

[ 5 ] The formal program is being implemented within the agency by supporting the Europa Clipper orbiter mission to Europa, [ 3 ] [ 6 ] and the Dragonfly mission to Titan. The program is also supporting concept studies for a proposed Europa Lander , [ 7 ] and concepts to explore the moon Triton .

[ 8 ] [ 5 ] Amanda Hendrix and Terry A. Hurford are the co-leads of the NASA Roadmaps to Oceans World Group.

[ 5 ] [ 9 ] History [ edit ] Artist's impression of possible hydrothermal activity on Enceladus's ocean floor [ 10 ] The chief author of NASA's budget proposal is John Culberson , who was at the time the head of the science subcommittee in the House of Representatives . In Spring 2015 he presented a budget request, creating the possibility of an all-new NASA mission program.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The House Appropriations Committee approved its version of the FY2016 House Appropriations Commerce-Justice-Science (CJS) bill on May 20, 2015.

[ 6 ] Therefore, the Committee directed NASA to create the Ocean Worlds Exploration Program whose primary goal is to discover extant life on another world using a mix of Discovery , New Frontiers and Flagship class missions consistent with the recommendations of current and future Planetary Science Decadal Surveys .

[ 3 ] In the FY2017 Budget Request, the committee recommended $348 million for "Outer Planets" and "Ocean Worlds," of which not less than $260 million is for the Europa Clipper orbiter and lander, with launch of the orbiter in 2025 [ 13 ] and the potential Europa Lander shortly after.

[ 14 ] A 2017 technical analysis stated that the technical challenges are enormous, and that "Without a genuinely strategic program plan, the great promise of an OWEP [Ocean Worlds Exploration Program] is highly likely to remain unfulfilled." [ 15 ] The report noted that development of OWEP-enabling technologies must currently compete for priority with other Solar System objectives, which is not useful for strategic planning. The report recommends common, multi-mission technical infrastructure and secure funding to develop it.

[ 15 ] The Roadmaps to Ocean Worlds (ROW) report was submitted and it was published in January 2019.

[ 5 ] Science goals [ edit ] Artist's cut-away representation of the internal structure of Ganymede. Layers drawn to scale.

On Earth , itself an ocean world, liquid water is essential to life as we know it. A question is whether the dark, alien oceans of the outer Solar System could be habitable for simple life forms, and if so, what their biochemistry might be.

[ 16 ] The goals of the Ocean Worlds Exploration Program are to "identify ocean worlds, characterize their oceans, evaluate their habitability, search for life, and ultimately understand any life we find." [ 5 ] Exploring these moons could help to answer the question of how life arose on Earth and whether it exists anywhere else in the Solar System.

[ 17 ] It may also be possible to find pre-biotic chemistry occurring, which could provide clues to how life started on Earth.

[ 18 ] Any life detected at the remote ocean worlds in the outer Solar System would likely have formed and evolved along an independent path from life on Earth, giving us a deeper understanding of the potential for life in the universe .

[ 4 ] Oceanographers , biologists and astrobiologists are part of the team developing the strategy roadmap.

[ 3 ] The planning also considers implementing planetary protection measures to avoid contaminating extraterrestrial habitable environments with resilient stowaway bacteria on their landers.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Targets [ edit ] Ocean worlds identified in the Solar System so far with reasonable certainty are the major moons Europa , Enceladus , Titan , Ganymede , and Callisto .

[ 5 ] Of these, Europa and Enceladus have the highest priority because their icy shells are thinner than the others (Enceladus’ is less than 10 km; Europa's is about 40 km) and there is some evidence their oceans are in contact with the rocky mantle , which could provide both energy and chemicals for life to form.

[ 5 ] Enceladus' ice crust has fractures at the south pole that allow ice and gas from the ocean to escape to space, where it has been sampled by mass spectrometers aboard the Cassini Saturn orbiter with tantalizing results.

[ 19 ] Titan's ocean is the deepest, at 50 to 100 km, and no evidence for active plumes or ice volcanism have been observed.

Bodies such as Triton , Pluto , Ceres , Miranda , Ariel , and Dione are considered candidate ocean worlds, based on hints from limited spacecraft observations.

[ 5 ] Missions [ edit ] The Ocean Worlds Exploration Program (OWEP) is supporting the Europa Clipper orbiter mission to Europa, which is the first planned target of this program to be launched in 2024.

[ 3 ] [ 6 ] The second is the Dragonfly mission to Titan.

[ 5 ] The program is also supporting concept studies for a proposed Europa Lander , [ 7 ] and a concept to explore the moon Triton with Trident , a mission selected as a finalist in NASA's Discovery Program in 2020.

[ 8 ] [ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Biology portal Solar system portal Astronomy portal Astrobiology mission concepts to water worlds in the outer Solar System: Enceladus Explorer ( EnEx ) – Planned interplanetary orbiter and lander mission Enceladus Life Finder ( ELF ) – Proposed NASA mission to a moon of Saturn Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability ( ELSAH ) – Astrobiology concept mission Enceladus Orbilander – Proposed NASA space probe to Saturn's moon Enceladus Explorer of Enceladus and Titan ( E 2 T ) – NASA/ESA Saturnian moon probe concept Journey to Enceladus and Titan ( JET ) – Proposed space mission Jupiter Icy Moons Explorer ( JUICE ) – European mission to study Jupiter and its moons since 2023 Laplace-P – Proposed Russian spacecraft to study the Jovian moon system and land on Ganymede Life Investigation For Enceladus ( LIFE ) – Proposed astrobiology mission Neptune Odyssey – NASA orbiter mission concept to study the Neptune system Oceanus (Titan orbiter) – 2017 proposed NASA Triton orbiter space probe Testing the Habitability of Enceladus's Ocean ( THEO ) – Orbiter mission to Enceladus Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Titan Lake In-situ Sampling Propelled Explorer ( TALISE ) – Proposed space mission Titan Mare Explorer ( TiME ) – Proposed spacecraft lander design Trident – NASA space probe proposal to study the ice giant planet Neptune and its moon Triton Triton Hopper – Proposed NASA Triton lander space probe References [ edit ] ^ Implementable program for efficient ocean-world exploration.

Sherwood, Brent; Sotin, Christophe; Lunine, Jonathan; Cwik, Tom. 42nd COSPAR Scientific Assembly. Held 14–22 July 2018, in Pasadena, California, USA, Abstract id. B5.3-5-18.

^ Foust, Jeff (14 April 2017).

" "Ocean Worlds" discoveries build case for new missions" .

Space News . Retrieved 2017-09-30 .

^ a b c d e f McEwen, Alfred (1 February 2016).

"Roadmaps to Ocean Worlds (ROW)" (PDF) .

Lunar and Planetary Institute . Retrieved 2017-09-30 .

^ a b c "NASA's plans to explore Europa and other "ocean worlds" " .

Universe Today . PhysOrg. 6 March 2017 . Retrieved 2017-09-30 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j The NASA Roadmap to Ocean Worlds.

Amanda R. Hendrix, Terry A. Hurford, Laura M. Barge, Michael T. Bland, Jeff S. Bowman, William Brinckerhoff, Bonnie J. Buratti, Morgan L. Cable, Julie Castillo-Rogez, Geoffrey C. Collins, etal.

Astrobiology , Vol. 19, No. 1.

doi : 10.1089/ast.2018.1955 ^ a b c "NASA's FY2016 Budget Request" (PDF) .

Space Policy Online . 27 May 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-07-31 . Retrieved 2017-09-30 .

In fact, the report accompanying the bill directs NASA to create an "Ocean Worlds Exploration Program" of which the Europa mission is part.

^ a b Europa Lander.

Home Page at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) NASA. Accessed on 22 September 2019.

^ a b Brown, David W. (19 March 2019).

"Neptune's Moon Triton Is Destination of Proposed NASA Mission" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 20 March 2019 .

^ Fish, Tom (5 March 2019).

"NASA Ocean Worlds mission: NASA's space program to search for alien life" .

UK Express .

^ Hsu, Hsiang-Wen; Postberg, Frank; et al. (March 11, 2015). "Ongoing hydrothermal activities within Enceladus".

Nature .

519 (7542): 207– 10.

Bibcode : 2015Natur.519..207H .

doi : 10.1038/nature14262 .

PMID 25762281 .

S2CID 4466621 .

^ Wenz, John (19 May 2015).

"NASA Wants to go Underwater Exploring on Ocean Moons" .

Popular Mechanics . Retrieved 2017-09-30 .

^ Berger, Eric (19 May 2015).

"The House budget for NASA plants the seeds of a program to finally find life in the outer solar system" .

Houston Chronicle . Archived from the original on 2017-10-01 . Retrieved 2017-09-30 .

^ Foust, Jeff (22 August 2019).

"Europa Clipper passes key review" .

Space News .

^ Foust, Jeff (17 February 2019).

"Final fiscal year 2019 budget bill secures $21.5 billion for NASA" .

Space News .

^ a b FOLLOW THE (OUTER SOLAR SYSTEM) WATER: PROGRAM OPTIONS TO EXPLORE OCEAN WORLDS . (PDF). B. Sherwood, J. Lunine, C. Sotin, T. Cwik1, F. Naderi. Planetary Science Vision 2050 Workshop 2017.

^ Amanda R. Hendrix; Terry A. Hurford; et al. (January 1, 2019).

"The NASA Roadmap to Ocean Worlds" .

Astrobiology .

19 (1): 1– 27.

Bibcode : 2019AsBio..19....1H .

doi : 10.1089/ast.2018.1955 .

PMC 6338575 .

PMID 30346215 .

^ Creech, Stephen D; Vane, Greg.

"Ocean World Exploration and SLS: Enabling the Search for Life" .

Nasa Technical Reports Server . NASA . Retrieved 2017-09-30 .

^ Anderson, Paul Scott (15 May 2015).

" 'Ocean Worlds Exploration Program': New Budget Proposal Calls for Missions to Europa, Enceladus, and Titan" .

AmericaSpace . Retrieved 2017-09-30 .

^ Postberg, Frank; et al. (June 27, 2018).

"Macromolecular organic compounds from the depths of Enceladus" .

Nature .

558 (7711): 564– 568.

Bibcode : 2018Natur.558..564P .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-018-0246-4 .

PMC 6027964 .

PMID 29950623 .

v t e NASA planetary exploration programs Active Large strategic science missions Lunar Discovery & Exploration Mars Exploration Planetary Missions Discovery New Frontiers Solar System Exploration Ocean Worlds Exploration Voyager Completed Lunar Orbiter Lunar Precursor Mariner MESUR New Millennium Pioneer Planetary Observer Ranger Surveyor Viking Cancelled Grand Tour Mariner Mark II Project Prometheus Voyager (Mars) List of NASA missions v t e Astrobiology Disciplines Astrochemistry Astrophysics Atmospheric sciences Biochemistry Evolutionary biology Exoplanetology Geomicrobiology Microbiology Paleontology Planetary oceanography Planetary science Main topics Abiogenesis Allan Hills 84001 Biomolecule Biosignature Drake equation Earliest known life forms Earth analog Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial sample curation Extremophiles Hypothetical types of biochemistry List of microorganisms tested in outer space Ocean planet Panspermia Planetary protection Search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) Yamato meteorite Planetary habitability Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Space missions Earth orbit BIO BIOCORE Biolab Bion BIOPAN Biosatellite program E-MIST ERA Eu:CROPIS EXOSTACK EXPOSE Lunar Micro Ecosystem O/OREOS OREOcube Tanpopo VEGGIE Mars Beagle 2 Fobos-Grunt Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover Mars 2020 Perseverance rover Phoenix Tianwen-1 Zhurong rover Trace Gas Orbiter Viking Comets and asteroids Hayabusa2 OSIRIS-REx Rosetta Heliocentric BioSentinel Planned Dragonfly Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover Proposed Breakthrough Enceladus BRUIE CAESAR Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder‎ Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Orbilander Europa Lander ExoLance Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Mars sample return mission Oceanus THEO Trident Cancelled and undeveloped Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection Kazachok Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher MELOS Northern Light Red Dragon Terrestrial Planet Finder Institutions and programs Astrobiology Society of Britain Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Breakthrough Starshot Carl Sagan Institute Center for Life Detection Science European Astrobiology Network Association NASA Astrobiology Institute Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Ocean Worlds Exploration Program Spanish Astrobiology Center‎ Category Commons v t e Extraterrestrial life Events and objects Shergotty meteorite (1865) Nakhla meteorite (1911) Murchison meteorite (1969) Viking lander biological experiments (1976) Allan Hills 77005 (1977) Allan Hills 84001 (1984) Yamato 000593 (2000) CI1 fossils (2011) Signals of interest Misidentified CP 1919 (misidentified pulsar) CTA-102 (misidentified quasar) Stars KIC 8462852 (unusual light fluctuations) EPIC 204278916 (unusual light fluctuations) VVV-WIT-07 (unusual light fluctuations) HD 164595 signal (unknown origin) Other SHGb02+14a (radio source) Wow! signal (inconclusive) Fast radio burst (unknown origin) BLC1 (radio signal) Life in the Universe Earliest known life forms Planetary habitability in the Solar System Life on Venus Life on Mars Life on Titan Planetary habitability Catalog of Nearby Habitable Systems Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems List of potentially habitable exoplanets Planetary habitability Superhabitable planet Tholin Space missions Beagle 2 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection BioSentinel Curiosity rover Darwin Dragonfly Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover ExoLance EXPOSE Foton-M3 Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Geyser Hopper Mars sample-return mission Mars 2020 Northern Light Opportunity rover Perseverance rover SpaceX Red Dragon Spirit rover Tanpopo Titan Mare Explorer Venus In Situ Explorer Viking 1 Viking 2 Interstellar communication Active SETI Allen Telescope Array Arecibo message Arecibo Observatory Berkeley SETI Research Center Bracewell probe Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence Gauss's Pythagorean right triangle proposal Astrolinguistics Lincos language NIROSETI Pioneer plaque Project Cyclops Project Ozma Project Phoenix SERENDIP Search for extraterrestrial intelligence SETI@home setiQuest Voyager Golden Record Water hole Xenolinguistics Types of alleged extraterrestrial beings Energy beings Grey aliens Insectoids Little green men Nordic aliens Reptilian humanoids Hypotheses Cosmic pluralism Directed panspermia Drake equation Extraterrestrial hypothesis Fermi paradox Hypothetical types of biochemistry Interplanetary contamination Kardashev scale Mediocrity principle Non-planetary abiogenesis Panspermia Fermi paradox solutions Aestivation hypothesis Berserker hypothesis Dark forest hypothesis Firstborn hypothesis Great Filter Hart–Tipler conjecture Neocatastrophism Planetarium hypothesis Rare Earth hypothesis Zoo hypothesis Related topics Ancient astronauts Astrobiology Astroecology Biosignature Brookings Report Exotheology Extraterrestrials in fiction Extremophile Hemolithin History of the extraterrestrial life debate Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Noogenesis Planetary protection Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact Post-detection policy San Marino Scale Technosignature UFO religion Xenoarchaeology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ocean_Worlds_Exploration_Program&oldid=1301542766 " Categories : NASA programs Astrobiology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Pages using div col with small parameter Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 11:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ocean Worlds Exploration Program 1 language Add topic

