Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Application 2 High-key analogous 3 Footnotes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Analogous colors 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Groups of three colors that are next to each other on the color wheel This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( May 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Analogous color scheme.

In color theory , analogous colors are groups of colors that are next to each other on the color wheel. Red, orange, and red-orange are examples.

The term analogous refers to having analogy, or corresponding to something in particular. This color scheme strength comes to the fact that it lacks contrast as in comparison to its counterpart, the complementary schemes.

[ citation needed ] Analogous color differ depending on the color wheel used. For example, by some definitions, it would be impossible to use Goethe's color wheel for analogous colors, because they do not share a common color, such as blue-green. If you wanted to use the analogous colors blue, blue-green, and green with  Boutet's color wheel on the left, you wouldn't be able to.

[ 1 ] Application [ edit ] These color schemes are most often seen in nature. For example, during the fall, one might often see the changing leaves form an analogous sort of color scheme, progressively moving through the color wheel to create a gradient in its natural pattern.

High-key analogous [ edit ] High-key color schemes have a lighter value, having white added to them or water in the case of watercolors. These have a more pastel-like look to them. Having a high-key analogous color scheme can give a piece a stimulating shimmer that pleases the eye, making everything seem the same color at first until approach. The colors are pure and aren't affected by their complements which grab attention. This was commonly used in impressionism by artists such as Monet , Pissarro , and Degas .

Pierre Bonnard has also been noted for using it.

Footnotes [ edit ] ^ analogous def.

References [ edit ] "Basic Color Schemes: Color Theory Introduction" .

Color Schemes Made Easy . TigerMedia. Archived from the original on April 30, 2015 . Retrieved December 4, 2011 .

"Color Wheel Pro: Classic Color Schemes" .

Color Wheel Pro: See Color Theory in Action!

. Color Wheel Pr . Retrieved December 4, 2011 .

"Basic Color Theory" .

Color Matters Welcomes You to the World of Color: Symbolism, Design, Vision, Science, Marketing and More!

. Color Matters. November 22, 1995 . Retrieved December 4, 2011 .

"Combining Colors - Analog, Complementary, Triad - Colors on the Web" .

Color Theory, Color Wheel and Combining Colors, Colors on the Web . Colors on the Web. 1998 . Retrieved December 4, 2011 .

Appellof, Marian (1994). "A High Key Analogous Color Scheme".

Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Watercolor . New York: Watson-Guptill. p. 57.

Bleicher, Steven (2011). "Color Harmonies".

Contemporary Color: Theory & Use . Clifton Park. NY: Delmar Cengage Learning. p. 70.

Lauer, David; Pentak, Stephen (2010). "Analogous Color Scheme".

Design Basics (8th ed.). Australia: Cengage. p. 279.

v t e Color topics Color science Color physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colors Chromophore Structural coloration Animal coloration Color of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Color perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Color calibration Color constancy Color task Color code Color temperature Color vision test Evolution of color vision Impossible colors Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Color psychology Color symbolism Color preferences Lüscher color test Kruithof curve Political color National colors Chromophobia Chromotherapy Color reproduction Color photography Color balance Color cast Digital image processing Color management Color printing Multi-primary color display Quattron Color model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Color space Color mapping Color philosophy Color scheme Color tool Monochromatic colors Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colors Analogous colors Achromatic colors (Neutral) Polychromatic colors Light-on-dark Web colors Tinctures in heraldry Color theory Color mixing Primary color Secondary color Chromaticity Color solid Color wheel Color triangle Color analysis (fashion) Color realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Color terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Gray Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Color history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Color in Chinese culture Traditional colors of Japan Human skin color Color dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colorfulness Pastel colors Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Color organizations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Color Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) List of colors by shade List of color palettes List of color spaces List of Crayola crayon colors history Color chart List of RAL colors List of web colors Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Analogous_colors&oldid=1279440532 " Category : Color Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from March 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from March 2021 Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2015 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2014 CS1: unfit URL This page was last edited on 8 March 2025, at 16:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Analogous colors 1 language Add topic

