Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Asia Toggle Asia subsection 2.1 China 2.2 India 2.3 Japan 3 Australia 4 Europe Toggle Europe subsection 4.1 European Convention on Human Rights 4.2 Czech Republic 4.3 France 4.4 Germany 4.5 United Kingdom 4.6 Russia 5 North America Toggle North America subsection 5.1 Canada 5.2 Mexico 5.3 United States 6 See also 7 Notes and references 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Civil liberties 48 languages Alemannisch العربية تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English سنڌي کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Civil rights and freedoms that provide individual specific rights Not to be confused with Civil and political rights .

Rights Theoretical distinctions Claim rights and liberty Individual and group Natural rights and legal Negative and positive Human rights Civil and political Economic, social and cultural Three generations Rights by beneficiary Accused Animals Autistic Children Consumers Creditors Deaf Disabled Elders Family Fetus Farmers Humans Indigenous Intersex Kings LGBTQ Transgender Life Men Minorities Parents Fathers Mothers Patients Peasants Plants Prisoners Robots States Students Victims Effective remedy Women Workers Youth Other groups of rights Assembly Association Asylum Civil liberties Clothing Development Digital Education Environment Fair trial Food Free migration Guns Health Housing Linguistic Movement Property Public participation Repair Resist Rest and leisure Revolution Security Sexual and Reproductive Abortion Reproductive Sexuality Self defense Self-determination Speech Water and sanitation v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Civil liberties are guarantees and freedoms that governments commit not to abridge, either by constitution , legislation , or judicial interpretation , without due process . Though the scope of the term differs between countries, civil liberties often include the freedom of conscience , freedom of press , freedom of religion , freedom of expression , freedom of assembly , the right to security and liberty , freedom of speech , the right to privacy , the right to equal treatment under the law and due process, the right to a fair trial , and the right to life . Other civil liberties include the right to own property , the right to defend oneself , and the right to bodily integrity . Within the distinctions between civil liberties and other types of liberty, distinctions exist between positive liberty / positive rights and negative liberty / negative rights .

Libertarians advocate for the negative liberty aspect of civil liberties, emphasizing minimal government intervention in both personal and economic affairs. Influential advocates of this interpretation include John Stuart Mill , whose work On Liberty argues for the protection of individual freedoms from government encroachment, and Friedrich Hayek , whose The Road to Serfdom warns against the dangers of expanding state power.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Ayn Rand's Atlas Shrugged and Ron Paul's The Revolution: A Manifesto further emphasize the importance of safeguarding personal autonomy and limiting government authority.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] These contributions have played a significant role in shaping the discourse on civil liberties and the appropriate scope of government.

Overview [ edit ] Broken Liberty: Istanbul Archaeology Museum Many contemporary nations have a constitution , a bill of rights , or similar constitutional documents that enumerate and seek to guarantee civil liberties. Other nations have enacted similar laws through a variety of legal means, including signing and ratifying or otherwise giving effect to key conventions such as the European Convention on Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights . The existence of some claimed civil liberties is a matter of dispute, as are the extent of most civil rights . Controversial examples include property rights , reproductive rights , and civil marriage . In authoritarian regimes in which government censorship impedes on perceived civil liberties, some civil liberty advocates argue for the use of anonymity tools to allow for free speech, privacy, and anonymity.

[ 5 ] The degree to which societies acknowledge civil liberties is affected by the influence of terrorism and war.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Whether the existence of victimless crimes infringes upon civil liberties is also a matter of dispute. Another matter of debate is the suspension or alteration of certain civil liberties in times of war or state of emergency , including whether and to what extent this should occur.

The formal concept of civil liberties is often dated back to Magna Carta , an English legal charter agreed in 1215 which in turn was based on pre-existing documents, namely the Charter of Liberties .

[ 8 ] Asia [ edit ] China [ edit ] Main article: Civil liberties in the People's Republic of China The Constitution of the People's Republic of China (which applies only to mainland China , not to Hong Kong , Macau , and Taiwan ) especially its Fundamental Rights and Duties of Citizens, claims to protect many civil liberties. Taiwan, which is separated from mainland China, has its own Constitution.

Although the 1982 constitution guarantees civil liberties, [ 9 ] the Chinese government usually uses the " subversion of state power " and "protection of state secrets " clauses in their law system to imprison those who criticize the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and the state leaders .

[ 10 ] India [ edit ] Main article: Fundamental rights in India The Fundamental Rights – embodied in Part III of the constitution – guarantee liberties such that all Indians can lead their lives in peace as citizens of India. The six fundamental rights are right to equality, right to freedom, right against exploitation, right to freedom of religion, cultural and educational rights and the right to constitutional remedies.

[ 11 ] Huge rallies like this one in Kolkata are commonplace in India .

These include individual rights common to most liberal democracies , incorporated in the fundamental law of the land and are enforceable in a court of law. Violations of these rights result in punishments as prescribed in the Indian Penal Code , subject to the discretion of the judiciary . These rights are neither absolute nor immune from constitutional amendments. They have been aimed at overturning the inequalities of pre-independence social practices. Specifically, they resulted in the abolishment of untouchability and prohibited discrimination on the grounds of religion, race, caste, sex, or place of birth. They forbid human trafficking and unfree labour . They protect the cultural and educational rights of ethnic and religious minorities by allowing them to preserve their languages and administer their own educational institutions.

All people, irrespective of race, religion, caste or sex, have the right to approach the High Courts or the Supreme Court for the enforcement of their fundamental rights. It is not necessary that the aggrieved party has to be the one to do so. In the public interest, anyone can initiate litigation in the court on their behalf. This is known as " public interest litigation ".

[ 12 ] High Court and Supreme Court judges can also act on their own on the basis of media reports.

The Fundamental Rights emphasize equality by guaranteeing all citizens access to and use of public institutions and protections, irrespective of their background. The rights to life and personal liberty apply to persons of any nationality, while others, such as the freedom of speech and expression apply only to the citizens of India (including non-resident Indian citizens).

[ 13 ] The right to equality in matters of public employment cannot be conferred to overseas citizens of India .

[ 14 ] Fundamental Rights primarily protect individuals from any arbitrary State actions, but some rights are enforceable against private individuals too.

[ 15 ] For instance, the constitution abolishes untouchability and prohibits begar . These provisions act as a check both on State actions and the actions of private individuals. Fundamental Rights are not absolute and are subject to reasonable restrictions as necessary for the protection of national interest. In the Kesavananda Bharati vs. State of Kerala case , the Supreme Court ruled that all provisions of the constitution, including Fundamental Rights can be amended.

[ 16 ] However, the Parliament cannot alter the basic structure of the constitution like secularism, democracy, federalism, and separation of powers. Often called the "Basic structure doctrine", this decision is widely regarded as an important part of Indian history. In the 1978 Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India case, the Supreme Court extended the doctrine's importance as superior to any parliamentary legislation. According to the verdict, no act of parliament can be considered a law if it violates the basic structure of the constitution. This landmark guarantee of Fundamental Rights was regarded as a unique example of judicial independence in preserving the sanctity of Fundamental Rights.
The Fundamental Rights can only be altered by a constitutional amendment, hence their inclusion is a check not only on the executive branch but also on the Parliament and state legislatures.

[ 17 ] The imposition of a state of emergency may lead to a temporary suspension of the rights conferred by Article 19 (including freedoms of speech, assembly and movement, etc.) to preserve national security and public order. The President can, by order, suspend the constitutional written remedies as well.

Japan [ edit ] Main article: Human rights in Japan Since 1947, Japan , a country with a constitutional monarchy and known for its socially "conservative society where change is gradual," has a constitution with a seemingly strong bill of rights at its core ( Chapter III. Rights and Duties of the People ).

[ 18 ] In many ways, it resembles the U.S. Constitution prior to the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , and that is because it came into life during the Allied occupation of Japan .  This constitution may have felt like a foreign imposition to the governing elites, but not to the ordinary people "who lacked faith in their discredited leaders and supported meaningful change." [ 19 ] In the abstract, the constitution strives to secure fundamental individual liberties and rights, which are covered pointedly in articles 10 to 40.  Most salient of the human dignity articles is article 25, section 1, which guarantees that all "People shall have the right to maintain the minimum standards of wholesome and cultured living." [ 20 ] Despite the adoption of this liberal constitution, often referred as the "Postwar Constitution" (戦後憲法, Sengo-Kenpō) or the "Peace Constitution" (平和憲法, Heiwa-Kenpō), the Japanese governing elites have struggled to usher in an inclusive, open and Pluralist society .

[ 21 ] Even after the end of World War II and the departure of the Allied government of occupation in 1952, Japan has been the target of international criticism for failing to admit to war crimes , institutional religious discrimination and maintaining a weak freedom of the press , the treatment of children, minorities, foreigners, and women, its punitive criminal justice system, and more recently, the systematic bias against LGBT people.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] The first Japanese attempt to a bill of rights was in the 19th century Meiji constitution (1890), which took both the Prussian (1850) and British constitutions as basic models.

[ 25 ] However, it had but a meagre influence in the practice of the rule of law as well as in people's daily lives.  So, the short and deliberately gradual history of struggles for personal rights and protection against government/society's impositions has yet to transform Japan into a champion of universal and individual freedom.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] According to constitutional scholar, Shigenori Matsui , People tend to view the Bill of Rights as a moral imperative and not as a judicial norm. The people also tend to rely upon bureaucrats to remedy social problems, including even human rights violations, rather than the court.

— Shigenori Matsui, "The protection of 'Fundamental human rights' in Japan." [ 29 ] Despite the divergences between Japan's social culture and the Liberal Constitutionalism that it purports to have adopted, the country has moved toward closing the gap between the notion and the practice of the law. The trend is more evident in the long term. Among several examples, the Diet (bicameral legislature) ratified the International Bill of Human Rights in 1979 and then it passed the Law for Equal Opportunity in Employment for Men and Women in 1985, measures that were heralded as major steps toward a democratic and participatory society.  In 2015, moreover, it reached an agreement with Korea to compensate for abuses related to the so-called " women of comfort " that took place during the Japanese occupation of the peninsula .

[ 30 ] However, human rights group, and families of the survivors condemned the agreement as patronizing and insulting.

[ 31 ] On its official site , the Japanese government has identified various human rights problems. Among these are child abuses (e.g., bullying , corporal punishment , child sexual abuse , child prostitution , and child pornography ), frequent neglect and ill-treatment of elderly persons and individuals with disabilities , Dowa claims (discrimination against the Burakumin ), Ainu people (indigenous people in Japan), foreign nationals, HIV/AIDS carriers , Hansen's disease patients, persons released from prison after serving their sentence, crime victims , people whose human rights are violated using the Internet , the homeless, individuals with gender identity disorders , and women . Also, the government lists systematic problems with gender biases and the standard reference to sexual preferences for jobs and other functions in society.

[ 32 ] Human rights organizations, national and foreign, expand the list to include human rights violations that relate to government policies, as in the case of daiyo kangoku system (substitute prison) and the methods of interrogating crime suspects.

[ 33 ] The effort of these agencies and ordinary people seem to pay off. In 2016, the U.S. Department of State released a report stating that Japan's human right record is showing signs of improvement.

[ 34 ] Australia [ edit ] Whilst Australia does not have an enshrined Bill of Rights or similar binding legal document, civil liberties are assumed as protected through a series of rules and conventions. Australia had primary involvement in and was a key signatory to the UN Universal Declaration on Human Rights (1948) The Constitution of Australia (1900) does offer very limited protection of rights: the right to freedom of religion and; the right to freedom from discrimination based on out-of-state residence (historical prejudice based upon residence within one state affecting treatment within another) Certain High Court interpretations of the Constitution have allowed for implied rights such as freedom of political communication (which is construed broadly) and the right to vote to be established, however, others such as freedom of assembly and freedom of association are yet to be identified.

Refugee issues Within the past decade, Australia has experienced increasing contention regarding its treatment of those seeking asylum. Although Australia is a signatory to the UN Refugee Convention (1951), successive governments have demonstrated an increasing tightening of borders; particularly against those who seek passage via small water vessels.

The Abbott Government (2013) like its predecessors (the Gillard and Howard Governments) has encountered particular difficulty curbing asylum seekers via sea, increasingly identified as "illegal immigration". The recent involvement of the Australian Navy in refugee rescue operations has many human rights groups such as Amnesty International concerned over the "militarisation" of the treatment of refugees and the issue of their human rights in Australia . The current "turn-back" policy is particularly divisive, as it involves placing refugees in government lifeboats and turning them towards Indonesia. Despite opposition however, the Abbott government's response has so far seen a reduction in the number of potential refugees undertaking the hazardous cross to Australia, which is argued by the government as an indicator of its policy success.

Europe [ edit ] European Convention on Human Rights [ edit ] The European Convention on Human Rights , to which almost all European countries belong (apart from Belarus ), enumerates a number of civil liberties and is of varying constitutional force in different European states.

Czech Republic [ edit ] Following the Velvet Revolution , a constitutional overhaul took place in Czechoslovakia . In 1991, the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Basic Freedoms was adopted, having the same legal standing as the Constitution . The Czech Republic has kept the Charter in its entirety following the dissolution of Czechoslovakia as Act No. 2/1993 Coll. (Constitution being No. 1).

France [ edit ] France's 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen listed many civil liberties and is of constitutional force.

Germany [ edit ] The German constitution , the "Grundgesetz" (lit. "Base Law"), starts with an elaborate listing of civil liberties and states in sec. 1 "The dignity of man is inviolable. To respect and protect it shall be the duty of all public authority." Following the " Austrian System ", the people have the right to appeal to the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany ("Bundesverfassungsgericht") if they feel their civil rights are being violated. This procedure has shaped German law considerably over the years.

United Kingdom [ edit ] Main article: Civil liberties in the United Kingdom Civil liberties in the United Kingdom date back to Magna Carta in 1215 and 17th century common law and statute law , such as the 1628 Petition of Right , the Habeas Corpus Act 1679 and the Bill of Rights 1689 . Parts of these laws remain in statute today and are supplemented by other legislation and conventions that collectively form the uncodified Constitution of the United Kingdom . In addition, the United Kingdom is a signatory to the European Convention on Human Rights which covers both human rights and civil liberties. The Human Rights Act 1998 incorporates the great majority of Convention rights directly into UK law.

In June 2008 the then Shadow Home Secretary David Davis resigned his parliamentary seat over what he described as the "erosion of civil liberties" by the then Labour government, and was re-elected on a civil liberties platform (although he was not opposed by candidates of other major parties). This was in reference to anti-terrorism laws and in particular the extension to pre-trial detention, that is perceived by many to be an infringement of habeas corpus established in Magna Carta.

Russia [ edit ] The Constitution of the Russian Federation guarantees in theory many of the same rights and civil liberties as the U.S. except to bear arms , i.e.: freedom of speech, freedom of religion, freedom of association and assembly, freedom to choose language, to due process, to a fair trial, privacy, freedom to vote, right for education, etc. However, human rights groups like Amnesty International have warned that Vladimir Putin has seriously curtailed freedom of expression , freedom of assembly and freedom of association amidst growing authoritarianism .

[ 35 ] North America [ edit ] Canada [ edit ] The Constitution of Canada includes the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms which guarantees many of the same rights as the U.S. Constitution. The Charter omits any mention of, or protection for, property.

Mexico [ edit ] The Constitution of Mexico was ratified on February 5, 1917. Similar to the U.S. Constitution, the United Mexican States provides all citizens the right to freedom of expression, but this right is not absolute (for example, child pornography , death threats , and defamation are exceptions to freedom of speech, and offenders can be subject to penalties). However, unlike the United States and Canada, Mexico has stricter limits on citizenship. For example, only people born in Mexico may take roles in law enforcement, legislating, or enlist in the armed forces. It also states each person born in Mexico cannot be deprived of their citizenship status.

[ 36 ] United States [ edit ] Main article: Civil liberties in the United States The United States Constitution , especially its Bill of Rights , protects civil liberties. The passage of the Fourteenth Amendment further protected civil liberties by introducing the Privileges or Immunities Clause , Due Process Clause , and Equal Protection Clause . Human rights within the United States are often called civil rights , which are those rights, privileges, and immunities held by all people, in distinction to political rights, which are the rights that inhere to those who are entitled to participate in elections, as candidates or voters.

[ 37 ] Before universal suffrage, this distinction was important, since many people were ineligible to vote but still were considered to have the fundamental freedoms derived from the rights to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. This distinction is less important now that Americans enjoy near universal suffrage , and civil rights are now taken to include the political rights to vote and participate in elections, being furthermore classified with civil liberties in general as either positive rights or negative rights . Because Native American tribal governments retain sovereignty over tribal members, the U.S. Congress in 1968 enacted a law that essentially applies most of the protections of the Bill of Rights to tribal members, to be enforced mainly by tribal courts .

[ 38 ] The Civil Liberties Act of 1988 was signed into effect by President Ronald Reagan on August 10, 1988. The act was passed by Congress to issue a public apology for those of Japanese ancestry who lost their property and liberty due to discriminatory actions by the United States Government during the internment period . This act also provided many other benefits within various sectors of the government. Within the treasury, it established a civil liberties public education fund. It directed the Attorney General to identify and locate each individual affected by this act and to pay them $20,000 from the Civil Liberties public education fund. It also established a board of directors who is responsible for making disbursements from this fund. Finally, it required that all documents and records that are created or received by the commission be kept by the Archivist of the United States .

[ 39 ] See also [ edit ] Political science portal politics portal American Civil Liberties Union Canadian Civil Liberties Association Civil and political rights Civil libertarianism Drug liberalization Equality and Human Rights Commission Fundamental freedoms Human rights Libertarianism Liberalism Liberty (pressure group) List of civil rights leaders Privacy Proactive policing Rule according to higher law Rutherford Institute State of World Liberty Index Statewatch Teaching for social justice Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Mill, John Stuart (1978-04-01).

On Liberty . Hackett Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-60384-617-2 .

^ Hayek, Friedrich (1944).

The Road to Serfdom (PDF) . George Routledge & Sons. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 10, 2024.

^ "The great stagnation" .

The Economist .

ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 2024-09-12 .

^ "Ron Paul's 'Revolution' : NPR" .

NPR . 2024-09-12. Archived from the original on 2024-09-12 . Retrieved 2024-09-12 .

^ Ghappour, Ahmed (2017-09-01).

"Data Collection and the Regulatory State" .

Connecticut Law Review .

49 (5): 1733.

^ Hunter, Lance Y. (2015-09-18). "Terrorism, Civil Liberties, and Political Rights: A Cross-National Analysis".

Studies in Conflict & Terrorism .

39 (2): 165– 193.

doi : 10.1080/1057610x.2015.1084165 .

ISSN 1057-610X .

S2CID 110482777 .

^ Fog, Agner (2017).

Warlike and Peaceful Societies: The Interaction of Genes and Culture . Open Book Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-78374-406-0 .

^ Hugh Starkey.

"Magna Carta - Human rights legislation" . British Library. Archived from the original on 22 November 2016 . Retrieved 22 November 2016 .

^ "Constitution of the People's Republic of China" .

People's Daily Online . Archived from the original on Oct 6, 2014 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ Buckley, Chris (3 April 2008).

"China jails rights activist outspoken on Tibet" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on Apr 11, 2023.

^ Constitution of India-Part III Fundamental Rights .

^ " Bodhisattwa Gautam vs. Subhra Chakraborty ; 1995 ICHRL 69" . [World Legal Information Institute] . Retrieved 2006-05-25 .

This was the case where public interest litigation was introduced (date of ruling 15 December 1995).

^ Tayal, B.B. & Jacob, A. (2005), Indian History, World Developments and Civics , p. A-25 ^ " Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2003 " (PDF) .

Rajya Sabha . p. 5. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-04-25 . Retrieved 2006-05-25 .

^ " Bodhisattwa Gautam vs. Subhra Chakraborty ; 1995 ICHRL 69" . [World Legal Information Institute] . Retrieved 2006-05-25 .

This was the case where Fundamental Rights were enforced against private individuals (date of ruling 15 December 1995).

^ Kesavananda Bharati vs. the State of Kerala ; AIR 1973 S.C. 1461, (1973) 4 SCC 225 – In what became famously known as the "Fundamental Rights case", the Supreme Court decided that the basic structure of the constitution was unamendable.

^ Tayal, B.B. & Jacob, A. (2005), Indian History, World Developments and Civics , p. A-24 ^ Ellington, Lucien (2002).

Japan: A Global Studies Handbook . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. p. 209.

ISBN 978-1576072714 .

^ Law, David S. (2013-05-26).

"The Myth of the Imposed Constitution" . Rochester, NY.

SSRN 2270399 .

^ Yokota, Yozo, & Chiyuki Aoi (2000).

"Japan's foreign policy towards human rights: uncertain changes" (PDF) .

Human Rights and Comparative Foreign Policy: Foundations of Peace, Edited by David Forsythe . United Nations University Press: Chapter 5.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-10-09.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Haddad, Mary Alice (2012).

Building Democracy in Japan . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 59.

ISBN 978-1107014077 .

^ "Japan veering away from global human rights standards, says Amnesty International" .

The Japan Times .

Kyodo News . February 25, 2015 . Retrieved July 5, 2016 .

^ Suzanne Trimel (July 25, 2014).

"UN Urges End to Discrimination Against LGBT Individuals in Japan" .

Analysis . Outright International . Retrieved July 5, 2016 .

^ Osumi, Magdalena (June 26, 2015).

"U.S. rights report slams Japan on child abuse, prison conditions, asylum system" .

News report . Japan Times . Retrieved July 5, 2016 .

^ Kazuhiro Takii and David Noble, The Meiji Constitution: The Japanese Experience of the West and the Shaping of the Modern State (Tokyo, Japan: International House of Japan, 2007), 181.

^ Andrew Gordon, Postwar Japan As History . Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993, p. 91.

^ Henderson, Dan Fenno (2015).

"Chapter 11: Law and Political Modernization in Japan" . In Ward, Robert E. (ed.).

Political Development in Modern Japan: Studies in the Modernization of Japan . Princeton University Press. pp.

441– 445.

ISBN 978-1400871667 . Retrieved July 5, 2016 .

^ Ugo Dessì, Japanese Religions and Globalization . London: Routledge, 2013, p. 64.

^ "The protection of ‘Fundamental human rights’ in Japan," a chapter in Human Rights in Asia: A Comparative Legal Study of Twelve Asian Jurisdictions, France and the USA, edited by Peerenboom, R. P., Carole Petersen, and Hongyi Chen (London: Routledge, 2006), 149 ^ "Japan and South Korea agree WW2 'comfort women' deal" . BBC. December 28, 2015 . Retrieved July 5, 2016 .

^ Sanghani, Radhika (December 29, 2015).

"The horrific story of Korea's 'comfort women' – forced to be sex slaves during World War Two" .

Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on 2022-01-12 . Retrieved July 5, 2016 .

^ Government of Japan (March 6, 2009).

"Major Human Rights Problems" .

Human Rights Bureau . Ministry of Justice, Japan. Archived from the original on April 23, 2018 . Retrieved July 5, 2016 .

^ Jeffrey Flynn,  Reframing the Intercultural Dialogue on Human Rights: A Philosophical Approach (London: Routledge, 2014), 114.

^ Wanklyn, Alastair (April 14, 2016).

"Japan human rights improve but problems persist: U.S. State Department" .

Japan Times . Retrieved July 5, 2016 .

^ "Putin rolling back civil rights, warns Amnesty" .

The Guardian . February 27, 2008.

^ "Constitución reordenada y consolidada" . Archived from the original on 2017-11-06 . Retrieved 2023-06-27 .

^ America's Constitution: A Biography by Akhil Reed Amar ^ Robert J. McCarthy, "Civil Rights in Tribal Courts; The Indian Bill of Rights at 30 Years", 34 Idaho Law Review 465 (1998).

^ Foley, Thomas (1988).

"Civil Liberties Act of 1987 – Conference Report" .

Congress.gov . Retrieved 2015-06-18 .

Further reading [ edit ] Dershowitz, Alan .

"Preserving Civil Liberties." Reflections on the Fractured Landscape , spec. sec. of Chronicle of Higher Education , Chronicle Review , September 28, 2001. Accessed August 11, 2006.

Smith, Jean Edward , and Herbert M. Levine.

Civil Liberties and Civil Rights Debated . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1988.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Civil Liberties .

Library resources about Civil liberties Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Court cases involving Civil Liberties held at the National Archives at Atlanta Leading Civil Liberties Organizations in the United States Rights, Civil Liberties and Freedoms in Russia The Cato Institute: Civil Liberties (archived 29 December 2006) USDOJ: Privacy and Civil Liberties Office v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons v t e Liberty Concepts Artistic freedom Cognitive liberty Free will Freedom of conscience Freedom of expression Freedom of Expression (book) Algeria Canada India South Africa Freethought Moral responsibility Personification of Liberty Libertas Negative liberty Positive liberty Rights Self-ownership Topfreedom By type Academic Civil Economic Financial Intellectual Internet Morphological Political By right Abortion Assembly Association Asylum Cannabis Choice Civil and political Clothing Death Digital Education Fair trial Family Freedom from discrimination Food Gun Health Housing Internet access Information Life Morphological Movement Personality Press Privacy Property Protest Religion Repair Resist Self-defense Sexual and reproductive health Sexuality Silence Speech Thought To be forgotten Truth Water and sanitation Workers' right to access the toilet See also All men are created equal Anarchism Autonomy Beard and haircut laws by country Civil libertarianism Clothing laws by country Dancing ban Decriminalization of sex work Drug liberalization Human rights Left-libertarianism Legality of recording by civilians LGBTQ rights Libertarianism Liberty, equality, brotherhood Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness Photography and the law Photography Is Not a Crime Pornography laws by region Prostitution law Psilocybin decriminalization in the United States Right-libertarianism Self-determination Stanley v. Georgia Universal Declaration of Human Rights v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category Authority control databases : National Germany Japan Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Civil_liberties&oldid=1297240748 " Categories : Civil rights and liberties Individualism Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 25 June 2025, at 00:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Civil liberties 48 languages Add topic

