Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Ownership and control 3 Political consequences and unexpected consequences 4 Quotations 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ownership society Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Slogan This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( January 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( January 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ownership society is a slogan for a model of society promoted by former United States president George W. Bush . It takes as lead values personal responsibility , economic liberty , and the owning of property .  The ownership society discussed by Bush also extends to certain proposals of specific models of health care and social security .

History [ edit ] The term appears to have been used originally by President Bush (for example in a speech February 20, 2003 in Kennesaw , Georgia ) as a phrase to rally support for his tax-cut proposals.

[ 1 ] From 2004 Bush supporters described the ownership society in much broader and more ambitious terms, including specific policy proposals concerning home ownership , medicine , education and savings .

The idea that the welfare of individuals is directly related to their ability to control their own lives and wealth, rather than relying on government transfer payments, is a longstanding one, particularly in British conservatism .

[ citation needed ] In a modern form its implementation was developed as a main plank of Thatcherism , and is traced back to David Howell , before 1970, with help from the phrase-maker Peter Drucker .

In political practice under Margaret Thatcher 's administration, it was implemented by measures such as the sale at affordable prices of public housing to tenants ( right to buy program), and privatization .

Ownership and control [ edit ] As formulated by the Cato Institute (see original quote and external link below), the goals are that patients have control of [decisions on] their personal health care, parents control [i.e. have power over] their children's education , and workers control [i.e. have some responsibility for the investment of, or explicit property rights in] their retirement savings .

Here the comments in brackets are an interpretation or paraphrase, consistent with a generalised idea of ownership . The conceptual link here is by means of the idea that private property , the most familiar and everyday form of ownership, is being extended.

Control is closely associated with ownership in that sense.

This Cato Institute formulation is not, however, in terms of positive policies.  It is more accurately a definition of ownership by taking the state out of the loop. So, for example, in health care ownership is not being defined just on the basis of informed consent .

There is no real originality, politically speaking, in the connection made between individual ownership of property and political stake-holding . This was an idea discussed in Europe and America in the eighteenth century. (For example, that the franchise should only be for property holders.) The novelty of the Cato Institute formulation would lie in the extrapolation. In the case of savings, for example, the extension would be an assertion of property rights in money held in savings or collected tax revenues.

The first desiderata was part of John McCain 's campaign platform as the 2008 Republican presidential nominee.  McCain's website says, 
"John McCain believes [that] the key to health care reform is to restore control to the patients themselves." [1] Political consequences and unexpected consequences [ edit ] Consistently with the basic tenet, proponents of an ownership society usually support inherited wealth , and oppose inheritance taxes and wealth taxes . They are also likely to favour a pattern of property ownership based on the purchase, rather than rental, of accommodation.

The consequences for health and education are heavily dependent on details of implementation. For example, ownership in one's child's education, for a parent, might be in the form of an education voucher , a vote in the running of a school, influence on the school curriculum, or a generalised 'right' to have a child educated in line with one's own values.

One example from the UK of an unexpected or unintended consequence of government policy favouring direct share ownership, through some oversubscribed privatisation issues, was the holding of small parcels of shares by individuals numbered in millions. This broad-based ownership created an administrative overhead, for example in relation to every shareholder vote.

Quotations [ edit ] The really big money in America comes not from working at all but from owning, which requires no expenditure of effort, either physical or mental. In short, working hard is not in and of itself directly related to the amount of income and wealth that individuals have.

– The Meritocracy Myth by Stephen J. McNamee and Robert K. Miller, Jr. University of North Carolina at Wilmington.

[ 2 ] We Conservatives have always passed our values from generation to generation. I believe that personal prosperity should follow the same course. I want to see wealth cascading down the generations. We do not see each generation starting out anew, with the past cut off and the future ignored.

– John Major conference speech, 1991.

...if you own something, you have a vital stake in the future of our country. The more ownership there is in America, the more vitality there is in America, and the more people have a vital stake in the future of this country.

– President George W. Bush, June 17, 2004.

We're creating... an ownership society in this country, where more Americans than ever will be able to open up their door where they live and say, welcome to my house, welcome to my piece of property.

– President George W. Bush, October 2004.

[2] Individuals are empowered by freeing them from dependence on government handouts and making them owners instead, in control of their own lives and destinies. In the ownership society, patients control their own health care, parents control their own children's education, and workers control their retirement savings.

– Cato Institute.

Many people don't have the time, inclination, or expertise necessary to take full responsibility for their own well-being in areas that are so complex as assuring they have sufficient income for retirement or choosing a health plan appropriate for their circumstances.

– Robert Reischauer, president of the Urban Institute , a Washington think tank .

...the key to health care reform is to restore control to the patients themselves.

– John McCain 's campaign website, 2008.

George Bush called this the ownership society, but what he really meant was 'you're-on-your-own' society.

– Barack Obama , 2008.

References [ edit ] ^ Pittsburgh Post - Gazette , Bush OKs Funding Bill for Fiscal '03 , Feb 21, 2003 Scott Lindlaw ^ "The Meritocracy Myth" .

www.ncsociology.org .

External links [ edit ] Fact Sheet: America's Ownership Society: Expanding Opportunities - White House press release 9 August 2004 Cato Institute page Ownership Society Institute Naomi Klein. 2008. Disowning the ownership society.

The Nation , Feb. 18. Online at Disowned by the Ownership Society Frank Luntz. 2006. The New American Lexicon. (produced for republican Congressional candidates for the 2006 elections). Accessible online at [3] .

Paul Glastris. 2005. Bush's ownership society: Why no one's buying.

Washington Monthly , December. Online at [4] Mark Weisbrot. 2005. Owning up to the ownership society.

Miami Herald , Mar 26. Online at [5] .

Bill Grigsby. 2005. Who owns the ownership society?

Scoop , March 10. Online at Bill Grigsby: Who Owns The Ownership Society? | Scoop News Joy-Ann Reid. 2005. The 'you're on your ownership society.' CommonDreams.org, Feb 9. Online at [6] Robert Reich. 2004. What ownership society?

TomPaine.com , Sept. 2. Online at [7] Zachary Karabell, Oct 11, 2008. "End of the ‘Ownership Society’", NEWSWEEK, online at [8] Michael & Susan Klonsky, 2008. Small Schools: Public School Reform Meets the Ownership Society.(Routledge) Small Schools: Public School Reform Meets the Ownership Society, 1st Edition (Paperback) - Routledge Schooling in the Ownership Society blog.

Schooling in the Ownership Society Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ownership_society&oldid=1305931113 " Categories : American political catchphrases American political neologisms Ownership Property Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2012 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles that may contain original research from January 2012 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2009 This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 23:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ownership society Add languages Add topic

