Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical context 2 Development of Quattrocento styles 3 List of Italian Quattrocento artists 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Quattrocento 43 languages Afrikaans Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian art and culture of 1400–1499 Art of Italy Periods Nuragic Etruscan Ancient Roman Italo-Byzantine Gothic architecture Renaissance painting and sculpture Mannerism Baroque and Rococo Neoclassical and 19th century Modern and contemporary Centennial divisions Duecento Trecento Quattrocento Cinquecento Seicento Settecento Important art museums Uffizi Pinacoteca di Brera Vatican Museums Villa Borghese Sabauda Gallery Gallerie dell'Accademia Pitti Palace Accademia di Belle Arti Firenze Bargello Important art festivals Venice Biennale Rome Quadriennale Major works The Tribute Money (Masaccio) The Birth of Venus Primavera Mona Lisa The Last Supper Annunciation (Leonardo) Sistine Chapel ceiling Sistine Madonna Pietà The Last Judgment The Creation of Adam David (Michelangelo) The School of Athens The Battle of San Romano Venus of Urbino David (Donatello) The Calling of St. Matthew Unique Forms of Continuity in Space Italian artists Painters Sculptors Architects Photographers Illustrators Italian art schools Bolognese school Ferrarese school Forlivese school Florentine school Lucchese and Pisan School Sienese school Venetian school Art movements Italo-Byzantine Renaissance Pittura infamante Mannerism Baroque Macchiaioli Futurism Novecento Italiano Metaphysical art Scuola Romana Aeropittura Arte Povera Transavantgarde Other topics Italian architecture Sculpture of Italy Timeline of Italian artists to 1800 Raphael Rooms v t e The cultural and artistic events of Italy during the period 1400 to 1499 are collectively referred to as the Quattrocento ( UK : / ˌ k w æ t r oʊ ˈ tʃ ɛ n t oʊ , - t r ə ˈ -/ , US : / ˌ k w ɒ t r oʊ ˈ -/ , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Italian: [ˌkwattroˈtʃɛnto] ) from the Italian word for the number 400, in turn from millequattrocento , which is Italian for the year 1400. The Quattrocento encompasses the artistic styles of the late Middle Ages (most notably International Gothic ), the early Renaissance (beginning around 1425), and the start of the High Renaissance , generally asserted to begin between 1495 and 1500.

Historical context [ edit ] After the decline of the Western Roman Empire in 476, economic disorder and disruption of trade spread across Europe.  This was the beginning of the Early Middle Ages , which lasted roughly until the 14th century, when trade increased, population began to expand and the people regained their authority.

In the late Middle Ages, the political structure of the European continent slowly coalesced from small, turbulent fiefdoms into larger, more stable nation states ruled by monarchies . In Italy, urban centers arose, populated by merchant and trade classes able to defend themselves.

Money replaced land as the primary measure of wealth, and increasing numbers of serfs became freedmen. The changes in Medieval Italy and the decline of feudalism paved the way for social, cultural, and economic changes.

[ 5 ] The Quattrocento is viewed as the transition from the Medieval period to the age of the Italian Renaissance , principally in the cities of Rome , Florence , Milan , Venice , Naples . The period saw the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Empire , and it has been compared with the Timurid Renaissance which unfolded at the same time in Central Asia.

[ 6 ] Development of Quattrocento styles [ edit ] Quattrocento art shed the decorative mosaics typically associated with Byzantine art along with Christian and Gothic media, as well as styles in stained glass , frescoes , illuminated manuscripts and sculpture . Instead, Quattrocento artists incorporated the more classic forms developed by classical Roman and Greek art .

List of Italian Quattrocento artists [ edit ] Since the Quattrocento overlaps with part of the Renaissance, it would be inaccurate to say that a particular artist was Quattrocento or Renaissance.  Artists of the time probably would not have identified themselves as members of a school or period.

Andrea del Castagno Andrea del Verrocchio Andrea della Robbia Andrea Mantegna Antonello da Messina Antoniazzo Romano Antonio del Pollaiuolo Antonio Rossellino Benozzo Gozzoli Bertoldo di Giovanni Carlo Crivelli Cosimo Tura Desiderio da Settignano Domenico di Bartolo Domenico Ghirlandaio Domenico Veneziano Donatello Ercole de' Roberti Filippo Brunelleschi Filippo Lippi Fra Angelico Francesco del Cossa Francesco di Giorgio Francesco Squarcione Gentile Bellini Gentile da Fabriano Giovanni Bellini Giovanni di Paolo Jacopo de' Barbari Jacopo Bellini Justus of Ghent Leonardo da Vinci Lorenzo Ghiberti Luca della Robbia Luca Signorelli Luciano Laurana [ 7 ] Masaccio Masolino Melozzo da Forlì Michelangelo Nanni di Banco Paolo Uccello Pedro Berruguete Piero della Francesca Pietro Perugino Sandro Botticelli Il Sassetta Troso da Monza Vecchietta Vittore Carpaccio Vittore Crivelli Also see the list of 27 prominent 15th century painters made contemporaneously by Giovanni Santi , Raphael Sanzio 's father as part of a poem for the Duke of Urbino .

See also [ edit ] Duecento – the 13th century in Italian culture Trecento – the 14th century in Italian culture Cinquecento – the 16th century in Italian culture Seicento – the 17th century in Italian culture Settecento – the 18th century in Italian culture Ottocento – the 19th century in Italian culture Novecento – the 20th century in Italian culture References [ edit ] ^ "Quattrocento" .

Collins English Dictionary .

HarperCollins . Retrieved 1 June 2019 .

^ "quattrocento" (US) and "quattrocento" .

Lexico UK English Dictionary .

Oxford University Press . Archived from the original on 2020-03-22.

^ "quattrocento" .

The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (5th ed.). HarperCollins . Retrieved 1 June 2019 .

^ "quattrocento" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 1 June 2019 .

^ "VASSALLI, FAMIGLIE E POTERI A PARMA E NEL TERRITORIO (SECOLI X-XII)" (in Italian). p. 5. Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ Ruggiero, Guido (15 April 2008).

A Companion to the Worlds of the Renaissance, Guido Ruggiero . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 9780470751619 . Archived from the original on 8 November 2016 . Retrieved 7 November 2016 .

^ Stokes, Adrian D. (2002) Quattro cento; and, Stones of Rimini Adrian Durham Stokes, https://books.google.com/books?id=TsIL1ziKIQEC Penn State Press. Original: 1932; footnote on p. 23 Further reading [ edit ] Pope-Hennessy, John & Kanter, Laurence B. (1987).

The Robert Lehman Collection I, Italian Paintings . New York, Princeton: The Metropolitan Museum of Art in association with Princeton University Press .

ISBN 0870994794 .

(see table of contents) External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of quattrocento at Wiktionary v t e Italy articles History Overview Timeline of Italian history By topic Citizenship Currency and coinage Economy Fashion Flags Genetic Historic states Judaism LGBT Military Music Name Postage Railways Prehistory Prehistory Neolithic Villanovan Terramare Rinaldone Apennine Nuragic Golasecca Canegrate Latial Ancient Ancient peoples Italic peoples Latins Osci Picentes Samnites Umbri Veneti Etruscans Celts Magna Graecia Ligures Messapians Ancient Rome Kingdom Republic Roman conquest Roman Italy Empire Western Empire Middle Ages Middle Ages Italy under Odoacer Ostrogoths Byzantium Lombards Papal States the Holy Roman Empire the Sardinian Judicates Arabs Normans Guelphs and Ghibellines Lombard League Kingdom of Sicily War of the Sicilian Vespers Kingdom of Naples Early modern Italian city-states Florence Siena Milan Maritime republics Venice Genoa Pisa Amalfi Kingdom of Sardinia Grand Duchy of Tuscany Duchy of Savoy Renaissance Italian Wars Early Modern period Napoleonic Italy Austrian occupation and Kingdom of Lombardy-Venetia Kingdom of the Two Sicilies Late modern Unification First War of Independence Second War of Independence Niçard exodus Expedition of the Thousand Proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy Third War of Independence Capture of Rome Monarchy and the World Wars Kingdom of Italy Colonial Empire World War I Fourth War of Independence Fascist Italy World War II Fall of the Fascist regime Resistance and Social Republic Civil War Contemporary Republic Institutional referendum Istrian–Dalmatian exodus Economic Boom Years of Lead Maxi Trial Mani pulite Coronavirus pandemic Geography Italian geographical region Peninsula Climate Climate change Geology Fauna Flora Mountains Prealps Alps Apennines Volcanism Volcanoes Beaches Canals Caves Earthquakes Islands Lakes Marine protected areas National parks Regional parks Rivers Valleys Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT rights Judiciary Law Law enforcement Military Nationality Parliament Political parties President ( List ) Prime Minister ( List ) Council of Ministers Regions Provinces Metropolitan cities Cities Comune Municipalities Security and intelligence Economy Economy Italian regions by GDP Agriculture Automotive industry Banking Banks Central Bank Brands Companies Energy Exports Science and technology Southern question Stock exchange Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport air rail road Welfare Wine Society Aristocracy Censorship Corruption Crime Demographics Education Emigration and diaspora Gambling Health Healthcare Immigration Inventions and discoveries Italians People Languages Italian Regional Life expectancy Orders, decorations, and medals Poverty Prostitution Public administration Racism Religion Social class Terrorism Water supply and sanitation Women Culture Duecento Trecento Quattrocento Cinquecento Seicento Settecento Ottocento Anthem Architecture Art Castles Cathedrals Cinema Coat of arm Cuisine Design Fashion Flag Folklore Gardens Internet Italophilia Libraries Literature Media Museums Music Mythology National symbols Palaces Philosophy Public holidays Sport Television Theatre Traditions World Heritage Sites Italy portal Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Quattrocento&oldid=1302823876 " Categories : Italian Renaissance 15th century in Italy Quattrocento painters 15th-century Italian composers Cultural history of Italy Renaissance art Italian Renaissance painters Italian Renaissance sculptors 15th-century Italian architects Italian literature 15th-century Italian painters 15th-century Italian sculptors Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with Italian IPA Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 16:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Quattrocento 43 languages Add topic

