Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contents 2 Authorship 3 Publication 4 Evaluation 5 See also 6 Notes Toggle Notes subsection 6.1 Citations 6.2 Bibliography 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Guilty Men Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Short polemical book published in 1940 For the Colombian film, see Guilty Men (film) .

Guilty Men is a British polemical book written under the pseudonym "Cato" that was published in July 1940, after the failure of British forces to prevent the defeat and occupation of Norway and France by Nazi Germany . It attacked fifteen public figures for their failed policies towards Germany and for their failure to re-equip the British armed forces. In denouncing appeasement , it defined the policy as the "deliberate surrender of small nations in the face of Hitler's blatant bullying".

[ 1 ] A classic denunciation of the former government's policy, it shaped popular and scholarly thinking for the next two decades.

Contents [ edit ] The book's slogan, "Let the guilty men retire", was an attack on members of the National Government before Winston Churchill became Prime Minister in May 1940. Most were Conservatives , although some were National Liberals and one was Ramsay MacDonald , the former leader of the Labour Party . Several were current members of Churchill's government. The book shaped popular thinking about appeasement for twenty years; it effectively destroyed the reputation of former Prime Ministers Stanley Baldwin and Neville Chamberlain , and contributed to the defeat of the Conservative Party at the 1945 general election . According to historian David Dutton, "its impact upon Chamberlain's reputation, both among the general public and within the academic world, was profound indeed".

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] According to the book, the "guilty men" were: Neville Chamberlain Sir John Simon Sir Samuel Hoare Ramsay MacDonald Stanley Baldwin Lord Halifax Sir Kingsley Wood Ernest Brown David Margesson Sir Horace Wilson Sir Thomas Inskip Leslie Burgin Earl Stanhope W. S. Morrison Sir Reginald Dorman-Smith [ 1 ] Though mostly devoted to what the authors see as the blindness and inertia of the Conservative majority that in 1939 led a drastically under-prepared Britain into war, followed by the disastrous losses of Norway and of France in 1940, the authors look briefly at the British Army's contribution to these failures. While praising the discipline and courage of the soldiers in the field, they point to grave errors of strategy. In their opinion, some lessons that should have been obvious from the 1914–1918 war over the same terrain in France were ignored: you need a secure perimeter to fall back on in need; you need a mobile reserve to call on; in defence, you must guard against infiltration by motorised infantry and you need copious anti-aircraft and anti-tank artillery; to attack, you need superiority in aircraft and tanks.

[ 5 ] Authorship [ edit ] Guilty Men was written by three journalists: Michael Foot (a future leader of the Labour Party), Frank Owen (a former Liberal MP), and Peter Howard (a Conservative). They believed that Britain had suffered a succession of bad leaders who, with junior ministers, advisers and officials, had conducted a disastrous foreign policy towards Germany and had failed to prepare the country for war. After Victor Gollancz , creator of the Left Book Club , had been persuaded to publish the book, the authors divided the 24 chapters among themselves and wrote it in four days, finishing on 5 June 1940. Gollancz asked for some of the rhetoric to be toned down, fearing the reaction it might provoke, but he rushed it into print in four weeks.

It was under a pseudonym because the writers were employed by Lord Beaverbrook , who barred his journalists from writing for publications other than his own. Beaverbrook, who was active in the Conservative Party, was also a vocal supporter of appeasement, though he was not mentioned in the book.

[ 6 ] There was much speculation as to who Cato was. At one time Aneurin Bevan was named as its author.

Randolph Churchill ( Winston's son, also a Beaverbrook journalist) was also wrongly attributed as its author.

[ 7 ] In the meantime, the real authors had some fun reviewing their own work. Michael Foot wrote an article, "Who Is This Cato?" Beaverbrook was as much in the dark as anyone but joked that he "made do with the royalties from Guilty Men ".

[ citation needed ] The authors earned no money from the book as their literary agent Ralph Pinker, son of the much more successful James B. Pinker , absconded with the royalties.

[ 8 ] Publication [ edit ] Guilty Men was published in early July 1940, shortly after Winston Churchill became Prime Minister, the Dunkirk evacuation had shown Britain's military unpreparedness, and the Fall of France left the country with few allies. Several major book wholesalers, W H Smith and Wyman's, and the largest book distributor, Simpkin Marshall , refused to handle the book. It was sold on news-stands and street barrows and went through twelve editions in July 1940, [ 9 ] selling 200,000 copies in a few weeks.

[ 8 ] Guilty Men remains in circulation and was reprinted for its historical interest by Penguin Books to mark its sixtieth anniversary in 2000.

Evaluation [ edit ] The book's arguments and conclusions have been questioned by politicians and historians. In 1945, Quintin Hogg, MP , wrote The Left Was Never Right , which was critical of Guilty Men and argued that "unpreparedness before the war was largely the consequence of the policies of the parties of the Left".

[ 10 ] In 1944, Geoffrey Mander published We Were Not All Wrong .

[ 11 ] The fact that all bar one of the 15 "guilty men" named were either Conservatives or Liberals caused controversy – no mention was made, for example, of the Labour Party (UK) cabinet member and mid-1930s leader George Lansbury , a pacifist who advocated Unilateral disarmament in the face of fascist rearmament.

The idea of appeasement as error and cowardice was challenged by historian A. J. P. Taylor in his book The Origins of the Second World War (1960), in which he argued that, in the circumstances, it might be seen as a rational policy.

See also [ edit ] The Left Was Never Right , a Tory contrary view by Quintin Hogg The bomber will always get through , a military/political belief from the 1930s that held that in future conflicts regardless of air defences sufficient numbers of bombers would survive to destroy cities and infrastructure Notes [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b "Oxford DNB theme: Guilty men" .

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography . Retrieved 2013-10-05 .

^ David Dutton, Neville Chamberlain (2001) pp. 71–72 ^ Graham Macklin (2006).

Chamberlain . Haus Publishing. p. 98.

ISBN 9781904950622 .

^ Paul Addison (2011).

The Road To 1945: British Politics and the Second World War Revised Edition . Random House. p. 136.

ISBN 9781446424216 .

^ Guilty Men, pp118-122 ^ Michael Foot, Preface to the 1998 re-issue of Guilty Men , Penguin Books ^ Morgan, Kenneth O. (2008).

Michael Foot: A Life , p.80. Harper Perennial. ISBN 978-0-00-717827-8.

^ a b Morgan, Michael Foot, ch 3 ^ Cato, Guilty Men , London: Victor Gollancz, 1941, 34th impression ^ Scott Kelly, "The Ghost of Neville Chamberlain: Guilty Men and the 1945 Election" Archived 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine , Conservative History Journal , Autumn 2005 ^ Geoffrey Mander , We were not all wrong – How the Labour and Liberal Parties (& also the anti-Munich Tories) strove, pre-war, for the policy of collective security against aggression – with adequate armaments to make that policy effective: the truth about the peace ballot: etc, etc.

(London: Victor Gollancz, 1944) Bibliography [ edit ] Cato (1940).

Guilty men . London: V. Gollancz.

OCLC 301463537 .

Further reading [ edit ] Aster, S.

"'Guilty men': the case of Neville Chamberlain" in R. Boyce and E. Robertson, eds., Paths to war: new essays on the origins of the Second World War (1989) Dutton, D. J. "Guilty men (act. 1940)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press.

online Faber, David .

Munich, 1938: Appeasement and World War II (2009).

Hucker, Daniel. "The Unending Debate: Appeasement, Chamberlain and the Origins of the Second World War." Intelligence and National Security 23.4 (2008): 536-551.

Morgan, Kenneth O.

Michael Foot: A Life (2007), ch 3 v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category v t e Michael Foot Political career Leader of the Labour Party (1980–1983) Shadow Cabinet Deputy Leader of the Labour Party (1976-1980) Member of Parliament for Plymouth Devonport (1945–1955) Member of Parliament for Ebbw Vale (1960–1983) Member of Parliament for Blaenau Gwent (1983–1992) Shadow Cabinet elections 1970 1971 1972 1973 Party leadership elections 1976 1980 Party deputy leadership elections 1970 1971 1972 1976 General elections 1983 Family Isaac Foot (father) Dingle Foot (brother) Hugh Foot, Baron Caradon (brother) John Foot, Baron Foot (brother) Jill Craigie (wife) Paul Foot (nephew) Oliver Foot (nephew) Sarah Foot (niece) Related topics Guilty Men Keep Left Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament Tribune 1960 Ebbw Vale by-election 1975 European Communities referendum The longest suicide note in history Michael Foot memorial Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Guilty_Men&oldid=1301089996 " Categories : Books about politics of the United Kingdom Michael Foot Books about World War II 1940 non-fiction books Victor Gollancz Ltd books 1940 in British politics 1940 in the United Kingdom Anti-fascist books Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 01:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Guilty Men Add languages Add topic

