Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Previous history 2.2 Foundation 2.3 Cooperation with Barco N.V.

2.4 Cooperation with Dolby Inc.

2.5 New filter generation 3 Operating establishments 4 Business activity 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Infitec 1 language Simple English Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Infitec" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Infitec GmbH Founded 2003 Headquarters Gerstetten , ( Baden-Württemberg , Germany) Key people Helmut Jorke (managing director), Markus Fritz (managing director), Ingo Jorke (managing director), Ankit Upadhyay (Director of marketing and business development i4.0) Products Components for 3D projection systems, Holography products Number of employees 100 (2018) [ citation needed ] Website infitec.net Infitec GmbH is a family-owned company based in Gerstetten ( District of Heidenheim , Baden-Württemberg , Germany) that develops, produces and markets products for the projection of 3D content . The registered name INFITEC is an acronym of In terference Fi lter Tec hnology, which was invented and patented by the founder of the company, Helmut Jorke.

Background [ edit ] The INFITEC or Wavelength Multiplex Technology (WMT) is based on the fact that the visible light spectrum can be divided into different wavelength ranges using steep-edged optical filters . Some of these wavelength ranges are presented to the left eye, the others to the right eye. By an appropriate design of the transmission spectra of the filters it can be ensured that both eyes are reached by wavelengths in the red, green, and blue range of the visible light, so both eyes will see a fully colored image.

[ 1 ] Such multi-bandpass optical filters can currently be made only as so called interference filters . The WMT requires filters for the glasses as well as for the projectors (except laser projectors ).

History [ edit ] Previous history [ edit ] INFITEC GmbH emerged from a research project at the former DaimlerChrysler research center in Ulm , Germany. In this project it was studied under the name of wavelength multiplex visualization system, whether a new technical approach was suitable for an improved and functionally enhanced imaging in virtual reality systems. For the resulting technology based on interference filters the brand INFITEC was registered.

Foundation [ edit ] In 2003, Helmut Jorke founded his own start-up enterprise called INFITEC GmbH.

[ 2 ] The aim was the utilization and further development of the INFITEC method . The head office was located in Ulm at that time.

Cooperation with Barco N.V.

[ edit ] The single-projector solution with INFITEC 3D filter wheel was developed in 2004 by the Belgian company Barco . The relevant patents by Barco were purchased by INFITEC GmbH in 2010.

Cooperation with Dolby Inc.

[ edit ] In 2006, the WMT was licensed to the American company Dolby Laboratories, Inc.

for digital cinema , and it was marketed under the name Dolby 3D . As Dolby uses different wavelength ranges than INFITEC, Dolby glasses are not compatible with projectors equipped with INFITEC filters, and vice versa.

New filter generation [ edit ] In 2011, INFITEC introduced a new generation of filters under the designation Excellence in 3D . By a new design of the transmission bands of the filters a balanced color impression for both eyes is achieved.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Before, an elaborate color correction was needed for both stereoscopic channels that partially required special video processors. Now, if necessary at all, the simple color adjustment included in many projectors is sufficient.

Operating establishments [ edit ] In 2010, the production of 3D glasses as well as the administration was relocated from Ulm to Gerstetten ( District of Heidenheim , Baden-Württemberg , Germany). Since 2013, INFITEC GmbH runs a sales office in the United States. In 2014, INFITEC GmbH acquired a 50% share of VisionOptics GmbH in Chemnitz ( Saxony , Germany). The headquarters, the sales department, and the research and development department of INFITEC GmbH moved from Ulm to Gerstetten in 2015. Global-offices include Russia, China, and USA.

Business activity [ edit ] INFITEC GmbH develops, manufactures and markets interference filters for 3D projection technology and glasses fitted with these filters. In some cases the retrofitting of filters to projectors is done as well. INFITEC GmbH is internationally active regarding purchase and sales. The INFITEC GmbH holds all patents and licensing rights (aside from the cinema market held by Dolby Inc.) from simulation in industry and research institutes, planetariums and museums , to large venue events, theme parks , and home cinema solutions.

[ buzzword ] References [ edit ] ^ H. Jorke and M. Fritz, Stereo Projection Using Interference Filters , Proc. of SPIE-IS&T Electronic Imaging, SPIE Vol. 6055 , 60550G (2006) ^ "DOLBY DOES 3D" .

filmjournal.com . 2007-04-20 . Retrieved 2017-01-17 .

^ Simon, Arnold and Jorke, Helmut, 25.1: Interference Filter System for High-Brightness and Natural-Color Stereoscopic Imaging , SID Symposium Digest of Technical Papers , 42 , p. 317 - 319, (2011) ^ H. Jorke and A. Simon, New high efficiency interference filter characteristics for stereoscopic imaging , Proc. SPIE 8288, Stereoscopic Displays and Applications XXIII , 82881D (28 February 2012) External links [ edit ] Infitec homepage A description of the Infitec system at stereoscopy.com Dolby 3D Digital Cinema Video Technology Blog Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Infitec&oldid=1305789908 " Categories : Stereoscopy 3D cinema Technology companies of Germany Companies based in Baden-Württemberg Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from January 2016 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017 Wikipedia articles containing buzzwords from March 2023 This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 03:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Infitec 1 language Add topic

