Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples 2 Etymology 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Mélange 15 languages العربية Čeština Español Galego ქართული Қазақша Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Русский Slovenčina Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Large-scale breccia typically consisting of a jumble of large blocks of varied lithologies This article is about the geological term. For other uses, see Melange .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( May 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Melange from Narooma , Australia .

In geology , a mélange is a large-scale breccia , a mappable body of rock characterized by a lack of continuous bedding and the inclusion of fragments of rock of all sizes, contained in a fine-grained deformed matrix. The mélange typically consists of a jumble of large blocks of varied lithologies .  Both tectonic and sedimentary processes can form mélange.

Mélange occurrences are associated with thrust faulted terranes in orogenic belts.  A mélange is formed in the accretionary wedge above a subduction zone . The ultramafic ophiolite sequences which have been obducted onto continental crust are typically underlain by a mélange.  Smaller-scale localized mélanges may also occur in shear or fault zones, where coherent rock has been disrupted and mixed by shearing forces.

Shale matrix mélange with clasts of sandstone and greenstone on Marshall's Beach, San Francisco, US Large-scale melanges formed in active continental margin settings generally consist of altered oceanic crustal material and blocks of continental slope sediments in a sheared mudstone matrix .  The mixing mechanisms in such settings may include tectonic shearing forces, ductile flow of a water-charged or deformable matrix (such as serpentinite ), sedimentary action (such as slumping, gravity-flow , and olistostromal action), or some combination of these.  Some larger blocks of rock may be as much as 1 kilometre (0.62 mi) across.

Before the advent of plate tectonics in the early 1970s, it was difficult to explain mélanges in terms of known geological mechanisms.  A particularly troubling paradox was the occurrence of blueschist blocks (low temperature and high pressure metamorphic rocks) in direct contact with graywacke (a coarse sandstone with lithic fragments) that was deposited in a sedimentary environment.

Examples [ edit ] Examples include the Franciscan Complex along the Coast Ranges of central and northern California and the Bay of Islands ophiolite complex in Newfoundland . The Gwna Mélange in the UK extends through Anglesey and the Llŷn Peninsula onto Bardsey Island in North Wales. The Northern Palawan melange is distributed in the Philippines' Miniloc Island [ clarify ] , west coast of Inabamalaki Island, west coast of El Nido [ clarify ] ; Cudugman Point on Bacuit Bay, and in the Cuyo Group of Islands. It consists of a jumble of various rock types contained in a matrix of grey-green slaty mudstone and siltstone.

The Eastern Desert of Egypt is part of the Neoproterozoic Arabian-Nubian Shield and displays different occurrences of Neoproterozoic ophiolitic mélanges. The mélanges contain exotic and native blocks and fragments of variable sizes and types set in a sheared and schistose volcaniclastic matrix. The main exotic blocks are ophiolitic and include metamorphosed ultramafic rocks , metagabbros , massive and pillowed metabasalts and pelagic sedimentary rocks. Based on the mode of occurrences of the ophiolitic components and the processes of mélange formation, the ophiolitic mélanges of the Central Eastern Desert are classified and mapped into tectonic mélange, olistostrome and olistostromal mélange. Both tectonic and sedimentary processes played a major role during mélange formation in a back-arc or inter-arc setting.

[ 1 ] Etymology [ edit ] The term mélange in English is a loan word from French , used to mean a mixture of disparate components.  Its derivation, and therefore to some extent its connotation, is similar to mêlée .

[ 2 ] Mélange is the modern form of the Old French noun meslance , which comes from the infinitive mesler , meaning "to mix".

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ Classification and origin of the Neoproterozoic ophiolitic mélanges in the Central Eastern Desert of Egypt; Authors: El Bahariya, Gaafar A. Affiliation: AA (Geology Department, Faculty of Science, Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt; Publication:	Tectonophysics, Volume 568, pp. 357–70.  09/2012 Origin: ELSEVIER doi : 10.1016/j.tecto.2012.03.020 Bibliographic Code: 2012Tectp.568..357E ^ "Online Etymology Dictionary" .

^ "Online Etymology Dictionary" .

Blatt, Harvey and Robert Tracy (1996), Petrology, 2nd ed., Freeman (pp. 178, 514), ISBN 0-7167-2438-3 .

Hsu, K.J., 1970, Preliminary report and geologic guide to Franciscan melanges of the Morro Bay – San Simeon area, San Luis Obispo County, California:  California Geological Survey Special Publication 35.

Raymond, L.A., 1984, Classification of melanges:  Geological Society of America, Special Paper 198, pp. 7–20.

British Geological Survey : "Geology of the country around Aberdaron," HMSO, London (1993), ISBN 0-11-884487-3 External links [ edit ] Look up mélange in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Trenches and mélanges from the University of Alberta v t e Structural geology Underlying theory Deformation mechanism Lamé's stress ellipsoid Mohr–Coulomb theory Mohr's circle Overburden pressure Rock mechanics Strain Strain partitioning Stress Stress field Tension Measurement conventions Brunton compass Inclinometer Orthographic projection Rake Stereographic projection Strike and dip Large-scale tectonics Accretionary wedge Allochthon Autochthon Back-arc basin Continental collision Convergent boundary Décollement Divergent boundary Extensional tectonics Fault block Fenster Fold and thrust belt Fold mountains Foreland basin Graben Half-graben Horse Horst Horst and graben Intra-arc basin Inversion Klippe List of tectonic plate interactions Mélange Mountain formation Nappe Obduction Orogeny Passive margin Plate tectonics Pull-apart basin Rift valley Rift Saddle Strike-slip tectonics Structural basin Suture Syneclise Terrane Thick-skinned deformation Thin-skinned deformation Thrust tectonics Fracturing Columnar jointing Dike Exfoliation joint Fissure Joint Vein Faulting Asperity Cataclasite Cataclastic rock Detachment fault Disturbance Fault friction Fault mechanics Fault scarp Fault trace Thrust fault Transfer zone Transform fault Foliation and lineation Cleavage Compaction Crenulation Fissility Oblique foliation Pressure solution Rock microstructure Slickenside Stylolite Tectonic phase Tectonite Folding Anticline Chevron Detachment fold Dome Homocline Monocline Syncline Vergence Boudinage Competence Kinematic analysis 3D fold evolution Paleostress inversion Paleostress Section restoration Shear zone Mylonite Pure shear Shear Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mélange&oldid=1180729517 " Categories : Structural geology Petrology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2012 All articles lacking in-text citations All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2012 This page was last edited on 18 October 2023, at 13:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mélange 15 languages Add topic

