Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In the United States Toggle In the United States subsection 1.1 Violence against Italians 1.2 Anti-Italian-American stereotyping 1.3 Italian-American organizations 1.4 Columbus Day 2 In the United Kingdom 3 World War II 4 After World War II Toggle After World War II subsection 4.1 Libya 4.2 Yugoslavia 4.3 Ethiopia and Somalia 5 In France 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Anti-Italian sentiment 5 languages العربية فارسی Français Italiano 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Anti-Italianism ) Discrimination against the Italian people Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Illustration of rioters breaking into parish prison, during the 1891 lynchings in New Orleans Anti-Italianism or Italophobia is a negative attitude regarding Italians or people with Italian ancestry, often expressed through the use of prejudice, discrimination or stereotypes . Often stemming from xenophobia , anti-Catholic sentiment and job security issues, it manifested itself in varying degrees in a number of countries to which Italians had immigrated in large numbers in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and after WWII. Its opposite is Italophilia , which is admiration of Italy, its people, and its culture.

In the United States [ edit ] Anti-Italianism arose among some Americans as an effect of the large-scale immigration of Italians to the United States during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The majority of Italian immigrants to the United States arrived in waves in the early 20th century, many of them from agrarian backgrounds. Nearly all the Italian immigrants were Catholic , as opposed to the nation's Protestant majority . Because the immigrants often lacked formal education and competed with earlier immigrants for lower-paying jobs and housing, significant hostility developed toward them.

[ 1 ] In reaction to the large-scale immigration from Southern Europe and Eastern Europe, the United States Congress passed legislation ( Emergency Quota Act of 1921 and Immigration Act of 1924 ) severely restricting immigration from those regions, but putting comparatively fewer restrictions on immigration from Northern European countries.

Anti-Italian cartoon by Louis Dalrymple depicting Italian immigrants as rats carrying mafia, socialism and anarchy. Published on Judge magazine , 1903 Anti-Italian prejudice was sometimes associated with the anti-Catholic tradition that existed in the United States, which was inherited as a result of Protestant/Catholic European competition and wars, which had been fought between Protestants and Catholics over the preceding three centuries. When the United States was founded, it inherited the anti-Catholic, anti-papal animosity of its original Protestant settlers . Anti-Catholic sentiments in the U.S. reached a peak in the 19th century, when the Protestant population became alarmed by the large number of Catholics who were immigrating to the United States from Ireland and Germany. The resulting anti-Catholic nativist movement , achieved prominence in the 1840s and 1850s. It had largely faded away before the Italians arrived in large numbers after 1880. The Italian immigrants, unlike some of the other Catholic immigrant groups, generally did not bring with them priests and other religious figures who could help ease their transition into American life. To remedy this situation, Pope Leo XIII dispatched a contingent of priests, nuns and brothers of the Missionaries of Saint Charles Borromeo and other orders (among which was Sister Francesca Cabrini ), who helped establish hundreds of parishes to serve the needs of the Italian communities, such as Our Lady of Pompeii in New York City.

[ 2 ] Some of the early 20th-century immigrants from Italy brought with them a political disposition toward anarchism . This was a reaction to the economic and political conditions which they had experienced in Italy. Such men as Arturo Giovannitti , Carlo Tresca , and Joe Ettor were at the forefront of organising Italians and other immigrant laborers in demanding better working conditions and shorter working hours in the mining, textile, garment, construction and other industries. These efforts often resulted in strikes, which sometimes erupted into violence between the strikers and strike-breakers. Italians were often strikebreakers. The anarchy movement in the United States at that time was responsible for bombings in major cities, and attacks on officials and law enforcement.

[ 3 ] As a result of the association of some with the labour and anarchy movements, Italian Americans were branded as " labor agitators " and radicals by many of the business owners and the upper class of the time, which resulted in further anti-Italian sentiment.

The vast majority of Italian immigrants worked hard and lived honest lives, as documented by police statistics of the early 20th century in Boston and New York City. Italian immigrants had an arrest rate that was no greater than those of other major immigrant groups.

[ 4 ] As late as 1963, James W. Vander Zander noted that the rate of criminal convictions among Italian immigrants was less than that among American-born whites .

[ 5 ] A satirical cartoon published in 1911 on Life Magazine which negatively portrays an Italian immigrant addressed with the derogatory term " wop ".

A criminal element that was active in some of the Italian immigrant communities in the large eastern cities used extortion, intimidation and threats in order to extract protection money from the wealthier immigrants and shop owners (known as the Black Hand racket ), and it was also involved in other illegal activities as well. When the Fascists came to power in Italy , they made the destruction of the Mafia in Sicily a high priority. Hundreds fled to the United States in the 1920s and 1930s in order to avoid prosecution.

When the United States enacted prohibition in 1920, the restrictions proved to be an economic windfall for those in the Italian-American community who were already involved in illegal activities, as well as those who had fled from Sicily. They smuggled liquor into the country, wholesaled and sold it through a network of outlets and speakeasies. While members of other ethnic groups were also deeply involved in these illegal bootlegging activities, and the associated violence between groups, Italian Americans were among the most notorious.

[ 6 ] Because of this, Italians became associated with the prototypical gangster in the minds of many, which had a long-lasting effect on the Italian-American image.

The experiences of Italian immigrants in North American countries were notably different from those in South American countries, where many of them immigrated in large numbers. Italians were key in developing countries such as: Argentina , Brazil, Chile, Uruguay and Venezuela . They quickly joined the middle and upper classes in those countries.

[ 7 ] In the U.S., Italian Americans initially encountered an established Protestant-majority Northern European culture. For a time, they were viewed mainly as construction and industrial workers, chefs, plumbers, or other blue collar workers. Like the Irish before them, many entered police and fire departments of major cities.

[ 8 ] Violence against Italians [ edit ] See also: Lynching of Italian Americans After the American Civil War , during the labour shortage that occurred as the South converted to free labour, planters in southern states recruited Italians to come to the United States and work, mainly as agricultural workers and labourers. Many soon found themselves the victims of prejudice and economic exploitation, and they were sometimes victims of violence. Anti-Italian stereotypes abounded during this period as a means of justifying the maltreatment of immigrants. The plight of the Italian immigrant agricultural workers in Mississippi was so serious that the Italian embassy became involved in investigating their mistreatment in cases that were studied for peonage . Later waves of Italian immigrants inherited these same virulent forms of discrimination and stereotyping which, by then, had become ingrained in the American consciousness.

[ 9 ] In the 1890s, more than 20 Italians were lynched in the United States.

[ 10 ] The largest mass-lynching in American history was the mass-lynching of eleven Italians in New Orleans , Louisiana, in 1891. The city had been the destination for numerous Italian immigrants.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Nineteen Italians who were thought to have assassinated police chief David Hennessy were arrested and held in the Parish Prison. Nine were tried, resulting in six acquittals and three mistrials. The next day, a mob stormed the prison and killed eleven men, none of whom had been convicted, and some of whom had not been tried.

[ 13 ] Afterward, the police arrested hundreds of Italian immigrants, on the false pretext that they were all criminals.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Teddy Roosevelt , not yet president, famously said the lynching was indeed "a rather good thing".

[ 16 ] John M. Parker helped organize the lynch mob, and in 1911 was elected as governor of Louisiana . He described Italians as "just a little worse than the Negro, being if anything filthier in their habits, lawless, and treacherous".

[ 17 ] Songsheet about the 1899 lynching of Italians in Tallulah. Published on the Huffington Post In 1899, in Tallulah, Louisiana , three Italian-American shopkeepers were lynched because they had treated blacks in their shops the same as whites. A vigilante mob hanged five Italian Americans: the three shopkeepers and two bystanders.

[ 18 ] Anarchist trial defendants Sacco and Vanzetti in handcuffs In 1920 two Italian immigrants, Sacco and Vanzetti , were tried for robbery and murder in Braintree, Massachusetts . Many historians agree that Sacco and Vanzetti were subjected to a mishandled trial, and the judge, jury, and prosecution were biased against them because of their anarchist political views and Italian immigrant status. Judge Webster Thayer called Sacco and Vanzetti "Bolsheviki!" and said he would "get them good and proper". In 1924 Thayer confronted a Massachusetts lawyer: "Did you see what I did with those anarchistic bastards the other day?", the judge said. Despite worldwide protests, Sacco and Vanzetti were eventually executed.

[ 19 ] Massachusetts Governor Michael Dukakis declared August 23, 1977, the 50th anniversary of their execution, as Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti Memorial Day. His proclamation, issued in English and Italian, stated that Sacco and Vanzetti had been unfairly tried and convicted and that "any disgrace should be forever removed from their names". He did not pardon them, because that would imply they were guilty.

[ 20 ] In the 1930s, Italians together with Jews were targeted by Sufi Abdul Hamid , [ 21 ] an anti-Semite and admirer of  Mufti of Palestine Amin al-Husseini .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Anti-Italianism was part of the anti-immigrant, anti-Catholic ideology of the revived Ku Klux Klan (KKK) after 1915; the white supremacist and nativist group targeted Italians and other Southern Europeans, seeking to preserve the supposed dominance of White Anglo-Saxon Protestants . During the early 20th century, the KKK became active in northern and midwestern cities, where social change had been rapid due to immigration and industrialization. It was not limited to the South. It reached a peak of membership and influence in 1925. A hotbed of anti-Italian KKK activity developed in South Jersey in the mid-1920s. In 1933, there was a mass protest against Italian immigrants in Vineland, New Jersey , where Italians made up 20% of the city population. The KKK eventually lost all of its power in Vineland and left the city.

Anti-Italian-American stereotyping [ edit ] See also: Italian Americans § Discrimination and stereotyping , and List of Italian-American television characters Since the early 20th century, Italian-Americans have been portrayed with stereotypes.

[ 24 ] Hostility was often directed toward the large numbers of southern Italians and Sicilians who began arriving in the U.S. after 1880.

[ 25 ] Italian-Americans in contemporary American society have actively objected to pervasive negative stereotyping in the mass media. Stereotyping of Italian-Americans being associated with the Mafia has been a consistent feature of movies such as The Godfather series, GoodFellas , and Casino , [ 26 ] and television series such as The Sopranos , which itself explored the concept by featuring non-Mafia Italian-Americans expressing concern at the Mafia's effect on their community's public image.

[ 27 ] Such stereotypes of Italian-Americans are reinforced by the frequent replay of these movies and series on cable and network TV. Video and board games, [ 28 ] and TV and radio commercials with Mafia themes also reinforce this stereotype. The entertainment media has stereotyped the Italian-American community as tolerant of violent, sociopathic gangsters.

[ 29 ] Other notable stereotypes portray Italian-Americans as overly aggressive and prone to violence.

[ 30 ] MTV 's series Jersey Shore was considered offensive by the Italian-American group UNICO .

[ 31 ] A comprehensive study of Italian-American culture on film, conducted from 1996 to 2001, by the Italic Institute of America, revealed the extent of stereotyping in media.

[ 32 ] More than two-thirds of the 2,000 films assessed in the study portray Italian-Americans in a negative light. Nearly 300 films featuring Italian-Americans as mobsters have been produced since The Godfather (1972), an average of nine per year.

[ 33 ] According to the Italic Institute of America, "The mass media has consistently ignored five centuries of Italian American history and has elevated what was never more than a minute subculture to the dominant Italian American culture." [ 34 ] According to 2015 FBI statistics, Italian-American organized crime members and associates number approximately 3,000. Given an Italian-American population estimated to be approximately 18 million, the study concludes that only one in 6,000 is active in organized crime.

[ 35 ] Italian-American organizations [ edit ] National organizations which have been active in combatting media stereotyping and defamation of Italian Americans are: Order Sons of Italy in America , Unico National , Columbus Citizens Foundation , National Italian American Foundation and the Italic Institute of America.

[ 32 ] Four Internet-based organizations are: Annotico Report, [ 36 ] the Italian-American Discussion Network, [ 37 ] ItalianAware [ 38 ] and the Italian American One Voice Coalition .

[ 39 ] Columbus Day [ edit ] Decisions by states and municipalities across the United States to change Columbus Day to Indigenous People's Day have been claimed by some commentators to be an attack on Italian Americans and their history, including anti-Italian discrimination.

[ 40 ] In California, the Italian Cultural Society of Sacramento proclaimed that, "Indigenous Peoples Day is viewed by Italian Americans and other Americans as anti-Columbus Day." [ 41 ] Other Italian-American groups, such as Italian Americans for Indigenous People's Day, have welcomed the change and asserted that it is not anti-Italian.

[ 42 ] In the United Kingdom [ edit ] See also: Italians in the United Kingdom An early manifestation of anti-Italianism in Britain was in 1820, at the time when King George IV sought to dissolve his marriage to Caroline of Brunswick . A sensational proceeding, the Pains and Penalties Bill 1820 , was held at the House of Lords in an effort to prove Caroline's adultery; since she had been living in Italy, many prosecution witnesses were from among her servants. The prosecution's reliance on Italian witnesses of low repute led to anti-Italian sentiment in Britain. The witnesses had to be protected from angry mobs, [ 43 ] and were depicted in popular prints and pamphlets as venal, corrupt and criminal.

[ 44 ] Street-sellers sold prints alleging that the Italians had accepted bribes to commit perjury.

[ 45 ] Anti-Italianism broke out again, in a more sustained way, a century later. After Benito Mussolini 's alliance with Nazi Germany in the late 1930s, there was a growing hostility towards Italy in the United Kingdom. The British media ridiculed the Italian capacity to fight in a war, pointing to the poor state of the Italian military during its imperialistic phase . A comic strip, which began running in 1938 in the British comic The Beano , was entitled "Musso the Wop". The strip featured Mussolini as an arrogant buffoon.

[ 46 ] Wigs on the Green was a novel by Nancy Mitford first published in 1935. It was a merciless satire of British fascism and the Italians living in the United Kingdom who supported it. The book is notable for lampooning the political enthusiasms of Mitford's sister Diana Mosley , and her links with some Italians in Great Britain who promoted the British Union of Fascists of Oswald Mosley . Furthermore, the announcement of Benito Mussolini's decision to side with Adolf Hitler 's Germany in the spring of 1940 caused an immediate response. By order of Parliament , all enemy aliens were to be interned, although there were few active Italian fascists . This anti-Italian feeling led to a night of nationwide riots against the Italian communities in June 1940. The Italians were now seen as a national security threat linked to the feared British Fascism movement, and Winston Churchill gave instructions to "collar the lot!". Thousands of Italian men between the ages of 17 and 60 were arrested after his speech.

[ 47 ] World War II [ edit ] Further information: Italian American internment and Italian-Canadian internment Adolf Hitler acknowledged the ancient history of the Roman civilization . He regarded the Italians as more artistic but less industrious than the Germanic population. In the interbellum period, Germans believed the Kingdom of Italy had "stabbed them in the back" by joining the "Big Four" in the ( Treaty of London, 1915 ). Hitler never made any speech denouncing Italy for this, instead worked on forging an alliance with a fellow Fascist regime.

Because many writers have uncritically repeated stereotypes shared by their sources, biases and prejudices have taken on the status of objective observations, including the idea that the Germans and British were the only belligerents in the Mediterranean after Italian setbacks in early 1941. Sadkovich questioned this point of view in Of Myths and Men and The Italian Navy , but persistent stereotypes, including that of the incompetent Italian, are well entrenched in the literature, from Puleston's early The Influence of Sea Power , to Gooch's Italian Military Incompetence , to more recent publications by Mack Smith, Knox and Sullivan. Wartime bias in early British and American histories, which focused on German operations, dismissed Italian forces as inept and or unimportant and viewed Germany as the pivotal power in Europe during the interwar period.

Loyd E. Lee and Robin D. S. Higham, World War II in Europe, Africa, and the Americas, with General Sources: A Handbook of Literature and Research . Greenwood Publishing Group, 1997.

ISBN 0-313-29325-2 (pp. 141–142).

During the Second World War , the United States and the United Kingdom designated Italian citizens living in their countries as alien , irrespective of how long they had lived there. Hundreds of Italian citizens, suspected by ethnicity of potential loyalty to Fascist Italy , were put in internment camps in the United States and Canada . Thousands more Italian citizens in the U.S., suspected of loyalty to Italy, were placed under surveillance.

Joe DiMaggio 's father, who lived in San Francisco, had his boat and house confiscated. Unlike Japanese Americans, Italian Americans and Italian Canadians never received reparations from their respective governments, but President Bill Clinton made a public declaration admitting the U.S. government's misjudgement in the internment.

[ 48 ] Because of the Italian conquest of Ethiopia and Italy's alliance with Nazi Germany, in the United Kingdom popular feeling developed against all the Italians in the country. Many Italian nationals were deported as enemy aliens, with some being killed by German submarines torpedoing the transportation ships.

[ 49 ] During the Second World War, much Allied propaganda was directed against Italian military performance, usually expressing a stereotype of the "incompetent Italian soldier". Historians have documented that the Italian Army suffered major defeats due to its being poorly prepared for major combat as a result of Mussolini's refusal to heed warnings by Italian Army commanders.

[ 50 ] Objective World War II accounts show that, despite having to rely in many cases on outdated weapons, [ 51 ] Italian troops frequently fought with great valor and distinction, especially well trained and equipped units such as the Bersaglieri , Paratroopers and Alpini .

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] The German soldier has impressed the world, however, the Italian Bersagliere soldier has impressed the German soldier.

— Erwin Rommel , on a plaque dedicated to the Bersaglieri in El Alamein .

" The German soldier has impressed the world, the Italian Bersagliere has impressed the German soldier ", praise towards Italian soldiers attributed to Erwin Rommel on a plaque at the Italian War Memorial at El Alamein Bias includes both implicit assumptions, evident in Knox's title The Sources of Italy's Defeat in 1940: Bluff or Institutionalized Incompetence?

, and the selective use of sources. Also see Sullivan's The Italian Armed Forces . Sims, in The Fighter Pilot , ignored the Italians, while D'Este in World War II in the Mediterranean shaped his reader's image of Italians by citing a German comment that Italy's surrender was "the basest treachery". Further, he discussed Allied and German commanders but ignored Messe, who commanded the Italian First Army, which held off both the U.S. Second Corps and the British Eighth Army in Tunisia.

In his article, Anglo-American Bias and the Italo-Greek War (1994), Sadkovich writes: Knox and other Anglo-American historians have not only selectively used Italian sources, but they have also gleaned negative observations and racist slurs and comments from British, American, and German sources and then presented them as objective depictions of Italian political and military leaders, a game that if played in reverse would yield some interesting results regarding German, American, and British competence.

[ 55 ] Sadkovich also states that such a fixation on Germany and such denigrations of Italians not only distort analysis, but they also reinforce the misunderstandings and myths that have grown up around the Greek theater and allow historians to lament and debate the impact of the Italo-Greek conflict on the British and German war efforts, yet dismiss as unimportant its impact on the Italian war effort. Because Anglo-American authors start from the assumption that Italy's war effort was secondary in importance to that of Germany, they implicitly, if unconsciously, deny even the possibility of a 'parallel war' long before Italian setbacks in late 1940, because they define Italian policy as subordinate to German from the very beginning of the war. Alan Levine even goes most authors one better by dismissing the whole Mediterranean theater as irrelevant, but only after duly scolding Mussolini for 'his imbecilic attack on Greece'.

[ 56 ] After World War II [ edit ] Former Italian communities once thrived in Italy's African colonies of Eritrea , Somalia and Libya , and in the areas at the borders of the Kingdom of Italy . In the aftermath of the end of imperial colonies and other political changes, many ethnic Italians were violently expelled from these areas, or left under threat of violence.

Libya [ edit ] In Libya , during its years as an Italian colony, some 150,000 Italians settled there, constituting about 18% of the total population.

[ 57 ] During the rise of independence movements, hostility increased against colonists. All of Libya 's remaining ethnic Italians were expelled from Libya in 1970, a year after Muammar Gaddafi seized power: Day of Revenge on 7 October 1970.

[ 58 ] Later, it was renamed the Day of Friendship because of improvement in Italy–Libya relations .

[ 59 ] Yugoslavia [ edit ] At the end of World War II , former Italian territories in Istria and Dalmatia became part of Yugoslavia by the Treaty of Peace with Italy, 1947 . Economic insecurity, ethnic hatred and the international political context that eventually led to the Iron Curtain resulted in up to 350,000 people, nearly all ethnic Italians , choosing to or being forced to leave the region during Josip Broz Tito 's rule.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] Scholars such as Rudolph Rummel note that the number of Dalmatian Italians has dropped from 45,000 in 1848, when they comprised nearly 10% of the total Dalmatian population under Austria-Hungary , [ 62 ] to 300 in modern times, related to democide and ethnic cleansing , although much criticism has been raised regarding these numbers.

[ 63 ] Ethiopia and Somalia [ edit ] Other forms of anti-Italianism showed up in Ethiopia [ citation needed ] and Somalia in the late 1940s, as happened with the Somali nationalist rebellion against the Italian colonial administration that culminated in a violent confrontation in January 1948 ( Eccidio di Mogadiscio ). 54 Italians, mostly women and children, [ 64 ] died in the ensuing political riots in Mogadishu and several coastal towns.

[ 65 ] In France [ edit ] Main articles: Massacre of Italians at Aigues-Mortes and 1894 anti-Italian riots Massacre in France, 1893 The massacre of the Italians at Aigues-Mortes took place on 16 and 17 August 1893, in Aigues-Mortes , France, which resulted in the deaths of immigrant Italian workers of the Compagnie des Salins du Midi , at the hands of French villagers and labourers. Estimates range from the official number of eight deaths up to 150, according to the Italian press of the time. Those killed were victims of lynchings, beatings with clubs, drowning and rifle shot. There were also many non-fatal injuries.

[ 66 ] The massacre was not the first attack by French workers on poor Italian immigrant labourers that were prepared to work at cut-rate wages.

[ 67 ] When the news reached Italy anti-French riots erupted in the country. The case was also one of the greatest legal scandals of the time, since no convictions were ever made.

See also [ edit ] Media related to Anti-Italianism at Wikimedia Commons Racism Compagnie Francaise de Navigation a Vapeur v. Louisiana Board of Health , a 1902 U.S. Supreme Court case that upheld state laws that prevented Italian immigrants from disembarking into quarantine zones Internment of Italian Americans in U.S. World War II References [ edit ] ^ Mangione, Jerre and Ben Morreale, La Storia – Five Centuries of the Italian American Experience , Harper Perennial, 1992.

^ "History - Our Lady of Pompeii NYC" .

Our Lady of Pompeii Church .

Archived from the original on April 17, 2016 . Retrieved August 31, 2018 .

^ Bruce Watson, Bread and Roses: Mills, Migrants, and the Struggle for the American Dream , New York, NY: Viking [2005].

^ p. 123 , Cleveland Memory.

^ W. Vander Zander, James (1974).

American Minority Relations, quoted by Richard Gambino, Blood of My Blood . New York: Doubleday. pp.

253– 254.

^ Fox, Stephen, Blood and Power , William Morrow and Co., 1989.

^ Latin American Hyphenated Italians – Italian culture in Argentina and Brazil Archived 2011-01-17 at the Wayback Machine at LifeInItaly.com ^ Lord, Eliot (1905).

The Italian in America . B.F. Buck. p.

1 .

italian in america.

^ Gauthreaux, Alan G., An Extreme Prejudice: Anti-Italian Sentiment and Violence in Louisiana, 1855–1924 , History4All, Inc.

^ "Under Attack | Italian | Immigration and Relocation in U.S. History | Classroom Materials at the Library of Congress | Library of Congress" .

Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 20540 USA .

Archived from the original on 2020-10-01 . Retrieved 2022-07-21 .

^ Moses, Norton H. (1997).

Lynching and Vigilantism in the United States: An Annotated Bibliography . Greenwood Publishing Group.

ISBN 0-313-30177-8 .

Archived from the original on 2024-02-24 . Retrieved 2020-10-15 .

^ "Vendetta : the true story of the largest lynching in U.S. history | WorldCat.org" .

search.worldcat.org . Retrieved 2024-10-25 .

^ Gambino, Richard (1977).

Vendetta: The True Story of the Largest Lynching in U.S. History (2000 ed.). Toronto: Guernica Editions.

ISBN 1-55071-103-2 .

Archived from the original on 2024-02-24 . Retrieved 2020-10-15 .

^ Gambino, Richard (1974).

Blood of My Blood: The Dilemma of the Italian Americans (2003 ed.). Toronto: Guernica Editions Inc.

ISBN 1-55071-101-6 .

Archived from the original on 2024-02-24 . Retrieved 2020-10-15 .

^ Sowell, Thomas (1981).

Ethnic America: A History . Basic Books, Inc.

ISBN 0-465-02075-5 .

Archived from the original on 2024-02-24 . Retrieved 2020-10-15 .

^ When Italian immigrants were ‘the other’ Archived 2023-07-11 at the Wayback Machine cnn.com ^ Falco, Ed (2012).

"When Italian immigrants were 'the other' " . CNN.com.

Archived from the original on 2014-09-03 . Retrieved 2016-03-04 .

^ Schoener, Allon (1987).

The Italian Americans . Macmillan Publishing Company.

^ Rappaport, Doreen (1993).

The Sacco-Vanzetti Trial (1994 ed.). New York: HarperTrophy.

^ "Dukakis Transcript" (PDF) . NBC. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 March 2012 . Retrieved 25 February 2014 .

^ "Black Hitler Jailed To Await Sentence" .

The New York Times . January 16, 1935.

Archived from the original on July 26, 2020 . Retrieved July 26, 2020 .

His name, he said, was Sufi Abdul Hamid. A year ago he was acquitted in the same court when the police accused him of urging his Negro followers to drive the Jews and Italians out of Harlem.

^ Friedman, Murray (September 11, 2007).

What Went Wrong?: The Creation & Collapse of the Black-Jewish Alliance . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 9781416576686 .

Archived from the original on February 24, 2024 . Retrieved August 20, 2022 – via Google Books.

^ [ This quote needs a citation ] ^ Giorgio Bertellini , "Black Hands and White Hearts: Italian Immigrants as 'Urban Racial Types' in Early American Film Culture", Urban History , 2004 31(3): 375–399.

^ Pitroso, Giulio (2022).

"Una prospettiva regionalista su "Italian Diaspora" e "Anti-Italianism" in Australia e negli Stati Uniti" .

Nazioni e Regioni ( 19– 20): 119– 138.

doi : 10.15162/2282-5681/1683 .

ISSN 2282-5681 .

Archived from the original on 2023-04-04 . Retrieved 2023-04-04 .

^ Campbell, R., Media and Culture: An Introduction to Mass Communication , St. Martin's Press, New York, 1998.

^ As depicted in The Sopranos episode " The Legend of Tennessee Moltisanti ".

^ Pitroso, Giulio (2020-03-12).

"Mafia and the representation of Italians" .

Transactions of the Digital Games Research Association .

5 (1).

doi : 10.26503/todigra.v5i1.110 .

hdl : 10072/418072 .

ISSN 2328-9422 .

Archived from the original on 2022-12-04 . Retrieved 2022-12-14 .

^ "Annotated Bibliography – p 6" . Archived from the original on 16 February 2012 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ Gottesman, Ronald; Brown, Richard Maxwell (January 1999).

Violence in America: A-F . Charles Scribner's Sons.

ISBN 9780684804880 .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2024 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ Vicki Hyman (November 24, 2009).

" 'Jersey Shore' offends Italian-American group; president protests use of 'Guido' " . NJ Advance Media.

Archived from the original on December 3, 2009 . Retrieved December 31, 2009 .

^ a b "Italic Institute of America, Italian Heritage, Italian American Heritage" .

Archived from the original on 18 April 2016 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ "Italian Culture on Film, Image Research Project, Italic Institute of America" . Archived from the original on 23 August 2012 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ "Hollywood vs Italians", The Italic Way , a publication of The Italic Institute of America, Vol. XXVII, 1997.

^ "FBI — Italian/Mafia" .

FBI . Archived from the original on 10 May 2015 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ "The Annotico Report – Italy at St. Louis" . Archived from the original on 3 May 2015 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ "H-ItAm" .

Archived from the original on 17 October 2012 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ "ItalianAware" . Archived from the original on 31 January 2019 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ "Italian American ONE VOICE Coalition" .

Archived from the original on 29 April 2015 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ Why Efforts to Abolish Columbus Day are Wrong Archived 2023-11-12 at the Wayback Machine Accessed November 12, 2023 ^ Italian Cultural Society of Sacramento, "Why Columbus Day Matters To Italian-Americans" online Archived 2023-06-08 at the Wayback Machine ^ Beacon Hill Push For Indigenous People's Day Gets Support From Italian-American Groups ^ Robins, pp. 187–188.

^ Robins, pp. 188–191.

^ Robins, p. 191.

^ The History of the Beano . Dundee, Scotland: D.C. Thomson & Co. Ltd. 2008. pp.

77– 78.

ISBN 978-1-902407-73-9 .

^ Moffat, Alistair (2013).

The British: A Genetic Journey . Edinburgh, Scotland: Birlinn Limited.

ISBN 978-1-78027-075-3 .

Archived from the original on 2024-02-24 . Retrieved 2020-10-15 .

^ Di Stasi, Lawrence (2004).

Una Storia Segreta: The Secret History of Italian American Evacuation and Internment during World War II , Heyday Books.

ISBN 1-890771-40-6 .

^ David Cesarani, Tony Kushner, The Internment of Aliens in Twentieth Century Britain Archived 2023-04-08 at the Wayback Machine , Routledge, 1st ed. (1 May 1993), pp. 176–178.

^ William B. Helmreich, The Things They Say Behind Your Back: Stereotypes and the Myths Behind Them . Fifth Printing. Transaction Publishing, 1984.

^ "The Italian Army" . Archived from the original on 2 May 2015 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ Luciano Garibaldi, Century of War , Friedman/Fairfax, 2001.

^ "Avalanche Press" .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2009 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ "Italian Folgore at El Alamein: Unbreakable" .

Comando Supremo . 12 December 2011.

Archived from the original on 17 January 2015 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ Sadkovich, 1994, p. 617.

^ Sadkovich, 1993, p. 617.

^ Libya – Italian colonization Archived 2013-04-30 at the Wayback Machine , Encyclopædia Britannica ^ "Libya cuts ties to mark Italy era" .

BBC .

Archived from the original on 2013-06-16 . Retrieved 2008-02-20 .

^ Zoubir, Yahia H. (2009). "Libya and Europe: Economic Realism at the Rescue of the Qaddafi Authoritarian Regime".

Journal of Contemporary European Studies .

17 (3): 401–415 [403, 411].

doi : 10.1080/14782800903339354 .

S2CID 153625134 .

^ "Election Opens Old Wounds In Trieste" Archived 2017-11-09 at the Wayback Machine , New York Times ^ History in Exile: Memory and Identity at the Borders of the Balkans Archived 2017-07-12 at the Wayback Machine , Princeton University Press ^ Statistisches Handbüchlein für die oesterreichische Monarchie . 1861.

Archived from the original on 8 April 2023 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ Dulić, Tomislav (January 24, 2004).

"A Reply to Rummel" .

Journal of Peace Research .

41 (1): 105– 106.

doi : 10.1177/0022343304040501 .

S2CID 71879376 .

Archived from the original on February 8, 2024 . Retrieved February 24, 2024 – via CrossRef.

^ "Item no longer available" .

AbeBooks .

Archived from the original on August 19, 2022 . Retrieved August 20, 2022 .

^ Melvin Eugene Page, Penny M. Sonnenburg (2003).

"Colonialism: An International, Social, Cultural, and Political Encyclopedia" . Bloomsbury Academic. p. 544.

ISBN 9781576073353 .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2023 . Retrieved 29 March 2014 .

^ Gérard Noiriel, Le massacre des Italiens: Aigues-Mortes, 17 août 1893 (Paris: Fayard, 2010).

ISBN 9782213660158 .

^ Hugh Seton-Watson, Italy from liberalism to fascism (1967), pp. 161–62.

Further reading [ edit ] Borsella, Cristogianni (2005).

On Persecution, Identity, and Activism . Boston: Dante University Press.

ISBN 0-937832-41-3 .

Bondanella, Peter E. (2004).

Hollywood Italians: Dagos, Palookas, Romeos, Wise Guys, and Sopranos .

A&C Black .

ISBN 9780826415448 .

Connell, William J. and Fred Gardaphé, eds., Anti-Italianism: Essays on a Prejudice , Palgrave Macmillan, 2010.

ISBN 0-230-10829-6 .

Gardaphe, Fred.

From Wiseguys to Wise Men: The Gangster and Italian American Masculinities (Routledge, 2006).

Jackson, Jessica Barbata (2017). "Before the Lynching: Reconsidering the Experience of Italians and Sicilians in Louisiana, 1870s-1890s".

Louisiana History: The Journal of the Louisiana Historical Association .

58 (3): 300– 338.

JSTOR 26290914 .

Larke-Walsh, George S.

Screening the Mafia: Masculinity, Ethnicity and Mobsters from The Godfather to The Sopranos (Macfarland, 2010) online .

Pacchioli, David (May 2004).

"Dark Legacy" .

Penn State Online Research Encyclopedia . Vol. 24. Pennsylvania State University . Retrieved 20 January 2013 .

Smith, Tom.

The Crescent City Lynchings: The Murder of Chief Hennessy, the New Orleans "Mafia" Trials, and the Parish Prison Mob , The Lyons Press, 2007) online .

v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons v t e Italy articles History Overview Timeline of Italian history By topic Citizenship Currency and coinage Economy Fashion Flags Genetic Historic states Judaism LGBT Military Music Name Postage Railways Prehistory Prehistory Neolithic Villanovan Terramare Rinaldone Apennine Nuragic Golasecca Canegrate Latial Ancient Ancient peoples Italic peoples Latins Osci Picentes Samnites Umbri Veneti Etruscans Celts Magna Graecia Ligures Messapians Ancient Rome Kingdom Republic Roman conquest Roman Italy Empire Western Empire Middle Ages Middle Ages Italy under Odoacer Ostrogoths Byzantium Lombards Papal States the Holy Roman Empire the Sardinian Judicates Arabs Normans Guelphs and Ghibellines Lombard League Kingdom of Sicily War of the Sicilian Vespers Kingdom of Naples Early modern Italian city-states Florence Siena Milan Maritime republics Venice Genoa Pisa Amalfi Kingdom of Sardinia Grand Duchy of Tuscany Duchy of Savoy Renaissance Italian Wars Early Modern period Napoleonic Italy Austrian occupation and Kingdom of Lombardy-Venetia Kingdom of the Two Sicilies Late modern Unification First War of Independence Second War of Independence Niçard exodus Expedition of the Thousand Proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy Third War of Independence Capture of Rome Monarchy and the World Wars Kingdom of Italy Colonial Empire World War I Fourth War of Independence Fascist Italy World War II Fall of the Fascist regime Resistance and Social Republic Civil War Contemporary Republic Institutional referendum Istrian–Dalmatian exodus Economic Boom Years of Lead Maxi Trial Mani pulite Coronavirus pandemic Geography Italian geographical region Peninsula Climate Climate change Geology Fauna Flora Mountains Prealps Alps Apennines Volcanism Volcanoes Beaches Canals Caves Earthquakes Islands Lakes Marine protected areas National parks Regional parks Rivers Valleys Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT rights Judiciary Law Law enforcement Military Nationality Parliament Political parties President ( List ) Prime Minister ( List ) Council of Ministers Regions Provinces Metropolitan cities Cities Comune Municipalities Security and intelligence Economy Economy Italian regions by GDP Agriculture Automotive industry Banking Banks Central Bank Brands Companies Energy Exports Science and technology Southern question Stock exchange Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport air rail road Welfare Wine Society Aristocracy Censorship Corruption Crime Demographics Education Emigration and diaspora Gambling Health Healthcare Immigration Inventions and discoveries Italians People Languages Italian Regional Life expectancy Orders, decorations, and medals Poverty Prostitution Public administration Racism Religion Social class Terrorism Water supply and sanitation Women Culture Duecento Trecento Quattrocento Cinquecento Seicento Settecento Ottocento Anthem Architecture Art Castles Cathedrals Cinema Coat of arm Cuisine Design Fashion Flag Folklore Gardens Internet Italophilia Libraries Literature Media Museums Music Mythology National symbols Palaces Philosophy Public holidays Sport Television Theatre Traditions World Heritage Sites Italy portal Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Italian_sentiment&oldid=1306236609 " Categories : Anti-national sentiment Anti-Italian sentiment Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with unsourced quotes Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 17:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Italian sentiment 5 languages Add topic

