Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 The Responsive Eye 2 Method of operation Toggle Method of operation subsection 2.1 Black-and-white and the figure-ground relationship 2.2 Color 3 Exhibitions 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Op art 52 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Magyar مصرى مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art movement Not to be confused with pop art , plop art , OOPArt , or OOPARTS (disambiguation) .

For "operational art", as used in military terminology, see Operational level of war .

Movement in Squares , by Bridget Riley 1961 Op art , short for optical art , is a style of visual art that uses distorted or manipulated geometrical patterns, often to create optical illusions .

[ 1 ] It began in the early 20th century, and was especially popular from the 1960s on, [ 2 ] the term "Op art" dating to 1964.

Op artworks are normally abstract , with some better-known pieces created in black and white. Typically, they give the viewer the impression of movement, hidden images, flashing and vibrating patterns, or swelling or warping.  In contrast, the much older trompe-l'œil style always represents figurative subjects, which are shown with deceptive three-dimensionality.

History [ edit ] Francis Picabia , c. 1921–22, Optophone I , encre, aquarelle et mine de plomb sur papier, 72 × 60 cm. Reproduced in Galeries Dalmau, Picabia , exhibition catalogue, Barcelona, November 18 – December 8, 1922.

Jesús Soto , Caracas (1996) Illusionism , focused on the perception of extended space within a flat picture, is found from the earliest points of art history. However, the antecedents of op art, in terms of graphic effects and concern for exotic optical illusions, can be traced back to Neo-Impressionism , Cubism , Futurism , Constructivism , and Dada .

[ 3 ] The Divisionists , a group of Neo-Impressionist painters, attempted to increase the apparent luminosity of their paintings through recourse to optics and optical illusions.

[ 4 ] László Moholy-Nagy produced photographic op art and taught the subject in the Bauhaus ; one of his lessons consisted of making his students produce holes in cards and then photographing them.

[ 5 ] Time magazine coined the term op art in 1964, in response to Julian Stanczak 's show Optical Paintings at the Martha Jackson Gallery , to mean a form of abstract art (specifically non-objective art) that uses optical illusions.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Works now described as "op art" had been produced for several years before Time's 1964 article. For instance, Victor Vasarely 's painting Zebras (1938) is made up entirely of curvilinear black and white stripes not contained by contour lines. Consequently, the stripes appear to both meld into and burst forth from the surrounding background. Also, the early black and white "dazzle" panels that John McHale installed at the This Is Tomorrow exhibit in 1956 and his Pandora series at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in 1962 demonstrate proto-op art tendencies.

Martin Gardner featured op art and its relation to mathematics in his July 1965 Mathematical Games column in Scientific American . In Italy, Franco Grignani , who originally trained as an architect, became a leading force of graphic design where op art or kinetic art was central. His Woolmark logo (launched in Britain in 1964) is probably the most famous of all his designs.

[ 8 ] An optical illusion by the Hungarian-born artist Victor Vasarely in Pécs (1977).

Op art ceramic mosaics by Wojciech Fangor in a railway station in Warsaw in Poland (1963).

Op art in modern architecture as a mosaic, painting with enamel paint on steel by Stefan Knapp in University of Toruń in Poland (1972).

Op art perhaps more closely derives from the constructivist practices of the Bauhaus .

[ 7 ] This German school, founded by Walter Gropius , stressed the relationship of form and function within a framework of analysis and rationality. Students learned to focus on the overall design or entire composition to present unified works. Op art also stems from trompe-l'œil and anamorphosis . Links with psychological research have also been made, particularly with Gestalt theory and psychophysiology .

[ 3 ] When the Bauhaus was forced to close in 1933, many of its instructors fled to the United States. There, the movement took root in Chicago and eventually at the Black Mountain College in Asheville, North Carolina , where Anni and Josef Albers eventually taught.

[ 9 ] Op artists thus managed to exploit various phenomena," writes Frank Popper , "the after-image and consecutive movement; line interference; the effect of dazzle; ambiguous figures and reversible perspective; successive colour contrasts and chromatic vibration; and in three-dimensional works different viewpoints and the superimposition of elements in space.

[ 3 ] In 1955, for the exhibition Mouvements at the Denise René gallery in Paris, Victor Vasarely and Pontus Hulten promoted in their "Yellow manifesto" some new kinetic expressions based on optical and luminous phenomenon as well as painting illusionism. The expression kinetic art in this modern form first appeared at the Museum für Gestaltung of Zürich in 1960, and found its major developments in the 1960s. In most European countries, it generally includes the form of optical art that mainly makes use of optical illusions , like op art, as well as art based on movement represented by Yacov Agam , Carlos Cruz-Diez , Jesús Rafael Soto , Gregorio Vardanega or Nicolas Schöffer . From 1961 to 1968, the Groupe de Recherche d'Art Visuel (GRAV) founded by François Morellet , Julio Le Parc , Francisco Sobrino , Horacio Garcia Rossi, Yvaral , Joël Stein and Vera Molnár was a collective group of opto-kinetic artists that—according to its 1963 manifesto—appealed to the direct participation of the public with an influence on its behavior, notably through the use of interactive labyrinths .

Some members of the group Nouvelle tendance (1961–1965) in Europe also were engaged in op art as Almir Mavignier and Gerhard von Graevenitz , mainly with their serigraphics. They studied optical illusions. The term op irritated many of the artists labeled under it, specifically including Albers and Stanczak. They had discussed upon the birth of the term a better label, namely perceptual art .

[ 10 ] From 1964, Arnold Schmidt ( Arnold Alfred Schmidt ) had several solo exhibitions of his large, black and white shaped optical paintings exhibited at the Terrain Gallery in New York.

[ 11 ] The Responsive Eye [ edit ] In 1965, between February 23 and April 25, an exhibition called The Responsive Eye , created by William C. Seitz , was held at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City and toured to St. Louis, Seattle, Pasadena, and Baltimore.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] The works shown were wide-ranging, encompassing the minimalism of Frank Stella and Ellsworth Kelly , the smooth plasticity of Alexander Liberman , the collaborative efforts of the Anonima group , alongside the well-known Wojciech Fangor , Victor Vasarely , Julian Stanczak , Richard Anuszkiewicz , Wen-Ying Tsai , Bridget Riley and Getulio Alviani . The exhibition focused on the perceptual aspects of art, which result both from the illusion of movement and the interaction of color relationships.

The exhibition was a success with the public (visitor attendance was over 180,000), [ 14 ] but less so with the critics.

[ 15 ] Critics dismissed op art as portraying nothing more than trompe-l'œil , or tricks that fool the eye. Regardless, the public's acceptance increased, and op art images were used in a number of commercial contexts. One of Brian de Palma 's early works was a documentary film on the exhibition.

[ 16 ] Method of operation [ edit ] Black-and-white and the figure-ground relationship [ edit ] Op art is a perceptual experience related to how vision functions. It is a dynamic visual art that stems from a discordant figure-ground relationship that puts the two planes—foreground and background—in a tense and contradictory juxtaposition. Artists create op art in two primary ways. The first, best known method, is to create effects through pattern and line. Often these paintings are black and white , or shades of gray ( grisaille )—as in Bridget Riley's early paintings such as Current (1964), on the cover of The Responsive Eye catalog. Here, black and white wavy lines are close to one another on the canvas surface, creating a volatile figure-ground relationship.

Getulio Alviani used aluminum surfaces, which he treated to create light patterns that change as the watcher moves (vibrating texture surfaces).  Another reaction that occurs is that the lines create after-images of certain colors due to how the retina receives and processes light. As Goethe demonstrates in his treatise Theory of Colours , at the edge where light and dark meet, color arises because lightness and darkness are the two central properties in the creation of color.

[ citation needed ] Color [ edit ] Beginning in 1965 Bridget Riley began to produce color-based op art; [ 17 ] however, other artists, such as Julian Stanczak and Richard Anuszkiewicz , were always interested in making color the primary focus of their work.

[ 18 ] Josef Albers taught these two primary practitioners of the "Color Function" school at Yale in the 1950s. Often, colorist work is dominated by the same concerns of figure-ground movement, but they have the added element of contrasting colors that produce different effects on the eye.  For instance, in Anuszkiewicz's "temple" paintings, the juxtaposition of two highly contrasting colors provokes a sense of depth in illusionistic three-dimensional space so that it appears as if the architectural shape is invading the viewer's space.

Intrinsic Harmony by Richard Anuszkiewicz, 1965 Victor Vasarely , Kezdi-Ga, 1970, Serigraph, Edition of 250, 20 × 20 in The Fire and Water Fountain by Yaacov Agam , Dizengoff Square in Tel Aviv, Israel 1986. Example of both op art and kinetic art .

Exhibitions [ edit ] L'Œil moteur: Art optique et cinétique 1960–1975 , Musée d'art moderne et contemporain, Strasbourg, France, May 13–September 25, 2005.

Op Art , Schirn Kunsthalle, Frankfurt, Germany, February 17–May 20, 2007.

The Optical Edge , The Pratt Institute of Art, New York, March 8–April 14, 2007.

Optic Nerve: Perceptual Art of the 1960s , Columbus Museum of Art, Columbus, Ohio, February 16–June 17, 2007.

CLE OP: Cleveland Op Art Pioneers , Cleveland Museum of Art, Cleveland, Ohio, April 9, 2011 – February 26, 2012 Bridget Riley has had several international exhibitions (e.g. Dia Center, New York, 2000; Tate Britain, London, 2003; Museum of Contemporary Art, Sydney, 2004).

See also [ edit ] List of op artists Divisionism Binakael (similar patterns in traditional Filipino textiles) Chubb illusion Cornsweet illusion Impossible object Lilac chaser M. C. Escher Mach bands Multistable perception Pattern glare Perception Peripheral drift illusion Same color illusion Zero (art) References [ edit ] ^ Artspeak, Robert Atkins, ISBN 978-1-55859-127-1 ^ Op art - Tate Gallery glossary terms ^ a b c "The Collection - MoMA" . The Museum of Modern Art . Retrieved November 5, 2017 .

^ Lee, Alan. "Seurat and Science." Art History 10 (June 1987): 203-24.

^ [1] László Moholy-Nagy ^ Jon Borgzinner. "Op Art", Time , October 23, 1964.

^ a b "Op-Art: History, Characteristics" .

Visual-Arts-Cork.com .

Archived from the original on 2024-05-03 . Retrieved 2019-12-15 .

^ "The Hypnotic, Mind-bending Work of Italian Designer Franco Grignani" .

Eye on Design . 2019-06-28 . Retrieved 2019-12-15 .

^ "Black Mountain College Movement Overview" .

The Art Story . Retrieved 2019-12-15 .

^ Bertholf. "Julian Stanczak: Decades of Light" Yale Press ^ "A Brief History of the Terrain Gallery" . TerrainGallery.org. Archived from the original on April 3, 2010 . Retrieved November 5, 2017 .

^ Seitz, William C. (1965).

The Responsive Eye (exhibition catalog) (PDF) . New York: Museum of Modern Art.

OCLC 644787547 . Retrieved January 23, 2016 .

^ "The Responsive Eye" (PDF) (Press release). New York: Museum of Modern Art. February 25, 1965 . Retrieved January 23, 2016 .

^ Gordon Hyatt (writer and producer), Mike Wallace (presenter) (1965).

The Responsive Eye (Television production). Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc. Archived from the original on 2013-01-03.

(Available on YouTube in three sections.) ^ "MoMA 1965: The Responsive Eye" . CoolHunting.com. Archived from the original on September 28, 2009 . Retrieved November 5, 2017 .

^ Brian De Palma (director) (1966).

The Responsive Eye (Motion picture).

^ Hopkins, David (September 14, 2000).

After Modern Art 1945-2000 . OUP Oxford. p. 147.

ISBN 9780192842343 . Retrieved November 5, 2017 – via Google Books.

^ See Color Function Painting: The Art of Josef Albers, Julian Stanczak, and Richard Anuszkiewicz , Wake Forest University, reprinted 2002.

Bibliography [ edit ] Frank Popper , Origins and Development of Kinetic Art , New York Graphic Society/Studio Vista, 1968 Frank Popper, From Technological to Virtual Art , Leonardo Books, MIT Press, 2007 Seitz, William C. (1965).

The Responsive Eye (PDF) . New York: Museum of Modern Art. Exhibition catalog.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: postscript ( link ) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Op art .

Opartica - online op art making tool v t e Op art Artists Yaacov Agam Josef Albers Getulio Alviani Edna Andrade Richard Anuszkiewicz Carlos Cruz-Diez Wojciech Fangor Gerhard von Graevenitz Edwin Mieczkowski Andrzej Nowacki Julio Le Parc Bridget Riley Arnold Alfred Schmidt Francisco Sobrino Jesús Rafael Soto Julian Stanczak Gregorio Vardanega Grazia Varisco Victor Vasarely Jean-Pierre Yvaral Color theory Figure–ground François Morellet Hard-edge painting M. C. Escher Optical illusion v t e Geometric abstraction Concrete art Constructivism De Stijl Minimalism Op art Suprematism v t e Optical illusions ( list ) Illusions Afterimage Ambigram Ambiguous image Ames room Autostereogram Barberpole Bezold Café wall Checker shadow Chubb Cornsweet Delboeuf Ebbinghaus Ehrenstein Flash lag Fraser spiral Gravity hill Grid Hering Impossible trident Irradiation Jastrow Lilac chaser Mach bands McCollough Müller-Lyer Necker cube Oppel-Kundt Orbison Penrose stairs Penrose triangle Peripheral drift Poggendorff Ponzo Rubin vase Sander Schroeder stairs Shepard tables Spinning dancer Ternus Vertical–horizontal White's Wundt Zöllner Popular culture Op art Trompe-l'œil Spectropia (1864 book) Ascending and Descending (1960 drawing) Waterfall (1961 drawing) The dress (2015 photograph) Related Accidental viewpoint Auditory illusions Illusions Tactile illusions Temporal illusion v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases National Czech Republic Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Op_art&oldid=1298673776 " Categories : Op art 1964 neologisms 20th-century art movements Time (magazine) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2009 CS1 maint: postscript Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 July 2025, at 23:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Op art 52 languages Add topic

