Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theory 2 Colors by wavelength 3 By category 4 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 4.1 Salts 4.2 Ions in flame 4.3 Gases 4.3.1 Bead tests 5 References Toggle the table of contents Color of chemicals 2 languages Français Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Physical property of chemicals The color of chemicals is a physical property of chemicals that in most cases comes from the excitation of electrons due to an absorption of energy performed by the chemical.

The study of chemical structure by means of energy absorption and release is generally referred to as spectroscopy .

Theory [ edit ] The UV-vis spectrum for a compound that appears orange in Dimethylformamide All atoms and molecules are capable of absorbing and releasing energy in the form of photons , accompanied by a change of quantum state. The amount of energy absorbed or released is the difference between the energies of the two quantum states. There are various types of quantum state, including, for example, the rotational and vibrational states of a molecule. However the release of energy visible to the human eye, commonly referred to as visible light, spans the wavelengths approximately 380 nm to 760 nm, depending on the individual, and photons in this range usually accompany a change in atomic or molecular orbital quantum state. The perception of light is governed by three types of color receptors in the eye, which are sensitive to different ranges of wavelength within this band.

The relationship between energy and wavelength is determined by the Planck-Einstein relation E = h f = h c λ λ {\displaystyle E=hf={\frac {hc}{\lambda }}} where E is the energy of the quantum ( photon ), f is the frequency of the light wave, h is the Planck constant , λ is the wavelength and c is the speed of light .

The relationships between the energies of the various quantum states are treated by atomic orbital , molecular orbital , Ligand Field Theory and Crystal Field Theory . If photons of a particular wavelength are absorbed by matter, then when we observe light reflected from or transmitted through that matter, what we see is the complementary color , made up of the other visible wavelengths remaining. For example, beta-carotene has maximum absorption at 454 nm (blue light), consequently what visible light remains appears orange .

Colors by wavelength [ edit ] What is seen by the eye is not the color absorbed, but the complementary color from the removal of the absorbed wavelengths . This spectral perspective was first noted in atomic spectroscopy .

Below is a rough table of wavelengths, colors and complementary colors. This utilizes the scientific CMY and RGB color wheels rather than the traditional RYB color wheel.

[ 1 ] Wavelength (nm) Color Complementary color 400–424 violet yellow 424–491 blue orange 491–570 green red 570–585 yellow violet 585–647 orange blue 647–700 red green This can only be used as a very rough guide, for instance if a narrow range of wavelengths within the band 647–700 nm is absorbed, then the blue and green receptors will be fully stimulated, making cyan, and the red receptor will be partially stimulated, diluting the cyan to a greyish hue.

By category [ edit ] The vast majority of simple inorganic (e.g.

sodium chloride ) and organic compounds (e.g. ethanol) are colorless.

Transition metal compounds are often colored because of transitions of electrons between d-orbitals of different energy. (see Transition metal#Colored compounds ). Organic compounds tend to be colored when there is extensive conjugation , causing the energy gap between the HOMO and LUMO to decrease, bringing the absorption band from the UV to the visible region. Similarly, color is due to the energy absorbed by the compound, when an electron transitions from the HOMO to the LUMO.

Lycopene is a classic example of a compound with extensive conjugation (11 conjugated double bonds), giving rise to an intense red color (lycopene is responsible for the color of tomatoes ).

Charge-transfer complexes tend to have very intense colors for different reasons.

Examples [ edit ] Colors of metallic ions Name Formula Color Magnesium(II) Mg 2+ colorless Scandium(III) Sc 3+ silver Titanium(III) Ti 3+ purple Titanium(IV) Ti 4+ silver Titanyl TiO 2+ colorless Vanadium(II) V 2+ light purple Vanadium(III) V 3+ dark grey-green Vanadyl(IV) VO 2+ blue Vanadium(IV) ( vanadite ) V 4 O 2− 9 brown Vanadium(V) ( pervanadyl ) VO + 2 yellow Metavanadate VO − 3 colorless Orthovanadate VO 3− 4 colorless Chromium(II) Cr 2+ bright blue Chromium(III) Cr 3+ blue-green-grey Chromium(III) hydroxide Cr(OH) 6 3− yellowish Monochromate CrO 2− 4 yellow Dichromate Cr 2 O 2− 7 orange Manganese(II) Mn 2+ pale pink Manganese(III) Mn 3+ crimson Manganate(V) MnO 3− 4 deep blue Manganate(VI) MnO 2− 4 dark green Manganate(VII) ( permanganate ) MnO − 4 deep purple Iron(II) Fe 2+ greenish Cobalt(II) fluoride Co 2+ pink Cobalt(III) amine Co(NH 3 ) 3+ 6 yellow/orange Nickel(II) Ni 2+ light green Nickel(II) amine complex Ni(NH 3 ) 2+ 6 lavender/blue Copper(I) amine complex Cu(NH 3 ) + 2 colorless Copper(II) Cu 2+ blue Copper(II) amine complex Cu(NH 3 ) 2+ 4 indigo-blue Copper(II) chloride CuCl 2− 4 blue-green Zinc(II) Zn 2+ colorless Silver(I) Ag + colorless Silver(III) in conc. HNO 3 Ag 3+ dark brown However, elemental colors will vary depending on what they are complexed with, often as well as their chemical state.  An example with vanadium(III); VCl 3 has a distinctive reddish hue, whilst V 2 O 3 appears black.

Salts [ edit ] Predicting the color of a compound can be extremely complicated.  Some examples include: Cobalt chloride is pink or blue depending on the state of hydration (blue dry, pink with water) so it is used as a moisture indicator in silica gel.

Zinc oxide is white, but at higher temperatures becomes yellow, returning to white as it cools.

Colors of various salts Name Formula of the corresponding salts Color Picture Iron(III) chloride hexahydrate FeCl 3 ·6H 2 O yellow/brown Iron(III) chloride anhydrate FeCl 3 black Chromium (III) sulfate Cr 2 (SO 4 ) 3 dark green Copper(II) sulfate anhydrate CuSO 4 white Copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate CuSO 4 ·5H 2 O blue Copper(II) benzoate Cu(C 7 H 5 O 2 ) 2 blue Cobalt(II) chloride CoCl 2 dep blue Cobalt(II) chloride hexahydrate CoCl 2 ·6H 2 O deep magenta Manganese(II) chloride tetrahydrate MnCl 2 ·4H 2 O pink Copper(II) chloride dihydrate CuCl 2 ·2H 2 O blue-green Nickel(II) chloride hexahydrate NiCl 2 ·6H 2 O green Lead(II) iodide PbI 2 yellow Ammonium dichromate (NH 4 ) 2 Cr 2 O 7 orange Ions in flame [ edit ] Main articles: Atomic spectroscopy and Flame test Colors of metal ions in flame [ 2 ] Name Formula Color Lithium Li red Sodium Na yellow/orange Magnesium Mg brilliant white Potassium K lilac/violet Calcium Ca brick red Rubidium Rb red-violet Strontium Sr red Caesium Cs light blue Barium Ba green/yellow Copper Cu Blue/Green(Often with white flashes) Lead Pb Grey/White Gases [ edit ] Colors of various gases Name Formula Color Hydrogen H 2 colorless Oxygen O 2 pale blue Ozone O 3 pale blue Fluorine F 2 pale yellow Chlorine Cl 2 greenish yellow Bromine Br 2 red/brown Iodine I 2 dark purple Chlorine dioxide ClO 2 intense yellow Dichlorine monoxide Cl 2 O brown/yellow Nitrogen dioxide NO 2 dark brown Trifluoronitrosomethane CF 3 NO deep blue Diazomethane CH 2 N 2 yellow Bead tests [ edit ] Main article: Bead test A variety of colors, often similar to the colors found in a flame test , are produced in a bead test, which is a qualitative test for determining metals. A platinum loop is moistened and dipped in a fine powder of the substance in question and borax . The loop with the adhered powders is then heated in a flame until it fuses and the color of the resulting bead observed.

Colors exhibited by metals in the bead test Metal [ 3 ] Oxidizing flame Reducing flame Aluminium colorless (hot and cold), opaque colorless, opaque Antimony colorless, yellow or brown (hot) gray and opaque Barium colorless Bismuth colorless, yellow or brownish (hot) gray and opaque Cadmium colorless gray and opaque Calcium colorless Cerium red (hot) colorless (hot and cold) Chromium dark yellow (hot), green (cold) green (hot and cold) Cobalt blue (hot and cold) blue (hot and cold) Copper green (hot), blue (cold) red, opaque (cold), colorless (hot) Gold golden (hot), silver (cold) red (hot and cold) Iron yellow or brownish red (hot and cold) green (hot and cold) Lead colorless, yellow or brownish (hot) gray and opaque Magnesium colorless Manganese violet (hot and cold) colorless (hot and cold) Molybdenum colorless yellow or brown (hot) Nickel brown, red (cold) gray and opaque (cold) Silicon colorless (hot and cold), opaque colorless, opaque Silver colorless gray and opaque Strontium colorless Tin colorless (hot and cold), opaque colorless, opaque Titanium colorless yellow (hot), violet (cold) Tungsten colorless brown Uranium yellow or brownish (hot) green Vanadium colorless green References [ edit ] ^ "SAP Fiori | SAP Community" .

^ Flame Tests at chemguide.co.uk ^ CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics . CRC Press. 1985.

ISBN 0-8493-0466-0 .

v t e Color topics Color science Color physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colors Chromophore Structural coloration Animal coloration Color of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Color perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Color calibration Color constancy Color task Color code Color temperature Color vision test Evolution of color vision Impossible colors Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Color psychology Color symbolism Color preferences Lüscher color test Kruithof curve Political color National colors Chromophobia Chromotherapy Color reproduction Color photography Color balance Color cast Digital image processing Color management Color printing Multi-primary color display Quattron Color model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Color space Color mapping Color philosophy Color scheme Color tool Monochromatic colors Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colors Analogous colors Achromatic colors (Neutral) Polychromatic colors Light-on-dark Web colors Tinctures in heraldry Color theory Color mixing Primary color Secondary color Chromaticity Color solid Color wheel Color triangle Color analysis (fashion) Color realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Color terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Gray Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Color history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Color in Chinese culture Traditional colors of Japan Human skin color Color dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colorfulness Pastel colors Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Color organizations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Color Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) List of colors by shade List of color palettes List of color spaces List of Crayola crayon colors history Color chart List of RAL colors List of web colors Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐f84ql
Cached time: 20250812000257
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.384 seconds
Real time usage: 0.539 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3658/1000000
Revision size: 15641/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 119776/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8325/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 16681/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.190/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5165952/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  365.531      1 -total
 26.59%   97.180      5 Template:Navbox
 26.11%   95.432      1 Template:Reflist
 25.69%   93.901      1 Template:Color_topics
 21.09%   77.093      1 Template:Cite_web
 18.52%   67.688      1 Template:Short_description
 11.99%   43.814     14 Template:Chem
 10.97%   40.088     14 Template:Chem/link
  9.76%   35.676      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.48%   31.004      1 Template:Val Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:285482:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000257 and revision id 1286555543. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Color_of_chemicals&oldid=1286555543 " Category : Chemical properties Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 April 2025, at 16:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Color of chemicals 2 languages Add topic

