Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 1.1 Ancient Greek philosophy 1.2 Modern usage 2 Rhetoric 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources Toggle the table of contents Aporia 33 languages Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina کوردی Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia State of puzzlement or expression of doubt, in philosophy and rhetoric For other uses, see Aporia (disambiguation) .

This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( January 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Pyrrhonism Pyrrhonists Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus Concepts Ataraxia Acatalepsy Adiaphora Aporia Dogma Epoché Similar philosophies Academic skepticism Modern influence Münchhausen trilemma Benson Mates Robert Fogelin Philosophy portal v t e In philosophy , an aporia ( Ancient Greek : ᾰ̓πορῐ́ᾱ , romanized : aporíā , lit.

'"lacking passage", also: "impasse", "difficulty in passage", "puzzlement"') is a conundrum or state of puzzlement. In rhetoric , it is a declaration of doubt, made for rhetorical purpose and often feigned. The notion of an aporia is principally found in ancient Greek philosophy , but it also plays a role in modern post-structuralist philosophy, as in the writings of Jacques Derrida and Luce Irigaray , and it has also served as an instrument of investigation in analytic philosophy .

Philosophy [ edit ] In philosophy, an aporia is a philosophical puzzle or a seemingly irresoluble impasse in an inquiry, often arising as a result of equally plausible yet inconsistent premises, i.e., a paradox . It can also denote the state of being perplexed, or at a loss, at such a puzzle or impasse.

Ancient Greek philosophy [ edit ] Plato 's early dialogues are often called his 'aporetic' (Greek: ἀπορητικός ) dialogues, because they typically end in aporia. In such a dialogue, Socrates questions his interlocutor about the nature or definition of a concept, e.g., virtue or courage. Socrates then, through elenctic testing, shows his interlocutor that his answer is unsatisfactory. After a number of such failed attempts, the interlocutor admits he is in aporia about the examined concept, concluding that he does not know what it is. In Plato's Meno (84a-c), Socrates describes the purgative effect of reducing someone to aporia: it shows someone who merely thought he knew something that he does not in fact know it and instills in him a desire to investigate it.

In Aristotle 's Metaphysics , aporia plays a role in his method of inquiry. In contrast to a rationalist inquiry that begins from a priori principles, or an empiricist inquiry that begins from a tabula rasa , he begins the Metaphysics by surveying the various aporiai that exist, drawing in particular on what puzzled his predecessors: "with a view to the science we are seeking [i.e., metaphysics ], it is necessary that we should first review the things about which we need, from the outset, to be puzzled" (995a24). Book Beta of the Metaphysics is a list of the aporiai that preoccupy the rest of the work.

In Pyrrhonism , aporia is intentionally induced as a means of producing ataraxia .

Modern usage [ edit ] Contemporary academic studies of the term aporia further characterize its usage in philosophical discourses. In "Aporetics: Rational Deliberation in the Face of Inconsistency" (2009), Nicholas Rescher is concerned with the methods in which an aporia, or "apory", is intellectually processed and resolved. In his Preface, Rescher identifies the work as an attempt to "synthesize and systematize an aporetic procedure for dealing with information overload (of ' cognitive dissonance ', as it is sometimes called)" (ix). The text is also useful in that it provides a more precise (although specialized) definition of the concept: "any cognitive situation in which the threat of inconsistency confronts us" (1). Rescher further introduces his specific study of the apory by qualifying the term as "a group of individually plausible but collectively incompatible theses", a designation he illustrates with the following syllogism or "cluster of contentions": 1. What the sight of our eyes tells us is to be believed.

2. Sight tells us the stick is bent.

3. What the touch of our hand tells us is to be believed.

4. Touch tells us the stick is straight. (2) The aporia, or "apory" of this syllogism lies in the fact that, while each of these assertions is individually conceivable, together they are inconsistent or impossible (i.e. they constitute a paradox ). Rescher's study is indicative of the continuing presence of scholarly examinations of the concept of aporia and, furthermore, of the continuing attempts of scholars to translate the word, to describe its modern meaning.

Aporia's role in modern post-structuralist philosophy, is reflected in the writings of Jacques Derrida and Luce Irigaray , and it has also served as an instrument of investigation in analytic philosophy . Derrida refers to three "aporias": "the epoche of the rule", "the ghost of the undecidable", and "the urgency that obstructs the horizon of knowledge".

[ 1 ] Rhetoric [ edit ] Aporia is also a rhetorical device whereby the speaker expresses a doubt —often feigned—about their position or asks the audience rhetorically how the speaker should proceed. One aim of aporia may be to discredit the speaker's opponent. Aporia is also called dubitatio . For example: I am at no loss for information about you and your family; but I am at a loss where to begin. Shall I relate how your father Tromes was a slave in the house of Elpias, who kept an elementary school near the Temple of Theseus, and how he wore shackles on his legs and a timber collar round his neck? Or how your mother practised daylight nuptials in an outhouse next door to Heros the bone-setter, and so brought you up to act in tableaux vivants and to excel in minor parts on the stage?

— Demosthenes , On The Crown , 129 See also [ edit ] Antinomy Cognition Dubitative mood Figure of speech Intuition Rhetorical question Thought experiment Zeno's paradoxes Gordian knot References [ edit ] ^ Lawlor, L., Jacques Derrida , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , updated on 27 August 2021, accessed on 6 January 2025 Sources [ edit ] "Aporia".

The Oxford English Dictionary (2 ed.). 1989.

Harmon, William (2009).

A Handbook to Literature . Upper Saddle River NJ: Pearson.

ISBN 978-0-205-02401-8 .

Kofman, Sarah (1983). "Beyond Aporia?". In Benjamin, Andrew (ed.).

Post-Structuralist Classics . London: Routledge. pp.

7– 44.

Vasilis Politis (2006). "Aporia and Searching in the Early Plato" in L. Judson and V. Karasmanis eds.

Remembering Socrates . Oxford University Press.

Rescher, Nicholas (2009).

Aporetics . Pittsburgh PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.

ISBN 978-0-8229-6057-7 .

Smyth, Herbert Weir (1920).

Greek Grammar . Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press. p. 674.

ISBN 0-674-36250-0 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism v t e Ancient Greek philosophical concepts Adiaphora (indifferent) Aletheia (truth) Apeiron (infinite) Aporia (problem) Arche (first principle) Arete (excellence) Ataraxia (tranquility) Cosmos (order) Diairesis (division) Doxa (opinion) Episteme (knowledge) Ethos (character) Eudaimonia (flourishing) Hesychia (stillness) Logos (reason) Mimesis (imitation) Monad (unit) Nous (intellect) Ousia (substance) Pathos (passion) Phronesis (prudence) Physis (nature) Sophia (wisdom) Sophrosyne (temperance) Sophós (sage) Techne (craft) Telos (goal) Thumos (temper) NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐jwr2t
Cached time: 20250814215353
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.389 seconds
Real time usage: 0.504 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2011/1000000
Revision size: 7468/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 57731/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4182/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 51242/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.252/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23047868/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  436.458      1 -total
 19.63%   85.667      1 Template:Langx
 18.42%   80.374      1 Template:Pyrrhonism_sidebar
 18.09%   78.970      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 17.66%   77.061      5 Template:Cite_book
 13.15%   57.389      1 Template:Short_description
 11.24%   49.049      3 Template:Navbox
  9.16%   39.969      1 Template:No_footnotes
  8.22%   35.874      1 Template:Ambox
  7.10%   30.998      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:680986:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215353 and revision id 1293186242. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aporia&oldid=1293186242 " Categories : Concepts in ancient Greek epistemology Concepts in ancient Greek philosophy of mind Figures of speech Mental states Pyrrhonism Rhetoric Theories in ancient Greek philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2023 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 07:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aporia 33 languages Add topic

