Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Religious life 3 Academic work 4 Selected publications 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Aidan Nichols 4 languages Deutsch مصرى Norsk bokmål Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English academic and Catholic priest This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Aidan Nichols" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Very Reverend Aidan Nichols OP Nichols in 2014 Orders Ordination 7 July 1976 Personal details Born ( 1948-09-17 ) 17 September 1948 (age 76) Lytham St Annes , Lancashire , England Denomination Catholic ( Latin Church ) Residence Cambridge Blackfriars Occupation Priest, academic, theologian Alma mater Christ Church, Oxford Blackfriars , Oxford University of Edinburgh Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas John Christopher " Aidan " Nichols OP [ 1 ] (born 17 September 1948) is an English academic and Catholic priest.

Nichols served as the first John Paul II Memorial Visiting Lecturer at the University of Oxford for 2006 to 2008, the first lectureship of Catholic theology at that university since the Protestant Reformation . He is a member of the Order of Preachers (Dominicans) residing in the Priory of St Michael the Archangel in Cambridge, England.

Early life [ edit ] Nichols was born in Lytham St Annes , Lancashire, on 17 September 1948. He graduated with first-class honours from Christ Church, Oxford , with a degree in modern history.

Religious life [ edit ] Nichols entered the Dominican Order in 1970. He spent the next seven years at Blackfriars, Oxford , during which time he was ordained to the priesthood. He then moved to Edinburgh, where he served as a chaplain at the University of Edinburgh . He received his doctorate at Edinburgh in 1986.

[ 2 ] Between 1983 and 1991, Nichols was lecturer in dogmatics and ecumenics at the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas in Rome. In 1990 he was awarded the degree of Licentiate of Sacred Theology from the university. In 2003, the master of the Dominican Order conferred on Nichols the degree of Master of Sacred Theology .

From Rome. Nichols moved back to England and to Cambridge , where he began as assistant Catholic chaplain, then as an affiliated university lecturer (1998) as prior of St Michael's for two terms between 1998 and 2004, and again for a third term from 2013.

Academic work [ edit ] Nichols began his academic work in the Russian theological tradition and has written on many figures, including Sergei Bulgakov . However he is best known for his work on Hans Urs von Balthasar , publishing three analytic volumes on von Balthasar's famous trilogy: The Word Has Been Abroad: A Guide Through Balthasar's Aesthetics (1998), No Bloodless Myth: A Guide Through Balthasar’s Dramatics (2000) and Say It Is Pentecost: A Guide Through Balthasar’s Logic (2001). He was also one of the contributors to the Cambridge Companion to Hans Urs von Balthasar (2004). He has also written The Theology of Joseph Ratzinger (1988), a book on the theological history of Anglicanism in The Panther and the Hind (1992) and a more general work on religion in the modern world, Christendom Awake (1993).

Selected publications [ edit ] Main article: Aidan Nichols bibliography The Theology of Joseph Ratzinger: An Introductory Study (1988) Yves Congar (1989) The Holy Eucharist: From the New Testament to Pope John Paul II (1991) The Shape of Catholic Theology: An Introduction to Its Sources, Principles, and History (1991) The Panther and the Hind: A Theological History of Anglicanism (1992) Discovering Aquinas: An Introduction to His Life, Work and Influence (2002) Epiphany: A Theological Introduction to Catholicism (2002) Lovely, like Jerusalem. The Fulfilment of the Old Testament in Christ and the Church (2007) G. K. Chesterton, Theologian (2009) Chalice of God. A Systematic Theology in Outline (2012) There Is No Rose: The Mariology of the Catholic Church (2015) All Great Art is Praise: Art and Religion in John Ruskin (2016) Balthasar for Thomists (2020) Romance and System: The Theological Synthesis of Matthias Joseph Scheeben (2021) Apologia: A Memoir (2023) References [ edit ] ^ "Sophia Institute: Fr. Aidan Nichols" . Archived from the original on 17 March 2015 . Retrieved 15 May 2015 .

^ Nichols, Aidan John Christopher (1987).

"The ecclesiology of N. N. Afanasev, patristic ressourcement and ecumenical prospect in the Russian tradition" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Aidan Nichols .

Blackfriars, Cambridge Christendom Awake website Interview with Touchstone magazine Sermons by Aidan Nichols at Torch v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Poland Israel Belgium Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aidan_Nichols&oldid=1299989539 " Categories : 1948 births Living people People from Lytham St Annes 20th-century British Roman Catholic theologians 20th-century English Roman Catholic priests 21st-century British Roman Catholic theologians 21st-century English Roman Catholic priests Academic staff of the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas Academics of the University of Cambridge Alumni of Blackfriars, Oxford Alumni of Christ Church, Oxford Alumni of the University of Edinburgh Dominican theologians English Dominicans New Blackfriars people Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata BLP articles lacking sources from September 2016 All BLP articles lacking sources Use British English from September 2014 Use dmy dates from March 2025 Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 16:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aidan Nichols 4 languages Add topic

