Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Flora 3 Fauna Toggle Fauna subsection 3.1 Endangered 3.2 Extinct 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Wildlife of Iran 9 languages العربية Чӑвашла فارسی Français हिन्दी ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Fauna of Iran ) The wildlife of Iran include the fauna and flora of Iran .

One of the most famous animals of Iran is the critically endangered Asiatic cheetah ( Acinonyx jubatus venaticus ), which today survives only in Iran.

[ 1 ] Another notable species is the Iranian ground jay ( Podoces pleskei ), the only bird endemic to Iran.

History [ edit ] The animals of Iran were described by Hamdallah Mustawfi in the 14th century. In the 18th and 19th centuries, Samuel Gottlieb Gmelin and Édouard Ménétries explored the Caspian Sea area and the Talysh Mountains to document Caspian fauna. Several naturalists followed in the 19th century, including Filippo de Filippi , William Thomas Blanford , and Nikolai Zarudny who documented mammal , bird , reptile , amphibian and fish species. The Complete Fauna of Iran by Eskandar Firouz , documents a wide range of species across the country’s ecosystems [ 2 ] Flora [ edit ] More than one-tenth of the country is forested. The most extensive forest is found on the mountain slopes rising from the Caspian Sea, with stands of oak , ash , elm , cypress , and other valuable trees. On the plateau proper, areas of scrub oak appear on the best-watered mountain slopes, and villagers cultivate orchards and grow the plane tree, poplar, willow , walnut , beech , maple , and mulberry . Wild plants and shrubs spring from the barren land in the spring and afford pasturage, but the summer sun burns them away. According to FAO reports, the major types of forests that exist in Iran and their respective areas are: [ 3 ] Caspian forests of the northern districts (33,000 km 2 ) Limestone mountainous forests in the northeastern districts ( Juniperus forests, 13,000 km 2 ) Pistachio forests in the eastern, southern and southeastern districts (26,000 km 2 ) Oak forests in the central and western districts (100,000 km 2 ) Shrubs of the Dasht-e Kavir districts in the central and northeastern part of the country (10,000 km 2 ) Sub-tropical forests of the southern coast (5,000 km 2 ) like the Hara forests .

More than 8,200 plant species are grown in Iran. The land covered by Iran's natural flora is four times that of the Europe's.

Persian ironwood is native to Northern Iran , but is widely planted elsewhere for aesthetic purposes Fritillaria imperialis of Iran The 4000-year-old Cypress of Abarqu , in Abarkuh Juniperus excelsa polycarpos or Persian juniper Avicennia marina trees (locally known as harra ) of the mangrove forests of Qeshm Trees in forests of Mazandaran Fauna [ edit ] Golden jackal ( Canis aureus ) Iran's living fauna includes 34 bat species, Indian grey mongoose , small Indian mongoose , golden jackal , Indian wolf , foxes , striped hyena , leopard , Eurasian lynx , brown bear and Asian black bear .

[ 2 ] Ungulate species include wild boar , urial , Armenian mouflon , red deer , and goitered gazelle .

[ 4 ] Domestic ungulates are represented by sheep , goat , cattle , horse , water buffalo , donkey and camel . Bird species like pheasant , partridge , stork , eagles and falcons are also native to Iran.

[ citation needed ] Long-legged buzzard Long-eared hedgehog Camels in Kavir National Park Syrian brown bear ( Ursus arctos syriacus ) in Lar National Park , northern Iran Endangered [ edit ] An Asiatic cheetah Persian fallow deer , surviving only in Iran and Israel As of 2001, 20 of Iran's mammal species and 14 bird species were endangered. Endangered species in Iran include the Baluchistan bear , Asiatic cheetah , Caspian seal , Persian fallow deer , Siberian crane , hawksbill turtle , green turtle , Oxus cobra , Latifi's viper , dugong , Panthera pardus tulliana , Caspian Sea wolf , and dolphin . At least 74 species of Iranian wildlife are listed on the IUCN Red List , a sign of serious threats to the country's biodiversity.

Majlis have shown disregard for wildlife by passing laws and regulations such as the act that lets the Ministry of Industries and Mines exploit mines without the involvement of the Department of Environment , and by approving large national development projects without demanding comprehensive study of their impact on wildlife habitats.

[ 5 ] The leopard's main range overlaps with that of bezoar ibex , which occurs throughout Alborz and Zagros mountain ranges, as well as smaller ranges within the Iranian Plateau . The leopard population is very sparse, due to loss of habitat, loss of natural prey, and population fragmentation . Apart from bezoar ibex, wild sheep, boar, deer, and domestic livestock constitute leopard prey in Iran.

[ 6 ] Extinct [ edit ] Aurochs (unknown date post-dating the Neolithic ).

Cave hyena , native to Iran during the Last Glacial Period (as evidenced by remains in sites such as Wezmeh Cave ), became extinct at an unknown date.

[ 7 ] Narrow-nosed rhinoceros native to Iran during the Last Glacial Period, became extinct at an unknown date.

[ 7 ] Hydruntine , extinct species of wild ass. Youngest records in Iran date to the 2nd millennium BC .

[ 8 ] The Syrian elephant roamed southern Iran, before vanishing there in ancient times.

[ 9 ] The Asiatic lion was recorded only in Iran's Khuzestan and Fars provinces . The last sighting occurred in 1957 in the Dez River valley.

[ 10 ] In the 1970s, Arzhan National Park was considered as a site for its reintroduction.

[ 4 ] [ 2 ] The Caspian tiger used to occur in the northern region around the Caspian Sea , and in the Trans-Caucasian and Turkestani regions of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics , before 1960. The last tiger in Iran was reportedly sighted in Golestan National Park in 1958.

[ 11 ] [ 4 ] [ 2 ] Sasanian Empire relief of boar-hunting on domestic elephants, Taq-e Bostan , Iran Men with a live lion in Persia, photographed by Antoin Sevruguin (1830s–1933) Caspian tiger killed in northern Iran in the early 1940s See also [ edit ] List of birds of Iran List of mammals of Iran List of non-marine molluscs of Iran World Network of Biosphere Reserves in Asia and the Pacific List of national parks and protected areas of Iran Geography of Iran Environmental issues in Iran International rankings of Iran Wildlife of Afghanistan Wildlife of South Asia Wildlife of Iraq References [ edit ] ^ Jowkar, H.; Hunter, L.; Ziaie, H.; Marker, L.; Breitenmoser-Wursten, C.; Durant, S. (2008).

" Acinonyx jubatus ssp.

venaticus " .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species .

2008 : e.T220A13035342.

doi : 10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T220A13035342.en . Retrieved 13 November 2021 .

^ a b c d Firouz, E. (2005).

The Complete Fauna of Iran . London, New York: I. B. Tauris.

ISBN 978-1-85043-946-2 .

^ "Unasylva – Vol. 8, No. 2" .

Food and Agriculture Organization . Retrieved 6 January 2018 .

^ a b c Humphreys, P.; Kahrom, E. (1999).

Lion and Gazelle: The Mammals and Birds of Iran . Avon: Images Publishing.

ISBN 0-9513977-6-1 .

^ "74 Iranian wildlife species red-listed by Environment Department" .

Payvand . Archived from the original on 20 May 2015 . Retrieved 6 January 2018 .

^ Sanei, A., Zakaria, M., Hermidas, S. (2011).

"Prey composition in the Persian leopard distribution range in Iran" .

Asia Life Sciences Supplement .

7 : 19–30.

^ a b Mashkour, M.; Monchot, H.; Trinkaus, E.; Reyss, J.‐L.; Biglari, F.; Bailon, S.; Heydari, S.; Abdi, K. (2009). "Carnivores and their prey in the Wezmeh Cave (Kermanshah, Iran): a Late Pleistocene refuge in the Zagros".

International Journal of Osteoarchaeology .

19 (6): 678– 694.

doi : 10.1002/oa.997 .

^ Özkan, M.; Gürün, K.; Yüncü, E.; Vural, K. B.; Atağ, G.; Akbaba, A.; Fidan, F. R.; Sağlıcan, E.; Altınışık, Ezgi N.; Koptekin, D.; Pawłowska, K.; Hodder, I.; Adcock, S. E.; Arbuckle, B. S.; Steadman, S. R. (2024).

"The first complete genome of the extinct European wild ass ( Equus hemionus hydruntinus )" .

Molecular Ecology .

33 (14).

doi : 10.1111/mec.17440 .

hdl : 11511/110286 .

^ Choudhury, A.; Lahiri Choudhury, D.K.; Desai, A.; Duckworth, J.W.; Easa, P.S.; Johnsingh, A.J.T.; Fernando, P.; Hedges, S.; Gunawardena, M.; Kurt, F. (2008).

" Elephas maximus " .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species .

2008 : e.T7140A12828813.

^ Khosravifard, S.; Niamir, A. (2016). "The lair of the lion in Iran".

Cat News (Special Issue 10): 14– 17.

^ Geptner, V. G.; Sludskij, A. A. (1992) [1972].

"Tiger" .

Mlekopitajuščie Sovetskogo Soiuza. Moskva: Vysšaia Škola [ Mammals of the Soviet Union. Volume II, Part 2. Carnivora (Hyaenas and Cats) ]. Washington DC: Smithsonian Institution and the National Science Foundation. pp.

95– 202.

Bibliography [ edit ] Rechinger, Karl Heinz , et al. (1963–2015).

Flora Iranica .

181 parts. Graz: Akademische Druck- u. Verlagsanstalt.

External links [ edit ] Fauna of Persia , Encyclopædia Iranica Department of Environment of Iran Asian Leopard Specialist Society, Iran: Research, Conservation and Management Flora of Iran by Pr Ahmad Ghahreman Flora of Iran Iranian Cheetah Society (ICS) Status of the Persian Leopard in Iran Skin of a Persian lioness, belonging to an endangered subspecies of lions, brought to Dublin by King Edward VII in 1902.

v t e Wildlife of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wildlife_of_Iran&oldid=1292594024#Fauna " Categories : Wildlife by country Biota of Iran Hidden categories: Cite IUCN without doi Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 20:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wildlife of Iran 9 languages Add topic

