Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Meaning and history 2 Lists of themes 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Literary topos 17 languages Deutsch Español Français Galego Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Standardized method of treating a theme in literature Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e In classical Greek rhetoric , topos , pl.

topoi , (from Ancient Greek : τόπος "place", elliptical for Ancient Greek : τόπος κοινός tópos koinós , [ 1 ] 'common place'), in Latin locus (from locus communis ), refers  to a method for developing arguments (see topoi in classical rhetoric ).

Meaning and history [ edit ] Topos is translated variously as "topic", "themes", "line of argument", or "commonplace".

Ernst Robert Curtius studied topoi as "commonplaces", themes common to orators and writers who re-worked them according to occasion, e.g., in classical antiquity the observation that "all must die" was a topos in consolatory oratory, for in facing death the knowledge that death comes even to great men brings comfort.

[ 2 ] Curtius also discussed the topoi in the invocation of nature (sky, seas, animals, etc.) for various rhetorical purposes, such as witnessing to an oath, rejoicing or praising God, or mourning with the speaker.

[ 3 ] Lists of themes [ edit ] Some examples of topoi are the following: the locus amoenus (for example, the imaginary world of Arcadia) and the locus horridus (for example, Dante's Inferno); the idyll cemetery poetry (see the Spoon River Anthology); love and death (in Greek, eros and thanatos), love as disease and love as death, (see the character of Dido in Virgil's Aeneid); warlike love (see the work Stanze per la giostra by Giuliano de 'Medici by Angelo Poliziano), love as homage (see the courtly lyric poem), painful love; the world upside down; the dangerous night; the infernal hunt (see Boccaccio's Decameron, day 5, novel 8); aphasia , for example in the presence of the beloved woman (see the works belonging to the Dolce stil novo current, for example Al cor gentil rempaira semper amore by Guido Guinizelli); the descensus ad inferos, or catàbasis in Greek (see Dante's entire Inferno, or the Aeneid, in his sixth book); the desperate search for something, or quête in French; the golden age ; The nostos : the return trip to the homeland (e.g. the Odyssey ) the paraclausithyron, lament before the closed door of the lover; the commutatio loci; elixir of eternal youth; the Fountain of Youth ; the topos modestiæ; pretending that the work is inspired or translated by a pseudobiblion (e.g.

The Betrothed or The Lord of the Rings ).

Hybris See also [ edit ] Argumentation scheme Trope (literature) References [ edit ] ^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Commonplace" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 779.

^ Ernst Robert Curtius, European Literature and the Latin Middle Ages , trans. from German by Willard R. Trask (New York, NY: Pantheon Books, 1953), 80.

^ Curtius, European Literature and the Latin Middle Ages , 92–94.

Further reading [ edit ] Branham, R. Bracht; Kinney, Daniel (1997).

Introduction to Petronius Satyrica .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of topos at Wiktionary This rhetoric -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Literary_topos&oldid=1289727658 " Categories : Rhetoric Rhetoric stubs Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All stub articles This page was last edited on 10 May 2025, at 13:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Literary topos 17 languages Add topic

