Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Super robot 3 Real robot 4 Types Toggle Types subsection 4.1 Piloted 4.2 Sentient 4.3 Remote controlled 4.4 Transforming 4.5 Wearable 5 Model robot 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Mecha anime and manga 13 languages العربية Español فارسی Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Русский کوردی Српски / srpski Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Anime and manga that feature fighting robots This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Mecha anime and manga" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Mecha Other names Giant robot, robot Stylistic origins Science fiction Cultural origins 1950s, Japan Subgenres Super robot Real robot Related topics Mecha Part of a series on Anime and manga Anime History Voice acting Companies Studios Original video animation Original net animation Fansub Fandub Lists Longest series Longest franchises Manga History Publishers International market Manga artist Alternative Gekiga Heta-uma New Wave Yonkoma Iconography Scanlation Manga cafe Lists Best-selling series Longest series Demographic groups Children Shōnen Shōjo Seinen Josei Genres Bara Boys' love Cooking Harem Isekai Iyashikei Lolicon Magical girl Mecha Otomechikku Ryona Shotacon Sports Teens' love Yuri People Manga artists Anime directors Fandom Doujinshi Doujin shop Doujinshi printer Conventions ( list ) Clubs Cosplay Anime music video Otaku Yaoi fandom General Glossary Ecchi Hentai Moe Nijikon Waifu 2.5D musical Anime song Anime-influenced animation MyAnimeList Anime and manga portal v t e Mecha , also known as giant robot or simply robot , is a genre of anime and manga that feature mecha in battle.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The genre is broken down into two subcategories; " super robot ", featuring super-sized, implausible robots, and " real robot ", where robots are governed by realistic physics and technological limitations.

Mecha series cover a wide variety of genres, from action to comedy to drama, and the genre has expanded into other media, such as video game adaptations. Mecha has also contributed to the popularity of scale model robots .

History [ edit ] The 1940 short manga Electric Octopus ( デンキダコ , Denki Dako ) featured a powered, piloted, mechanical octopus.

[ 3 ] The 1943 Yokoyama Ryūichi's propaganda manga The Science Warrior Appears in New York ( 科学戦士ニューヨークに出現す , Kagaku Senshi New York ni Shutsugensu ) featured a sword-wielding, steam-powered, giant humanoid mecha.

[ 4 ] The first series in the mecha genre was Mitsuteru Yokoyama 's 1956 manga Tetsujin 28 , which was also released as an anime in 1963.

[ 1 ] Yokoyama was inspired to become a manga creator by Osamu Tezuka , and began serializing the manga in Shonen , an iconic boy's magazine, in 1956.

[ 1 ] In this series, the robot, which was made as a last-ditch effort to win World War II by the Japanese military , was remote-controlled by the protagonist Shotaro Kaneda, a twelve-year-old detective and "whiz kid".

[ 1 ] The story turned out to have immense mass appeal, and inspired generations of imitators.

[ 1 ] In 1972, Go Nagai defined the super robot genre with Mazinger Z , which was directly inspired by the former series.

[ 1 ] He had the idea to create a mecha that people could control like a car, while waiting to cross a busy street.

[ 1 ] The concept became "explosively popular", making the manga and anime into a success.

[ 1 ] The series also was the genesis for different tropes of the genre, such as the idea of a robot as a "dynamic entity" that could join with other machines or humans to become unstoppable.

[ 1 ] Anime critic Fred Patten wrote that almost all mecha anime plots, such as monster of the week shows, were actually metaphors for re-fighting World War II, and defending Japan and its culture from Western encroachment.

[ 1 ] By 1977, a large number of super robot anime had been created, including Brave Raideen and Danguard Ace .

[ 1 ] The market for super robot toys also grew, spawning metal die-cast toys such as the Chogokin series in Japan and the Shogun Warriors in the U.S., that were (and still are) very popular with children and collectors.

[ 1 ] The super robot genre became heavily commercialized and stagnant, creating an opening for innovation, which was seized upon by Yoshiyuki Tomino in 1979 with the creation of Mobile Suit Gundam , a complex "space saga" that was called the " Star Wars of Japan" and birthed the real robot genre, which featured more realistic, gritty technology.

[ 1 ] Tomino did not like the formulaic storylines and overt advertising of the super robot shows he had worked on, and wanted to create a movie where robots were used as tools.

[ 1 ] While the response to Gundam was lukewarm at first, efforts by dedicated fans led to it becoming a success.

[ 1 ] It created a massive market for mecha model robots, and became an industry that earned Bandai ¥42.8 billion in 2004.

[ 1 ] Many real robot series and other media were later created, such as Full Metal Panic!

and the video game series Armored Core .

[ 1 ] 1990 saw the release of Patlabor , an animated movie directed by Mamoru Oshii that popularized the mecha genre and aesthetic in the West .

[ 5 ] Neon Genesis Evangelion , created by Hideaki Anno in 1995, was a major influence on the super robot genre, arriving when the real robot genre was dominant on television.

[ 1 ] Due to its unusual psychological themes, the show became a massive success, [ 1 ] and further caused Japanese anime culture to spread widely and rapidly around the world.

[ 6 ] The mecha anime genre (as well as Japanese kaiju films) received a Western homage with the 2013 film Pacific Rim directed by Guillermo del Toro .

[ 7 ] Similarly the genre was inspirational for the 1998 first-person shooter Shogo: Mobile Armor Division developed by Monolith Productions .

[ 8 ] Super robot [ edit ] Super robot Stylistic origins Science fiction Cultural origins 1970s, Japan Some of the first mecha featured in manga and anime were " super robots " (スーパーロボット sūpā robotto ).

[ 1 ] The super robot genre features superhero -like giant robots that are often one-of-a-kind and the product of an ancient civilization, aliens or a mad genius .  These robots are usually piloted by Japanese teenagers via voice command or neural uplink , and are often powered by mystical or exotic energy sources.

[ 1 ] Their abilities are described as "quasi-magical".

[ 9 ] Real robot [ edit ] "Real robot" redirects here. For robots in reality, see Robot . For the UK published magazine named Real Robot in Japan, see Real Robots .

Real robot Stylistic origins Hard science fiction military science fiction super robot Cultural origins 1970s, Japan The later real robot (リアルロボット riaru robotto ) genre features robots that do not have mythical superpowers, but rather use largely conventional, albeit futuristic weapons and power sources, and are often mass-produced on a large scale for use in wars.

[ 1 ] The real robot genre also tends to feature more complex characters with moral conflicts and personal problems.

[ 10 ] The genre is therefore aimed primarily at young adults instead of children.

[ 11 ] The genre has been compared to hard science fiction by its fanbase, and is strongly associated with sales of popular toy models such as Gunpla .

One of the "founding fathers" of real robot design was Kunio Okawara , who started out working on Gundam and continued on to other real robot series such as Armored Trooper Votoms .

[ 9 ] Mobile Suit Gundam (1979) is largely considered the first series to introduce the real robot concept and, along with The Super Dimension Fortress Macross (1982), would form the basis of what people would later call real robot anime.

[ 12 ] In an interview with Yoshiyuki Tomino and other production crew members in the April 1989 issue of Newtype , about his views on the first Gundam anime that was not directed by him, he commented on the realism of the show, in which he sees the sponsors, Sunrise , as imaginary enemies of Gundam , since they did not accept a certain level of realism.

[ 13 ] Armored Trooper Votoms is viewed by Famitsu magazine as the peak of real-robot anime.

[ 14 ] The concepts behind "real robots" that set it apart from previous robot anime are such as: The robot is used as an industrial machine with arm-like manipulators and is manufactured by military and commercial enterprises of various nations.

[ 15 ] The concept of industrial production and commercial manufacturing processes appeared for the first time in the history of robot shows, introducing manufacturing language like " mass-production " (MP), " prototype " and "test-type".

[ 15 ] While classic super robots typically use special attacks activated by voice commands, real robots more commonly use manually operated scaled-up/advanced versions of infantry weapons, such as lasers / particle beams , firearms , melee weapons ( swords , axes , etc.) and shields .

Real robots use mostly ranged weapons that require an ammunition supply.

[ 16 ] [ user-generated source ] Real robots require periodic maintenance and are often prone to malfunction and break down, like real machines.

[ 15 ] Types [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( May 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Piloted [ edit ] This ubiquitous subgenre features mecha piloted internally as vehicles. The first series to feature such mecha was Go Nagai's Mazinger Z (1972). In a 2009 interview, Go Nagai claimed the idea came to mind when he was stuck in a traffic jam and wished his car could sprout arms and legs to walk over the cars in front.

[ 17 ] Other examples include Science Ninja Team Gatchaman (1972), Mobile Suit Gundam (1979), The Super Dimension Fortress Macross (1982), and Tengen Toppa Gurren Lagann (2007). There are series that have piloted mecha that are also in the sentient category, usually because of an AI system to assist and care for the pilot, as featured in Blue Comet SPT Layzner (1985) and Gargantia on the Verdurous Planet (2013), [ 18 ] or going berserk because the mecha has biological aspects, as featured in Neon Genesis Evangelion (1995).

Sentient [ edit ] These are mecha that have the ability to be self-aware, think, and sometimes feel emotion. The source of sentience varies from aliens, such as the titular characters of American-produced and Japanese-animated series, The Transformers (1984), to artificial intelligence or synthetic intelligence , such as the robots of Dragon's Heaven (1988) and Brave Police J-Decker (1994)  to magic, such as Da-Garn of The Brave Fighter of Legend Da-Garn (1992). The first series that featured a sentient giant robot, also the first mecha anime in color, was Astroganger (1972).

[ 19 ] Remote controlled [ edit ] These are mecha that are controlled externally. The first mecha anime, Tetsujin 28-go (1966), and Giant Robo (1967) are famous examples.

Transforming [ edit ] A transforming mech can transform between a standard vehicle (such as a fighter plane or transport truck) and a fighting mecha robot. The concept of transforming mecha was pioneered by Japanese mecha designer Shōji Kawamori in the early 1980s, when he created the Diaclone toy line in 1980 and then the Macross anime franchise in 1982. Some of Kawamori's most iconic transforming mecha designs include the VF-1 Valkyrie from the Macross and Robotech franchises, and Optimus Prime (called Convoy in Japan) from the Transformers and Diaclone franchises. The concept later became more popular in the mid-1980s, with Macross: Do You Remember Love?

(1984) and Zeta Gundam (1985) in Japan, and with Transformers (1984 adaptation of Diaclone ) [ 20 ] and Robotech (1985 adaptation of Macross ) in the West.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Wearable [ edit ] This refers to mecha that are powered exoskeletons rather than piloted as vehicles, such as in Genesis Climber MOSPEADA (1983), Bubblegum Crisis (1987) and Active Raid (2016); merge with the mecha, such as in Detonator Orgun (1991) & The King of Braves GaoGaiGar (1997); combine with the robots, such as in Transformers: Super-God Masterforce (1988); or become mechanical themselves, such as in Brave Command Dagwon (1996) and Fire Robo (2016).

Model robot [ edit ] Main article: Model robot Assembling and painting mecha scale model kits is a popular pastime among mecha enthusiasts. Like other models such as cars or airplanes, more advanced kits require much more intricate assembly.

Lego mecha construction can present unique engineering challenges; the balancing act between a high range of motion, good structural stability, and aesthetic appeal can be difficult to manage. In 2006, the Lego Group released their own somewhat manga-inspired mecha line with the Lego Exo-Force series.

See also [ edit ] List of mecha anime References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v Hornyak, Timothy N. (2006).

"Chapter 4" .

Loving the Machine: the Art and Science of Japanese Robots (1st ed.). Tokyo: Kodansha International. pp.

57–70 .

ISBN 4770030126 .

OCLC 63472559 .

^ Hikawa, Ryusuke ; Inoue, Koichi; Sawaki, Daisuke (2013).

Japanese Animation Guide: The History of Robot Anime (PDF) (Report). Translated by AltJapan . Mori Building Co., Ltd . Retrieved May 31, 2024 .

^ 井上晴樹 (August 2007).

日本ロボット戦争記 1939~1945 . NTT出版.

ISBN 9784757160149 . Retrieved April 1, 2018 .

^ 井上晴樹 (August 2007).

The Anime Encyclopedia, 3rd Revised Edition: A Century of Japanese Animation . NTT出版.

ISBN 9784757160149 . Retrieved September 8, 2019 .

^ Hanson, Matt (2005).

Building sci-fi moviescapes : the science behind the fiction . East Sussex, England: Rotovision. p. 38.

ISBN 0240807723 .

OCLC 60800154 .

^ "TV Tokyo's Iwata Discusses Anime's 'Road to Survival' (Updated)" .

Anime News Network . Retrieved September 21, 2017 .

^ Axinto, Jemarc (April 24, 2014).

"Pacific Rim: In-depth study of the influence of Anime" . The Artifice . Retrieved November 14, 2014 .

^ Sabbagh, Michel (December 17, 2015).

"Effort Upon Effort: Japanese Influences in Western First-Person Shooters" (PDF) . Worcester Polytechnic Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 1, 2016 . Retrieved December 29, 2015 .

^ a b Clements, Jonathan; McCarthy, Helen (February 9, 2015).

The anime encyclopedia : a century of Japanese animation (3rd revised ed.). Berkeley, California.

ISBN 978-1611729092 .

OCLC 904144859 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Tomino, Yoshiyuki; Schodt, Frederik L. (2012).

Mobile Suit Gundam: Awakening, Escalation, Confrontation (2nd ed.). Berkeley, CA: Stone Bridge Press. p. 8.

ISBN 978-1611720051 .

OCLC 772711844 .

^ Denison, Rayna (2015). "Chapter 5".

Anime: a Critical Introduction . London.

ISBN 978-1472576767 .

OCLC 879600213 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ 10 commandments of Real robot, Gundam Sentinel introduction, Gundam workshop, Format ACG ^ Newtype magazine, April 1989 ^ famitsu news リアルロボットアニメの最高峰がスクリーンで蘇える！ 『装甲騎兵ボトムズ ペールゼン・ファイルズ 劇場版』 Peak of Real Robot anime on screen, Votoms movie.

^ a b c Robot Watch SF seminar, April 29, 2007, Interview of Ryōsuke Takahashi The side of Real Robot (SFセミナー「高橋良輔インタビュー リアルロボットの向こう側」レポート) ^ Hatena keyword [ user-generated source ] Hatena ^ "永井 豪 | R25" .

30オトコの本音に向き合う、ビジネスマン向けサイト | R25 . Retrieved October 25, 2016 .

^ Barder, Ollie.

"How A Blue Comet Influenced The Last 30 Years Of Japanese Pop-Culture And Beyond" .

Forbes . Retrieved October 25, 2016 .

^ Daigo Otaki - Encirobot.com.

"Astroganga – Pagina Principale" . Encirobot.com . Retrieved June 30, 2014 .

^ "Hasbro Publishes Transformers Timeline to Movie" .

^ Barder, Ollie (December 10, 2015).

"Shoji Kawamori, The Creator Hollywood Copies But Never Credits" .

Forbes . Retrieved April 16, 2020 .

^ Knott, Kylie (February 27, 2019).

"He created Macross and designed Transformers toys: Japanese anime legend Shoji Kawamori" .

South China Morning Post . Retrieved April 16, 2020 .

^ culture, Japanese (August 27, 2023).

"interesting thing you have learned from a foreign culture: Japanese anime legend Shoji Kawamori" .

Ieltsfree.ca . Retrieved August 10, 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Gears Online Mecha Anime HQ : Extensive coverage on Gundams and other mecha.

v t e Mecha Mecha anime and manga List of mecha anime Model robot Gundam model v t e Film genres By style Action Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Art Biographical Comedy Action Black Commedia all'italiana Sexy Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated City symphony Direct cinema Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Video essay Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Erotic Category III films Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Black Body Cannibal Chinese horror Christmas horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo List of films Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Melodrama Korean Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Maximalist film Minimalist film Mumblecore Musical Arthouse Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Crossover Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography ( Malayalam ) Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Art Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Iyashikei Slow cinema Survival Thriller Comedy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cabrito Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Cute Girls Doing Cute Things Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Ero guro Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Space Suburban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBTQ Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Kaiju Mummy Vampire Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sageuk Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shoshimin-eiga Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel imaginary voyage Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Contemporary Western Dacoit Western Fantasy Florida Horror Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Science fiction Singing cowboy Space Spaghetti Weird Western Zapata Western By movement or period Absolute American eccentric cinema Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Moral Anxiety Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film d'art Film gris Free Cinema French Impressionist French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Golden Age of Argentine cinema Golden Age of Mexican Cinema Golden Age of Nigerian Cinema Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Indiewood Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Modernist film Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Objectivity New Queer No Wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Pan-Indian film Parallel cinema Persian Film Philippine New Wave Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi The Prague film school Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Slow cinema Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Taiwan New Cinema Telefoni Bianchi Thai New Wave Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Art Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Behind-the-scenes Black-and-white Blockbuster Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Direct-to-video ONA OVA Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage High concept Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking List of American independent films Interstitial art Live action animation Low-budget Major film studios Masala Maximalist film Message picture Meta-film Minimalist film Mockbuster Modernist film Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Slow cinema Socialist realist Sound Television film Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie Category v t e Animation industry in Japan History of anime Industry associations The Association of Japanese Animations Japanese Animation Creators Association Awards Animation Kobe Awards Animax Anison Grand Prix Anime Grand Prix Japan Academy Prize for Animation of the Year Japan Media Arts Awards Mainichi Film Award for Best Animation Film Newtype Anime Award Ōfuji Noburō Award Seiyu Awards Sugoi Japan Award Tokyo Anime Award Types Original net animation (ONA) Original video animation (OVA) Television Late night UHF Genres Bara Cooking Cute Girls Doing Cute Things Ecchi Futanari Girls with guns Harem Hentai Tentacle erotica Isekai Iyashikei Kaitō Lolicon Magical girl Mecha Otomechikku Ryona Shotacon Sports Teens' love Yaoi Yuri Anime programming blocks Animeism IMAnimation Noise (defunct) Noitamina +Ultra Related topics Animage Animation director ( List of anime directors ) Animedia Katsudō Shashin Kinema Junpo Manga Newtype Anime song Portal v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐mdft7
Cached time: 20250817045131
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.892 seconds
Real time usage: 1.059 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3468/1000000
Revision size: 19437/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 232207/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2586/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 129940/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.496/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24453697/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  810.043      1 -total
 29.79%  241.341      1 Template:Reflist
 23.13%  187.345      1 Template:Anime_and_manga
 22.89%  185.444      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.58%  126.192      7 Template:Cite_book
 14.18%  114.899     24 Template:Transliteration
 10.40%   84.216      3 Template:Infobox_literary_genre
 10.00%   81.017      3 Template:Infobox
  9.15%   74.102      9 Template:Navbox
  8.04%   65.095      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12250739:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045131 and revision id 1287399664. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mecha_anime_and_manga&oldid=1287399664 " Categories : Mecha anime and manga Anime and manga genres Anime and manga terminology Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Accuracy disputes from January 2024 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2016 All articles needing additional references Use mdy dates from February 2025 Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles that may contain original research from May 2020 All articles that may contain original research This page was last edited on 26 April 2025, at 00:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mecha anime and manga 13 languages Add topic

