Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Historical 1.2 Political economy 1.3 Social domination 2 Intelligentsia 3 After Gramsci Toggle After Gramsci subsection 3.1 German student movement 3.2 State apparatuses of ideology 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Cultural hegemony 28 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Русский Sardu Српски / srpski தமிழ் Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marxist theory of cultural dominance The Marxist intellectual Antonio Gramsci (1891–1937) developed cultural hegemony to explain the social-control structures of society, arguing that the working-class intelligentsia must generate a working-class ideology to counter the worldview (cultural hegemony) of the ruling class.

In Marxist philosophy , cultural hegemony is the dominance of a culturally diverse society by the ruling class who shape the culture of that society—the beliefs and explanations , perceptions , values , and mores —so that the worldview of the ruling class becomes the accepted cultural norm .

[ 1 ] As the universal dominant ideology , the ruling-class worldview misrepresents the social, political, and economic status quo as natural and inevitable, and that it perpetuates social conditions that benefit every social class, rather than as artificial social constructs that benefit only the ruling class.

[ 2 ] [ full citation needed ] [ 3 ] When the social control is carried out by another society, it is known as cultural imperialism .

In philosophy and in sociology, the denotations and the connotations of term cultural hegemony derive from the Ancient Greek word hegemonia (ἡγεμονία), which indicates the leadership and the régime of the hegemon.

[ 4 ] In political science, hegemony is the geopolitical dominance exercised by an empire, the hegemon (leader state) that rules the subordinate states of the empire by the threat of intervention, an implied means of power , rather than by threat of direct rule—military invasion , occupation , and territorial annexation .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Background [ edit ] Historical [ edit ] Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e This article is part of a series on Communism in Italy People Battisti Bertinotti Berlinguer Berardi Bordiga Bombacci Cafiero Cagol Colletti Covelli Cossutta Curcio Damen Della Volpe Di Vittorio Diliberto Gennari Feltrinelli Federici Ferrando Ferrero Fortichiari Galleani Gramsci Grieco Iotti Lama Lazzari Losurdo Longo Maitan Malatesta Napolitano Natta Negri Occhetto Panzieri Pasolini Scuderi Screpanti Spinelli Togliatti Toscano Tronti Vattimo Vendola Virno History Biennio Rosso XVII Congress of the PSI I Congress of the PCd'I Proština rebellion Aventine Secession Italian Resistance Red Republic of Caulonia Third De Gasperi government Portella della Ginestra massacre May 1947 crises Manifesto of the 101 Years of Lead Hot Autumn Primavalle fire Assassination of Sergio Ramelli Kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro Mitterrand doctrine Movement of 1977 Murder of Francesco Di Cataldo Kidnapping of Ciro Cirillo Historic Compromise Ideologies Anarchist communism Autonomism Bordigism Christian communism Council communism Eurocommunism Italian road to socialism Left communism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Maoism Stalinism Marxist humanism Migliorismo Neo-Gramscianism Neo-Marxism Post-Marxism Trotskyism Western Marxism Workerism Principles Anti-clericalism Anti-fascism Anti-imperialism Antimilitarism Class conflict Cultural hegemony Counterhegemony Euroscepticism Feminism Organic centralism Passive revolution Proletarian internationalism Secularism Solidarity Subalterns Current organisations Lotta Comunista (Communist Struggle) Anticapitalist Left CARC Party Communist Alternative Party Communist Front Communist Party Communist Refoundation Party GC Communist Struggle Countercurrent Italian Communist Party (2016) Italian General Confederation of Labour Italian Marxist–Leninist Party Network of Communists People's Union Revolutionary Communist Party Trotskyist League of Italy Unified Communist Party of Italy Workers' Communist Party Defunct organisations Armed Proletarians for Communism Autonomia Operaia Communist Party of Italy (2014) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Red Line Critical Left Front Line Italian Communist Party FGCI The Left – The Rainbow Lotta Continua Movement of Unitarian Communists October 22 Group Party of the Christian Left Party of Italian Communists FGCI Popular Democratic Front Proletarian Democracy Proletarian Unity Party Red Brigades Volante Rossa Workers' Power Media Liberazione il manifesto Pattuglia Il Pioniere Il Politecnico La Plebe Quaderni piacentini Quaderni Rossi Rinascita Società l'Unità Vie Nuove Related topics Anarchism in Italy Bandiera Rossa Bella ciao Christian left Christian socialism Democratic socialism Fischia il vento History of Italy Italian neorealism Politics of Italy Prison Notebooks Social democracy Socialism in Italy Craxism Communism portal Italy portal v t e In 1848, Karl Marx proposed that the economic recessions and practical contradictions of a capitalist economy would provoke the working class to proletarian revolution , depose capitalism , restructure social institutions (economic, political, social) per the rational models of socialism , and thus begin the transition to a communist society.  Therefore, the dialectical changes to the functioning of the economy of a society determine its social superstructures (culture and politics).

Russian revolutionary, Leon Trotsky , argued in his book Problems of Everyday Life , that capitalism was long established in Western Europe , the proletariat of those societies were much more culturally acculturated with bourgeois habits and reformist traditions and hence more attached to the existing system.  Consequently, this in turn made the revolutionary process in those respective countries more difficult. Nevertheless, Trotsky argued that due to the cultural and economic advantages that Western Europe had accumulated over centuries that this in turn would make the potentiality of socialist construction more achievable.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] To that end, Antonio Gramsci proposed a strategic distinction between the politics for a war of position and for a war of manœuvre . The war of position is an intellectual and cultural struggle wherein the anti-capitalist revolutionary creates a proletarian culture whose native value system counters the cultural hegemony of the bourgeoisie . The proletarian culture will increase class consciousness , teach revolutionary theory and historical analysis, and thus further develop revolutionary organisation among the social classes.

[ 9 ] After winning the war of position, socialist leaders would then have the necessary political power and popular support to realise the war of manœuvre, the political praxis of revolutionary socialism .

Political economy [ edit ] As Marxist philosophy , cultural hegemony analyses the functions of economic class within the base and superstructure , from which Gramsci developed the functions of social class within the social structures created for and by cultural domination. In the practise of imperialism, cultural hegemony occurs when the working and the peasant classes believe and accept that the prevailing cultural norms of a society (the dominant ideology imposed by the ruling class) realistically describes the natural order of things in society.

In the war for position, the working-class intelligentsia politically educate the working classes to perceive that the prevailing cultural norms are not natural and inevitable social conditions, and to recognize that the social constructs of bourgeois culture function as instruments of socio-economic domination, e.g. the institutions (state, church, and social strata), the conventions (custom and tradition), and beliefs (religions and ideologies), etc. That to realise their own working-class culture the workers and the peasants, by way of their own intellectuals, must perform the necessary analyses of their culture and national history in order for the proletariat to transcend the old ways of thinking about the order of things in a society under the cultural hegemony of an imperial power.

Social domination [ edit ] Gramsci said that cultural and historical analyses of the "natural order of things in society" established by the dominant ideology, would allow common-sense men and women to intellectually perceive the social structures of bourgeois cultural hegemony. In each sphere of life (private and public) common sense  is the intellectualism with which people cope with and explain their daily life within their social stratum within the greater social order ; yet the limits of common sense inhibit a person's intellectual perception of the exploitation of labour made possible with cultural hegemony. Given the difficulty in perceiving the status quo hierarchy of bourgeois culture (social and economic classes), most people concern themselves with private matters, and so do not question the fundamental sources of their socio-economic oppression , individual and collective.

[ 10 ] Intelligentsia [ edit ] To perceive and combat ruling-class cultural hegemony, the working class and the peasant class depend upon the moral and political leadership of their native intelligentsia , scholars, academics, and teachers, scientists, philosophers, administrators et al.

from their specific social classes; thus Gramsci's political distinction between the intellectuals of the bourgeoisie and the intellectuals of the working class, respectively, the men and women who are the proponents and the opponents of the cultural status quo : Since these various categories of traditional intellectuals experience through an esprit de corps their uninterrupted historical continuity, and their special qualifications, they thus put themselves forward as autonomous and independent of the dominant social group . This self-assessment is not without consequences in the ideological and political fields; consequences of wide-ranging import. The whole of idealist philosophy can easily be connected with this position, assumed by the social complex of intellectuals, and can be defined as the expression of that social utopia, by which the intellectuals think of themselves as "independent" [and] autonomous, [and] endowed with a character of their own, etc.

— Selections from the Prison Notebooks of Antonio Gramsci (1971), pp. 7–8.

[ 11 ] The traditional and vulgarized type of the intellectual is given by the Man of Letters, the philosopher, and the artist. Therefore, journalists, who claim to be men of letters, philosophers, artists, also regard themselves as the "true" intellectuals. In the modern world, technical education , closely bound to industrial labour, even at the most primitive and unqualified level, must form the basis of the new type of intellectual. . . . The mode of being of the new intellectual can no longer consist of eloquence, which is an exterior and momentary mover of feelings and passions, but in active participation in practical life, as constructor [and] organizer, as "permanent persuader", not just simple orator.

— Selections from the Prison Notebooks of Antonio Gramsci (1971), pp. 9–10.

[ 12 ] After Gramsci [ edit ] In 1968, Rudi Dutschke , a leader of the German student movement ,  the "68er-Bewegung", said that changing the bourgeois society of West Germany required a long march through the society's institutions , in order to identify and combat cultural hegemony.

[ 13 ] German student movement [ edit ] In 1967, regarding the politics and society of West Germany, the leader of the German Student Movement , Rudi Dutschke , applied Gramsci's analyses of cultural hegemony using the phrase the " Long March through the Institutions " to describe the ideological work necessary to realise the war of position. The allusion to the Long March (1934–35) of the Chinese People's Liberation Army indicates the great work required of the working-class intelligentsia to produce the working-class popular culture with which to replace the dominant ideology imposed by the cultural hegemony of the bourgeoisie .

[ 14 ] [ 13 ] State apparatuses of ideology [ edit ] In Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses (1970), Louis Althusser describes the complex of social relationships among the different organs of the State that transmit and disseminate the dominant ideology to the populations of a society.

[ 15 ] The ideological state apparatuses (ISA) are the sites of ideological conflict among the social classes of a society; and, unlike the military and police forces, the repressive state apparatuses (RSA), the ISA exist as a plurality throughout society.

Despite the ruling-class control of the RSA, the ideological apparatuses of the state are both the sites and the stakes (the objects) of class struggle , because the ISA are not monolithic social entities, and exist amongst society. As the public and the private sites of continual class struggle, the ideological apparatuses of the state (ISA) are overdetermined zones of society that are composed of elements of the dominant ideologies of previous modes of production , hence the continual political activity in: the religious ISA (the clergy) the educational ISA (the public and private school systems) the family ISA (patriarchal family) the legal ISA (police and legal, court and penal systems) the political ISA (political parties) the company union ISA the mass communications ISA (print, radio, television, internet, cinema) the cultural ISA (literature, the arts, sport, etc.) [ 16 ] The parliamentary structures of the State, by which elected politicians exercise the will of the people also are an ideological apparatus of the State, given the State's control of which populations are allowed to participate as political parties. In itself, the political system is an ideological apparatus, because citizens' participation involves intellectually accepting the ideological "fiction, corresponding to a 'certain' reality, that the component parts of the [political] system, as well as the principle of its functioning, are based on the ideology of the 'freedom' and 'equality' of the individual voters and the 'free choice' of the people's representatives, by the individuals that 'make up' the people".

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Behavioral contagion – Spontaneous, unsolicited and uncritical imitation of another's behavior Collective action problem – Type of social dilemma Cultural capital – Concept of social status and social mobility Cultural conflict – Clash of beliefs or values Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden Transcripts (1990), by James C. Scott Focal point (game theory) – Concept in game theory Hegemonic masculinity – Concept in gender studies Hegemony and Socialist Strategy (1985), by Ernesto Laclau and Chantal Mouffe Herd behavior – Behavior of individuals acting in a group " Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses " (1970), by Louis Althusser Marxist cultural analysis – Anti-capitalist cultural critique Marx's theory of alienation – Social theory claiming that capitalism alienates workers from their humanity Nicos Poulantzas – Marxist political sociologist and philosopher (1936–1979) Organic crisis Passive revolution – Years-long change in political order, in Gramscian discourse Political consciousness – Psychological political theory Posthegemony – Concept in political philosophy Sheeple Social capital – Networks of relationships among people who live and work in a particular society Soft power – Concept developed by Joseph Nye Southern strategy – 20th century Republican electoral strategy for the Southern US Subaltern (postcolonialism) – Concept from critical theory and post-colonial studies The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a Category of Bourgeois Society (1962), by Jürgen Habermas References [ edit ] ^ Bullock, Alan; Trombley, Stephen, Editors (1999), The New Fontana Dictionary of Modern Thought Third Edition, pp. 387–88.

^ The Columbia Encyclopedia , Fifth Edition. (1994), p. 1215.

^ Comaroff, Jean ; Comaroff, John L.

(1991).

Of Revelation and Revolution . ATLA Special Series. Vol. 1: Christianity, Colonialism, and Consciousness in South Africa. Chicago: University of Chicago Press (published 2008). p. 25.

ISBN 9780226114477 .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2023 . Retrieved 7 October 2020 .

Typically . . . the making of hegemony involves the assertion of control over various modes of symbolic production: over such things as educational and ritual processes, patterns of socialization, political and legal procedures, canons of style and self-representation, public communication, health and bodily discipline, and so on.

^ Hassig, Ross (1994). "Mesoamerica and the Aztecs".

Mexico and the Spanish Conquest (2 ed.). Norman: University of Oklahoma Press (published 2014). p. 28.

ISBN 9780806182087 .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2023 . Retrieved 7 October 2020 .

The more a hegemonic empire relies on power (the perception that one can enforce one's desired goals) rather than force (direct physical action to compel one's goals), the more efficient it is, because the subordinates police themselves.

^ Ross Hassig, Mexico and the Spanish Conquest (1994), pp. 23–24.

^ L. Adamson, Walter (2014).

Hegemony and Revolution . Echo Point Books & Media.

^ Trotsky, Leon (May 1998).

Problems of Everyday Life: Creating the Foundations for a New Society in Revolutionary Russia . Pathfinder Press. pp.

190– 200.

ISBN 978-0-87348-854-9 .

^ Knei-Paz, Baruch (1978).

The Social and Political Thought of Leon Trotsky . Clarendon Press. pp.

282– 290.

ISBN 978-0-19-827233-5 .

^ Badino, Massimiliano (2020).

Cultural Hegemony in a Scientific World . Brill.

^ Hall, Stuart (1986).

"The Problem of Ideology — Marxism without Guarantees" .

Journal of Communication Inquiry .

10 (2): 28– 44.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.1033.1130 .

doi : 10.1177/019685998601000203 .

S2CID 144448154 .

^ Selections from the Prison Notebooks of Antonio Gramsci (1971), Quentin Hoare and Geoffrey Nowell Smith, eds., pp. 7–8.

^ Selections from the Prison Notebooks of Antonio Gramsci (1971), Quentin Hoare and Geoffrey Nowell Smith, eds., pp. 9–10.

^ a b Buttigieg, J. A. (2005).

"The Contemporary Discourse on Civil Society: A Gramscian Critique" (PDF) .

Boundary 2 .

32 (1): 33– 52.

doi : 10.1215/01903659-32-1-33 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-07-16 . Retrieved 2020-07-16 .

^ Gramsci, Buttigieg, Joseph A (ed.), Prison Notebooks (English critical ed.), p 50 footnote 21, archived from the original on 2010-06-16, Long March Through the Institutions 21 ^ Althusser, Louis (2014).

On The Reproduction of Capitalism . London/ New York: Verso. pp.

74– 75, 103– 47, 177, 180, 198– 206, 218– 31, 242– 6.

ISBN 9781781681640 .

^ Althusser, Louis (2014).

On the Reproduction of Capitalism . London/ New York: Verso. p. 243.

ISBN 9781781681640 .

^ Althusser, Louis (2014).

On the Reproduction of Capitalism . London/New York: Verso. pp.

222– 223.

Further reading [ edit ] Abercrombie, Nicholas; Turner, Bryan S. (June 1978). "The Dominant Ideology Thesis".

The British Journal of Sociology .

29 (2): 149– 70.

doi : 10.2307/589886 .

JSTOR 589886 .

Anderson, Perry (1977).

"The Antinomies of Antonio Gramsci" (PDF) .

New Left Review . No. 100. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-05-18.

Beech, Dave; Andy Hewitt; Mel Jordan (2007).

The Free Art Collective Manifesto for a Counter-Hegemonic Art . England: Free Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-9554748-0-4 .

OCLC 269432294 .

Bessis, Sophie (2003) Western Supremacy: The Triumph of an Idea .  Zed Books.

ISBN 9781842772195 ISBN 1842772198 Bullock, Alan; Trombley, Stephen, eds. (1999), The New Fontana Dictionary of Modern Thought (3rd ed.) .

Flank, Lenny (2007).

Hegemony and Counter-Hegemony: Marxism, Capitalism, and Their Relation to Sexism, Racism, Nationalism, and Authoritarianism .

St. Petersburg, Florida : Red and Black Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-9791813-7-5 .

OCLC 191763227 .

Gramsci, Antonio (1992), Buttigieg, Joseph A (ed.), Prison notebooks , New York City: Columbia University Press, ISBN 978-0-231-10592-7 , OCLC 24009547 External links [ edit ] Gramsci (archive) , Marxists .

International Gramsci society .

Gramsci, journal , AU: UOW, archived from the original on 2012-11-28 , retrieved 2009-09-22 .

Rethinking Marxism .

Rethinking Marxism: Association for economic & social analysis , EI Net, archived from the original (review) on 2013-02-21 , retrieved 2009-09-22 Gramsci, "Selections", Prison notebooks , Marxists .

Gramsci, Prison notebooks , Marxists .

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐ntnj7
Cached time: 20250815181115
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.757 seconds
Real time usage: 0.980 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4930/1000000
Revision size: 22096/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 144321/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3565/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 111957/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.484/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 28414865/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  801.872      1 -total
 31.32%  251.134     18 Template:Annotated_link
 20.30%  162.741      1 Template:Reflist
 18.66%  149.645     11 Template:Cite_book
 17.20%  137.961      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 16.48%  132.145      1 Template:Marxism
  8.64%   69.302      1 Template:Short_description
  7.88%   63.158      1 Template:Sidebar
  6.21%   49.787     10 Template:Citation
  4.74%   38.006      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:410722:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815181115 and revision id 1300182304. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cultural_hegemony&oldid=1300182304 " Categories : Cultural hegemony Anti-corporate activism Conflict theory Antonio Gramsci Marxist terminology Marxist theory Postcolonialism Postmodern theory Social concepts Communism Socialism Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from December 2024 This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 19:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cultural hegemony 28 languages Add topic

