Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nomenclature 2 Genetics 3 Lifestyle 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Mlabri people 14 languages অসমীয়া Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano ភាសាខ្មែរ Русский Svenska ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethnic group Mlabri Total population ~400 (est.) Regions with significant populations Laos , Thailand Languages Mlabri , others Religion Christianity , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Animism [ 3 ] The Mlabri ( Thai : มลาบรี ) or Mrabri , also called the Phi Tong Luang , are an ethnic group of Thailand and Laos , and have been called "the most interesting and least understood people in Southeast Asia".

[ 4 ] Only about 400 or fewer Mlabris remain in the world today, with some estimates as low as 100. A hill tribe in northern Thailand along the border with Laos , they have been groups of nomadic hunter-gatherers .  Those in Thailand live close to the Hmong and northern Thai . Those living in Laos live close to other ethnic groups.

Nomenclature [ edit ] The name Mlabri is a Thai/Lao alteration of the word Mrabri , which appears to come from a Khmuic term "people of the forest". In Khmu , mra means "person" and bri "forest". They are also known locally as Phi Tong Leuang (Thai: ผีตองเหลือง, Lao: ຜີຕອງເຫລືອງ) or "spirits of the yellow leaves", since they abandon their shelters when the leaves begin to turn yellow.

Genetics [ edit ] Genetic analysis of the Mlabri group by Hiroki Oota and colleagues led them to believe that their mtDNA has little diversity, suggesting the Mlabris originated 500 to 800 years ago from very few individuals. However, this was contested in the journal PLoS Biology in 2005 in an exchange of articles between Hiroki Oota and his colleagues and Tony Waters.

Lifestyle [ edit ] The Mlabri traditionally lived a nomadic lifestyle. They moved frequently, and had no permanent houses, instead making temporary shelters from palm leaves and bamboo-string. They wore only a loin-covering of bark or cloth, though most Mlabri now wear factory-made clothes gained by trade with other hill tribes. They are hunter-gatherers, with most of their food coming from gathering. Women give birth alone in the forest, and infant mortality used to be very high.

The Mlabri have few regimented social ceremonies, and are said to have no formal religious system, though they believe in forest spirits and other nature spirit. Marriages are made with simple request; there is no bride-price. The dead are buried near where they expired, and the tribe moves on.

In 1938, Austrian anthropologist Hugo Bernatzik published an ethnography of the "Yellow Leaf People" which contained his brief observations of the tribe in the early 20th century.

Since the 1990s, the Mlabri in Thailand have settled into more permanent villages in Phrae and Nan provinces. The Thai government has declared the forest areas where they used to live to be state-owned forest reserves and discourages any Mlabri from returning there.

[ 5 ] The houses in the permanent villages that the Mlabri now live in are made of cinderblock and wood, with metal roofs and even electricity.  Mlabri children have started going to public schools, and their health care has improved.

[ 6 ] It was reported in 2013 that the Mlabri's suicide rate has risen.

[ 5 ] Mlabri villages have some economic activity. While still hunting and gathering, the Mlabri now engage in highland farming and hammock weaving, besides working as day laborers.

One of the Mlabri settlements in Nan Province is under the patronage of Princess Sirindhorn .

References [ edit ] ^ Chongwarothai, Methiphat & Moyadi, Pannachat (2014).

Social Changes and Lifestyle of Mlabris in Tambol Mae Khaning, Amphur Wiangsa, Nan Province (PDF) . Bangkok: Sukhothai Thammathirat Open University. p. 67.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Mlabri (Tong Lueang)" (PDF) .

Thai Department of Agriculture . Retrieved 13 July 2019 .

^ "Mlabri" .

^ Schliesinger, Joachim, Ethnic Groups of Laos, vol. 2 , ISBN 974-480-036-4 , p. 187 ^ a b Long, Mary, Eugene Long, and Tony Waters (2013) "Suicide Among the Mla Bri Hunter-Gatherers of Northern Thailand." Journal of the Siam Society (v. 101).

[1] ^ Waters, Tony; สุขเสน่ห์, บุญยืน.

"The Demographics of a Village of Recently Settled Hunter- Gatherers in Thailand" .

Journal of the Siam Society .

Bibliography [ edit ] Bernatzik, Hugo, The Spirits of the Yellow Leaves Leipzig 1938; London: R. Hale.  Translated by E. W. Dickson.  1958.

Long, Eugene, Mary Long, and Tony Waters.  The Demography of a Settled Hunter Gatherer Group in Thailand." Journal of the SIam Society (v.105) 2017.

Long, Mary, Eugene Long, and Tony Waters. "Suicide Among the Mla Bri Hunter-Gatherers of Northern Thailand." Journal of the Siam Society (v. 101) 2013.

Nimonjiya, Shu, "From Ghosts to Hill Tribe to Thai Citizens: Towards a History of the Mlabri of Northern Thailand." Aseanie 32: 155-176, 2013.

Oota, Hiroki and others, "Recent Origin and Cultural Reversion of a Hunter-Gatherer Group", PLOS Biology , 2005 March, volume 3, number 3.

Rischel, Jurgen.

Mlabri and Mon-Khmer: Tracking the history of a hunter-gatherer language .  The Royal Danish Society of Sciences and Letters 2007.

Schliesinger, Joachim, Ethnic Groups of Laos, vol. 2 , White Lotus 2000, pp. 187–197 Siam Society.  "The Mlabri" Special issue of The Journal of the Siam Society Vol 51 (2) 1963.

[2] Waters, Tony, "Comment on 'Recent Origin and Cultural Reversion of a Hunter-Gatherer Group," PLoS Biology 2005 August, volume 3, number 8.

Trier, Jesper Invoking the Spirits - fieldwork on the material and spiritual life of the Mlabri, pp. 325, 2008 July ISBN 978-87-88415-47-6 External links [ edit ] Long, Eugene, Mary Long, and Tony Waters. The Demography of a Settled Hunter Gatherer Group in Thailand." Journal of the SIam Society (v.105) 2017.

[3] Long, Mary, Eugene Long, and Tony Waters (2013) "Suicide Among the Mla Bri Hunter-Gatherers of Northern Thailand." Journal of the Siam Society (v. 101).

[4] RWAAI (Repository and Workspace for Austroasiatic Intangible Heritage) Mlabri in RWAAI Digital Archive Ethnography as a Contact Sport The Mla Bri and the Long Family of Phrae Thailand by Tony Waters v t e Ethnic and linguistic groups in Thailand by language family Kra–Dai Southwestern Tai Isan Khün Lao Lao Ga Lao Krang Lao Lom Lao Loum Lao Ngaew Lao Song Lao Ti Lao Wiang Tai Lu Tai Yuan Nyong Phu Thai Phuan Tai Bueng Tai Daeng Tai Dam Tai Gapong Kaleun Tai Nüa Tai Wang Thai Noi Khorat Thai Thai Yai Northern Tai Saek Nyaw Yoy Austronesian Malayo-Polynesian Cham Malay Bangkok Malays Patani Malays Satun Malays Moken Moklen Urak Lawoi’ Austroasiatic Khmuic Khmu Lua Mlabri Phai Pray Tin Bru Palaungic Blang Lamet Lawa Mok Palaung Khmer Khmer Northern Western Monic Mon Nyah Kur Katuic Kuy Pearic Pear Chong Sa'och Aslian Maniq Kintaq Kensiu Vietic Aheu Vietnamese Sino-Tibetan Sinitic Chinese Chin Haw Peranakan Teochew Hokkien Hakka Hainanese Cantonese Hokchew Tibeto-Burman Akha Bisu Karen Kayah Lahu Lisu Lolo Mpi Pa'O Phrae Pwo Phunoi Pwo S'gaw Ugong Indo-European Indo-Iranian Indians Persians Pathans Roman Portuguese Hmong–Mien Hmong Yao Iu Mien Immigrants and expatriates Australians Burmese Farang Filipino Japanese Koreans Luk khrueng Nepalis Swedish v t e Ethnic groups in Laos by language family Lao-Tai Lao Lu Phuan Phu Thai Saek Tai Daeng (Red Tai) Tai Dam (Black Tai) Tai Khao (White Tai) Tai Maen Tai Nüa Vietic Atel Bo Chut (May) Kinh/Vietnamese Krih Liha people [ vi ] ( Đan Lai ) Maleng Phong Phon Sung (Aheu) Thavung Tum Khmeric Khmer Katuic Bru Ca Tu Kuy Makong Pacoh Sou Ta Oi Bahnaric Alak Brau (Lavae) Kataang Jeng Oy Laven Nyaheun Sedang Talieng Yae (Jeh) Khmu - Palaungic Bit Khang Htin (Lua) Khamu Keu Mlabri Lamet O Du Xinh Mun (Puoc) Samtao (Kiorr) Hmong–Mien Hmong Lanten Yao Tibeto-Burman Akha Hani Kado Kaduo Lahu Phana' Phunoi Si La Austronesian Cham Laotian Cham Other Chinese Doi Kaleung Lavy (Lawi) General grouping Lao Loum (Lowland) Lao Theung (Midland) Lao Sung (Highland) Laos portal Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mlabri_people&oldid=1303861938 " Categories : Ethnic groups in Laos Ethnic groups in Thailand Khmuic peoples Hunter-gatherers of Asia Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 13:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mlabri people 14 languages Add topic

