Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Other notable works 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Fritz Schaper 9 languages Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German sculptor (1841–1919) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in German .

(November 2020) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Fritz Schaper (Bildhauer)]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|de|Fritz Schaper (Bildhauer)}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Schaper in his studio (1909) Fritz (Friedrich) Schaper (31 July 1841, Alsleben – 29 November 1919, Berlin ) was a German sculptor.

Life [ edit ] He was orphaned at an early age, and was sent to Halle to receive instruction at the Francke Foundations .

[ 1 ] After being apprenticed as a stonemason , he went to Berlin in 1859 for further training at the Prussian Academy of Arts . Afterwards, he became an employee at the workshop of Albert Wolff until establishing his own studios in 1867.

[ 1 ] He was a professor at the Prussian Academy from 1875 to 1890 and also served as manager of the "Aktsaal" (nude modelling studio).

[ 1 ] Max Baumbach , Adolf Brütt , Reinhold Felderhoff , Fritz Klimsch , Ludwig Manzel , Max Unger , Joseph Uphues and Wilhelm Wandschneider were among his many well-known students.

He became a full member of the Academy in 1880 and a member of the governing Senate in 1881. He was also an honorary member of the academies in Munich and Dresden . In 1914, he was one of the signatories to the Manifesto of the Ninety-Three , a document supporting Germany's invasion of Belgium.

Other notable works [ edit ] Gotthold Lessing Monument, Gänsemarkt , Hamburg Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg , Fehrbellin Altgermanische Wisentjagd (bison hunting), Berlin Alfred Krupp Monument, Essen Luther Monument, Erfurt Goethe Monument in the Berliner Tiergarten (1880), his best known work References [ edit ] ^ a b c Jutta von Simson (2005).

"Schaper, Hugo Wilhelm Friedrich" .

Neue Deutsche Biographie (in German). Vol. 22. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. pp.

562– 563 . ( full text online ).

Further reading [ edit ] Jutta von Simson: Fritz Schaper. 1841–1919.

Prestel, München 1976, ISBN 3-7913-0090-3 .

Uwe Hinkfoth: Fritz Schaper, die Wiederentdeckung des Denkmals.

Catalog for an exhibition at the Goch Museum Goch, 30 July to 3 September 2000.

ISBN 3-926245-47-6 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fritz Schaper .

Literature by and about Fritz Schaper in the German National Library catalogue Sources on Schaper's life and work from the BAM-Portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Artists ULAN RKD Artists Musée d'Orsay ADK People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fritz_Schaper&oldid=1256515522 " Categories : 1841 births 1919 deaths People from Salzlandkreis Artists from the Province of Saxony German male sculptors 20th-century German sculptors 19th-century German sculptors Prussian Academy of Arts alumni Academic staff of the Prussian Academy of Arts Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class) Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Biography articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 November 2024, at 08:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fritz Schaper 9 languages Add topic

