Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Motherland 2 Fatherland Toggle Fatherland subsection 2.1 Other groups that refer to their native country as a "fatherland" 2.2 Romance languages 2.3 Multiple references to parental forms 3 In Hebrew 4 Uses by country 5 Land of one's home 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Homeland 35 languages العربية ܐܪܡܝܐ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Чӑвашла Eesti فارسی Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Latviešu Magyar Malagasy مصرى Nederlands Română Runa Simi Русский සිංහල Simple English کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Татарча / tatarça Tayal Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Place associated with a collective identity This article is about native lands. For the TV series, see Homeland (TV series) . For other uses, see Homeland (disambiguation) .

"Old Country" redirects here. For the silent film, see The Old Country . For the album by Nat Adderley's Quintet, see The Old Country (album) .

Liberty Leading the People by Eugène Delacroix personifies the French motherland.

Part of a series on Nationalism Nation forming Nationalism in Antiquity Nationalism in the Middle Ages Anthem Church Colours Emblem Father Flag Epic God Identity Persona Language Myth Sport State Symbol Treasure Animal Core values Allegiance Independence Patriotism Self-determination Solidarity Types Anarchist Blind Bourgeois Business Welfare Civic Communist Constitutional patriotism Corporate Cyber- Ecological Economic Ethnic Ethnopluralism Expansionist Homosexual Indigenism Integral Left-wing ( populism ) Musical Mystic Neo- Pan- Racial Religious Clerical Resource Revolutionary National syndicalist National Bolshevik Fascism Nazism Ethnocacerism Romantic Technological Territorial Trans- Ultra- Organizations List of nationalist organizations Related concepts Anationalism Anti-nationalism Anti-globalization movement Anti-imperialism Banal nationalism Civil religion Communitarianism Cosmopolitanism Cultural nationalism Diaspora politics Ethnocentrism Francoism Gastronationalism Gender and nationalism Globalism Historiography and nationalism Imagined community Imperialism Internationalism Irredentism Jingoism Localism Militarism National indifference Nationalism studies Nativism Plurinationalism Post- Racism Revanchism Right-wing populism Seasonal or cultural festival Subsidiarity in Catholicism Trumpism Xenophobia Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Conservatism Variants Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Libertarian Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Balance of power Class collaboration Collective identity Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family as a state model Family values Fundamentalism Gender roles Complementarianism Essentialism Historism Honour Imperialism Law and order Loyalty Maternalism Monarchism Royalism Moral absolutism Natalism Nationalism Nativism Natural law Norms Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organised religion State Orthodoxy Patriarchy Patriarchalism Patriotism Peace through strength Property rights Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Sovereignty Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Johnson Hume Burke More Maistre Bonald Chateaubriand Czartoryski Coleridge Karamzin Savigny Carlyle Ranke Newman Tocqueville Dostoevsky Taine Le Bon Nordau Belloc Iorga Chesterton Spengler Jabotinsky Ilyin Savarkar Schmitt Eliot Mannheim Jünger Evola Strauss Röpke Gadamer Freyre Voegelin Oakeshott Burnham Lefebvre Qutb Kuehnelt-Leddihn Gómez Dávila Kirk Solzhenitsyn Koselleck Mishima Buckley Sowell Mansfield Scruton Hoppe Dugin Peterson Politicians Adams Pitt Canning Metternich Disraeli Bismarck Salisbury Dmowski Mannerheim Baldwin Maurras Horthy Metaxas Churchill Adenauer De Gasperi Chiang Salazar De Gaulle Dollfuss Franco Khomeini Reagan Powell Pinochet Marcos Park Smith Reza Shah Suharto Lee Zia Vajpayee Thatcher Kohl Fujimori Trump Bush Kaczyński Netanyahu Modi Putin Erdoğan Abe Sarkozy Bolsonaro Yoon Orbán Milei Meloni Bukele Religion Christian democracy Christian right Confucianism Clericalism Hindutva Islamism Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Theravada Buddhism Traditionalist Catholicism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Personal variants Berlusconism Bukelism Cameronism Chiangism Erdoğanism Francoism Fujimorism Gaullism Janismo Kaczyzm Maurrassisme Mellismo Metaxism Powellism Pinochetism Putinism Qutbism Khomeinism Reaganism Sarkozysm Thatcherism Trumpism Ziaism National variants Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Belize Brazil Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Cuba Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Guatemala Hungary Iceland India Iran Israel Italy Japan Luxembourg Malaysia Mexico Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Panama Peru Poland Russia Serbia Singapore Sweden Switzerland South Korea Taiwan Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Toryism United States Related ideologies Agrarianism Black conservatism In US Conservative feminism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Conservative socialism Corporatism Hispanic conservatism In US LGBTQ conservatism Ordoliberalism Para-fascism Related topics Anti-communism White Terror Anti-gender movement Anti-immigration Catholic social teaching Conservative wave NatCon Radical right Europe US Right realism Right-wing politics Alt Authoritarianism Centre Dictatorship Far New Small-c conservative Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e A homeland is a place where a national or ethnic identity has formed. The definition can also mean simply one's country of birth.

[ 1 ] When used as a proper noun , the Homeland, as well as its equivalents in other languages, often has ethnic nationalist connotations. A homeland may also be referred to as a fatherland , a motherland , or a mother country , depending on the culture and language of the nationality in question.

Motherland [ edit ] "Motherland" redirects here. For other uses, see Motherland (disambiguation) .

"Mother country" redirects here. For other uses, see Mother Country (disambiguation) .

Further information: Metropolis Bharat Mata (Mother India) statue accompanied by a lion at Yanam, India Motherland refers to a mother country , i.e. the place in which somebody grew up or had lived for a long enough period that somebody has formed their own cultural identity, the place that one's ancestors lived for generations, or the place that somebody regards as home, or a Metropole in contrast to its colonies. People often refer to Mother Russia as a personification of the Russian nation. The Philippines is also considered as a motherland which is derived from the word " Inang Bayan " which means "Motherland". Within the British Empire , many natives in the colonies came to think of Britain as the mother country of one, large nation.

India is often personified as Bharat Mata (Mother India). The French commonly refer to France as "la mère patrie"; [ 2 ] Hispanic countries that were former Spanish viceroyalties commonly referred to Spain as " la Madre Patria ".

Turks refer to Turkey as "ana vatan" (lit: mother homeland.).

Kathleen Ni Houlihan is a mythical symbol of Irish nationalism found in literature and art including work by W.B. Yeats and Seán O'Casey , She was an emblem during colonial rule, and became associated with the Irish Republican Army in Northern Ireland, especially during The Troubles .

Fatherland [ edit ] "Fatherland" redirects here. For other uses, see Fatherland (disambiguation) .

Postcard of an Austrian and a German soldier in the First World War with the text "Shoulder to shoulder, hand in hand, for God, Emperor and Fatherland." Fatherland is the nation of one's "fathers", " forefathers ", or ancestors . The word can also mean the country of nationality, the country in which somebody grew up, the country that somebody's ancestors lived in for generations, or the country that somebody regards as home, depending on how the individual uses it.

[ 3 ] It can be viewed as a nationalist concept, in so far as it is evocative of emotions related to family ties and links them to national identity and patriotism. It can be compared to motherland and homeland, and some languages will use more than one of these terms.

[ 4 ] The Ancient Greek patris , fatherland, led to patrios , of our fathers and thence to the Latin patriota and Old French patriote , meaning compatriot; from these the English word patriotism is derived. Romans and the subjects of Rome saw Italy as the fatherland ( patria or terrarum parens ) of the Roman Empire , in contrast to Roman provinces .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The related Ancient Roman word Patria led to similar forms in modern Romance languages .

The term fatherland is used throughout Europe where a Germanic language is spoken. In Dutch vaderland is used in the national anthem, " Het Wilhelmus ", which lyrics are written around 1570. It is also common to refer to the national history as vaderlandse geschiedenis .

In German, the term Vaterland became more prominent in the 19th century. It appears in numerous patriotic songs and poems, such as Hoffmann's song Lied der Deutschen which became the national anthem in 1922. German government propaganda used its appeal to nationalism when making references to Germany and the state.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] It was used in Mein Kampf , [ 9 ] and on a sign in a German concentration camp , also signed, Adolf Hitler .

[ 10 ] Because of the use of Vaterland in Nazi-German war propaganda, the term "Fatherland" in English has become associated with domestic British and American anti-Nazi propaganda during World War II . This is not the case in Germany itself, or in other Germanic speaking and Eastern European countries, where the word remains used in the usual patriotic contexts.

Terms equating "Fatherland" in Germanic languages: Afrikaans: Vaderland Danish: fædreland Dutch (Flemish): vaderland [ 11 ] West Frisian: heitelân German: Vaterland [ 12 ] (as in the national anthem Das Lied der Deutschen , also Austrians , the Swiss as in the national anthem Swiss Psalm and Liechtensteiners ) Icelandic: föðurland Norwegian: fedreland Swedish: fäderneslandet (besides the more common fosterlandet ; the word faderlandet also exists in Swedish but is never used for Sweden itself, but for other countries such as Germany).

A corresponding term is often used in Slavic languages, in: Russian otechestvo (отечество) or otchizna (отчизна) Polish ojczyzna in common language literally meaning "fatherland", ziemia ojców literally meaning "land of fathers", [ 13 ] sometimes used in the phrase ziemia ojców naszych [ 14 ] literally meaning "land of our fathers" (besides rarer name macierz "motherland") Ukrainian batʹkivshchyna (батьківщина) or vitchyzna (вітчизна).

Czech otčina (although the normal Czech term for "homeland" is vlast ) the Belarusians as Бацькаўшчына ( Baćkaŭščyna ) Serbo-Croatian otadžbina (отаџбина) meaning "fatherland", domovina (домовина) meaning "homeland", dedovina (дедовина) or djedovina meaning "grandfatherland" or "land of grandfathers" Bulgarian татковина ( tatkovina ) as well as otechestvo (Отечество) Macedonian татковина ( tatkovina ) Other groups that refer to their native country as a "fatherland" [ edit ] Groups with languages that refer to their native country as a "fatherland" include: the Arabs as أرض الآباء 'arḍ al-'abā' ("land of the fathers") the Albanians as Atdhe the Amharas as አባት አገር ( Abbat Ager ) the Arakanese as A pha rakhaing pray (အဖရခိုင်ပြည်) the Chechens as Daimokh the Estonians as isamaa (as in the national anthem Mu isamaa, mu õnn ja rõõm ) the Finns as isänmaa the Georgians as Samshoblo (სამშობლო - "[land] of parents") or Mamuli (მამული) the Ancient Greeks as πατρίς patris the Ancient Romans as patria “fatherland” the Greeks as πατρίδα patrida ' the Kazakhs as atameken the Kyrgyz as ata meken the Latvians as tēvzeme the Lithuanians as tėvynė the Nigerians as fatherland the Oromo as Biyya Abaa the Pakistanis as Vatan (madar-e-watan means motherland. Not fatherland) the Somali as Dhulka Abaa , land of the father the Thais as pituphum (ปิตุภูมิ), the word is adapted from Sanskrit the Tibetans as ཕ་ཡུལ ( pha yul ) the Welsh as Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau , 'the ancient land of my fathers' Romance languages [ edit ] In Romance languages , a common way to refer to one's home country is Patria/Pátria/Patrie which has the same connotation as Fatherland , that is, the nation of our parents/fathers (From the Latin, Pater, father). As patria has feminine gender, it is usually used in expressions related to one's mother, as in Italian la Madrepatria , Spanish la Madre Patria or Portuguese a Pátria Mãe (Mother Fatherland). Examples include: the Esperantists as patrio , patrolando or patrujo Aragonese , Asturian , Franco-Provençal , Galician , Italian , Spanish (in its many dialects): Patria Catalan : Pàtria Occitans : Patrìo French : Patrie Romanian : Patrie Portuguese : Pátria Multiple references to parental forms [ edit ] the Armenians , as Hayrenik (Հայրենիք), home. The national anthem Mer Hayrenik translates as Our Fatherland the Azerbaijanis as Ana vətən (lit. mother homeland; vətən from Arabic) or Ata ocağı (lit. father's hearth ) the Bosniaks as Otadžbina (Отаџбина), although Domovina (Домовина) is sometimes used colloquially meaning homeland the Chinese as zǔguó (祖国 or 祖國 ( traditional chinese ), "land of ancestors"), zǔguómǔqīn (祖国母亲 or 祖國母親, "ancestral land, the mother") is frequently used.

the Czechs as vlast , power or (rarely) otčina , fatherland the Hungarians as szülőföld (literally: "bearing land" or "parental land") the Indians as मातृभूमि literally meaning "motherland", or पितृभूमि translating to "fatherland" in the Indo-Aryan liturgical tradition the Kurds as warê bav û kalan meaning "land of the fathers and the grandfathers" the Japanese as sokoku (祖国, "land of ancestors") the Koreans as joguk (조국, Hanja : 祖國, "land of ancestors") French speakers : Patrie , although they also use la mère patrie , which includes the idea of motherland the Latvians as tēvija or tēvzeme (although dzimtene – roughly translated as "place that somebody grew up" – is more neutral and used more commonly nowadays) the Burmese as အမိမြေ (ami-myay) literally meaning "motherland" the Persians as Sarzamin e Pedari (Fatherland), Sarzamin e Mādari (Motherland) or Mihan (Home) the Poles as ojczyzna ( ojczyzna is derived from ojciec , Polish for father, but ojczyzna itself and Polska are feminine , so it can also be translated as motherland), also an archaism macierz "mother" is rarely used.

the Russians , as Otechestvo (отечество) or Otchizna (отчизна), both words derived from отец , Russian for father.

Otechestvo is neuter , otchizna is feminine .

the Slovenes as očetnjava , although domovina (homeland) is more common.

the Swedes as fäderneslandet , although fosterlandet is more common (meaning the land that fostered/raised a person) the Vietnamese as Tổ quốc ( Chữ Nôm : 祖國, "land of ancestors") In Hebrew [ edit ] Jews , especially Modern-Day Israelis, use several different terms, all referring to Israel , including: Moledet (מולדת; Birth Land). The most analogous Hebrew word to the English term 'Homeland'.

Erets Israel (ארץ ישראל; Land of Israel). This is the most common usage.

Haarets (הארץ; The Land). This is used by Israelis, and Jews abroad, when making distinctions between Israel and other countries in conversation.

Haarets Hamuvtachat (הארץ המובטחת; The Promised Land). This is a term with historical and religious connotations.

Erets Zion (ארץ ציון; Land of Zion; Land of Jerusalem). Notably use in The Israeli Anthem .

Erets Avot (ארץ אבות; Land of the Fathers). This is a common biblical and literary usage. Equivalent to 'Fatherland'.

Erets Zavat Chalav Oudvash (ארץ זבת חלב ודבש; Land Flowing with Milk and Honey). This is a biblical term which is still sometimes used.

Haarets Hatova (הארץ הטובה; The Good Land). Originated in the Book of Deuteronomy .

Uses by country [ edit ] The Soviet Union created homelands for some minorities in the 1920s, including the Volga German ASSR and the Jewish Autonomous Oblast . In the case of the Volga German ASSR, these homelands were later abolished, and their inhabitants deported to either Siberia or the Kazakh SSR .

In the United States , the Department of Homeland Security was created soon after the 11 September 2001, terrorist attacks , as a means to centralize response to various threats . In a June 2002 column, Republican consultant and speechwriter Peggy Noonan expressed the hope that the Bush administration would change the name of the department, writing that, "The name Homeland Security grates on a lot of people, understandably.

Homeland isn't really an American word, it's not something we used to say or say now".

[ 15 ] In the apartheid era in South Africa , the concept was given a different meaning. The white government had designated approximately 25% of its non-desert territory for black tribal settlement. Whites and other non-blacks were restricted from owning land or settling in those areas. After 1948 they were gradually granted an increasing level of "home-rule". From 1976 several of these regions were granted independence. Four of them were declared independent nations by South Africa, but were unrecognized as independent countries by any other nation besides each other and South Africa. The territories set aside for the African inhabitants were also known as bantustans .

[ citation needed ] In Australia, the term refers to relatively small Aboriginal settlements (referred to also as "outstations") where people with close kinship ties share lands significant to them for cultural reasons. Many such homelands are found across Western Australia, the Northern Territory, and Queensland. The homeland movement gained momentum in the 1970 and 1980s. Not all homelands are permanently occupied owing to seasonal or cultural reasons.

[ 16 ] Much of their funding and support have been withdrawn since the 2000s.

[ 17 ] In Turkish , the concept of "homeland", especially in the patriotic sense, is " ana vatan " (lit. mother homeland), while " baba ocağı " (lit. father's hearth ) is used to refer to one's childhood home. (Note: The Turkish word " ocak " has the double meaning of january and fireplace , like the Spanish " hogar ", which can mean "home" or "hearth".) [ citation needed ] Land of one's home [ edit ] In some languages, there are additional words that refer specifically to the place where one is home to, but is narrower in scope than one's nation, and often have some sort of nostalgic, fantastic, heritage connection, for example: In German language, heimat .

In Dutch and Afrikaans, t(h)uisland , equivalent to the term bantustan In Japanese language, kokyō, or , furusato ( 故郷 ) , or kyōdo ( 郷土 ) .

In Chinese languages, 故乡 ; 故鄉 ; gùxiāng or 家乡 ; 家鄉 ; jiāxiāng .

In Vietnamese language, cố hương .

In Korean language, 고향 , gohyang , 故鄕 .

See also [ edit ] Diaspora politics Heimat Homeland security Mother tongue Separatism Secession References [ edit ] ^ "Definition of Homeland" .

merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 23 December 2018 .

^ Pitroipa, Abdel (14 July 2010).

"Ces tirailleurs sénégalais qui ont combattu pour la France" .

L'Express (in French) . Retrieved 14 August 2019 .

^ "Definition of FATHERLAND" .

merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 8 January 2019 .

^ James, Caroline (May 2015).

"Identity Crisis: Motherland or Fatherland?" .

Oxford Dictionaries .

Oxford University Press .

Archived from the original on 11 May 2015 . Retrieved 14 August 2019 .

^ Bloomsbury Publishing (20 November 2013).

Historiae Mundi: Studies in Universal History .

A&C Black . p. 97.

ISBN 9781472519801 .

^ Anthon, Charles (1867).

Eneid of Virgil .

^ Wierzbicka, Anna (21 July 1997).

Understanding Cultures Through Their Key Words : English, Russian, Polish, German, and Japanese .

Oxford University Press . pp.

173– 175.

ISBN 978-0-19-535849-0 .

^ Stargardt, Nicholas (18 December 2007).

Witnesses of War: Children's Lives Under the Nazis .

Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group . p. 328.

ISBN 9780307430304 .

^ Wilensky, Gabriel (2010).

Six Million Crucifixions . QWERTY Publishers.

ISBN 9780984334643 .

What we have to fight for is the freedom and independence of the fatherland, so that our people may be enabled to fulfill the mission assigned to it by the creator ^ "Nazi Germany reveals official pictures of its concentration camps" .

Life . Vol. 7, no. 8.

Time Inc . 21 August 1939. p. 22.

ISSN 0024-3019 .

There is a road to freedom. Its milestones are Obedience, Endeavor, Honesty, Order, Cleanliness, Sobriety, Truthfulness, Sacrifice, and love of the Fatherland.

^ Wilhelmus -YouTube ^ Vaterland -YouTube ^ "Ziemia Ojców" . 16 April 2012.

^ "Ziemia Ojców Naszych" . Archived from the original on 14 May 2016 . Retrieved 24 August 2019 .

^ Noonan, Peggy (14 June 2002).

"OpinionJournal – Peggy Noonan" .

Archived from the original on 30 September 2007 . Retrieved 8 September 2007 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "The Encyclopedia of Aboriginal Australia". 1994.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Peterson, Nicolas; Myers, Fred, eds. (January 2016).

Experiments in self-determination: Histories of the outstation movement in Australia [blurb] . Monographs in Anthropology. ANU Press.

doi : 10.22459/ESD.01.2016 .

ISBN 9781925022902 . Retrieved 2 August 2020 .

Further reading [ edit ] Landscape and Memory by Simon Schama (Random House, 1995) External links [ edit ] Nationalism and Ethnicity – A Theoretical Overview v t e International Indigenous and minority rights Rights Ancestral domain Free, prior and informed consent Intellectual property Land rights Language Self-determination in Australia in Canada in the United States Traditional knowledge ecological medical Treaty rights in Australia in New Zealand Non-governmental and political organizations Amazon Watch Assembly of First Nations Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador Congress of Aboriginal Peoples Coordinator of Indigenous Organizations of the Amazon River Basin Cultural Survival Indigenous Environmental Network Indigenous Peoples Council on Biocolonialism International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs National Indigenous Organization of Colombia Native American Rights Fund Survival International Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization Zapatista Army of National Liberation ( more ...

) Issues Civilizing mission Colonialism Internal colonialism Settler colonialism Biopiracy Bioprospecting Cultural appropriation Sports mascots Redface Dakota Access Pipeline protests Discovery doctrine Fortress conservation Green grabbing Homeland Lands inhabited by indigenous peoples Bantustan Autonomous okrugs American Indian reservation Indian colony Indian reserve Ranchería Rancherie Russian republics Urban Indian reserve Manifest destiny Plastic shaman Rainbow Warriors Two-spirit Legal representation Governmental bodies Aotearoa-New Zealand Te Puni Kōkiri Brazil Fundação Nacional do Índio Canada Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada Mexico National Institute of Indigenous Peoples Philippines National Commission on Indigenous Peoples Russia Ministry for the Development of the Russian Far East and Arctic Government of Bashkortostan Government of the Sakha Republic Government of Tatarstan Taiwan Council of Indigenous Peoples US Bureau of Indian Affairs Intergovernmental bodies African Union African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights Arctic Council WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge, and Folklore BBNJ ABS Committee Indigenous-led international bodies UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues Indigenous Caucus Treaties and Declarations of Rights 1989: Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention (ILO C169) 1992: Convention on Biological Diversity 2007: UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) 2010: Nagoya Protocol on Fair Access and Benefit-Sharing 2018: UN Declaration on the Rights of Peasants (UNDROP) 2023: High Seas Treaty (BBNJ Agreement) 2024: Treaty on Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge (GRATK) Historical cases Chechen–Russian conflict Sri Lankan Civil War 2009 Peruvian political crisis Alta controversy Chiapas conflict Expulsion of the Chagossians High Arctic relocation Human rights in Tibet Indian removal Little Danes experiment Mapuche conflict Oka Crisis Residential schools Canada New Zealand South Africa United States Rubber boom San controversy Stolen Generations Persecution of Uyghurs in China Indigenous rights • Minority rights v t e Nationalism Development Nationalism in Antiquity Nationalism in the Middle Ages Anthem Colours Flag Epic God Identity Language Music Myth Religion Sport Symbol Animal Emblem Flower Treasure By type African Anarchist Blind Bourgeois Business Welfare Civic Constitutional patriotism Corporate- Cyber- Ecological Economic Ethnic European Expansionist Palingenetic ultranationalism Homo- Integral Left-wing Communist Linguistic Mystic Neo-/New Pan- Queer Right-wing Racial Arab Berber Black Korean White Zionism Religious Christian Catholic Clerico- Mormon Hindu Hindutva Islamic Resource Revolutionary Ethnocacerism National syndicalist Falangism Fascism List of fascist movements Romantic Technological Territorial Terrorism Trans- Ultra- Japan Organizations List of nationalist organizations Nationalist Clubs Related concepts Anarchism and nationalism Anationalism Anti-nationalism Banal nationalism Cultural nationalism Diaspora politics Eliminationism Exceptionalism Gastronationalism Gender and nationalism Historiography and nationalism Internationalism Irredentism Jingoism Nation-building National indifference National question National revival Nation state Nationalism studies Natural border Plurinationalism Principle of nationalities [ fr ] Revanchism State-building Wars of national liberation v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal Authority control databases İslâm Ansiklopedisi NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wwkzx
Cached time: 20250817103053
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.811 seconds
Real time usage: 1.016 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2840/1000000
Revision size: 22466/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 185925/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2014/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 104781/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.469/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21590363/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  729.201      1 -total
 25.94%  189.134      1 Template:Reflist
 17.16%  125.147     17 Template:Lang
 16.02%  116.839      1 Template:Conservatism_sidebar
 13.19%   96.206      4 Template:Cite_web
 11.90%   86.784      1 Template:Nationalism_sidebar
 11.64%   84.849      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.94%   65.181      3 Template:Navbox
  8.25%   60.138      1 Template:Short_description
  6.96%   50.730      1 Template:Indigenous_rights_footer Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:13920:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817103053 and revision id 1304589196. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Homeland&oldid=1304589196 " Categories : Nationalism Conservatism Cultural geography Ethnicity in politics Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Belarusian-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Amharic-language text Articles containing Standard Tibetan-language text Articles containing Welsh-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles containing Vietnamese-language text Articles containing Korean-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 00:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Homeland 35 languages Add topic

