Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Toponymy 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Prehistory 2.2 Ancient history 2.3 Middle Ages 2.4 Early modern period 2.5 Union with Scotland 2.6 Late modern and contemporary periods 3 Governance Toggle Governance subsection 3.1 Politics 3.2 Law 3.3 Subdivisions 3.3.1 London 4 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 4.1 Landscape and rivers 4.2 Climate 4.3 Nature and wildlife 4.4 Major conurbations 5 Economy Toggle Economy subsection 5.1 Science and technology 5.2 Transport 5.3 Energy 6 Healthcare 7 Demography Toggle Demography subsection 7.1 Population 7.2 Language 7.3 Religion 8 Education Toggle Education subsection 8.1 Higher education 9 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 9.1 Architecture 9.2 Gardens 9.3 Folklore 9.4 Cuisine 9.5 Visual arts 9.6 Literature, poetry, and philosophy 9.7 Performing arts 9.8 Cinema 9.9 Sites and institutions 9.10 Media 9.11 Sport 10 National symbols 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References Toggle References subsection 13.1 Bibliography 14 External links Toggle the table of contents England 247 languages Acèh Адыгабзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Anarâškielâ अंगिका Ænglisc Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Armãneashti Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chavacano de Zamboanga Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Dolnoserbski डोटेली ཇོང་ཁ Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ГӀалгӀай Gĩkũyũ گیلکی 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kongo Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Li Niha Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی ပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏ Papiamentu پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sesotho Sesotho sa Leboa Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça တႆး తెలుగు Tetun ไทย Тоҷикӣ Lea faka-Tonga Türkçe Türkmençe Twi Tyap Тыва дыл Удмурт Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro Walon 文言 West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Obolo Batak Toba Betawi Batak Mandailing Kadazandusun Kumoring Yerwa Kanuri Moore Nupe ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 53°08′N 1°23′W ﻿ / ﻿ 53.13°N 1.38°W ﻿ / 53.13; -1.38 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Country within the United Kingdom For other uses, see England (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with United Kingdom .

England Flag Anthem: None officially; Predominantly " God Save the King " [ a ] Location of England (dark green) – in Europe (green & dark grey) – in the United Kingdom (green) Status Country Capital and largest city London 51°30′N 0°7′W ﻿ / ﻿ 51.500°N 0.117°W ﻿ / 51.500; -0.117 National language English , BSL [ 1 ] Regional languages Cornish Ethnic groups ( 2021 ) [ 2 ] 81.0% White 9.6% Asian 4.2% Black 3.0% Mixed 2.2% other Religion (2021) [ 2 ] 46.3% Christianity 36.7% no religion 6.7% Islam 1.8% Hinduism 0.9% Sikhism 0.5% Judaism 0.5% Buddhism 0.6% other 6.0% not stated Demonym(s) English [ b ] Sovereign state Legal jurisdiction United Kingdom England and Wales Government Direct rule by the UK Government with some sub-regional devolution [ 3 ] within a parliamentary constitutional monarchy • Monarch Charles III Parliament of the United Kingdom • House of Commons 543 MPs (of 650) Establishment • Unification of Angles, Saxons and Danes by 12 July 927 • Union with Scotland 1 May 1707 Area • Total [ d ] 132,932 km 2 (51,325 sq mi) [ 4 ] • Land [ c ] 130,310 km 2 (50,310 sq mi) [ 5 ] Population • 2022 estimate 57,106,398 [ 5 ] • 2021 census 56,490,048 [ 2 ] • Density 438/km 2 (1,134.4/sq mi) [ 5 ] GVA 2023 estimate • Total £2.113 trillion • Per capita £36,632 [ 6 ] GDP (nominal) 2023 estimate • Total £2.330 trillion • Per capita £40,382 [ 7 ] Currency Pound sterling ( GBP ; £ ) Time zone UTC +0 ( GMT ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC +1 ( BST ) Date format dd/mm/yyyy ( AD ) Calling code +44 ISO 3166 code GB-ENG England is a country that is part of the United Kingdom . It is located on the island of Great Britain , of which it covers about 62%, and more than 100 smaller adjacent islands . England shares a land border with Scotland to the north and another land border with Wales to the west, and is otherwise surrounded by the North Sea to the east, the English Channel to the south, the Celtic Sea to the south-west, and the Irish Sea to the west.

Continental Europe lies to the south-east, and Ireland to the west. At the 2021 census , the population was 56,490,048.

London is both the largest city and the capital .

The area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Paleolithic . It takes its name from the Angles , a Germanic tribe who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century and has had extensive cultural and legal impact on the wider world since the Age of Discovery , which began during the 15th century.

[ 8 ] The Kingdom of England , which included Wales after 1535, ceased to be a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union brought into effect a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland that created the Kingdom of Great Britain .

[ 9 ] England is the origin of the English language , the English legal system (which served as the basis for the common law systems of many other countries), association football , and the Anglican branch of Christianity; its parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations.

[ 10 ] The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England, transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.

[ 11 ] England is home to the two oldest universities in the English-speaking world: the University of Oxford , founded in 1096, and the University of Cambridge , founded in 1209. Both universities are ranked amongst the most prestigious in the world.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] England's terrain chiefly consists of low hills and plains , especially in the centre and south . Upland and mountainous terrain is mostly found in the north and west, including Dartmoor , the Lake District , the Pennines , and the Shropshire Hills . The London metropolitan area has a population of 14.2 million as of 2021, representing the United Kingdom's largest metropolitan area. England's population of 56.3 million comprises 84% of the population of the United Kingdom, largely concentrated around London, the South East , and conurbations in the Midlands , the North West , the North East , and Yorkshire , which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.

[ 14 ] Toponymy See also: Toponymy of England The name "England" is derived from the Old English name Englaland , which means "land of the Angles ".

[ 15 ] The Angles were one of the Germanic tribes that settled in Great Britain during the Early Middle Ages . They came from the Angeln region of what is now the German state of Schleswig-Holstein .

[ 16 ] The earliest recorded use of the term, as " Engla londe ", is in the late-ninth-century translation into Old English of Bede 's Ecclesiastical History of the English People . The term was then used to mean "the land inhabited by the English", and it included English people in what is now south-east Scotland but was then part of the English kingdom of Northumbria . The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle recorded that the Domesday Book of 1086 covered the whole of England, meaning the English kingdom, but a few years later the Chronicle stated that King Malcolm III went "out of Scotlande into Lothian in Englaland", thus using it in the more ancient sense.

[ 17 ] The earliest attested reference to the Angles occurs in the 1st-century work by Tacitus , Germania , in which the Latin word Anglii is used.

[ 18 ] The etymology of the tribal name itself is disputed by scholars; it has been suggested that it derives from the shape of the Angeln peninsula, an angular shape.

[ 19 ] How and why a term derived from the name of this tribe, rather than others such as the Saxons , came to be used for the entire country is not known, but it seems this is related to the custom of calling the Germanic people in Britain Angli Saxones or English Saxons to distinguish them from continental Saxons (Eald-Seaxe) of Old Saxony in Germany.

[ 20 ] In Scottish Gaelic , the Saxon tribe gave their name to the word for England ( Sasunn ); [ 21 ] similarly, the Welsh name for the English language is Saesneg . A romantic name for England is Loegria , related to the Welsh word for England, Lloegr , and made popular by its use in Arthurian legend .

Albion is also applied to England in a more poetic capacity, [ 22 ] though its original meaning is the island of Britain as a whole.

History Main article: History of England For a chronological guide, see Timeline of English history .

Prehistory Main article: Prehistoric Britain Stonehenge , a Neolithic monument The Battersea Shield is one of the most significant pieces of ancient Celtic art found in Britain.

The earliest known evidence of human presence in the area now known as England was that of Homo antecessor , dating to about 780,000 years ago. The oldest proto-human bones discovered in England date from 500,000 years ago.

[ 23 ] Modern humans are known to have inhabited the area during the Upper Paleolithic period, though permanent settlements were only established within the last 6,000 years.

[ 24 ] After the last ice age only large mammals such as mammoths , bison and woolly rhinoceros remained. Roughly 11,000 years ago, when the ice sheets began to recede, humans repopulated the area; genetic research suggests they came from the northern part of the Iberian Peninsula .

[ 25 ] The sea level was lower than the present day and Britain was connected by land bridge to Ireland and Eurasia .

[ 26 ] As the seas rose, it was separated from Ireland 10,000 years ago and from Eurasia two millennia later.

The Beaker culture arrived around 2,500 BC, introducing drinking and food vessels constructed from clay, as well as vessels used as reduction pots to smelt copper ores.

[ 27 ] It was during this time that major Neolithic monuments such as Stonehenge (phase III) and Avebury were constructed. By heating together tin and copper, which were in abundance in the area, the Beaker culture people made bronze , and later iron from iron ores. The development of iron smelting allowed the construction of better ploughs , advancing agriculture (for instance, with Celtic fields ), as well as the production of more effective weapons.

[ 28 ] During the Iron Age , Celtic culture , deriving from the Hallstatt and La Tène cultures , arrived from Central Europe.

Brythonic was the spoken language during this time. Society was tribal; according to Ptolemy 's Geographia there were around 20 tribes in the area. Like other regions on the edge of the Empire, Britain had long enjoyed trading links with the Romans. Julius Caesar of the Roman Republic attempted to invade twice in 55 BC; although largely unsuccessful, he managed to set up a client king from the Trinovantes .

Ancient history The Roman Baths are well-preserved Roman thermae in the city of Bath , Somerset.

A segment of the ruins of Hadrian's Wall in northern England, overlooking Crag Lough.

The Romans invaded Britain in 43 AD during the reign of Emperor Claudius , subsequently conquering much of Britain , and the area was incorporated into the Roman Empire as Britannia province .

[ 29 ] The best-known of the native tribes who attempted to resist were the Catuvellauni led by Caratacus . Later, an uprising led by Boudica , Queen of the Iceni , ended with Boudica's suicide following her defeat at the Battle of Watling Street .

[ 30 ] The author of one study of Roman Britain suggested that from 43 AD to 84 AD, the Roman invaders killed somewhere between 100,000 and 250,000 people from a population of perhaps 2,000,000.

[ 31 ] This era saw a Greco-Roman culture prevail with the introduction of Roman law , Roman architecture , aqueducts , sewers , many agricultural items and silk.

[ 32 ] In the 3rd century, Emperor Septimius Severus died at Eboracum (now York ), where Constantine was subsequently proclaimed emperor a century later.

[ 33 ] There is debate about when Christianity was first introduced; it was no later than the 4th century, probably much earlier. According to Bede , missionaries were sent from Rome by Eleutherius at the request of the chieftain Lucius of Britain in 180 AD, to settle differences as to Eastern and Western ceremonials, which were disturbing the church. There are traditions linked to Glastonbury claiming an introduction through Joseph of Arimathea , while others claim through Lucius of Britain.

[ 34 ] By 410, during the decline of the Roman Empire , Britain was left exposed by the end of Roman rule in Britain and the withdrawal of Roman army units, to defend the frontiers in continental Europe and partake in civil wars.

[ 35 ] Celtic Christian monastic and missionary movements flourished. This period of Christianity was influenced by ancient Celtic culture in its sensibilities, polity, practices and theology. Local "congregations" were centred in the monastic community and monastic leaders were more like chieftains, as peers, rather than in the more hierarchical system of the Roman-dominated church.

[ 36 ] Middle Ages Main article: England in the Middle Ages Replica of the 7th-century ceremonial Sutton Hoo helmet from the Kingdom of East Anglia Roman military withdrawals left Britain open to invasion by pagan, seafaring warriors from north-western continental Europe, chiefly the Saxons, Angles , Jutes and Frisians who had long raided the coasts of the Roman province. These groups then began to settle in increasing numbers over the course of the fifth and sixth centuries, initially in the eastern part of the country.

[ 35 ] Their advance was contained for some decades after the Britons' victory at the Battle of Mount Badon , but subsequently resumed, overrunning the fertile lowlands of Britain and reducing the area under Brittonic control to a series of separate enclaves in the more rugged country to the west by the end of the 6th century. Contemporary texts describing this period are extremely scarce, giving rise to its description as a Dark Age . Details of the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain are consequently subject to considerable disagreement; the emerging consensus is that it occurred on a large scale in the south and east but was less substantial to the north and west, where Celtic languages continued to be spoken even in areas under Anglo-Saxon control.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Roman-dominated Christianity had, in general, been replaced in the conquered territories by Anglo-Saxon paganism , but was reintroduced by missionaries from Rome led by Augustine from 597.

[ 39 ] Disputes between the Roman- and Celtic-dominated forms of Christianity ended in victory for the Roman tradition at the Council of Whitby (664), which was ostensibly about tonsures (clerical haircuts) and the date of Easter, but more significantly, about the differences in Roman and Celtic forms of authority, theology, and practice.

[ 36 ] During the settlement period the lands ruled by the incomers seem to have been fragmented into numerous tribal territories, but by the 7th century, when substantial evidence of the situation again becomes available, these had coalesced into roughly a dozen kingdoms including Northumbria , Mercia , Wessex , East Anglia , Essex , Kent and Sussex . Over the following centuries, this process of political consolidation continued.

[ 40 ] The 7th century saw a struggle for hegemony between Northumbria and Mercia, which in the 8th century gave way to Mercian preeminence.

[ 41 ] In the early 9th century Mercia was displaced as the foremost kingdom by Wessex. Later in that century escalating attacks by the Danes culminated in the conquest of the north and east of England, overthrowing the kingdoms of Northumbria, Mercia and East Anglia. Wessex under Alfred the Great was left as the only surviving English kingdom, and under his successors, it steadily expanded at the expense of the kingdoms of the Danelaw . This brought about the political unification of England, first accomplished under Æthelstan in 927 and definitively established after further conflicts by Eadred in 953. A fresh wave of Scandinavian attacks from the late 10th century ended with the conquest of this united kingdom by Sweyn Forkbeard in 1013 and again by his son Cnut in 1016, turning it into the centre of a short-lived North Sea Empire that also included Denmark and Norway . However, the native royal dynasty was restored with the accession of Edward the Confessor in 1042.

King Henry V at the Battle of Agincourt , fought on Saint Crispin's Day and concluded with an English victory against a larger French army in the Hundred Years' War A dispute over the succession to Edward led to an unsuccessful Norwegian Invasion in September 1066 close to York in the North, and the successful Norman Conquest in October 1066, accomplished by an army led by Duke William of Normandy invading at Hastings late September 1066.

[ 42 ] The Normans themselves originated from Scandinavia and had settled in Normandy in the late 9th and early 10th centuries.

[ 43 ] This conquest led to the almost total dispossession of the English elite and its replacement by a new French-speaking aristocracy, whose speech had a profound and permanent effect on the English language.

[ 44 ] Subsequently, the House of Plantagenet from Anjou inherited the English throne under Henry II , adding England to the budding Angevin Empire of fiefs the family had inherited in France including Aquitaine .

[ 45 ] They reigned for three centuries, some noted monarchs being Richard I , Edward I , Edward III and Henry V .

[ 45 ] The period saw changes in trade and legislation, including the signing of Magna Carta , an English legal charter used to limit the sovereign's powers by law and protect the privileges of freemen. Catholic monasticism flourished, providing philosophers, and the universities of Oxford and Cambridge were founded with royal patronage. The Principality of Wales became a Plantagenet fief during the 13th century [ 46 ] and the Lordship of Ireland was given to the English monarchy by the Pope. During the 14th century, the Plantagenets and the House of Valois claimed to be legitimate claimants to the House of Capet and of France; the two powers clashed in the Hundred Years' War .

[ 47 ] The Black Death epidemic hit England ; starting in 1348, it eventually killed up to half of England's inhabitants .

[ 48 ] Between 1453 and 1487, a civil war known as the War of the Roses waged between the two branches of the royal family, the Yorkists and Lancastrians .

[ 49 ] Eventually it led to the Yorkists losing the throne entirely to a Welsh noble family the Tudors , a branch of the Lancastrians headed by Henry Tudor who invaded with Welsh and Breton mercenaries, gaining victory at the Battle of Bosworth Field where the Yorkist king Richard III was killed.

[ 50 ] Early modern period King Henry VIII (1491–1547) Queen Elizabeth I (1558–1603) During the Tudor period , England began to develop naval skills , and exploration intensified in the Age of Discovery .

[ 51 ] Henry VIII broke from communion with the Catholic Church, over issues relating to his divorce, under the Acts of Supremacy in 1534 which proclaimed the monarch head of the Church of England . In contrast with much of European Protestantism , the roots of the split were more political than theological.

[ e ] He also legally incorporated his ancestral land Wales into the Kingdom of England with the 1535–1542 acts . There were internal religious conflicts during the reigns of Henry's daughters, Mary I and Elizabeth I . The former took the country back to Catholicism while the latter broke from it again, forcefully asserting the supremacy of Anglicanism . The Elizabethan era is the epoch in the Tudor age of the reign of Queen Elizabeth I ("the Virgin Queen"). Historians often depict it as the golden age in English history that represented the apogee of the English Renaissance and saw the flowering of great art, drama, poetry, music and literature.

[ 53 ] England during this period had a centralised, well-organised, and effective government.

[ 54 ] Competing with Spain , the first English colony in the Americas was founded in 1585 by explorer Walter Raleigh in Virginia and named Roanoke . The Roanoke colony failed and is known as the lost colony after it was found abandoned on the return of the late-arriving supply ship.

[ 55 ] With the East India Company , England also competed with the Dutch and French in the East. During the Elizabethan period, England was at war with Spain. An armada sailed from Spain in 1588 as part of a wider plan to invade England and re-establish a Catholic monarchy. The plan was thwarted by bad coordination, stormy weather and successful harrying attacks by an English fleet under Lord Howard of Effingham . This failure did not end the threat: Spain launched two further armadas, in 1596 and 1597 , but both were driven back by storms.

Union with Scotland Further information: Union of the Crowns and Treaty of Union King of Scotland , James VI , became King of England as James I in 1603, forming the Union of the Crowns The political structure of the island changed in 1603, when the King of Scots , James VI , a kingdom which had been a long-time rival to English interests, inherited the throne of England as James I, thereby creating a personal union .

[ 56 ] He styled himself King of Great Britain , although this had no basis in English law.

[ 57 ] Under the auspices of James VI and I the Authorised King James Version of the Holy Bible was published in 1611. It was the standard version of the Bible read by most Protestant Christians for four hundred years until modern revisions were produced in the 20th century.

Based on conflicting political, religious and social positions, the English Civil War was fought between the supporters of Parliament and those of King Charles I , known colloquially as Roundheads and Cavaliers respectively. This was an interwoven part of the wider multifaceted Wars of the Three Kingdoms , involving Scotland and Ireland . The Parliamentarians were victorious, Charles I was executed and the kingdom replaced by the Commonwealth . Leader of the Parliament forces, Oliver Cromwell declared himself Lord Protector in 1653; a period of personal rule followed.

[ 58 ] After Cromwell's death and the resignation of his son Richard as Lord Protector, Charles II was invited to return as monarch in 1660, in a move called the Restoration . With the reopening of theatres, fine arts, literature and performing arts flourished throughout the Restoration of the "Merry Monarch" Charles II.

[ 59 ] After the Glorious Revolution of 1688, it was constitutionally established that King and Parliament should rule together, though Parliament would have the real power. This was established with the Bill of Rights in 1689. Amongst the statutes set down were that the law could only be made by Parliament and could not be suspended by the King, also that the King could not impose taxes or raise an army without the prior approval of Parliament.

[ 60 ] Also since that time, no British monarch has entered the House of Commons when it is sitting, which is annually commemorated at the State Opening of Parliament by the British monarch when the doors of the House of Commons are slammed in the face of the monarch's messenger, symbolising the rights of Parliament and its independence from the monarch.

[ 61 ] With the founding of the Royal Society in 1660, science was greatly encouraged.

The English Restoration restored the monarchy under King Charles II and peace after the English Civil War .

In 1666 the Great Fire of London gutted the city of London, but it was rebuilt shortly afterward with many significant buildings designed by Sir Christopher Wren .

[ 62 ] By the mid-to-late 17th century, two political factions had emerged – the Tories and Whigs . Though the Tories initially supported Catholic king James II , some of them, along with the Whigs, during the Revolution of 1688 invited the Dutch Prince William of Orange to defeat James and become the king. Some English people, especially in the north, were Jacobites and continued to support James and his sons. Under the Stuart dynasty England expanded in trade, finance and prosperity. The Royal Navy developed Europe's largest merchant fleet.

[ 63 ] After the parliaments of England and Scotland agreed, [ 64 ] the two countries joined in political union , to create the Kingdom of Great Britain in 1707.

[ 56 ] To accommodate the union, institutions such as the law and national churches of each remained separate.

[ 65 ] Late modern and contemporary periods The River Thames during the Georgian period from the Terrace of Somerset House looking towards St. Paul's, c.

1750 Under the newly formed Kingdom of Great Britain, output from the Royal Society and other English initiatives combined with the Scottish Enlightenment to create innovations in science and engineering, while the enormous growth in British overseas trade protected by the Royal Navy paved the way for the establishment of the British Empire . Domestically it drove the Industrial Revolution , a period of profound change in the socioeconomic and cultural conditions of England, resulting in industrialised agriculture, manufacture, engineering and mining, as well as new and pioneering road, rail and water networks to facilitate their expansion and development.

[ 66 ] The opening of Northwest England's Bridgewater Canal in 1761 ushered in the canal age in Britain .

[ 67 ] In 1825 the world's first permanent steam locomotive-hauled passenger railway – the Stockton and Darlington Railway – opened to the public.

[ 67 ] During the Industrial Revolution , many workers moved from England's countryside to new and expanding urban industrial areas to work in factories, for instance at Birmingham and Manchester , [ 68 ] with the latter the world's first industrial city.

[ 69 ] England maintained relative stability throughout the French Revolution , under George III and William Pitt the Younger . The regency of George IV is noted for its elegance and achievements in the fine arts and architecture.

[ 70 ] During the Napoleonic Wars , Napoleon planned to invade from the south-east ; however, this failed to manifest and the Napoleonic forces were defeated by the British: at sea by Horatio Nelson , and on land by Arthur Wellesley . The major victory at the Battle of Trafalgar confirmed the naval supremacy Britain had established during the course of the eighteenth century.

[ 71 ] The Napoleonic Wars fostered a concept of Britishness and a united national British people , shared with the English, Scots and Welsh.

[ 72 ] The Battle of Trafalgar was a naval engagement between the Royal Navy and the combined fleets of France and Spain during the Napoleonic Wars .

[ 73 ] London became the largest and most populous metropolitan area in the world during the Victorian era , and trade within the British Empire – as well as the standing of the British military and navy – was prestigious.

[ 74 ] Technologically, this era saw many innovations that proved key to the United Kingdom's power and prosperity.

[ 75 ] Political agitation at home from radicals such as the Chartists and the suffragettes enabled legislative reform and universal suffrage .

[ 76 ] Power shifts in east-central Europe led to World War I; hundreds of thousands of English soldiers died fighting for the United Kingdom as part of the Allies .

[ f ] Two decades later, in World War II , the United Kingdom was again one of the Allies . Developments in warfare technology saw many cities damaged by air-raids during the Blitz . Following the war, the British Empire experienced rapid decolonisation , and there was a speeding-up of technological innovations; automobiles became the primary means of transport and Frank Whittle 's development of the jet engine led to wider air travel .

[ 78 ] Residential patterns were altered in England by private motoring, and by the creation of the National Health Service in 1948, providing publicly funded health care to all permanent residents free at the point of need. Combined, these prompted the reform of local government in England in the mid-20th century.

[ 79 ] The Victorian era is often cited as a Golden Age . Painting done by William Powell Frith to show cultural divisions.

Since the 20th century, there has been significant population movement to England, mostly from other parts of the British Isles , but also from the Commonwealth , particularly the Indian subcontinent .

[ 80 ] Since the 1970s there has been a large move away from manufacturing and an increasing emphasis on the service industry .

[ 81 ] As part of the United Kingdom, the area joined a common market initiative called the European Economic Community which became the European Union .

Since the late 20th century the administration of the United Kingdom has moved towards devolved governance in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.

[ 82 ] England and Wales continues to exist as a jurisdiction within the United Kingdom.

[ 83 ] Devolution has stimulated a greater emphasis on a more English-specific identity and patriotism.

[ 84 ] There is no devolved English government, but an attempt to create a similar system on a sub-regional basis was rejected by referendum .

[ 85 ] Governance Politics Main article: Politics of England England is part of the United Kingdom, [ 86 ] a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary system .

[ 87 ] There has not been a government of England since 1707, when the Acts of Union 1707 , [ 88 ] putting into effect the terms of the Treaty of Union , joined England and Scotland to form the Kingdom of Great Britain .

[ 64 ] Before the union England was ruled by its monarch and the Parliament of England .

The Palace of Westminster , the seat of the Parliament of the United Kingdom in which England is directly governed England is governed directly by the Parliament of the United Kingdom , although other countries of the United Kingdom have devolved governments.

[ 89 ] There has been debate about how to counterbalance this in England. Originally it was planned that various regions of England would be devolved, but following the proposal's rejection by the North East in a 2004 referendum , this has not been carried out.

[ 85 ] In 2024, an England-only intergovernmental body, known as the Mayoral Council for England , was established to bring together ministers from the UK Government , the Mayor of London and the leaders of combined authorities .

[ 90 ] In the House of Commons which is the lower house of the British Parliament based at the Palace of Westminster , there are 543 members of parliament (MPs) for constituencies in England, out of the 650 total.

[ 91 ] England is represented by 347 MPs from the Labour Party , 116 from the Conservative Party , 65 from the Liberal Democrats , four for Reform UK and four for the Green Party of England and Wales .

[ 92 ] Law Main article: English law The Royal Courts of Justice The English law legal system, developed over the centuries, is the basis of common law [ 93 ] legal systems used in most Commonwealth countries [ 94 ] and the United States (except Louisiana ). Despite now being part of the United Kingdom, the legal system of the Courts of England and Wales continued, under the Treaty of Union , as a separate legal system from the one used in Scotland . The general essence of English law is that it is made by judges sitting in courts, applying their common sense and knowledge of legal precedent – stare decisis – to the facts before them.

[ 95 ] The court system is headed by the Senior Courts of England and Wales, consisting of the Court of Appeal , the High Court of Justice for civil cases, and the Crown Court for criminal cases.

[ 96 ] The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom is the highest court for criminal and civil cases in England and Wales . It was created in 2009 after constitutional changes, taking over the judicial functions of the House of Lords .

[ 97 ] A decision of the Supreme Court is binding on every other court in the hierarchy, which must follow its directions.

[ 98 ] The Secretary of State for Justice is the minister responsible to Parliament for the judiciary , the court system and prisons and probation in England.

[ 99 ] Crime increased between 1981 and 1995 but fell by 42% in the period 1995–2006.

[ 100 ] The prison population doubled over the same period, giving it one of the highest incarceration rates in Western Europe at 147 per 100,000.

[ 101 ] His Majesty's Prison Service , reporting to the Ministry of Justice , manages most prisons, housing 81,309 prisoners in England and Wales as of September 2022 [update] .

[ 102 ] Subdivisions Main article: Subdivisions of England See also: Regions of England , Combined authority , Counties of England , and Districts of England Northumberland Durham Lancashire Cheshire Derbs.

Notts.

Lincolnshire Leics.

Staffs.

Shropshire Warks.

Northants.

Norfolk Suffolk Essex Herts.

Beds.

Bucks.

Oxon.

Glos.

Somerset Wiltshire Berkshire Kent Surrey Hampshire Dorset Devon Cornwall Heref.

Worcs.

Bristol East Riding of Yorkshire Rutland Cambs.

Greater London Not shown: City of London Tyne & Wear Cumbria North Yorkshire South Yorks.

West Yorkshire Greater Manc.

Merseyside East Sussex West Sussex Isle of Wight West Midlands The subdivisions of England consist of up to four levels of subnational division , controlled through a variety of types of administrative entities created for the purposes of local government .

Outside the London region, England's highest tier is the 48 ceremonial counties .

[ 103 ] These are used primarily as a geographical frame of reference. Of these, 38 developed gradually since the Middle Ages ; these were reformed to 51 in 1974 and to their current number in 1996.

[ 104 ] Each has a Lord Lieutenant and High Sheriff ; these posts are used to represent the British monarch locally.

[ 103 ] Some counties, such as Herefordshire , are only divided further into civil parishes. The royal county of Berkshire and the metropolitan counties have different types of status to other ceremonial counties.

[ 105 ] The second tier is made up of combined authorities and the 27 county-tier shire counties . In 1974, all ceremonial counties were two-tier; and with the metropolitan county tier phased out, the 1996 reform separated the ceremonial county and the administrative county tier.

England is also divided into local government districts.

[ 106 ] The district can align to a ceremonial county, or be a district tier within a shire county , be a royal or metropolitan borough , have borough or city status , or be a unitary authority .

At the community level, much of England is divided into civil parishes with their own councils ; in Greater London only one such parish, Queen's Park , exists as of 2014 [update] after they were abolished in 1965 until legislation allowed their recreation in 2007.

London From 1994 until the early 2010s England was divided for a few purposes into regions; a 1998 referendum for the London Region created the London Assembly two years later.

[ 107 ] A failed 2004 North East England devolution referendum cancelled further regional assembly devolution [ 85 ] with the regional structure outside London abolished.

Administratively, London is divided between 33 local government districts : the 32 London boroughs and the City of London .

[ 108 ] The 32 London boroughs form the ceremonial county of Greater London, with the City of London being a separate ceremonial county.

Geography Main article: Geography of England Landscape and rivers The Malvern Hills located in the English counties of Worcestershire and Herefordshire . The hills have been designated by the Countryside Agency as an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty .

Geographically, England includes the central and southern two-thirds of the island of Great Britain, plus such offshore islands as the Isle of Wight and the Isles of Scilly . It is bordered by two other countries of the United Kingdom: to the north by Scotland and to the west by Wales.

England is closer than any other part of mainland Britain to the European continent. It is separated from France ( Hauts-de-France ) by a 21-mile (34 km) [ 109 ] sea gap, though the two countries are connected by the Channel Tunnel near Folkestone .

[ 110 ] England also has shores on the Irish Sea , North Sea and Atlantic Ocean.

The ports of London, Liverpool , and Newcastle lie on the tidal rivers Thames , Mersey and Tyne respectively. At 220 miles (350 km), the Severn is the longest river flowing through England.

[ 111 ] It empties into the Bristol Channel and is notable for its Severn Bore (a tidal bore ), which can reach 2 metres (6.6 ft) in height.

[ 112 ] However, the longest river entirely in England is the Thames, which is 215 miles (346 km) in length.

[ 113 ] There are many lakes in England ; the largest is Windermere , within the aptly named Lake District .

[ 114 ] Most of England's landscape consists of low hills and plains, with upland and mountainous terrain in the north and west of the country. The northern uplands include the Pennines , a chain of uplands dividing east and west, the Lake District mountains in Cumbria, and the Cheviot Hills , straddling the border between England and Scotland. The highest point in England, at 978 metres (3,209 ft), is Scafell Pike in the Lake District.

[ 114 ] The Shropshire Hills are near Wales while Dartmoor and Exmoor are two upland areas in the south-west of the country. The approximate dividing line between terrain types is often indicated by the Tees–Exe line .

[ 115 ] The village of Glenridding and Ullswater in Cumbria The Pennines, known as the "backbone of England", are the oldest range of mountains in the country, originating from the end of the Paleozoic Era around 300 million years ago.

[ 116 ] Their geological composition includes, amongst others, sandstone and limestone , and also coal. There are karst landscapes in calcite areas such as parts of Yorkshire and Derbyshire . The Pennine landscape is high moorland in upland areas, indented by fertile valleys of the region's rivers. They contain two national parks , the Yorkshire Dales and the Peak District . In the West Country , Dartmoor and Exmoor of the Southwest Peninsula include upland moorland supported by granite.

[ 117 ] The English Lowlands are in the central and southern regions of the country, consisting of green rolling hills, including the Cotswold Hills , Chiltern Hills , North and South Downs ; where they meet the sea they form white rock exposures such as the cliffs of Dover . This also includes relatively flat plains such as the Salisbury Plain , Somerset Levels , South Coast Plain and The Fens .

Climate Main article: Climate of England England has a temperate maritime climate : it is mild with temperatures not much lower than 0 °C (32 °F) in winter and not much higher than 32 °C (90 °F) in summer.

[ 118 ] The weather is damp relatively frequently and is changeable. The coldest months are January and February, the latter particularly on the English coast , while July is normally the warmest month. Months with mild to warm weather are May, June, September and October.

[ 118 ] Rainfall is spread fairly evenly throughout the year.

Important influences on the climate of England are its proximity to the Atlantic Ocean , its northern latitude and the warming of the sea by the Gulf Stream .

[ 118 ] Rainfall is higher in the west, and parts of the Lake District receive more rain than anywhere else in the country.

[ 118 ] Since weather records began, the highest temperature recorded was 40.3 °C (104.5 °F) on 19 July 2022 at Coningsby , Lincolnshire , [ 119 ] while the lowest was −26.1 °C (−15.0 °F) on 10 January 1982 in Edgmond , Shropshire.

[ 120 ] Nature and wildlife Main article: Fauna of England The Eurasian wren , the most numerous bird species in England [ 121 ] The fauna of England is similar to that of other areas in the British Isles with a wide range of vertebrate and invertebrate life in a diverse range of habitats.

[ 122 ] National nature reserves in England are designated by Natural England as key places for wildlife and natural features in England. They were established to protect the most significant areas of habitat and of geological formations. NNRs are managed on behalf of the nation, many by Natural England themselves, but also by non-governmental organisations, including the members of The Wildlife Trusts partnership, the National Trust , and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds . There are 221 NNRs in England covering 110,000 hectares (1,100 square kilometres). Often they contain rare species or nationally important populations of plants and animals.

[ 123 ] .
The Environment Agency is a non-departmental public body, established in 1995 and sponsored by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs with responsibilities relating to the protection and enhancement of the environment in England.

[ 124 ] The Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs is the minister responsible for environmental protection, agriculture, fisheries and rural communities in England.

[ 125 ] Red deer in Richmond Park . The park was created by Charles I in the 17th century as a deer park .

[ 126 ] England has a temperate oceanic climate in most areas, lacking extremes of cold or heat, but does have a few small areas of subarctic and warmer areas in the South West . Towards the North of England the climate becomes colder and most of England's mountains and high hills are located here and have a major impact on the climate and thus the local fauna of the areas.

Deciduous woodlands are common across all of England and provide a great habitat for much of England's wildlife, but these give way in northern and upland areas of England to coniferous forests (mainly plantations) which also benefit certain forms of wildlife. Some species have adapted to the expanded urban environment, particularly the red fox , which is the most successful urban mammal after the brown rat , and other animals such as common wood pigeon , both of which thrive in urban and suburban areas.

[ 127 ] Major conurbations See also: List of places in England The Greater London Built-up Area is by far the largest urban area in England [ 128 ] and one of the busiest cities in the world. It is considered a global city and has a population larger than any other country in the United Kingdom besides England itself.

[ 128 ] Other urban areas of considerable size and influence tend to be in northern England or the English Midlands .

[ 128 ] There are 50 settlements which have designated city status in England , while the wider United Kingdom has 66.

While many cities in England are quite large, such as Birmingham , Sheffield , Manchester , Liverpool , Leeds , Newcastle , Bradford , Nottingham , population size is not a prerequisite for city status.

[ 129 ] Traditionally the status was given to towns with diocesan cathedrals , so there are smaller cities like Wells , Ely , Ripon , Truro and Chichester .

v t e Largest conurbations in England 2011 census [ 128 ] Rank Conurbation Pop.

Principal settlement 1 Greater London 9,787,426 London 2 Greater Manchester 2,553,379 Manchester 3 West Midlands 2,440,986 Birmingham 4 West Yorkshire 1,777,934 Leeds 5 Liverpool 864,122 Liverpool 6 South Hampshire 855,569 Southampton 7 Tyneside 774,891 Newcastle upon Tyne 8 Nottingham 729,977 Nottingham 9 Sheffield 685,368 Sheffield 10 Bristol 617,280 Bristol Economy Main article: Economy of England London is the financial capital of England and the United Kingdom.

England's economy is one of the largest and most dynamic in the world, with a GDP per capita of £37,852 in 2022.

[ 7 ] HM Treasury , led by the Chancellor of the Exchequer , is responsible for developing and executing the government's public finance policy and economic policy .

[ 130 ] Usually regarded as a mixed market economy , it has adopted many free market principles, yet maintains an advanced social welfare infrastructure.

[ 131 ] The economy of England is the largest part of the UK's economy .

[ 132 ] England is a leader in the chemical and pharmaceutical sectors and in key technical industries, particularly aerospace , the arms industry , and the software industry . London, home to the London Stock Exchange , the United Kingdom's main stock exchange and the largest in Europe, is England's financial centre, with 100 of Europe's 500 largest corporations being based there.

[ 133 ] London is the largest financial centre in Europe and as of 2014 is the second largest in the world.

[ 134 ] London has also been named as the fastest growing technology hub in Europe, with England having over 100 unique tech companies with a value of $1 billion or more.

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] The Bank of England , founded in 1694 as private banker to the government of England and a state-owned institution since 1946, is the United Kingdom's central bank .

[ 137 ] The bank has a monopoly on the issue of banknotes in England and Wales , although not in other parts of the UK. The government has devolved responsibility to the bank's Monetary Policy Committee for managing the monetary policy of the country and setting interest rates.

[ 138 ] Aston Martin manufacture luxury vehicles in England.

England is highly industrialised, but since the 1970s there has been a decline in traditional heavy and manufacturing industries, and an increasing emphasis on a more service industry oriented economy.

[ 81 ] Tourism has become a significant industry, attracting millions of visitors to England each year. The export part of the economy is dominated by pharmaceuticals , automotives, crude oil and petroleum from the English parts of North Sea oil along with Wytch Farm , aircraft engines and alcoholic beverages.

[ 139 ] The creative industries accounted for 7 per cent GVA in 2005 and grew at an average of 6 per cent per annum between 1997 and 2005.

[ 140 ] Agriculture is intensive, highly mechanised and efficient by European standards, producing 60% of food needs with only 2% of the labour force.

[ 141 ] Two-thirds of production is devoted to livestock, the remainder to arable crops.

[ 142 ] The main crops that are grown are wheat , barley , oats , potatoes , and sugar beets . England retains a significant fishing industry. Its fleets bring home a variety of fish, ranging from sole to herring . England is also rich in natural resources including coal , petroleum , natural gas , tin , limestone , iron ore , salt , clay , chalk , gypsum , lead , and silica.

[ 143 ] Science and technology Main articles: List of English inventions and discoveries and Royal Society Prominent English figures from the field of science and mathematics include Sir Isaac Newton , Charles Darwin , Robert Hooke , Alan Turing , Stephen Hawking , Edward Jenner , Francis Crick , Joseph Lister , Joseph Priestley , Thomas Young , Christopher Wren and Richard Dawkins .

Sir Isaac Newton is one of the most influential figures in the history of science .

England was a leading centre of the Scientific Revolution from the 17th century.

[ 144 ] As the birthplace of the Industrial Revolution , England was home to many significant inventors during the late 18th and early 19th centuries. Famous English engineers include Isambard Kingdom Brunel , best known for the creation of the Great Western Railway , a series of famous steamships , and numerous important bridges, revolutionising public transport and modern-day engineering.

[ 145 ] Thomas Newcomen 's steam engine helped spawn the Industrial Revolution.

[ 146 ] The Father of Railways, George Stephenson , built the first public inter-city railway line in the world, the Liverpool and Manchester Railway , which opened in 1830. With his role in the marketing and manufacturing of the steam engine, and invention of modern coinage, Matthew Boulton (business partner of James Watt ) is regarded as one of the most influential entrepreneurs in history.

[ 147 ] The physician Edward Jenner 's smallpox vaccine is said to have "saved more lives ... than were lost in all the wars of mankind since the beginning of recorded history." [ 148 ] Inventions and discoveries of the English include the jet engine ; the first industrial spinning machine ; the first computer and the first modern computer ; the World Wide Web along with HTML ; the first successful human blood transfusion ; the motorised vacuum cleaner ; [ 149 ] the lawn mower ; the seat belt ; the hovercraft ; the electric motor ; steam engines ; and theories such as the Darwinian theory of evolution and atomic theory . Newton developed the ideas of universal gravitation , Newtonian mechanics , and calculus , and Robert Hooke his eponymously named law of elasticity . Other inventions include the iron plate railway, the thermosiphon , tarmac , the rubber band , the mousetrap , "cat's eye" road marker , joint development of the light bulb , steam locomotives , the modern seed drill and many modern techniques and technologies used in precision engineering .

[ 150 ] The Royal Society , formally The Royal Society of London for Improving Natural Knowledge , [ 151 ] is a learned society and the United Kingdom 's national academy of sciences . Founded on 28 November 1660, [ 151 ] It is the oldest national scientific institution in the world.

[ 152 ] The Royal Institution of Great Britain was founded in 1799 by leading English scientists, including Henry Cavendish .

[ 153 ] Some experts claim that the earliest concept of a metric system was invented by John Wilkins in 1668.

[ 154 ] Scientific research and development remains important in the universities of England , with many establishing science parks to facilitate production and co-operation with industry.

[ 155 ] Cambridge is the most intensive research cluster for science and technology in the world.

[ 156 ] In 2022, the UK produced 6.3 per cent of the world's scientific research papers and had a 10.5 per cent share of scientific citations, the third highest in the world (after the United States and China).

[ 157 ] Scientific journals produced in England include Nature , the British Medical Journal and The Lancet . The Department for Science, Innovation and Technology , Secretary of State for Science, Innovation and Technology , and Minister of State for Science, Research and Innovation has responsibility for science in England.

[ 158 ] Transport Main article: Transport in England The Department for Transport is the government body responsible for overseeing transport in England. The department is run by the Secretary of State for Transport .

England has a dense and modern transportation infrastructure. There are many motorways in England , and many other trunk roads, such as the A1 Great North Road , which runs through eastern England from London to Newcastle [ 159 ] (much of this section is motorway) and onward to the Scottish border. The longest motorway in England is the M6 , from Rugby through the North West up to the Anglo-Scottish border , a distance of 232 miles (373 km).

[ 159 ] Other major routes include: the M1 from London to Leeds, the M25 which encircles London, the M60 which encircles Manchester, the M4 from London to South Wales, the M62 from Liverpool via Manchester to East Yorkshire, and the M5 from Birmingham to Bristol and the South West.

[ 159 ] London St Pancras International is one of London's main domestic and international transport hubs providing both commuter rail and high-speed rail services across the UK and to Paris, Lille and Brussels .

Bus transport across the country is widespread; major companies include Arriva , FirstGroup , Go-Ahead Group , Mobico Group , Rotala and Stagecoach Group .

Bus rapid transit originated in England with the Runcorn Busway opening in 1971.

[ 160 ] [ 161 ] The red double-decker buses in London have become a symbol of England.

National Cycle Route offers cycling routes nationally.

Rail transport in England is the oldest in the world: passenger railways originated in England in 1825.

[ 162 ] Much of Britain's 10,000 miles (16,000 km) of rail network lies in England, covering the country fairly extensively. There is rail transport access to France and Belgium through an undersea rail link, the Channel Tunnel , which was completed in 1994.

Great British Railways is a planned state-owned public body that will oversee rail transport in Great Britain from 2024. The Office of Rail and Road is responsible for the economic and safety regulation of England's railways.

[ 163 ] Crossrail was Europe's largest construction project with a £15 billion projected cost, opened in 2022.

[ 164 ] High Speed 2 , a new high-speed north–south railway line, is under construction.

[ 165 ] There is a rapid transit network in two English cities: the London Underground , and the Tyne and Wear Metro in Newcastle upon Tyne , Gateshead and Sunderland .

[ 166 ] There are several extensive tram networks, such as the Manchester Metrolink , Sheffield Supertram , West Midlands Metro , Nottingham Express Transit , and Tramlink in South London.

[ 166 ] England also has extensive domestic and international aviation links. The largest airport is Heathrow , which is the world's second busiest airport measured by number of international passengers .

[ 167 ] By sea there is ferry transport, both local and international, including from Liverpool to Ireland and the Isle of Man, and Hull to the Netherlands and Belgium.

[ 168 ] There are around 4,400 miles (7,100 km) of navigable waterways in England, half of which is owned by the Canal & River Trust , [ 168 ] however, water transport is very limited. The River Thames is the major waterway in England, with imports and exports focused at the Port of Tilbury in the Thames Estuary , one of the United Kingdom's three major ports.

[ 168 ] Energy Main article: Energy in the United Kingdom Wind turbines at Den Brook , Devon. The UK is one of the best sites in Europe for wind energy , and wind power production is its fastest growing supply.

[ 169 ] [ 170 ] Successive governments have outlined numerous commitments to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. Notably, the UK is one of the best sites in Europe for wind energy , and wind power production is its fastest growing supply.

[ 170 ] Wind power contributed 26.8% of UK electricity generation in 2022.

[ 171 ] England is home to Hornsea 2 , the largest offshore wind farm in the world, situated in waters roughly 89 kilometres off the coast of Yorkshire.

[ 172 ] The Climate Change Act 2008 was passed in Parliament with an overwhelming majority across political parties. It sets out emission reduction targets that the UK must comply with legally. It represents the first global legally binding climate change mitigation target set by a country.

[ 173 ] UK government energy policy aims to play a key role in limiting greenhouse gas emissions , while meeting energy demand. Shifting availabilities of resources and development of technologies also change the country's energy mix through changes in costs.

[ 174 ] The current energy policy is the responsibility of the Department for Energy Security and Net Zero and Secretary of State for Energy Security and Net Zero .

[ 175 ] The Minister of State for Business, Energy and Clean Growth is responsible for green finance, climate science and innovation, and low carbon generation.

[ 176 ] In 2022, the United Kingdom was ranked 2 out of 180 countries in the Environmental Performance Index .

[ 177 ] A law has been passed that UK greenhouse gas emissions will be net zero by 2050.

[ 178 ] Healthcare Main article: Healthcare in England William Beveridge 's 1942 report Social Insurance and Allied Services served as the basis for the post- World War II welfare state .

The National Health Service (NHS), is the publicly funded healthcare system responsible for providing the majority of healthcare in the country. The NHS began on 5 July 1948, putting into effect the provisions of the National Health Service Act 1946 . It was based on the findings of the Beveridge Report , prepared by the economist and social reformer, William Beveridge .

[ 179 ] The NHS is largely funded by general taxation and National Insurance payments; [ 180 ] it provides most of its services free at the point of use, although there are charges for some people for eye tests, dental care, prescriptions and aspects of personal care.

[ 181 ] The government department responsible for the NHS is the Department of Health , under the Secretary of State for Health . Most of the department's expenses are on the NHS – £98.6 billion was spent in 2008–2009.

[ 182 ] Regulatory bodies such as the General Medical Council and the Nursing and Midwifery Council are organised on a UK-wide basis, as are non-governmental bodies such as the Royal Colleges .

The average life expectancy is 77.5 years for males and 81.7 years for females, the highest of the four countries of the United Kingdom .

[ 183 ] The south of England has a higher life expectancy than the north, but regional differences seem to be slowly narrowing: between 1991–1993 and 2012–2014, life expectancy in the North East increased by 6.0 years and in the North West by 5.8 years.

[ 183 ] Demography Main article: Demographics of England Population Main article: English people See also: English diaspora , Cornish people , and List of urban areas in the United Kingdom The metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties , colour-coded to show population Population of England and Wales by administrative areas. Their size shows their population, with some approximation. Each group of squares in the map key is 20% of total number of districts.

With over 56 million inhabitants, England is by far the most populous country of the United Kingdom, accounting for 84% of the combined total.

[ 5 ] England taken as a unit and measured against international states would be the 26th largest country by population in the world.

[ 184 ] The English people are British people .

[ 185 ] There is an English diaspora in former parts of the British Empire; especially the United States , Canada , Australia , South Africa and New Zealand .

[ g ] Since the late 1990s, many English people have migrated to Spain.

[ 190 ] Due in particular to the economic prosperity of South East England , it has received many economic migrants from the other parts of the United Kingdom.

[ 185 ] There has been significant Irish migration .

[ 191 ] The proportion of ethnically European residents totals at 81.7%, [ 192 ] including White British , Germans [ 193 ] and Poles , [ 185 ] down from 94.1% in 1991.

[ 185 ] Other people from much further afield in the former British colonies have arrived since the 1950s: in particular, about 7% of people living in England have family origins in the Indian subcontinent , mostly India , Pakistan and Bangladesh .

[ 192 ] [ 193 ] About 0.7% are Chinese , [ 192 ] [ 193 ] 0.6% are Arabs .

[ 192 ] 4.0% of the population are black , from Africa and the Caribbean , especially former British colonies, [ 192 ] [ 193 ] and 2.9% identified as multiracial or mixed .

[ 192 ] In 2007, 22% of primary school children in England were from ethnic minority families, [ 194 ] and in 2011 that figure was 26.5%.

[ 195 ] About half of the population increase between 1991 and 2001 was due to immigration.

[ 196 ] England contains one indigenous national minority, the Cornish people , recognised by the UK government under the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities in 2014.

[ 197 ] Language Further information: Languages of the United Kingdom and English language in England Language Native speakers (thousands) [ 198 ] English 46,937 Polish 529 Punjabi 272 Urdu 266 Bengali 216 Gujarati 212 Arabic 152 French 145 Portuguese 131 Welsh 8 Cornish 0.6 Other 2,267 Population 51,006 English , today widely spoken around the world, [ 199 ] originated in what is now England, where it remains the principal tongue. According to a 2011 census, it is spoken well or very well by 98% of the population [ 200 ] English language learning and teaching is an important economic activity . There is no legislation mandating an official language for England, [ 201 ] but English is the only language used for official business. Despite the country's relatively small size, there are many distinct regional accents .

Cornish died out as a community language in the 18th century but is being revived, [ 202 ] and is now protected under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages .

[ 203 ] It is spoken by 0.1% of people in Cornwall , [ 204 ] and is taught to some degree in several primary and secondary schools.

[ 205 ] State schools teach students a second language or third language from the ages of seven, most commonly French, Spanish or German.

[ 206 ] It was reported in 2007 that around 800,000 school students spoke a foreign language at home, [ 194 ] the most common being Punjabi and Urdu . However, following the 2011 census data released by the Office for National Statistics , figures now show that Polish is the main language spoken in England after English.

[ 207 ] In 2022, British Sign Language became an official language of England when the British Sign Language Act 2022 came into effect.

[ 208 ] Religion Main article: Religion in England Further information: History of Christianity in England In the 2011 census, 59.4% of the population of England specified their religion as Christian, 24.7% answered that they had no religion, 5% specified that they were Muslim , while 3.7% of the population belongs to other religions and 7.2% did not give an answer.

[ 209 ] Christianity is the most widely practised religion in England. The established church of England is the Church of England , [ 210 ] which left communion with Rome in the 1530s when Henry VIII was unable to annul his marriage to Catherine of Aragon . The church regards itself as both Catholic and Protestant .

[ 211 ] There are High Church and Low Church traditions and some Anglicans regard themselves as Anglo-Catholics , following the Tractarian movement . The monarch of the United Kingdom is the supreme governor of the Church of England , which has around 26 million baptised members (of whom the vast majority are not regular churchgoers). It forms part of the Anglican Communion with the Archbishop of Canterbury acting as its symbolic worldwide head.

[ 212 ] Many cathedrals and parish churches are historic buildings of significant architectural importance, such as Westminster Abbey , York Minster , Durham Cathedral , and Salisbury Cathedral .

Westminster Abbey is a notable example of English Gothic architecture . The coronation of the British monarch traditionally takes place at the Abbey.

The second-largest Christian denomination is the Catholic Church . Since its reintroduction after the Catholic Emancipation , the Church has organised ecclesiastically on an England and Wales basis where there are 4.5 million members (most of whom are English).

[ 213 ] There has been one Pope from England to date, Adrian IV , while saints Bede and Anselm are regarded as Doctors of the Church .

A form of Protestantism known as Methodism is the third largest Christian practice and grew out of Anglicanism through John Wesley .

[ 214 ] It gained popularity in the mill towns of Lancashire and Yorkshire , and amongst tin miners in Cornwall .

[ 215 ] There are other non-conformist minorities, such as Baptists , Quakers , Congregationalists , Unitarians and The Salvation Army .

[ 216 ] The patron saint of England is Saint George ; his symbolic cross is included in the flag of England.

[ 217 ] There are many other English and associated saints, including Cuthbert , Edmund , Alban , Wilfrid , Aidan , Edward the Confessor , John Fisher , Thomas More , Petroc , Piran , Margaret Clitherow and Thomas Becket . There are non-Christian religions practised.

Jews have a history of a small minority on the island since 1070.

[ 218 ] They were expelled from England in 1290 following the Edict of Expulsion , and were allowed back in 1656.

[ 218 ] Especially since the 1950s, religions from the former British colonies have grown in numbers, due to immigration.

Islam is the most common of these, now accounting for around 5% of the population in England.

[ 219 ] Hinduism , Sikhism and Buddhism are next in number, adding up to 2.8% combined, [ 219 ] introduced from India and Southeast Asia .

[ 219 ] A small minority of the population practise ancient Pagan religions .

Neopaganism in the United Kingdom is primarily represented by Wicca and Neopagan witchcraft , Druidry , and Heathenry . According to the 2011 census , there are roughly 53,172 people who identify as Pagan in England, [ h ] including 11,026 Wiccans .

[ i ] 24.7% of people in England declared no religion , compared with 14.6% in 2001.

[ 220 ] Norwich had the highest such proportion at 42.5%, followed by Brighton and Hove at 42.4%.

Education Main article: Education in England The Department for Education is the government department responsible for issues affecting people in England up to the age of 19, including education.

[ 221 ] State-funded schools are attended by about 93% of English schoolchildren.

[ 222 ] Education is the responsibility of the Secretary of State for Education .

[ 223 ] Children between the ages of 3 and 5 attend nursery or an Early Years Foundation Stage reception unit within a primary school. Children between the ages of 5 and 11 attend primary school, and secondary school is attended by those aged between 11 and 16. State-funded schools are obliged by law to teach the National Curriculum ; basic areas of learning include English literature, English language, mathematics, science, art & design, citizenship, history, geography, religious education, design & technology, computing, ancient & modern languages, music, and physical education.

[ 224 ] The University of Oxford was founded in 1096, making it the world's second-oldest university.

The Programme for International Student Assessment coordinated by the OECD currently ranks the overall knowledge and skills of British 15-year-olds as 13th in the world in literacy, mathematics, and science with the average British student scoring 503.7, well above the OECD average of 493.

[ 225 ] Although most English secondary schools are comprehensive, there are selective intake grammar schools to which entrance is subject to passing the eleven-plus exam. Around 7.2 per cent of English schoolchildren attend private schools , which are funded by private sources.

[ 226 ] Standards in state schools are monitored by the Office for Standards in Education , and in private schools by the Independent Schools Inspectorate .

[ 227 ] After finishing compulsory education, students take GCSE examinations. Students may then opt to continue into further education for two years.

Further education colleges (particularly sixth form colleges ) often form part of a secondary school site.

A-level examinations are sat by a large number of further education students, and often form the basis of an application to university. Further education covers a wide curriculum of study and apprenticeships , including T-levels , BTEC , NVQ and others.

Tertiary colleges provide both academic and vocational courses.

[ 228 ] Higher education Higher education students normally attend university from age 18 onwards, where they study for an academic degree . There are over 90 universities in England, all but one of which are public institutions . The Department for Business, Innovation and Skills is the government department responsible for higher education in England.

[ 229 ] Students are generally entitled to student loans to cover tuition fees and living costs.

[ j ] The first degree offered to undergraduates is the bachelor's degree , which usually takes three years to complete. Students are then able to work towards a postgraduate degree, which usually takes one year, or a doctorate, which takes three or more years.

[ 231 ] England's universities include some of the highest-ranked universities in the world. As of 2024, four England-based universities, the University of Cambridge , University of Oxford , Imperial College London , and University College London , are ranked amongst the top ten in the 2024 QS World University Rankings . The University of Cambridge, founded in 1209, and the University of Oxford, founded in 1096, are the two oldest universities in the English-speaking world .

[ 232 ] The London School of Economics has been described as the world's leading social science institution for both teaching and research.

[ 233 ] The London Business School is considered one of the world's leading business schools and in 2010 its MBA programme was ranked best in the world by the Financial Times .

[ 234 ] Academic degrees in England are usually split into classes: first class, upper second class, lower second class, third, and unclassified.

[ 231 ] The King's School, Canterbury and King's School, Rochester are the oldest schools in the English-speaking world.

[ 235 ] Many of England's most well-known schools, such as Winchester College , Eton , St Paul's School , Harrow School and Rugby School are fee-paying institutions.

[ 236 ] Culture Main article: Culture of England Further information: English Renaissance Architecture Many ancient standing stone monuments were erected during the prehistoric period; amongst the best known are Stonehenge , Devil's Arrows , Rudston Monolith and Castlerigg .

[ 237 ] With the introduction of Ancient Roman architecture there was a development of basilicas , baths , amphitheaters , triumphal arches , villas , Roman temples , Roman roads , Roman forts , stockades and aqueducts .

[ 238 ] It was the Romans who founded the first cities and towns such as London, Bath, York, Chester and St Albans. Perhaps the best-known example is Hadrian's Wall stretching right across northern England.

[ 238 ] Another well-preserved example is the Roman Baths at Bath, Somerset .

[ 238 ] Bodiam Castle is a 14th-century moated castle near Robertsbridge in East Sussex.

Early medieval architecture 's secular buildings were simple constructions mainly using timber with thatch for roofing. Ecclesiastical architecture ranged from a synthesis of Hiberno – Saxon monasticism , [ 239 ] [ 240 ] to Early Christian basilica and architecture characterised by pilaster-strips, blank arcading, baluster shafts and triangular headed openings. After the Norman conquest in 1066 various castles were created; the best known include the Tower of London , Warwick Castle , Durham Castle and Windsor Castle .

[ 241 ] Throughout the Plantagenet era, an English Gothic architecture flourished, with prime examples including the medieval cathedrals such as Canterbury Cathedral , Westminster Abbey and York Minster .

[ 241 ] Expanding on the Norman base there was also castles , palaces , great houses , universities and parish churches . Medieval architecture was completed with the 16th-century Tudor style ; the four-centred arch, now known as the Tudor arch , was a defining feature as were wattle and daub houses domestically. In the aftermath of the Renaissance a form of architecture echoing classical antiquity synthesised with Christianity appeared, the English Baroque style of architect Christopher Wren being particularly championed.

[ 242 ] Georgian architecture followed in a more refined style, evoking a simple Palladian form; the Royal Crescent at Bath is one of the best examples of this. With the emergence of romanticism during Victorian period, a Gothic Revival was launched. In addition to this, around the same time the Industrial Revolution paved the way for buildings such as The Crystal Palace . Since the 1930s various modernist forms have appeared whose reception is often controversial, though traditionalist resistance movements continue with support in influential places.

[ k ] Gardens Main article: English garden The landscape garden at Stourhead. Inspired by the great landscape artists of the seventeenth century, the landscape garden was described as a "living work of art" when first opened in the 1750s.

[ 244 ] Landscape gardening, as developed by Capability Brown , set an international trend for the English landscape garden . Gardening, and visiting gardens, are regarded as typically English pursuits. The English garden presented an idealised view of nature. At large country houses, the English garden usually included lakes, sweeps of gently rolling lawns set against groves of trees, and recreations of classical temples, Gothic ruins, bridges, and other picturesque architecture, designed to recreate an idyllic pastoral landscape.

[ 245 ] By the end of the 18th century, the English garden was being imitated by the French landscape garden , and as far away as Pavlovsk, Saint Petersburg , the gardens of the future Emperor Paul . It also had a major influence on the public parks and gardens which appeared around the world in the 19th century.

[ 246 ] The English landscape garden was centred on the English country house and manor houses.

[ 245 ] English Heritage and the National Trust preserve great gardens and landscape parks throughout the country.

[ 247 ] The RHS Chelsea Flower Show is held every year by the Royal Horticultural Society and is said to be the largest gardening show in the world.

[ 248 ] Folklore Main article: English folklore Robin Hood and Maid Marian with Richard I of England English folklore developed over many centuries. Some of the characters and stories are present across England, but most belong to specific regions. Common folkloric beings include pixies , giants , elves , bogeymen , trolls , goblins and dwarves . While many legends and folk-customs are thought to be ancient, such as the tales featuring Offa of Angel and Wayland the Smith , [ 249 ] others date from after the Norman invasion. The legends featuring Robin Hood and his Merry Men of Sherwood , and their battles with the Sheriff of Nottingham , are amongst the best-known of these.

[ 250 ] During the High Middle Ages tales originating from Brythonic traditions entered English folklore and developed into the Arthurian myth .

[ 251 ] [ 252 ] [ 253 ] These were derived from Anglo-Norman , Welsh and French sources, [ 252 ] featuring King Arthur , Camelot , Excalibur , Merlin and the Knights of the Round Table such as Lancelot . These stories are most centrally brought together within Geoffrey of Monmouth 's Historia Regum Britanniae ( History of the Kings of Britain ).

[ l ] Some folk figures are based on semi or actual historical people whose story has been passed down centuries.

[ 255 ] On 5 November people celebrate Bonfire Night to commemorate the foiling of the Gunpowder Plot centred on Guy Fawkes . There are various national and regional folk activities, participated in to this day, such as Morris dancing , Maypole dancing , Rapper sword in the North East, Long Sword dance in Yorkshire, Mummers Plays , bottle-kicking in Leicestershire, and cheese-rolling at Cooper's Hill .

[ 256 ] There is no official national costume, but a few are well established such as the Pearly Kings and Queens associated with cockneys, the Royal Guard , the Morris costume and Beefeaters .

[ 257 ] Cuisine Main article: English cuisine Since the early modern period the food of England has historically been characterised by its simplicity of approach and a reliance on the high quality of natural produce.

[ 258 ] During the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, English cuisine enjoyed an excellent reputation, though a decline began during the Industrial Revolution with increasing urbanisation. The cuisine of England has, however, recently undergone a revival, which has been recognised by food critics with some good ratings in Restaurant ' s best restaurant in the world charts.

[ 259 ] English foods: clockwise from top left— tea cakes , cheeses , wines and cider Traditional examples of English food include the Sunday roast , featuring a roasted joint (usually beef, lamb , chicken or pork) served with assorted vegetables, Yorkshire pudding and gravy .

[ 260 ] Other prominent meals include fish and chips and the full English breakfast (generally consisting of bacon , sausages , grilled tomatoes, fried bread, black pudding , baked beans , mushrooms and eggs).

[ 261 ] Various meat pies are consumed, such as steak and kidney pie , steak and ale pie , cottage pie , pork pie (usually eaten cold) [ 260 ] and the Cornish pasty .

Sausages are commonly eaten, either as bangers and mash or toad in the hole .

Lancashire hotpot is a well-known stew originating in the northwest. Some of the more popular cheeses are Cheddar , Red Leicester , Wensleydale , Double Gloucester and Blue Stilton . Many Anglo-Indian hybrid dishes, curries , have been created, such as chicken tikka masala and balti . Traditional English dessert dishes include apple pie or other fruit pies; spotted dick – all generally served with custard ; and, more recently, sticky toffee pudding . Sweet pastries include scones served with jam or cream, dried fruit loaves, Eccles cakes and mince pies as well as sweet or spiced biscuits.

Common non-alcoholic drinks include tea [ 262 ] and coffee; frequently consumed alcoholic drinks include wine, ciders and English beers , such as bitter , mild , stout and brown ale .

[ 263 ] Visual arts Main article: English art See also: Arts Council England The Hay Wain by John Constable , 1821, is an archetypal English painting.

The Lady of Shalott by John William Waterhouse , 1888, in the Pre-Raphaelite style The earliest known examples are the prehistoric rock and cave art pieces, most prominent in North Yorkshire , Northumberland and Cumbria , but also feature further south, for example at Creswell Crags .

[ 264 ] With the arrival of Roman culture in the 1st century, various forms of art such as statues, busts, glasswork and mosaics were the norm. There are numerous surviving artefacts, such as those at Lullingstone and Aldborough .

[ 265 ] During the Early Middle Ages the style favoured sculpted crosses and ivories, manuscript painting, gold and enamel jewellery, demonstrating a love of intricate, interwoven designs such as in the Staffordshire Hoard discovered in 2009. Some of these blended Gaelic and Anglian styles, such as the Lindisfarne Gospels and Vespasian Psalter .

[ 266 ] Later Gothic art was popular at Winchester and Canterbury, examples survive such as Benedictional of St. Æthelwold and Luttrell Psalter .

[ 267 ] The Tudor era saw prominent artists as part of their court; portrait painting, which would remain an enduring part of English art, was boosted by German Hans Holbein , and natives such as Nicholas Hilliard built on this.

[ 267 ] Under the Stuarts, Continental artists were influential especially the Flemish, examples from the period include Anthony van Dyck , Peter Lely , Godfrey Kneller and William Dobson .

[ 267 ] The 18th century saw the founding of the Royal Academy ; a classicism based on the High Renaissance prevailed, with Thomas Gainsborough and Joshua Reynolds becoming two of England's most treasured artists.

[ 267 ] In the 19th century, John Constable and J. M. W. Turner were major landscape artists. The Norwich School continued the landscape tradition, while the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood , led by artists such as Holman Hunt , Dante Gabriel Rossetti and John Everett Millais , revived the Early Renaissance style with their vivid and detailed style.

[ 267 ] Prominent amongst 20th-century artists was Henry Moore , regarded as the voice of British sculpture, and of British modernism in general.

[ 268 ] The Royal Society of Arts is an organisation committed to the arts.

[ 269 ] Literature, poetry, and philosophy Main article: English literature Geoffrey Chaucer was an English author, poet and philosopher, best remembered for his unfinished frame narrative The Canterbury Tales .

Early authors such as Bede and Alcuin wrote in Latin.

[ 270 ] The period of Old English literature provided the epic poem Beowulf and the secular prose of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle , [ 271 ] along with Christian writings such as Judith , Cædmon 's Hymn and hagiographies .

[ 270 ] Following the Norman conquest Latin continued amongst the educated classes, as well as an Anglo-Norman literature .

Middle English literature emerged with Geoffrey Chaucer , author of The Canterbury Tales , along with Gower , the Pearl Poet and Langland .

William of Ockham and Roger Bacon , who were Franciscans , were major philosophers of the Middle Ages.

Julian of Norwich , who wrote Revelations of Divine Love , was a prominent Christian mystic. With the English Renaissance literature in the Early Modern English style appeared.

William Shakespeare , whose works include Hamlet , Romeo and Juliet , Macbeth , and A Midsummer Night's Dream , remains one of the most championed authors in English literature.

[ 272 ] Christopher Marlowe , Edmund Spenser , Philip Sydney , Thomas Kyd , John Donne , and Ben Jonson are other established authors of the Elizabethan age .

[ 273 ] Francis Bacon and Thomas Hobbes wrote on empiricism and materialism , including scientific method and social contract .

[ 273 ] Filmer wrote on the Divine Right of Kings .

Marvell was the best-known poet of the Commonwealth , [ 274 ] while John Milton authored Paradise Lost during the Restoration .

This royal throne of kings, this sceptred isle, this earth of majesty, this seat of Mars, this other Eden, demi-paradise; this fortress, built by nature for herself. This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England.

William Shakespeare .

[ 275 ] Some of the most prominent philosophers of the Enlightenment were John Locke , Thomas Paine , Samuel Johnson and Jeremy Bentham . More radical elements were later countered by Edmund Burke who is regarded as the founder of conservatism.

[ 276 ] The poet Alexander Pope with his satirical verse became well regarded. The English played a significant role in romanticism : Samuel Taylor Coleridge , Lord Byron , John Keats , Mary Shelley , Percy Bysshe Shelley , William Blake and William Wordsworth were major figures.

[ 277 ] In response to the Industrial Revolution , agrarian writers sought a way between liberty and tradition; William Cobbett , G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc were main exponents, while the founder of guild socialism , Arthur Penty , and cooperative movement advocate G. D. H. Cole are somewhat related.

[ 278 ] Empiricism continued through John Stuart Mill and Bertrand Russell , while Bernard Williams was involved in analytics . Authors from around the Victorian era include Charles Dickens , the Brontë sisters , Jane Austen , George Eliot , Rudyard Kipling , Thomas Hardy , H. G. Wells and Lewis Carroll .

[ 279 ] Since then England has continued to produce novelists such as George Orwell , D. H. Lawrence , Virginia Woolf , C. S. Lewis , Enid Blyton , Aldous Huxley , Agatha Christie , Terry Pratchett , J. R. R. Tolkien , and J. K. Rowling .

[ 280 ] Performing arts Further information: Folk music of England See also: Music of the United Kingdom Thomas Tallis' "Lamentations I" "Greensleeves" Henry Purcell's "The Queen's Dolour (A Farewell)" Problems playing these files? See media help .

The traditional folk music of England is centuries old and has contributed to several genres prominently; mostly sea shanties , jigs , hornpipes and dance music . It has its own distinct variations and regional peculiarities. Ballads featuring Robin Hood, printed by Wynkyn de Worde in the 16th century, are an important artefact, as are John Playford 's The Dancing Master and Robert Harley 's Roxburghe Ballads collections.

[ 281 ] Some of the best-known songs are Greensleeves , Pastime with Good Company , Maggie May and Spanish Ladies amongst others. Many nursery rhymes are of English origin such as Mary, Mary, Quite Contrary , Roses Are Red , Jack and Jill , London Bridge Is Falling Down , The Grand Old Duke of York , Hey Diddle Diddle and Humpty Dumpty .

[ 282 ] Traditional English Christmas carols include " We Wish You a Merry Christmas ", " The First Noel ", " I Saw Three Ships " and " God Rest Ye Merry, Gentlemen ".

Early English composers in classical music include Renaissance artists Thomas Tallis and William Byrd , followed by Henry Purcell from the Baroque period and Thomas Arne who was well known for his patriotic song Rule, Britannia!

. German-born George Frideric Handel spent most of his composing life in London and became a national icon in Britain, creating some of the most well-known works of classical music, especially his English oratorios, The Messiah , Solomon , Water Music , and Music for the Royal Fireworks .

[ 283 ] The Beatles are the most commercially successful and critically acclaimed band in popular music.

[ 284 ] Classical music attracted much attention in the 18th century with the formation of the Birmingham Triennial Music Festival , which was the longest running classical music festival of its kind until the final concerts in 1912. The English Musical Renaissance was a hypothetical development in the late 19th and early 20th century, when English composers, often those lecturing or trained at the Royal College of Music , were said to have freed themselves from foreign musical influences. There was a revival in the profile of composers from England in the 20th century led by Edward Elgar , Benjamin Britten , Frederick Delius , Gustav Holst , Ralph Vaughan Williams and others.

[ 285 ] Present-day composers from England include Michael Nyman , best known for The Piano , and Andrew Lloyd Webber , whose musicals have achieved enormous success in the West End and worldwide.

In popular music , many English bands and solo artists have been cited as the most influential and best-selling musicians of all time. Acts such as the Beatles , Led Zeppelin , Pink Floyd , Elton John , Queen , Rod Stewart , David Bowie , the Rolling Stones and Def Leppard are amongst the highest-selling recording artists in the world.

[ 286 ] Many musical genres have origins in (or strong associations with) England, such as British invasion , progressive rock , hard rock , Mod , glam rock , heavy metal , Britpop , indie rock , gothic rock , shoegazing , acid house , garage , trip hop , drum and bass and dubstep .

[ 287 ] The Royal Albert Hall . Since the hall's opening in 1871, the world's leading artists from many performance genres have appeared on its stage.

Large outdoor music festivals in the summer and autumn are popular, such as Glastonbury , V Festival , and the Reading and Leeds Festivals . England was at the forefront of the illegal, free rave movement from the late 1980s, which inspired the pan-European culture of teknivals .

[ 288 ] The Boishakhi Mela is a Bengali New Year festival celebrated by the British Bangladeshi community. It is the largest open-air Asian festival in Europe. After the Notting Hill Carnival , it is the second-largest street festival in the UK, attracting over 80,000 visitors.

The most prominent opera house in England is the Royal Opera House at Covent Garden .

[ 289 ] The Proms is a major annual cultural event in the English calendar.

[ 289 ] The Royal Ballet is one of the world's foremost classical ballet companies. The Royal Academy of Music is the oldest conservatoire in the UK, founded in 1822, receiving its royal charter in 1830.

[ 290 ] England is home to numerous major orchestras such as the BBC Symphony Orchestra , the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra , the Philharmonia Orchestra , and the London Symphony Orchestra .

[ 291 ] Other forms of entertainment that originated in England include the circus [ 292 ] [ 293 ] [ 294 ] and the pantomime .

[ 295 ] Cinema See also: Cinema of the United Kingdom Peter O'Toole as T. E. Lawrence in David Lean 's 1962 epic Lawrence of Arabia England has had a considerable influence on the history of the cinema, producing some of the greatest actors, directors and motion pictures of all time, including Alfred Hitchcock , Charlie Chaplin , David Lean , Laurence Olivier , Vivien Leigh , John Gielgud , Peter Sellers , Julie Andrews , Michael Caine , Gary Oldman , Helen Mirren , Kate Winslet and Daniel Day-Lewis . Hitchcock and Lean are amongst the most critically acclaimed filmmakers.

[ 296 ] Hitchcock's The Lodger: A Story of the London Fog (1926) helped shape the thriller genre in film, while his 1929 Blackmail is often regarded as the first British sound feature film.

[ 297 ] Major film studios in England include Pinewood , Elstree and Shepperton . Some of the most commercially successful films of all time have been produced in England, including two of the highest-grossing film franchises ( Harry Potter and James Bond ).

[ 298 ] Ealing Studios in London has a claim to being the oldest continuously working film studio in the world.

[ 299 ] Famous for recording many motion picture film scores , the London Symphony Orchestra first performed film music in 1935.

[ 300 ] The Hammer Horror films starring Christopher Lee saw the production of the first gory horror films showing blood and guts in colour.

[ 301 ] The BFI Top 100 British films includes Monty Python's Life of Brian (1979), a film regularly voted the funniest of all time by the UK public.

[ 302 ] English producers are also active in international co-productions and English actors, directors and crew feature regularly in American films. The UK film council ranked David Yates , Christopher Nolan , Mike Newell , Ridley Scott and Paul Greengrass the five most commercially successful English directors since 2001.

[ 303 ] Other contemporary English directors include Sam Mendes , Guy Ritchie and Richard Curtis . Current actors include Tom Hardy , Daniel Craig , Benedict Cumberbatch , Lena Headey , Felicity Jones , Emilia Clarke , Lashana Lynch , and Emma Watson . Acclaimed for his motion capture work, Andy Serkis opened The Imaginarium Studios in London in 2011.

[ 304 ] The visual effects company Framestore in London has produced some of the most critically acclaimed special effects in modern film.

[ 305 ] Many successful Hollywood films have been based on English people, stories or events. The 'English Cycle' of Disney animated films include Alice in Wonderland , The Jungle Book and Winnie the Pooh .

[ 306 ] Sites and institutions Further information: List of museums in England The Natural History Museum in London English Heritage is a governmental body with a broad remit of managing the historic sites, artefacts and environments of England. It is currently sponsored by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport . A non-governmental charity, the National Trust holds a complementary role, focussed on landscapes and country houses . 17 of the 25 United Kingdom UNESCO World Heritage Sites fall within England.

[ 307 ] Some of the best-known of these are: Hadrian's Wall , Stonehenge, Avebury and Associated Sites , the Tower of London , the Jurassic Coast , Saltaire , Ironbridge Gorge , Blenheim Palace and the Lake District .

[ 308 ] London's British Museum holds more than seven million objects, [ 309 ] one of the largest and most comprehensive collections in the world, [ 310 ] illustrating and documenting global human culture from its beginnings to the present. The British Library in London is the national library and is one of the world's largest research libraries , holding over 150 million items in almost all known languages and formats, including around 25 million books.

[ 311 ] [ 312 ] The National Gallery in Trafalgar Square houses a collection of over 2,300 paintings dating from the mid-13th century to 1900.

[ 313 ] The Tate galleries house the national collections of British and international modern art; they also host the Turner Prize .

[ 314 ] The Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport has overall responsibility for cultural property and heritage.

[ 315 ] [ 316 ] A blue plaque , the oldest historical marker scheme in the world, is a permanent sign installed in a public place in England to commemorate a link between that location and a famous person or event. In 2011 there were around 1,600 museums in England.

[ 317 ] Entry to most museums and galleries is free.

[ 318 ] London is one of the world's most visited cities, regularly taking the top five most visited cities in Europe . It is considered a global centre of finance, art and culture.

[ 319 ] Media Main article: Media in the United Kingdom MediaCity in Manchester is the largest media-production facility in Europe.

[ 320 ] The BBC , founded in 1922, is the UK's publicly funded radio, television and Internet broadcasting corporation, and is the oldest and largest broadcaster in the world.

[ 321 ] [ 322 ] It operates numerous television and radio stations in the UK and abroad and its domestic services are funded by the television licence .

[ 323 ] [ 324 ] The BBC World Service is an international broadcaster owned and operated by the BBC . It is the world's largest of any kind.

[ 325 ] It broadcasts radio news, speech and discussions in more than 40 languages.

[ 326 ] [ 327 ] London dominates the media sector in England: national newspapers and television and radio are largely based there, although Manchester is also a significant national media centre. The UK publishing sector, including books, directories and databases, journals, magazines and business media, newspapers and news agencies, has a combined turnover of around £20 billion and employs around 167,000 people.

[ 328 ] National newspapers produced in England include The Times , The Guardian , The Daily Telegraph , and the Financial Times .

[ 329 ] Magazines and journals published in England that have achieved worldwide circulation include Nature , New Scientist , The Spectator , Prospect , NME and The Economist . The Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport has overall responsibility over media and broadcasting in England.

[ 315 ] Sport Main article: Sport in England England has a strong sporting heritage, and during the 19th century codified many sports that are now played around the world. Sports originating in England include association football , [ 330 ] cricket , rugby union , rugby league , tennis , boxing , badminton, squash , [ 331 ] rounders , [ 332 ] hockey , snooker , billiards , darts , table tennis, bowls , netball , thoroughbred horseracing, greyhound racing and fox hunting . It has helped the development of golf , sailing and Formula One . England has been crowned world champion in several major sports including: Cricket , Rugby and Association Football .

Football is the most popular of these sports. The England national football team , whose home venue is Wembley Stadium , played Scotland in the first-ever international football match in 1872.

[ 333 ] Referred to as the "home of football" by FIFA , England hosted and won the 1966 FIFA World Cup .

[ 334 ] With a British television audience peak of 32.30 million viewers, the final is the most watched television event ever in the UK.

[ 335 ] England is recognised by FIFA as the birthplace of club football: Sheffield F.C.

, founded in 1857, is the world's oldest club.

[ 330 ] The England women's national football team won the UEFA Women's Euro 2022 , hosted by England.

[ 336 ] England was also victorious in the UEFA Women's Euro 2025 , winning the final in a penalty shootout against Spain.

[ 337 ] Wembley Stadium , home of the England football team , during the UEFA Women's Euro 2022 final . At 90,000 capacity, it is the biggest stadium in the UK and the second-largest stadium in Europe .

Cricket is generally thought to have been developed in the early medieval period amongst the farming and metalworking communities of the Weald .

[ 338 ] The England cricket team is a composite England and Wales team. One of the game's top rivalries is The Ashes series between England and Australia , contested since 1882.

Lord's Cricket Ground situated in London is sometimes referred to as the "Mecca of Cricket".

[ 339 ] After winning the 2019 Cricket World Cup , England became the first country to win the World Cups in football, rugby union, and cricket.

[ 340 ] William Penny Brookes was prominent in organising the format for the modern Olympic Games .

[ 341 ] London has hosted the Summer Olympic Games three times, in 1908 , 1948 , and 2012 . England competes in the Commonwealth Games , held every four years.

Sport England is the governing body responsible for distributing funds and providing strategic guidance for sporting activity in England.

Rugby union originated in Rugby School , Warwickshire in the early 19th century.

[ 342 ] The top level of club participation is the English Premiership .

Rugby league was born in Huddersfield in 1895. Since 2008, the England national rugby league team has been a full test nation in lieu of the Great Britain national rugby league team , which won three World Cups . Club sides play in Super League , the present-day embodiment of the Rugby Football League Championship . Rugby League is most popular amongst towns in the northern English counties of Lancashire , Yorkshire and Cumbria .

[ 343 ] Golf has been prominent in England, due in part to its cultural and geographical ties to Scotland .

[ 344 ] There are professional tours for men and women, in two main tours: the PGA and the European Tour . The world's oldest golf tournament, and golf's first major is The Open Championship , played both in England and Scotland. The biennial golf competition, the Ryder Cup , is named after English businessman Samuel Ryder .

[ 345 ] Tennis was created in Birmingham in the late 19th century, and the Wimbledon Championships is the oldest tennis tournament in the world, and widely considered the most prestigious.

[ 346 ] Wimbledon has a major place in the English cultural calendar.

[ 347 ] Former Formula One world champion Nigel Mansell driving at Silverstone in 1990. The circuit hosted the first ever World Championship Formula One race in 1950.

In boxing , under the Marquess of Queensberry Rules , England has produced many world champions across the weight divisions internationally recognised by the governing bodies.

[ 348 ] Originating in 17th and 18th-century England, the thoroughbred is a horse breed best known for its use in horse racing . The National Hunt horse race the Grand National , is held annually at Aintree Racecourse in early April. It is the most watched horse race in the UK, and three-time winner Red Rum is the most successful racehorse in the event's history.

[ 349 ] The 1950 British Grand Prix at Silverstone was the first race in the newly created Formula One World Championship .

[ 350 ] [ 351 ] England has seen the manufacture some of the most technically advanced racing cars, and many of today's racing companies choose England as their base of operations.

[ 352 ] England also has a rich heritage in Grand Prix motorcycle racing , the premier championship of motorcycle road racing , and has produced several world champions.

[ 353 ] Darts is a widely popular sport in England; a professional competitive sport, it is a traditional pub game .

[ 354 ] [ 355 ] Another popular sport commonly associated with pub games is snooker , and England has produced several world champions.

The English are keen sailors and enjoy competitive sailing ; founding and winning some of the world's most famous international competitive tournaments across the various race formats, including the match race , a regatta, and the America's Cup .

National symbols Main article: National symbols of England The St George's Cross has been the national flag of England since the 13th century. Originally, the flag was used by the maritime Republic of Genoa . The English monarch paid a tribute to the Doge of Genoa from 1190 onwards so that English ships could fly the flag as a means of protection when entering the Mediterranean.
A red cross was a symbol for many Crusaders in the 12th and 13th centuries, and became associated with Saint George .

[ 356 ] Since 1606 the St George's Cross has formed part of the design of the Union Flag , a Pan-British flag designed by King James I .

[ 217 ] During the English Civil War and Interregnum , the New Model Army 's standards and the Commonwealth 's Great Seal both incorporated the flag of Saint George.

[ 357 ] [ 358 ] The Tudor rose , England's national floral emblem There are numerous other symbols and symbolic artefacts, both official and unofficial, including the Tudor rose , the nation's floral emblem , and the Three Lions featured on the Royal Arms of England . The Tudor rose was adopted as a national emblem of England around the time of the Wars of the Roses as a symbol of peace.

[ 359 ] It is a syncretic symbol in that it merged the white rose of the Yorkists and the red rose of the Lancastrians . It is also known as the Rose of England .

[ 360 ] The oak tree is a symbol of England: the Royal Oak symbol and Oak Apple Day commemorate the escape of King Charles II after his father's execution, when he hid in an oak to avoid detection by the parliamentarians before safely reaching exile.

The Royal Arms of England The Royal Arms of England, a national coat of arms featuring three lions, originated with Richard the Lionheart in 1198. It is blazoned as gules, three lions passant guardant or and it provides one of the most prominent symbols of England. England does not have an official national anthem, as the United Kingdom as a whole has God Save the King . However, Jerusalem , Land of Hope and Glory (used for England during the 2002 Commonwealth Games ), [ 361 ] and I Vow to Thee, My Country are often considered unofficial English national anthems . England's National Day is 23 April which is Saint George's Day : Saint George is the patron saint of England.

[ 362 ] See also England portal Outline of England Outline of the United Kingdom Notes ^ England has no official anthem, as such it typically uses the anthem of the United Kingdom, God Save The King at international events, although it sometimes makes use of other English patriotic songs such as Land of Hope and Glory and the hymn Jerusalem .

^ Englishman/Englishwoman ^ ONS Standard Area Measurement, 'area to mean high water excluding inland water' ^ ONS Standard Area Measurement, 'total extent of the realm' (area to mean low water) ^ As Roger Scruton explains, "The Reformation must not be confused with the changes introduced into the Church of England during the "Reformation Parliament" of 1529–36, which were of a political rather than a religious nature, designed to unite the secular and religious sources of authority within a single sovereign power: the Anglican Church did not make substantial change in doctrine until later." [ 52 ] ^ Figure of 550,000 military deaths is for England and Wales.

[ 77 ] ^ For instance, in 1980 around 50 million Americans claimed English ancestry .

[ 186 ] In Canada there are around 6.5 million Canadians who claim English ancestry .

[ 187 ] Around 70% of Australians in 1999 denoted their origins as Anglo-Celtic , a category which includes all peoples from Great Britain and Ireland.

[ 188 ] Chileans of English descent are somewhat of an anomaly in that Chile itself was never part of the British Empire, but today there are around 420,000 people of English origins living there.

[ 189 ] ^ People who strictly identified as "Pagan". Other Pagan paths, such as Wicca or Druidism, have not been included in this number.

[ 220 ] ^ People who strictly identified as "Wiccan". Other Pagan paths, such as Druidism, and general "Pagan" have not been included in this number.

[ 220 ] ^ Students attending English universities now have to pay tuition fees towards the cost of their education, as do English students who choose to attend university in Scotland. Scottish students attending Scottish universities have their fees paid by the devolved Scottish Parliament.

[ 230 ] ^ While people such as Norman Foster and Richard Rogers represent the modernist movement, Prince Charles since the 1980s has voiced strong views against it in favour of traditional architecture and put his ideas into practice at his Poundbury development in Dorset.

[ 243 ] Architects like Raymond Erith , Francis Johnson and Quinlan Terry continued to practise in the classical style.

^ These tales may have come to prominence, at least in part, as an attempt by the Norman ruling elite to legitimise their rule of the British Isles, finding Anglo-Saxon history ill-suited to the task during an era when members of the deposed House of Wessex , especially Edgar the Ætheling and his nephews of the Scottish House of Dunkeld , were still active in the isles.

[ 252 ] [ 254 ] Also Michael Wood explains; "Over the centuries the figure of Arthur became a symbol of British history – a way of explaining the matter of Britain, the relationship between the Saxons and the Celts, and a way of exorcising ghosts and healing the wounds of the past." [ 251 ] References ^ "Historic moment as BSL becomes official language" .

www.hw.ac.uk . 28 April 2022 . Retrieved 18 June 2025 .

^ a b c UK Census (2021).

"2021 Census Area Profile – England Country (E92000001)" .

Nomis .

Office for National Statistics . Retrieved 14 August 2023 .

^ "English devolution" .

Institute for Government . 21 June 2024 . Retrieved 24 November 2024 .

^ "Standard Area Measurements for Administrative Areas (December 2023) in the UK" .

Open Geography Portal . Office for National Statistics. 31 May 2024 . Retrieved 7 June 2024 .

^ a b c d "Mid-Year Population Estimates, UK, June 2022" .

Office for National Statistics . 26 March 2024 . Retrieved 3 May 2024 .

^ "Regional gross value added (balanced) per head and income components" .

Office for National Statistics . 24 April 2024 . Retrieved 15 May 2024 .

^ a b "Regional gross domestic product: all ITL regions" .

Office for National Statistics .

^ "England – Culture" .

britainusa.com . Archived from the original on 16 May 2008 . Retrieved 1 February 2009 .

^ Burns, William E.

A Brief History of Great Britain . p.

xxi .

; "Acts of Union 1707" .

parliament.uk . Retrieved 27 January 2011 .

^ "Country profile: United Kingdom" . BBC News. 26 October 2009 . Retrieved 1 February 2009 .

^ "Industrial Revolution" .

Ace.mmu.ac.uk . Archived from the original on 27 April 2008 . Retrieved 1 February 2009 .

^ "What makes UK universities so popular?" .

CamVision Education . 4 October 2021 . Retrieved 17 September 2023 .

^ "World University Rankings" .

Times Higher Education (THE) . 4 October 2022 . Retrieved 17 September 2023 .

^ 2011 Census – Population and household estimates for England and Wales, March 2011 . Accessed 31 May 2013.

^ "England" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved 21 July 2010 .

^ Ripley 1869 , p. 570.

^ Molyneaux 2015 , pp. 6–7.

^ "Germania" .

Tacitus . Archived from the original on 16 September 2008 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "Angle" .

Oxford English Dictionary . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

[ dead link ] ^ Crystal 2004 , pp. 26–27 ^ Forbes, John (1848).

The Principles of Gaelic Grammar . Edinburgh: Oliver, Boyd and Tweeddale.

^ Foster 1988 , p. 9.

^ "500,000 BC – Boxgrove" .

Current Archaeology . Current Publishing. 24 May 2007 . Retrieved 20 December 2010 .

^ "Palaeolithic Archaeology Teaching Resource Box" (PDF) . Palaeolithic Rivers of South-West Britain Project (2006). Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 May 2021 . Retrieved 20 December 2010 .

; "Chalk east" . A Geo East Project. Archived from the original on 5 March 2011 . Retrieved 20 December 2010 .

^ Oppenheimer 2006 , p. 173.

^ "Tertiary Rivers: Tectonic and structural background" . University of Cambridge . Retrieved 9 September 2009 .

^ "Function and significance of Bell Beaker pottery according to data from residue analyses" . Retrieved 21 December 2010 .

^ Reid, Struan (1994).

Inventions and Trade. P.8 . James Lorimer & Company.

ISBN 978-0-921921-30-1 . Retrieved 23 December 2010 .

^ Burke, Jason (2 December 2000).

"Dig uncovers Boudicca's brutal streak" .

The Observer . London. Archived from the original on 22 October 2003 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "Cornelius Tacitus, The Annals" . Alfred John Church, William Jackson Brudribh, Ed . Retrieved 22 December 2010 .

^ Goldsworthy, Adrian (2016).

Pax Romana: War, Peace and Conquest in the Roman World . Hachette UK. p. 276.

^ Bedoyere, Guy.

"Architecture in Roman Britain" .

Heritage Key . Archived from the original on 3 July 2009 . Retrieved 23 December 2010 .

; Philip, Robert (1860).

The History of Progress in Great Britain . Vol. 2 . Retrieved 23 December 2010 .

; Rees, Bob; Shute, Paul; Kelly, Nigel (2003).

Medicine through time . Heinemann.

ISBN 978-0-435-30841-4 . Retrieved 24 December 2010 .

^ Rankov 1994 , p. 16.

^ Wright 2008 , p. 143.

^ a b James, Edward.

"Overview: Anglo-Saxons, 410 to 800" . BBC . Retrieved 3 December 2010 .

^ a b Lehane, Brendan (1968).

Early Christian Christianity . John Murray.

^ Dark, Ken R. (2003).

"Large-scale population movements into and from Britain south of Hadrian's Wall in the fourth to sixth centuries AD" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 June 2021 . Retrieved 20 June 2020 .

; Martin, Toby F. (2015).

The Cruciform Brooch and Anglo-Saxon England . Boydell and Brewer Press. pp.

174– 178.

; Coates, Richard.

"Celtic whispers: revisiting the problems of the relation between Brittonic and Old English" .

; Kortlandt, Frederik (2018).

"Relative Chronology" (PDF) .

; Fox, Bethany.

"The P-Celtic Place Names of North-East England and South-East Scotland" .

^ Härke, Heinrich (2011). "Anglo-Saxon Immigration and Ethnogenesis".

Medieval Archaeology .

55 (1): 1– 28.

doi : 10.1179/174581711X13103897378311 .

ISSN 0076-6097 .

S2CID 162331501 .

^ "The Christian Tradition" .

PicturesofEngland.com . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ Kirby 2000 , p. 4.

^ Lyon 1960 , p. 23.

^ "Overview: The Normans, 1066–1154" . BBC . Retrieved 3 December 2010 .

^ Crouch 2006 , pp. 2–4 ^ "Norman invasion word impact study" . BBC News. 20 February 2008 . Retrieved 3 December 2010 .

^ a b Bartlett 1999 , p. 124.

^ "Edward I (r. 1272–1307)" .

Royal.gov.uk . Archived from the original on 24 June 2008 . Retrieved 21 September 2009 .

^ Fowler 1967 , p. 208.

^ Ziegler 2003 , p. 230; Goldberg 1996 , p. 4.

^ Crofton 2007 , p. 111.

^ "Richard III (r. 1483–1485)" .

Royal.gov.uk . Archived from the original on 10 July 2008 . Retrieved 21 September 2009 .

^ "Royal Navy History, Tudor Period and the Birth of a Regular Navy" . Archived from the original on 18 January 2012 . Retrieved 24 December 2010 .

; Smith, Goldwin.

England Under the Tudors . Forgotten Books. p. 176.

ISBN 978-1-60620-939-4 . Retrieved 26 December 2010 .

^ Scruton 1982 , p. 470.

^ From the 1944 Clark lectures by C. S. Lewis ; Lewis, English Literature in the Sixteenth Century (Oxford, 1954) p. 1, OCLC 256072 ^ "Tudor Parliaments" .

Spartacus Educational . Retrieved 4 April 2021 .

^ Ordahl, Karen (2007).

Roanak:the abandoned colony . Rowman & Littlefield publishers Inc.

ISBN 978-0-7425-5263-0 . Retrieved 24 December 2010 .

^ a b Colley 1992 , p. 12; "Making the Act of Union" .

Act of Union 1707 . UK Parliament. Archived from the original on 9 June 2008 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ Hay, Denys.

"The term 'Great Britain' in the Middle Ages" (PDF) .

ads.ahds.ac.uk . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2009 . Retrieved 19 February 2009 .

^ "Oliver Cromwell (English statesman)" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 8 August 2009 .

^ Lyndsey Bakewell, " Changing scenes and flying machines: re-examination of spectacle and the spectacular in Restoration theatre, 1660–1714 " (PhD. Diss. Loughborough University, 2016).

^ Adler, Philip J.; Pouwels, Randall L. (2007).

World Civilization . Cengage Learning. p. 340.

ISBN 978-0-495-50262-3 . Retrieved 24 December 2010 .

^ "Democracy Live: Black Rod" . BBC. Retrieved 6 August 2008; Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Black Rod" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 4 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

^ "London's Burning: The Great Fire" .

BBC News . Retrieved 25 September 2009 .

^ "The History Press | The Stuarts" .

thehistorypress.co.uk . Retrieved 11 April 2021 .

^ a b "The first Parliament of Great Britain" . Parliament. Archived from the original on 21 June 2008 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ Gallagher 2006 , p. 14.

^ Hudson, Pat.

"The Workshop of the World" . BBC . Retrieved 10 December 2010 .

^ a b Office for National Statistics 2000 , p. 5; McNeil & Nevell 2000 , p. 4.

^ McNeil & Nevell 2000 , p. 9.; Birmingham City Council .

"Heritage" .

visitbirmingham.com . Archived from the original on 26 April 2012 . Retrieved 4 October 2009 .

^ "Manchester – the first industrial city" . Entry on Sciencemuseum website. Archived from the original on 9 March 2012 . Retrieved 17 March 2012 .

^ "Regency | British Architectural Dates and Styles | Property | UK | Mayfair Office" .

mayfairoffice.co.uk . Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 8 April 2021 .

^ Bennet, Geoffrey (2004).

The Battle of Trafalgar . England: Pen & Sword Books Limited, CPI UK, South Yorkshire.

^ Colley 1992 , p. 1.

^ "Department of History – Napoleonic Wars" . 28 July 2014. Archived from the original on 28 July 2014 . Retrieved 8 April 2021 .

^ Haggard, Robert F. (2001).

The persistence of Victorian liberalism:The Politics of Social Reform in Britain, 1870–1900 . Greenwood Publishing. p. 13.

ISBN 978-0-313-31305-9 . Retrieved 26 December 2010 .

^ Atterbury, Paul (17 February 2011).

"Victorian Technology" . BBC . Retrieved 13 October 2020 .

^ Crawford, Elizabeth.

"Women: From Abolition to the Vote" . BBC . Retrieved 10 December 2010 .

^ Cox 1970 , p. 180.

^ Golley, John (10 August 1996).

"Obituaries: Air Commodore Sir Frank Whittle" .

The Independent . London . Retrieved 2 December 2010 .

^ Clark, Steed & Marshall 1973 , p. 1; Wilson & Game 2002 , p. 55.

^ Gallagher 2006 , pp. 10–11.

^ a b Reitan 2003 , p. 50.

^ Keating, Michael (1 January 1998). "Reforging the Union: Devolution and Constitutional Change in the United Kingdom".

Publius: The Journal of Federalism .

28 (1): 217.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordjournals.pubjof.a029948 .

^ "The coming of the Tudors and the Act of Union" .

BBC Wales . BBC News. 2009 . Retrieved 9 September 2009 .

^ Kenny, English & Hayton 2008 , p. 3; Ward 2004 , p. 180.

^ a b c Sherman, Jill; Andrew Norfolk (5 November 2004).

"Prescott's dream in tatters as North East rejects assembly" .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on 25 May 2010 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "A Beginner's Guide to UK Geography (2023)" .

Open Geography Portal . Office for National Statistics. 4 February 2025 . Retrieved 14 May 2025 .

^ "United Kingdom" .

CIA [ The World Factbook ]. Retrieved 13 April 2021.

^ "The Act of Union between England and Scotland" .

Historic UK . Retrieved 25 December 2023 .

^ Cabinet Office (26 March 2009).

"Devolution in the United Kingdom" . cabinetoffice.gov.uk . Retrieved 16 August 2009 .

^ "Deputy Prime Minister launches first-ever Mayoral Council" .

^ "Lists of MPs" . Parliament.uk . Retrieved 21 May 2009 .

^ "State of the parties" . Retrieved 31 July 2025 .

^ "Common Law" .

The People's Law Dictionary . ALM Media Properties . Retrieved 5 October 2013 .

^ "The Common Law in the British Empire" . H-net.msu.edu. 19 October 2000 . Retrieved 20 August 2011 .

^ Fafinski 2007 , p. 60.

^ Fafinski 2007 , p. 127.

^ "Constitutional reform: A Supreme Court for the United Kingdom" (PDF) . DCA.gov.uk. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 January 2009 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ Fafinski 2007 , p. 67.

^ "Lord Chancellor and Secretary of State for Justice" .

GOV.UK .

^ "Crime over the last 25 years" (PDF) . HomeOffice.gov.uk. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 March 2009 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "New record high prison population" .

BBC News . 8 February 2008 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "Offender management statistics quarterly: April to June 2022" .

GOV.UK . Retrieved 14 November 2022 .

^ a b Encyclopædia Britannica 2002 , p. 100 ^ Redcliffe-Maud & Wood 1974 .

^ abcounties.com (26 June 2013).

"The problem of 'county confusion' – and how to resolve it" .

Association of British Counties . Retrieved 17 September 2023 .

^ Singh 2009 , p. 53.

^ Cooper, Hilary (29 March 2011).

"Tiers shed as regional government offices disappear" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 16 June 2011 .

^ Axford 2002 , p. 315.

^ "English Channel" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . britannica.com. 2009 . Retrieved 15 August 2009 .

^ "History" . EuroTunnel.com. Archived from the original on 16 November 2008 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "The River Severn" . BBC . Retrieved 5 December 2010 .

^ "Severn Bore and Trent Aegir" . Environment Agency. Archived from the original on 22 November 2010 . Retrieved 5 December 2010 .

^ "River Thames and London (England)" .

London Evening Standard . London . Retrieved 17 August 2009 .

[ dead link ] ^ a b "North West England & Isle of Man: climate" . Met Office. Archived from the original on 5 June 2011 . Retrieved 5 December 2010 .

^ World Regional Geography . Joseph J. Hobbs. 2008.

ISBN 978-0-495-38950-7 . Retrieved 6 December 2017 .

^ "Pennines" . Smmit Post . Retrieved 8 September 2009 .

^ "National Parks – About us" . nationalparks.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 27 October 2010 . Retrieved 5 December 2010 .

^ a b c d "What is the Climate like in Britain?" . Woodlands Kent. Archived from the original on 14 January 2010 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "Record high temperatures verified" .

Met Office . Retrieved 22 March 2023 .

^ "English Climate" . MetOffice.com. Archived from the original on 29 August 2008.

^ Ornithology, British Trust for (4 February 2020).

"It's official – the Wren is our commonest bird" .

BTO . Retrieved 2 December 2022 .

^ "Natural History Museum" . Retrieved 7 July 2020 .

^ "Natural England: Designated sites" . Archived from the original on 25 August 2021 . Retrieved 20 July 2020 .

^ "Environment Agency" .

GOV.UK . Retrieved 3 April 2021 .

^ "Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs – GOV.UK" .

gov.uk . Retrieved 3 April 2021 .

^ Historic England (2015).

"Richmond Park  (397979)" .

Research records (formerly PastScape) . Retrieved 3 May 2015 .

^ "Mammals in Britain's cities: A spotter's guide – in pictures | Urban wildlife" .

The Guardian . 17 May 2012.

^ a b c d "2011 Census – Built-up areas" .

ONS . Retrieved 5 February 2014 .

^ O'Brian, Harriet (24 November 2007).

"The Complete Guide To: Cathedral cities in the UK" .

The Independent . London. Archived from the original on 12 August 2009 . Retrieved 8 September 2009 .

^ Fenton, Trevor (12 December 2018).

Regional economic activity by gross value added (balanced), UK: 1998 to 2017 (Report).

Office for National Statistics .

^ "The Welfare State – Never Ending Reform" .

BBC News . Retrieved 17 September 2009 .

^ Office for National Statistics .

"Regional Accounts" . statistics.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 26 August 2009 . Retrieved 17 September 2009 .

^ "Financial Centre" . London.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 13 July 2011 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "The Global Financial Centres Index" (PDF) . City of London Policy Resources Committee. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 October 2009 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "London Has Officially Become the Technology Capital of Europe" .

BrainStation . 21 July 2021 . Retrieved 10 July 2023 .

^ Willems, Michiel (20 June 2021).

"Unicorn nest: UK hits milestone of 100 $1bn tech companies, more than rest of Europe combined" .

CityAM . Retrieved 17 September 2023 .

^ "The Bank's relationship with Parliament" . BankofEngland.co.uk. Archived from the original on 8 July 2009 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "Monetary Policy Committee" . BankofEngland.co.uk. Archived from the original on 8 July 2009 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "England Exports" . EconomyWatch.com. Archived from the original on 5 January 2012 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "From the Margins to the Mainstream – Government unveils new action plan for the creative industries" . DCMS. 9 March 2007. Archived from the original on 4 December 2008 . Retrieved 9 March 2015 .

^ "World Guide – England – Economy Overview" .

World Guide . Intute. Archived from the original on 2 August 2009 . Retrieved 9 September 2009 .

^ "Economy of the United Kingdom" (PDF) . PTeducation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 November 2009 . Retrieved 8 October 2009 .

^ "Coal | Mines and quarries | MineralsUK" .

MineralsUK . Archived from the original on 20 July 2016 . Retrieved 7 July 2016 .

^ Gascoin, J. "A reappraisal of the role of the universities in the Scientific Revolution", in Lindberg, David C. and Westman, Robert S., eds (1990), Reappraisals of the Scientific Revolution . Cambridge University Press. p. 248.

ISBN 0-521-34804-8 .

^ Spratt, H. P. (1958).

"Isambard Kingdom Brunel" .

Nature .

181 (4626): 1754– 1755.

Bibcode : 1958Natur.181.1754S .

doi : 10.1038/1811754a0 .

S2CID 4255226 .

^ Oakes 2002 , p. 214 ^ Ronald Shillingford (2010). "The History of the World's Greatest- Entrepreneurs: Biographies of Success". p. 64–69 ^ Saunders 1982 , p. 13; White 1885 , p. 335; Levine 1960 , p. 183 ^ Wohleber, Curt (Spring 2006).

"The Vacuum Cleaner" .

Invention & Technology Magazine . American Heritage Publishing. Archived from the original on 13 March 2010 . Retrieved 8 December 2010 .

^ "English Inventors and Inventions" . English-Crafts.co.uk. Archived from the original on 15 April 2010 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ a b "The formal title as adopted in the royal charter" (PDF) .

royalsociety.org .

^ Hunter, Michael.

"Royal Society" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 24 February 2018 .

^ Caroe, Gwendy (1985).

The Royal Institution : an informal history . Final chapter by Alban. London: J. Murray.

ISBN 0719542456 .

^ "Metric system was British" .

BBC News . 13 July 2007 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ Castells, M.; Hall, P.; Hall, P.G. (2004).

Technopoles of the World: the Making of Twenty-First-Century Industrial Complexes . London: Routledge. pp. 98–100.

ISBN 0-415-10015-1 .

^ "Cambridge remains most intensive science and technological cluster in the world" .

University of Cambridge . 20 September 2023 . Retrieved 4 December 2023 .

^ "International comparison of the UK research base, 2022" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2023 . Retrieved 11 March 2023 .

(last checked 11 March 2023) ^ "Department for Science, Innovation and Technology" .

GOV.UK . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ a b c UK Parliament 2007 , p. 175 ^ Lesley, Lewis (1983). "Runcorn – A Rapid Transit New Town?".

Built Environment .

9 (3/4): 234.

JSTOR 23286723 .

^ "Runcorn New Town – 7.3 Transport" .

rudi.net . Archived from the original on 18 October 2014 . Retrieved 24 July 2020 .

^ "27 September 1825 – Opening of the Stockton and Darlington Railway" . The Stockton and Darlington Railway. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013 . Retrieved 5 October 2013 .

^ "Home page | Office of Rail and Road" .

orr.gov.uk . Archived from the original on 28 August 2020 . Retrieved 21 May 2021 .

^ "Crossrail's giant tunnelling machines unveiled" .

BBC News . 2 January 2012.

^ "HS2: When will the line open and how much will it cost?" . BBC. 11 February 2020 . Retrieved 5 September 2020 .

^ a b White 2002 , p. 63.

^ "Delta Expects New Slots To Foster Growth At Heathrow Airport" .

The Wall Street Journal . 23 February 2011. Archived from the original on 13 May 2011 . Retrieved 23 March 2011 .

^ a b c Else 2007 , p. 781.

^ "BBC – Weather Centre – Climate Change – Wind Power" .

bbc.co.uk . Retrieved 9 June 2015 .

^ a b "UK Renewable Energy Roadmap Crown copyright, July 2011" (PDF) .

; "RenewableUK News website article" . Archived from the original on 9 May 2015.

^ "Britain produced record amount of wind power in 2022, National Grid says" .

Reuters . 6 January 2023 . Retrieved 8 May 2023 .

^ "The world's biggest offshore wind farm is now fully operational" .

CNBC . September 2022 . Retrieved 13 April 2023 .

^ "What is the 2008 Climate Change Act?" .

Grantham Research Institute on climate change and the environment . Retrieved 1 April 2021 .

^ Proctor, Darrell (24 November 2020).

"UK Undergoing 'Remarkable Shift' in Power Generation" .

POWER Magazine . Retrieved 11 April 2021 .

^ "Department for Energy Security & Net Zero – GOV.UK" .

gov.uk . Retrieved 3 April 2021 .

^ "Minister of State (Minister for Business, Energy and Clean Growth) – GOV.UK" .

gov.uk . Retrieved 24 October 2020 .

^ "2022 EPI Results" .

Environmental Performance Index . 3 June 2020. Archived from the original on 21 June 2023 . Retrieved 5 July 2023 .

^ "UK net zero target" .

Institute for Government . 20 April 2020 . Retrieved 20 November 2020 .

^ "BBC History on William Beveridge" .

BBC News . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "NHS Expenditure in England" (PDF) .

House of Commons Library . Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 April 2010 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "NHS costs and exemptions" .

Department of Health . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

[ dead link ] ^ "Budget 2008, Chapter C" (PDF) .

HM Treasury . 3 March 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 October 2008 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ a b Office for National Statistics .

"Life expectancy" . statistics.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 25 May 2009 . Retrieved 20 July 2009 .

^ United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs .

"World Population Prospects: Analytical Report for the 2004" . United Nations. Archived from the original on 7 August 2009 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ a b c d Office for National Statistics (2011).

"Ethnicity and National Identity in England and Wales 2011" . Statistics.gov.uk . Retrieved 5 October 2013 .

^ "Shifting Identities – statistical data on ethnic identities in the US" . Bnet. 2001. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016 . Retrieved 29 July 2009 .

^ "Ethnic origins, 2006 counts, for Canada, provinces and territories" . Statistics Canada. 2 April 2008. Archived from the original on 1 November 2009 . Retrieved 29 July 2009 .

^ Centre for Population and Urban Research, Monash University.

"Australian Population: Ethnic Origins" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 July 2011 . Retrieved 29 July 2009 .

^ "Inmigración británica en Chile" . Galeon.com. Archived from the original on 22 August 2009 . Retrieved 29 July 2009 .

^ Burke, Jason (9 October 2005).

"An Englishman's home is his casa as thousands go south" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

; Travis, Alan; Sarah Knapton (16 November 2007).

"Record numbers leave the country for life abroad" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 8 August 2009 .

^ "One in four Britons claim Irish roots" .

BBC News . 16 March 2001 . Retrieved 26 November 2010 .

^ a b c d e f "Population of England and Wales" .

Gov.uk . 22 December 2022.

^ a b c d "British Immigration Map Revealed" .

BBC News . 7 September 2005 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ a b Paton, Graeme (1 October 2007).

"One fifth of children from ethnic minorities" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 14 August 2014 .

^ Shepherd, Jessica (22 June 2011).

"Almost a quarter of state school pupils are from an ethnic minority" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 17 January 2014 .

^ Leppard, David (10 April 2005).

"Immigration rise increases segregation in British cities" .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on 11 February 2008 . Retrieved 8 August 2009 .

^ "Cornish people formally declared a national minority along with Scots, Welsh and Irish" .

The Independent . 23 April 2014. Archived from the original on 24 April 2014 . Retrieved 23 April 2014 .

^ QS204EW – Main language , Office for National Statistics 2011 Census. Retrieved 21 July 2015.

^ Mujica, Mauro E. (19 June 2003).

"English: Not America's Language?" .

The Globalist . Washington, DC. Archived from the original on 17 January 2008 . Retrieved 1 February 2009 .

^ "QS205EW – Proficiency in English" .

Office for National Statistics 2011 census . Retrieved 20 July 2015 .

Out of the 51,005,610 residents of England over the age of three, 50,161,765 (98%) can speak English "well" or "very well" ^ "English language history" . Yaelf. Archived from the original on 13 February 2010 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ Government Offices for the English Regions .

"Cornish language" . gos.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016 . Retrieved 22 September 2009 .

; "The Cornish Language Development Project – Evaluation – Final Report" . Hywel Evans, Aric Lacoste / ERS. p. 20. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013 . Retrieved 5 October 2013 .

^ "South West – Cornish Language" . Government Office South West. Archived from the original on 13 October 2008 . Retrieved 17 September 2009 .

^ "On being a Cornish "Celt": changing Celtic heritage and traditions" (PDF) .

University of Exeter . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 September 2009 . Retrieved 1 February 2009 .

^ Dugan, Emily (6 September 2009).

"The Cornish: They revolted in 1497, now they're at it again" .

The Independent . London. Archived from the original on 19 August 2018 . Retrieved 17 September 2009 .

; "Cornish in Schools" .

Cornish Language Partnership . 2009. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013 . Retrieved 5 October 2013 .

^ Lipsett, Anthea (26 June 2008).

"Number of primaries teaching foreign languages doubles" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 23 September 2009 .

^ Booth, Robert (30 January 2013).

"Polish becomes England's second language" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 30 January 2013 .

^ "British Sign Language gets official status after 19 years of campaigning" .

ITV News . 6 May 2022 . Retrieved 14 June 2023 .

^ "Table KS209EW 2011 Census: Religion, local authorities in England and Wales" . Office for National Statistics. 11 December 2012 . Retrieved 22 May 2017 .

^ "Church of England" . BBC . Retrieved 4 December 2010 .

^ "In depth history of the Church of England" . Church of England . Retrieved 25 January 2017 .

The religious settlement that eventually emerged in the reign of Elizabeth gave the Church of England the distinctive identity that it has retained to this day. It resulted in a Church that consciously retained a large amount of continuity with the Church of the Patristic and Medieval periods in terms of its use of the catholic creeds, its pattern of ministry, its buildings and aspects of its liturgy, but which also embodied Protestant insights in its theology and in the overall shape of its liturgical practice. The way that this is often expressed is by saying that the Church of England is both 'catholic and reformed.' ^ "Global Anglicanism at a Crossroads" . PewResearch.org. 19 June 2008. Archived from the original on 13 August 2011 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "People here 'must obey the laws of the land' " .

The Daily Telegraph . London. 9 February 2008.

Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "The Methodist Church" .

BBC News . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "An Independent Academic Study on Cornish" (PDF) . p. 8. Archived from the original on 2 November 2019 . Retrieved 26 December 2010 .

^ "Cambridge History of Christianity" . Hugh McLeod. Archived from the original on 21 July 2012 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ a b "United Kingdom – History of the Flag" . FlagSpot.net . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ a b "From Expulsion (1290) to Readmission (1656): Jews and England" (PDF) . Goldsmiths.ac.uk. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 1 February 2009 .

^ a b c Office for National Statistics .

"Religion" . Statistics.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 7 July 2009 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ a b c "2011 ONS results" . Retrieved 28 October 2017 .

^ Gearon 2002 , p. 246.

^ West 2003 , p. 28.

^ "Secretary of State for Education – GOV.UK" .

gov.uk .

^ "National Curriculum" . Retrieved 8 July 2020 .

^ "OECD: PISA 2018" (PDF) .

^ "Independent Schools in the United Kingdom" . 2009. Archived from the original on 29 August 2009.

^ Gearon 2002 , p. 102.

^ Watson, Judith; Church, Andrew (2009).

"The Social Effects of Travel to Learn Patterns – A Case Study of 16–19 Year Olds in London" .

Local Economy: The Journal of the Local Economy Policy Unit .

24 (5): 389– 414.

doi : 10.1080/02690940903166971 .

S2CID 145187656 .

^ United Kingdom Parliament .

"Innovation, Universities, Science and Skills Committee Contents" . publications.parliament.uk . Retrieved 16 September 2009 .

^ "Financial support for higher education students" .

commonslibrary.parliament.uk . House of Commons Library. 31 January 2024.

^ a b "The Frameworks for Higher Education Qualifications of UK Degree-Awarding Bodies" (PDF) . November 2014. p. 17. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 4 November 2016 .

^ "QS World University Rankings 2023 | Top Universities" . QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. February 2017 . Retrieved 28 February 2023 .

^ Hoyle, Ben (23 September 2007).

"The Sunday Times Good University Guide 2007 – Profile for London School of Economics" .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on 2 December 2008 . Retrieved 6 June 2008 .

^ "FT Global MBA Rankings" .

Financial Times . Archived from the original on 4 May 2011 . Retrieved 25 January 2010 .

^ Webster 1937 , p. 383.

^ Lowe 1971 , p. 317.

^ "The Prehistoric Sites of Great Britain" . Stone-Circles.org.uk . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ a b c "Ancient Roman architecture in England and Wales" . Castles.me.uk. Archived from the original on 12 December 2009 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ Colgrave 1985 , p. 326.

^ Pevsner 1942 , p. 14.

^ a b Atkinson 2008 , p. 189.

^ Downes 2007 , p. 17.

^ "Architects to hear Prince appeal" .

BBC News . 12 May 2009 . Retrieved 20 June 2009 .

^ "The history of the house at Stourhead" .

National Trust . Retrieved 10 April 2021 .

^ a b "Gardens through time" .

English Heritage . Retrieved 10 April 2021 .

^ Lucia Impelluso, Jardins, potagers et labyrinthes , Mondatori Electra, Milan ^ "Gardens & parks" .

National Trust . Retrieved 10 April 2021 .

^ "RHS Chelsea Flower Show" .

rhs.org.uk .

^ Keary 1882 , p. 50.

^ Pollard 2004 , p. 272.

^ a b Wood, Michael.

"King Arthur, 'Once and Future King' " .

BBC News . Retrieved 16 September 2009 .

^ a b c Higham 2002 , p. 25.

^ Koch 2006 , p. 732.

^ Lacy 1986 , p. 649.

^ Briggs 2004 , p. 26.

^ Withington 2008 , p. 224.

^ "What is England's national costume?" . Woodlands-Junior.kent.sch.uk. Archived from the original on 5 May 2009 . Retrieved 24 June 2009 .

^ Else 2007 , p. 76.

^ "The S.Pellegrino World's 50 Best Restaurants" . TheWorlds50Best.com. Archived from the original on 13 January 2010 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ a b "Traditional English Food Specialities" . TravelSignPosts.com . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "How to make the perfect full English breakfast" . 25 June 2015.

Archived from the original on 10 January 2022.

^ "Catherine of Braganza" . Tea.co.uk . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "Types of Beer" . Icons of England. Archived from the original on 30 October 2009 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "The Prehistoric Cave Art of England" (PDF) . ArchaeologyDataService.ac.uk . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ English Heritage .

"Aldborough Roman Site" . english-heritage.org.uk. Archived from the original on 22 October 2009 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "Early Middle Ages Art" . Tiscali.co.uk. Archived from the original on 27 February 2009 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ a b c d e "English art" . Tiscali.co.uk. Archived from the original on 16 February 2009 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ Turner, Chris.

"The Bronze Age: Henry Moore and his successors" .

Tate Magazine (6). Archived from the original on 5 January 2012 . Retrieved 9 September 2009 .

^ "About the RSA – RSA" .

thersa.org . Retrieved 8 May 2021 .

^ a b Warner 1902 , p. 35.

^ Rogers 2001 , p. 17.

^ Rogers 2001 , p. 135.

^ a b Rowse 1971 , p. 48.

^ Norbrook 2000 , p. 6.

^ "Richard II" .

William Shakespeare . Archived from the original on 28 June 2008 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ Heywood 2007 , p. 74.

^ Watson 1985 , p. 360.

^ Cole 1947 , p. 268.

^ Hawkins-Dady 1996 , p. 970.

^ Eccleshare 2002 , p. 5.

^ Chappell 1966 , p. 690.

^ Lax 1989 , p. 7.

^ "The Birth of British Music: Handel – The Conquering Hero" . BBC. 15 July 2019.

Archived from the original on 14 May 2017.

^ Kynaston, Nic (1998).

"The Guinness Book of Records 1999" . Guinness.

ISBN 9780851120706 .

^ Stradling 1993 , p. 166.

^ Recording Industry Association of America .

"Top Selling Artists" . riaa.com. Archived from the original on 1 July 2007 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ Else 2007 , p. 65.

^ Matthew Collin, John Godfrey (2010). "Altered State: The Story of Ecstasy Culture and Acid House" p. 258.

^ a b Foreman 2005 , p. 371.

^ "Royal Academy of Music | University of London" .

london.ac.uk . Retrieved 24 February 2024 .

^ "- PPL" .

ppluk.com . 25 September 2018 . Retrieved 1 May 2021 .

^ Great dynasties of the world: The Chipperfields The Guardian Retrieved 18 February 2011.

^ "The circus comes to the Circus" . BBC News. Retrieved 13 December 2014 ^ Hamilton, John (2000) Entertainment: A Pictorial History of the Past One Thousand Years p. 24. Retrieved 3 February 2011.

^ David Christopher (2002). "British Culture: An Introduction". p. 74. Routledge, ^ "The Directors' Top Ten Directors" . British Film Institute. Archived from the original on 17 May 2012.

^ St. Pierre, Paul Matthew (1 April 2009).

Music Hall Mimesis in British Film, 1895–1960: On the Halls on the Screen . New Jersey: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press . p. 79.

ISBN 978-1-61147-399-5 .

^ "Harry Potter becomes highest-grossing film franchise" .

The Guardian . London. 11 September 2007 . Retrieved 2 November 2010 .

^ "History of Ealing Studios" . Ealing Studios. Archived from the original on 26 July 2013 . Retrieved 9 March 2015 .

^ London Symphony Orchestra and Film Music Archived 30 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine LSO. Retrieved 30 June 2011 ^ "Frankenstein: Behind the monster smash" . BBC. 1 January 2018.

^ "Life of Brian tops comedy poll" . BBC News ( Total Film magazine poll: 29 September 2000) Retrieved 27 June 2015 ^ Statistical Yearbook 2011: 7.3 UK directors Archived 15 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine . UK Film Council.

^ "Does Andy Serkis's motion capture acting deserve an Oscar?" . The Telegraph. Retrieves 11 January 2015 ^ "Tim Webber: the man who put Sandra Bullock in space" . Evening Standard. Retrieved 17 January 2014 ^ "Barry Ronge's Classic DVD : Alice in Wonderland" .

The Times . 15 August 2010. Archived from the original on 9 October 2012.

It was made under the personal supervision of Walt Disney, and he took special care when animating British fantasy. He called them his "English Cycle".

^ "United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland" .

UNESCO World Heritage . Retrieved 8 September 2009 .

^ "English World Heritage Sites to get strongest ever protections" . Institute of Historic Building Conservation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 April 2017 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "Museum in London" . BritishMuseum.org . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "250 Years of the British Museum" .

Time . 15 January 2009. Archived from the original on 17 January 2009 . Retrieved 17 September 2009 .

^ "British Library" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "Facts and figures of the British Library" .

The British Library . Archived from the original on 31 July 2020 . Retrieved 23 May 2020 .

^ "The National Gallery" . ArtInfo.com . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ Youngs, Ian (31 October 2002).

"The art of Turner protests" .

BBC News . Retrieved 10 August 2009 .

^ a b "Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport" .

gov.uk .

^ "Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for Arts, Heritage and Tourism" .

gov.uk . Retrieved 29 January 2020 .

^ "A review of research and literature on museums and libraries" (PDF) . Arts Council. September 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2012 . Retrieved 24 February 2013 .

^ "Ten years of free museums" . 1 December 2011 . Retrieved 9 July 2020 .

^ "These Are the World's Most Popular City Destinations in 2019" .

Bloomberg.com . 3 December 2019 . Retrieved 3 December 2019 .

; "Top 100 City Destinations: 2019 Edition" .

Euromonitor International . Retrieved 3 December 2019 .

^ "Europe's largest, digital, tech and creative hub: MediaCity" (PDF) .

MediaCityUK .

^ "BBC: World's largest broadcaster & Most trusted media brand" . Media Newsline. Archived from the original on 5 October 2010 . Retrieved 23 September 2010 .

^ "About the BBC – What is the BBC" .

BBC Online . Archived from the original on 16 January 2010 . Retrieved 9 March 2015 .

^ Newswire7 (13 August 2009).

"BBC: World's largest broadcaster & Most trusted media brand" .

Media Newsline . Archived from the original on 10 May 2011 . Retrieved 19 June 2011 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "TV Licence Fee: facts & figures" . BBC Press Office. April 2010.

Archived from the original on 27 April 2011.

^ "The Work of the BBC World Service" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 October 2020 . Retrieved 16 February 2011 .

^ "News in your language" .

bbc.co.uk .

^ "BBC World Service" .

BBC News .

^ "Publishing" . Department of Culture, Media and Sport.

Archived from the original on 5 May 2011.

^ "ABCs: National daily newspaper circulation September 2008" .

The Guardian . UK. 10 October 2008 . Retrieved 17 October 2008 .

^ a b "Sheffield FC: 150 years of history" .

FIFA . 24 October 2007. Archived from the original on 25 October 2007 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "History of squash" . WorldSquash2008.com. Archived from the original on 31 August 2009 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ "History of the Game" . NRA-Rounders.co.uk. Archived from the original on 23 February 2006.

^ Paul Mitchell .

"The first international football match" . BBC . Retrieved 15 January 2015 .

^ "Hurst the hero for England in the home of football" . FIFA.com. Retrieved 15 January 2015 ^ "Tracking 30 years of TV's most watched programmes" . BBC. Retrieved 25 June 2015 ^ "England 2–1 Germany (aet): Kelly gives Lionesses Wembley final triumph" .

UEFA . 31 July 2022 . Retrieved 20 November 2023 .

^ Wrack, Suzanne (27 July 2025).

"Chloe Kelly the hero again as England beat Spain in Euro 2025 final shootout" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 27 July 2025 .

^ Underdown 2000 , p. 6.

^ Fay, Stephen (21 June 1998).

"Cricket: Flaw Lord's out of order" .

The Independent . London. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012 . Retrieved 9 September 2009 .

^ "England 1st country to win Cricket World Cup, Football World Cup and Rugby World Cup" .

India Today . 15 July 2019 . Retrieved 16 July 2023 .

^ "Father of the modern Olympics" . BBC. 22 September 2017.

^ "Origins of Rugby – Codification 'The innovation of running with the ball was introduced some time between 1820 and 1830.' " . Rugbyfootballhistory.com . Retrieved 15 August 2011 .

^ "Rugby League World Cup 2013 will provide the sport with a true test of its popularity" . The Telegraph. Retrieved 23 September 2015 ^ "Scotland is the home of golf" .

PGA Tour official website. Archived from the original on 28 August 2008 . Retrieved 4 December 2008 .

Scotland is the home of golf ...

^ Fry, Peter (July 2000). Samuel Ryder: The Man Behind the Ryder Cup. Wright Press.

^ Clarey, Christopher (5 July 2008).

"Traditional Final: It's Nadal and Federer" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

^ Kaufman & Macpherson 2005 , p. 958.

^ "Top 20 British Boxers" .

Bleacher Report . Retrieved 12 April 2011 .

^ Red Rum: Aintree favourite BBC. Retrieved 11 October 2011 ^ "The History of British Motorsport and Motor Racing at Silverstone" .

Silverstone . Silverstone.co.uk . Retrieved 31 October 2009 .

^ "F1 Champions: Dan Wheldon killed in Las Vegas" .

ESPN . Archived from the original on 22 September 2013 . Retrieved 15 December 2011 .

^ Asher, Richard; Hardy, Ed (5 August 2022).

"Where are F1 teams based? Mercedes, Ferrari, Red Bull and more" .

Autosport .

^ "Inside MotoGP™ · History" . 24 March 2016. Archived from the original on 24 March 2016 . Retrieved 30 August 2024 .

^ "Part relishes Taylor triumph" .

BBC Sport . 6 January 2003 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ "Phil Taylor player profile" .

Dartsdatabase . Archived from the original on 18 January 2019 . Retrieved 23 July 2010 .

^ "St. George – England's Patron Saint" . Britannia.com. Archived from the original on 8 March 2017 . Retrieved 1 February 2009 .

^ Good, Jonathan (2009).

The Cult of Saint George in Medieval England . Boydell Press. p. 149.

ISBN 978-1-84383-469-4 .

^ "The Great Seal of the Commonwealth of England, 1651" .

Getty Images . 18 January 2014 . Retrieved 27 October 2018 .

^ "National flowers" . Number10.gov.uk. 13 January 2003. Archived from the original on 9 September 2008 . Retrieved 8 August 2009 .

^ Smith, Jed (3 June 2005).

"England's Rose – The Official History" .

Museum of Rugby, Twickenham . RugbyNetwork.net . Retrieved 8 August 2009 .

^ "Jason Cowley loves the Commonwealth Games" .

New Statesman . Archived from the original on 11 October 2013 . Retrieved 5 October 2013 .

^ "The Great Saint George Revival" .

BBC News . 23 April 1998 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 .

Bibliography Ackroyd, Peter (2000).

London: the biography . Chatto & Windus.

ISBN 978-1-85619-716-8 .

Arlotto, Anthony (1971).

Introduction to historical linguistics . Houghton Mifflin.

ISBN 978-0-395-12615-8 .

Atkinson, T.D. (2008).

English Architecture . Read Books.

ISBN 978-1-4097-2581-7 .

Axford, Barrie (2002).

Politics: an introduction . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-25181-5 .

Ball, Martin (1993).

The Celtic Languages . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-01035-1 .

Bartlett, Robert (1999).

England Under the Norman and Angevin Kings, 1075–1225 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-925101-8 .

Bennett, James (2004).

The Anglosphere Challenge . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-7425-3333-2 .

Brewer, Ebenezer (2006).

Wordsworth Dictionary of Phrase and Fable . Wordsworth Editions.

ISBN 978-1-84022-310-1 .

Briggs, Katharine (2004).

A Dictionary of British Folk-tales in the English Language . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-203-39737-4 .

Chappell, William (1966).

The Roxburghe Ballads . New York: AMS Press.

OCLC 488599560 .

Clark, David M.; Steed, Michael ; Marshall, Sally (1973).

Greater Manchester Votes: A Guide to the New Metropolitan Authorities . Stockport: Redrose.

ISBN 978-0-9502932-0-2 .

Clemoes, Peter (2007).

Anglo-Saxon England, Volume 12 . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-03834-8 .

Cole, George (1947).

The Life of William Cobbett . Home & Van Thal.

ISBN 978-0-8492-2139-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Colgrave, Bertram (1985).

Two lives of Saint Cuthbert . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-31385-8 .

Colley, Linda (1992).

Britons: Forging the Nation, 1701–1837 . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-05737-9 .

Cox, Peter (1970).

Demography . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-09612-6 .

Crouch, David (2006).

Normans: The History of a Dynasty . Hambledon Continuum.

ISBN 978-1-85285-595-6 .

Crofton, Ian (2007).

The Kings and Queens of England . Quercus.

ISBN 978-1-84724-065-1 .

Crystal, David (2004).

The Stories of English . The Overlook Press.

ISBN 978-1-58567-601-9 .

Downes, Kerry (2007).

Christopher Wren . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-921524-9 .

Eccleshare, Julia (2002).

Beatrix Potter to Harry Potter . National Portrait Gallery.

ISBN 978-1-85514-342-5 .

Else, David (2007).

Inghilterra . EDT srl.

ISBN 978-88-6040-136-6 .

Encyclopædia Britannica (2002).

The New Encyclopædia Britannica . University of Michigan.

ISBN 978-0-85229-787-2 .

Encyclopædia Britannica (2009).

Encyclopædia Britannica . BiblioBazaar.

ISBN 978-0-559-09589-4 .

Fafinski, Stefan (2007).

English legal system . Pearson Education.

ISBN 978-1-4058-2358-6 .

Foreman, Susan (2005).

London: a musical gazetteer . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-10402-8 .

Foster, Damon (1988).

A Blake dictionary . UPNE.

ISBN 978-0-87451-436-0 .

Fowler, Kenneth (1967).

The Age of Plantagenet and Valois: The Struggle for Supremacy, 1328–1498 . Putnam.

ISBN 978-0-236-30832-3 .

Gallagher, Michael (2006).

The United Kingdom Today . London: Franklin Watts.

ISBN 978-0-7496-6488-6 .

Gearon, Liam (2002).

Education in the United Kingdom . David Fulton.

ISBN 978-1-85346-715-8 .

Goldberg, Jeremy (1996). "Introduction". In Mark Ormrod & P.G. Lindley (ed.).

The Black Death in England . Stamford: Paul Watkins.

ISBN 978-1-871615-56-2 .

Green, Tamara (2003).

The Greek & Latin roots of English . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-7425-1466-9 .

Hawkins-Dady, Mark (1996).

Reader's guide to literature in English . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-1-884964-20-6 .

Heywood, Andrew (2007).

Political Ideologies: An Introduction . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-230-52179-7 .

Higham, NJ (2002).

King Arthur: myth-making and history . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-21305-9 .

Kaufman, Will; Macpherson, Heidi (2005).

Britain and the Americas: Culture, Politics, and History . ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 978-1-85109-431-8 .

Kirby, D.P. (2000).

The earliest English kings . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-24210-3 .

Keary, Charles Francis (1882).

Outlines of primitive belief among the Indo-European races . C Scribner's Sons.

ISBN 978-0-7905-4982-8 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Kenny, Michael; English, Richard; Hayton, Richard (2008).

Beyond the Constitution? Englishness in a post-devolved Britain .

Institute for Public Policy Research .

Koch, John (2006).

Celtic Culture: A Historical Encyclopedia . ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 978-1-85109-440-0 .

Lacy, Norris (1986).

The Arthurian Encyclopedia . Garland Pub.

ISBN 978-0-8240-8745-6 .

Lax, Roger (1989).

The Great Song Thesaurus . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-505408-8 .

Levine, Israel E. (1960).

Conqueror of smallpox: Dr. Edward Jenner . Messner.

ISBN 978-0-671-63888-7 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Lowe, Roy (1971).

The English school . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-7100-6882-8 .

Lyon, Bryce Dale (1960).

A constitutional and legal history of medieval England . University of Michigan.

ISBN 978-0-393-95132-5 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Major, John (2004).

History in Quotations . Cassell.

ISBN 978-0-304-35387-3 .

Marden, Orison (2003).

Home Lover's Library . Kessinger Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-7661-5324-0 .

Massey, Gerald (2007).

A Book of the Beginnings, Vol. 1 . Cosimo.

ISBN 978-1-60206-829-2 .

McNeil, Robina; Nevell, Michael (2000).

A Guide to the Industrial Archaeology of Greater Manchester . Association for Industrial Archaeology.

ISBN 978-0-9528930-3-5 .

Molyneaux, George (2015).

The Formation of the English Kingdom in the Tenth Century . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-871791-1 .

Norbrook, David (2000).

Writing the English Republic: Poetry, Rhetoric and Politics, 1627–1660 . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-78569-3 .

O'Hanlon, Ardal (2008).

Global Airlines . Elsevier.

ISBN 978-0-7506-6439-4 .

Oakes, Elizabeth H. (2002).

A to Z of STS scientists . Facts on File Inc.

ISBN 978-0-8160-4606-5 .

Office for National Statistics (2000).

Britain 2001: The Official Handbook of the United Kingdom . London: Stationery Office Books .

ISBN 978-0-11-621278-8 .

Oppenheimer, Stephen (2006).

Origins of the British . Carroll & Graf.

ISBN 978-0-7867-1890-0 .

Pevsner, Nikolaus (1942).

An outline of European architecture . University of Michigan.

ISBN 978-0-14-061613-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Pollard, A.J. (2004).

Imagining Robin Hood . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-22308-9 .

Rankov, Boris (1994).

The Praetorian Guard . Osprey Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-85532-361-2 .

Redcliffe-Maud, John ; Wood, Bruce (1974).

English Local Government Reformed . London: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-885091-5 .

Reitan, Earl Aaron (2003).

The Thatcher Revolution . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-7425-2203-9 .

Ripley, George (1869).

The New American Cyclopædia . D. Appleton.

Rogers, Pat (2001).

The Oxford illustrated history of English literature . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-285437-7 .

Room, Adrian (2006).

Placenames of the World . McFarland.

ISBN 978-0-7864-2248-7 .

Rowse, A. L.

(1971).

Elizabethan Renaissance . Scribner.

ISBN 978-0-684-12682-1 .

Saunders, Paul (1982).

Edward Jenner, the Cheltenham years, 1795–1823 . University Press of New England.

ISBN 978-0-87451-215-1 .

Scruton, Roger (1982).

A dictionary of political thought . Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-333-33439-3 .

Singh, Udai (2009).

Decentralized democratic governance in new millennium . Concept Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-81-8069-540-7 .

Stradling, R.A. (1993).

The English musical Renaissance, 1860–1940 . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-415-03493-7 .

UK Parliament (2007).

Department for Transport annual report . Stationery Office.

ISBN 978-0-10-170952-1 .

Underdown, David (2000).

Start of Play: Cricket and Culture in Eighteenth-Century England . Allen Lane.

ISBN 978-0-7139-9330-1 .

Ward, Paul (2004).

Britishness Since 1870 . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-203-49472-1 .

Warner, Charles (1902).

Library of the world's best literature, ancient and modern . International society.

ISBN 978-1-60520-202-0 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Watson, John (1985).

English poetry of the Romantic period, 1789–1830 . Longman.

ISBN 978-0-582-49259-2 .

Webster, Frederick A.M. (1937).

Our great public schools: their traditions, customs and games . London: Ward, Lock.

OCLC 638146843 .

West, Anne (2003).

Underachievement in schools . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-24132-8 .

White, W. (1885).

The Story of a Great Delusion in a Series of Matter-of-fact Chapters . E.W. Allen . Retrieved 2 September 2021 .

White, Peter (2002).

Public transport . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-415-25772-5 .

Wilson, David; Game, Chris (2002).

Local Government in the United Kingdom (3rd ed.). Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan.

ISBN 978-0-333-94859-0 .

Withington, Robert (2008).

English Pageantry; An Historical Outline . Read Books.

ISBN 978-1-4086-8062-9 .

World Book (2007).

The World Book Encyclopedia, Volume 6 . University of Michigan.

ISBN 978-0-7166-0102-9 .

Wright, Kevin J (2008).

The Christian Travel Planner . Thomas Nelson Inc.

ISBN 978-1-4016-0374-8 .

Young, Robert JC (2008).

The Idea of English Ethnicity . Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1-4051-0129-5 .

Ziegler, Philip (2003).

The Black Death (New ed.). Sutton: Sutton Publishing Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-7509-3202-8 .

External links England at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage English Heritage – national body protecting English heritage Natural England – wildlife and the natural world of England VisitEngland – English tourist board BBC News – England – news items from BBC News relating to England GOV.UK – official website of the British Government Geographic data related to England at OpenStreetMap v t e England articles History Overviews Timeline History of England Education Local government Maritime Military English society British Isles United Kingdom Ancient Prehistoric Roman Britain Lloegyr History of Anglo-Saxons Anglo-Saxon England Heptarchy Settlement of Britain Middle Ages Kingdom of England Norman Conquest Angevin Empire Wars of the Roses Early Modern Tudor period Stuart period English Renaissance English Reformation Elizabethan era Jacobean era Civil War Union with Scotland Treaty of Union Georgian era Late Modern Regency era Victorian era Edwardian era The Blitz Contemporary Postwar Britain (1945–1979) Political history of the United Kingdom (1979–present) Social history of the United Kingdom (1979–present) Prior Kingdoms Kingdom of Essex Kingdom of Northumbria Kingdom of East Anglia Kingdom of Mercia Kingdom of Sussex Related House of Plantagenet House of Lancaster House of York Geography Counties Districts Gardens Islands Parishes Places Regions Towns Politics Economy Middle Ages Elizabethan government Independence Monarchy Parliament Culture Afternoon tea Anglophilia Art Castles Country clothing Cuisine Demographics Education Folklore Fête Landscape garden Identity Innovations and discoveries English language in England Middle England Museums People list Religion Church of England Science education Sunday Roast Sport Cricket national team Football The Football Association national team Rugby league Rugby Football League national team Rugby union Rugby Football Union national team Wimbledon Symbols Anthem Coat of arms Flags national flag Heraldry Oak tree Royal standards Royal supporters Saint George Saint George's Day Tudor rose Outline Category Portal Articles related to England v t e United Kingdom articles History Chronology Formation Union of England and Scotland Act 1603 Treaty of Union Acts of Union 1707 Union with Scotland (Amendment) Act 1707 Georgian era Victorian era Edwardian era First World War Interwar Second World War civilian military Postwar political social Since 1979 political social Membership of the European Union (1973–2020) By topic Economic Empire Foreign relations 1814–1919 Law enforcement Maritime Mass surveillance Military Taxation Women's history Geography Administrative Counties of the United Kingdom Countries of the United Kingdom Crown Dependencies Overseas territories City status Towns Former colonies Physical British Isles terminology Great Britain Climate change Coastline Geology Lakes and lochs Mountains Rivers Volcanoes Resources Agriculture Energy biodiesel coal geothermal hydraulic frac.

hydroelectricity marine North Sea oil Renewable energy solar wind Fishing English Scottish Welsh Hunting Materials forestry mining Wildlife fauna flora Politics Constitution Corruption Devolution Elections By-elections Foreign relations Human rights LGBT Judiciary Law Law enforcement Local government Monarchy monarchs republicanism Nationality Parliament House of Commons House of Lords Political parties Female party leaders Political scandals Shadow Cabinet Government Cabinet list Civil service Departments Ministers list Prime Minister list Military His Majesty's Naval Service Royal Navy Royal Marines British Army Royal Air Force Weapons of mass destruction Economy Banks Bank of England Budget Economic geography Free trade agreements Income Manufacturing Pound sterling (currency) Science and technology Stock exchanges ( London Exchange ) Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Transport Air transport Bus transport Driving Roads Rail transport Society Cannabis Crime Demography Drug policy Education Environmental inequality Environmental issues Ethnic groups Health Homelessness England Scotland Housing Hunger Immigration Innovation Languages Life expectancy Mental health Poverty Prostitution Public holidays Racism Social care Social class Suicide Universal basic income (UBI) Water supply and sanitation Waste Welfare state Culture Art Anthem Cinema Cuisine Wine Identity Literature Media Music Religion Sport Symbols Theatre Stereotypes of the British World Heritage Sites Anglosphere Countries of the United Kingdom England History social timeline Geography Politics Law Economy tourism Education Health care Homelessness Culture Religion Symbols Northern Ireland History Geography Politics Assembly Executive First Minister and Deputy First Minister Law Economy tourism Education Health care Culture Religion Symbols Scotland History timeline Geography Politics Parliament Government First Minister Law Economy tourism Education Health care Homelessness Culture Religion Symbols Wales History Geography Politics Senedd Government First Minister Law Economy tourism Education Health care Culture Religion Symbols Outline Index Category Portal v t e Countries, territories and dependencies of the British Crown Countries of the United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Crown Dependencies Bailiwick of Guernsey Alderney Guernsey Sark Bailiwick of Jersey Isle of Man Overseas territories Akrotiri and Dhekelia 1 Anguilla Bermuda British Antarctic Territory 2 British Indian Ocean Territory British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Falkland Islands Gibraltar Montserrat Pitcairn, Henderson, Ducie and Oeno Islands Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Ascension Island Saint Helena Tristan da Cunha Gough Island South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Turks and Caicos Islands Former colonies List of countries that have gained independence from the United Kingdom 1 Sovereign Base Areas .

2 Partial suspension of sovereignty due to the Antarctic Treaty .

v t e British Isles Names Terminology Alba Albion Cymru Prydain Britain Éire Hibernia Politics Sovereign states Ireland United Kingdom ( England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales ) Crown Dependencies Bailiwick of Guernsey Jersey Isle of Man Political cooperation Ireland–United Kingdom relations British–Irish Council British–Irish Intergovernmental Conference British–Irish Parliamentary Assembly Common Travel Area Geography Island groups Channel Islands Islands of the Clyde Great Britain Hebrides Inner Outer Ireland Isle of Man Northern Isles Orkney Shetland Isles of Scilly Lists of islands of Bailiwick of Guernsey Ireland Bailiwick of Jersey Isle of Man United Kingdom England Scotland Wales History ( outline ) Island groups Ireland Current states Ireland United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Guernsey Jersey Isle of Man Former states Irish Free State Kingdom of England Principality of Wales Kingdom of Great Britain Kingdom of Ireland Kingdom of Scotland United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland Society Modern languages Germanic English Scots Celtic Cornish Scottish Gaelic Irish Manx Welsh Romance Auregnais French Guernésiais Jèrriais Sercquiais Other British Sign Language Irish Sign Language Northern Ireland Sign Language Shelta People British Cornish English English Gypsies Irish Irish Travellers Kale Manx Northern Irish Scottish Ulster-Scots Welsh v t e 1974–1996 ← Ceremonial counties of England → current Bedfordshire Berkshire Bristol Buckinghamshire Cambridgeshire Cheshire Cornwall Cumbria Derbyshire Devon Dorset Durham East Riding of Yorkshire East Sussex Essex Gloucestershire Greater London Greater Manchester Hampshire Herefordshire Hertfordshire Isle of Wight Kent Lancashire Leicestershire Lincolnshire City of London Merseyside Norfolk Northamptonshire Northumberland North Yorkshire Nottinghamshire Oxfordshire Rutland Shropshire Somerset South Yorkshire Staffordshire Suffolk Surrey Tyne and Wear Warwickshire West Midlands West Sussex West Yorkshire Wiltshire Worcestershire Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Norway Israel Geographic MusicBrainz area Academics CiNii Other IdRef NARA İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX 53°08′N 1°23′W ﻿ / ﻿ 53.13°N 1.38°W ﻿ / 53.13; -1.38 NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5cf665967b‐kjhzz
Cached time: 20250818154025
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 4.359 seconds
Real time usage: 4.929 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 32399/1000000
Revision size: 233753/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1010727/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 138732/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 106/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1302283/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.805/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24673468/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 4057.042      1 -total
 45.78% 1857.223      2 Template:Reflist
 24.92% 1011.093    190 Template:Cite_web
 14.25%  578.139     99 Template:Cite_book
  8.39%  340.563     62 Template:Cite_news
  8.28%  336.044      1 Template:Infobox_UK_country
  8.20%  332.715      1 Template:Infobox_country
  4.08%  165.578     11 Template:Sfn
  3.45%  139.905      2 Template:Country_topics
  3.02%  122.364      1 Template:ISO_3166_code Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:9316:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818154025 and revision id 1305990814. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=England&oldid=1305990814 " Categories : England Countries and territories where English is an official language Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom by country Christian states Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2017 CS1: unfit URL Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with dead external links from June 2016 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use British English from April 2012 Use dmy dates from April 2021 Articles containing Old English (ca. 450-1100)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Scottish Gaelic-language text Articles containing Welsh-language text Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing potentially dated statements from September 2022 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014 Articles with hAudio microformats CS1 errors: ISBN date Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 08:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents England 247 languages Add topic

