Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The problem 2 The neocatastrophism resolution 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Neocatastrophism 7 languages Español 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Polski Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the idea that Earth has been affected in the past by short-lived, violent worldwide events, see Catastrophism .

Hypothesis for lack of detected aliens Gamma-ray bursts might have regulated the advent of intelligent life Neocatastrophism is the hypothesis that life-exterminating events such as gamma-ray bursts have acted as a galactic regulation mechanism in the Milky Way upon the emergence of complex life in its habitable zone .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] It is one of several proposed solutions to the Fermi paradox since it provides a mechanism which would have delayed the advent of intelligent beings in local galaxies near Earth .

The problem [ edit ] It is estimated that Earth-like planets in the Milky Way started forming 9 billion years ago, and that their median age is 6.4 ± 0.7 Ga .

[ 4 ] Moreover, 75% of stars in the galactic habitable zone are older than the Sun .

[ 5 ] This makes the existence of potential planets with evolved intelligent life more likely than not to be older than that of the Earth ( 4.54 Ga ). This creates an observational dilemma since even slower-than-lightspeed interstellar travel could in theory take only 5 to 50 million years to colonize the galaxy.

[ 6 ] This leads to a conundrum first posed in 1950 by the physicist Enrico Fermi in his namesake paradox : "Why are no aliens or their artifacts physically here?" [ 7 ] The neocatastrophism resolution [ edit ] The hypothesis posits that astrobiological evolution is subject to regulation mechanisms that arrest or postpone the advent of complex creatures capable of interstellar communication and traveling technology. These regulation mechanisms act to temporarily sterilize planets of biology in the galactic habitable zone . The main proposed regulation mechanism is gamma-ray bursts.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Part of the neocatastrophism hypothesis is that stellar evolution produces a decreasing frequency of such catastrophic events increasing the length of the "window" in which intelligent life might arise as galaxies age. According to modeling, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] this creates the possibility of a phase transition at which point a galaxy turns from a place that is essentially dead (with a few pockets of simple life) to one that is crowded with complex life forms.

See also [ edit ] Astronomy portal Biology portal Anthropic principle Drake equation Goldilocks Principle Great Filter Mediocrity principle Planetary habitability Rare Earth hypothesis References [ edit ] ^ a b c Cirković MM, Vukotić B. (2008). Astrobiological phase transition: towards resolution of Fermi's paradox. 
Orig Life Evol Biosph. 38(6):535-47.

doi : 10.1007/s11084-008-9149-y PMID 18855114 ^ a b c Ćirković M.M. (2009).

Fermi's paradox: The last challenge for copernicanism?

Serbian Astronomical Journal 178:1-20 doi : 10.2298/SAJ0978001C ^ a b c Cirkovic, M. M. Vukotic, B. (2009).

Astrobiological Landscape and Neocatastrophism.

[ permanent dead link ] Publications of the Astronomical Observatory of Belgrade,86:193-19 ^ Lineweaver C.H. (2001).

An Estimate of the Age Distribution of Terrestrial Planets in the Universe: Quantifying Metallicity as a Selection Effect.

Icarus, 151:307-313 doi : 10.1006/icar.2001.6607 .

^ Lineweaver CH, Fenner Y, Gibson BK. (2004).

The galactic habitable zone and the age distribution of complex life in the Milky Way.

Science. 303(5654):59-62.

doi : 10.1126/science.1092322 PMID 14704421 ^ Crawford, I.A., "Where are They? Maybe we are alone in the galaxy after all" Archived 2009-03-26 at the Wayback Machine , Scientific American, July 2000, 38-43, (2000) ^ Webb S. (2002).

If the universe is teeming with aliens, where is everybody? Fifty solutions to the Fermi paradox and the problem of extraterrestrial life . Copernicus Books (Springer Verlag) v t e Astrobiology Disciplines Astrochemistry Astrophysics Atmospheric sciences Biochemistry Evolutionary biology Exoplanetology Geomicrobiology Microbiology Paleontology Planetary oceanography Planetary science Main topics Abiogenesis Allan Hills 84001 Biomolecule Biosignature Drake equation Earliest known life forms Earth analog Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial sample curation Extremophiles Hypothetical types of biochemistry List of microorganisms tested in outer space Ocean planet Panspermia Planetary protection Search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) Yamato meteorite Planetary habitability Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Space missions Earth orbit BIO BIOCORE Biolab Bion BIOPAN Biosatellite program E-MIST ERA Eu:CROPIS EXOSTACK EXPOSE Lunar Micro Ecosystem O/OREOS OREOcube Tanpopo VEGGIE Mars Beagle 2 Fobos-Grunt Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover Mars 2020 Perseverance rover Phoenix Tianwen-1 Zhurong rover Trace Gas Orbiter Viking Comets and asteroids Hayabusa2 OSIRIS-REx Rosetta Heliocentric BioSentinel Planned Dragonfly Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover Proposed Breakthrough Enceladus BRUIE CAESAR Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder‎ Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Orbilander Europa Lander ExoLance Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Mars sample return mission Oceanus THEO Trident Cancelled and undeveloped Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection Kazachok Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher MELOS Northern Light Red Dragon Terrestrial Planet Finder Institutions and programs Astrobiology Society of Britain Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Breakthrough Starshot Carl Sagan Institute Center for Life Detection Science European Astrobiology Network Association NASA Astrobiology Institute Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Ocean Worlds Exploration Program Spanish Astrobiology Center‎ Category Commons v t e Interstellar communications Programs Active SETI Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence Search for extraterrestrial intelligence Messages List of interstellar radio messages A Message from Earth Across the Universe Arecibo message Bracewell probe Cosmic Call CosmicOS Hello from Earth Pioneer plaque Teen Age Message Voyager Golden Record People Frank Drake Ann Druyan Hans Freudenthal Sebastian von Hoerner Nikolai Kardashev Jon Lomberg Carl Sagan Linda Salzman Sagan Iosif Shklovsky Aleksandr Zaitsev Other Alien language Archaeology, Anthropology, and Interstellar Communication Astrobiology Astrolinguistics Drake equation Extraterrestrial life Lincos Fermi paradox Prix Guzman San Marino Scale Category Space Portal v t e Extraterrestrial life Events and objects Shergotty meteorite (1865) Nakhla meteorite (1911) Murchison meteorite (1969) Viking lander biological experiments (1976) Allan Hills 77005 (1977) Allan Hills 84001 (1984) Yamato 000593 (2000) CI1 fossils (2011) Signals of interest Misidentified CP 1919 (misidentified pulsar) CTA-102 (misidentified quasar) Stars KIC 8462852 (unusual light fluctuations) EPIC 204278916 (unusual light fluctuations) VVV-WIT-07 (unusual light fluctuations) HD 164595 signal (unknown origin) Other SHGb02+14a (radio source) Wow! signal (inconclusive) Fast radio burst (unknown origin) BLC1 (radio signal) Life in the Universe Earliest known life forms Planetary habitability in the Solar System Life on Venus Life on Mars Life on Titan Planetary habitability Catalog of Nearby Habitable Systems Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems List of potentially habitable exoplanets Planetary habitability Superhabitable planet Tholin Space missions Beagle 2 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection BioSentinel Curiosity rover Darwin Dragonfly Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover ExoLance EXPOSE Foton-M3 Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Geyser Hopper Mars sample-return mission Mars 2020 Northern Light Opportunity rover Perseverance rover SpaceX Red Dragon Spirit rover Tanpopo Titan Mare Explorer Venus In Situ Explorer Viking 1 Viking 2 Interstellar communication Active SETI Allen Telescope Array Arecibo message Arecibo Observatory Berkeley SETI Research Center Bracewell probe Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence Gauss's Pythagorean right triangle proposal Astrolinguistics Lincos language NIROSETI Pioneer plaque Project Cyclops Project Ozma Project Phoenix SERENDIP Search for extraterrestrial intelligence SETI@home setiQuest Voyager Golden Record Water hole Xenolinguistics Types of alleged extraterrestrial beings Energy beings Grey aliens Insectoids Little green men Nordic aliens Reptilian humanoids Hypotheses Cosmic pluralism Directed panspermia Drake equation Extraterrestrial hypothesis Fermi paradox Hypothetical types of biochemistry Interplanetary contamination Kardashev scale Mediocrity principle Non-planetary abiogenesis Panspermia Fermi paradox solutions Aestivation hypothesis Berserker hypothesis Dark forest hypothesis Firstborn hypothesis Great Filter Hart–Tipler conjecture Neocatastrophism Planetarium hypothesis Rare Earth hypothesis Zoo hypothesis Related topics Ancient astronauts Astrobiology Astroecology Biosignature Brookings Report Exotheology Extraterrestrials in fiction Extremophile Hemolithin History of the extraterrestrial life debate Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Noogenesis Planetary protection Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact Post-detection policy San Marino Scale Technosignature UFO religion Xenoarchaeology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neocatastrophism&oldid=1231055681 " Categories : Astrobiology Origin of life Fermi paradox Biological hypotheses Disasters Astronomical controversies Astronomical hypotheses Gamma-ray bursts Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 June 2024, at 06:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neocatastrophism 7 languages Add topic

