Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Cultural background 3 Language 4 Notable people 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Mauritian Australians 2 languages مصرى Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Mauritian Australians" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ethnic group Mauritian Australians Total population 60,000 estimate as of 2017 (by birth and ancestry) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Regions with significant populations Mauritius-born/ ancestry people by state or territory Victoria 32,000 [ 1 ] New South Wales 12,260 [ 1 ] Western Australia 11,200 [ 3 ] Queensland 3,678 [ 3 ] Languages English · Mauritian · French Religion Christianity · Hinduism · Islam · Other Related ethnic groups African Australians Mauritian Australians are Australians of Mauritian origin, including Mauritius -born Australians and Australians of Mauritian ancestry.

In 2021, the Australian census recorded 25,981 Mauritius-born people in Australia, an increase of 6.8 per cent from the 2016 census .

As of 2021, the state with the largest population of Mauritius-born Australians was Victoria with a population of 12,341, followed by New South Wales (5,794), Western Australia (5,208), and Queensland (1,797).

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Based on the trading relationship between Mauritius and Australia which was established in 1803, the first Mauritian migrants arrived in Australia before the 1901 federation as convicts , fossickers during the gold rush , or sugar men who were skilled sugarcane workers who helped to develop Queensland 's sugar industry .

[ 5 ] Right after World War II the migration of Mauritians to Australia resumed, but was restricted to the privileged minority of white Franco-Mauritians due to the White Australia policy which prevailed until 1973.

[ 6 ] Especially in the years leading to the 1968 Independence of Mauritius there was a significant increase in the number of Franco-Mauritians , Mulatto , and Mauritian Creoles who migrated permanently to Australia as a result of the anti-Hindu hegemony fear campaign which was financed by the white Franco-Mauritian owners of sugar estates and implemented by Gaetan Duval 's Parti Mauricien Social Démocrate and the local press. Indeed a climate of fear and uncertainty resulted from the fear campaign which resulted in lynching, murders and racial riots which broke out in 1965 , 1967 , and 1968 .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Cultural background [ edit ] As Mauritius is a country with a multicultural and multiethnic society , Mauritians have different and diverse ethnic backgrounds. 
In the 2021 Census, most Mauritius-born people living in Australia reported being of Mauritian descent (13,673), followed by those of French (5,674), Indian (3,873), and Chinese descent (2,751).

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Based on ethnic lines, Creole Mauritians (Black and mixed-race) represent 50% of the community in Australia, this group were largest numbers leaving Mauritius after independence from colonial rule (Britain, and previously, France) in 1968.

[ citation needed ] Chinese-Mauritians make up 7%, arriving mostly during the 80s and 90s, those of Indian ancestry are 20-25% and Creoles of African ancestry 20-25%.

[ citation needed ] Most of the Afro-Mauritians and Indians have arrived after the 2000s, and are the fastest growing part of the community.

[ citation needed ] Mauritian-Australians have a growing presence in Australian popular culture , including in music, literature, and television.

[ 12 ] Aisha in The Slap is a notable example, identified in the TV series adaptation as 'Mauritian-Australian'.

[ 13 ] Havana Brown is a significant Australian musician of Mauritian background.

Language [ edit ] The main languages spoken by Mauritius-born people in Australia were French (12,545), English (5,665) and Mauritian (2,654).

[ 2 ] [ 14 ] [ 11 ] Note that Australia has a large French-speaking Mauritian community in relation to percentage of the overall Mauritian community, they represent 1.4% of the Mauritian community, although numbers would be much higher, but most of the second generation speak English. The French speakers using the language as mother tongue represent the white Franco-Mauritians , Mulattos and gens de couleur (mixed-race Creoles) ethnic groups, making up at least 50% of the Mauritian community in Australia. In comparison, in Mauritius 4.1% of the population speaks French as a first language (mother tongue) with 68.6% using French as a second language making a total of 72.7% French speakers.

[ 15 ] Notable people [ edit ] Dylan Collard - footballer Marlee Francois - footballer Tyrese Francois - footballer Jake Adelson - footballer Nick Sullivan - footballer Nikolai Topor-Stanley - footballer, former Socceroo Jordi Valadon - footballer Miguel Di Pizio - footballer Ludovic Boi - footballer Orwin Castel - footballer Jean-Paul De Marigny - footballer, Football Manager, former Socceroo Marcus Dimanche - footballer Patrick Kisnorbo - footballer, Football Manager, former Socceroo Cooper Legrand - footballer Doug Ithier - footballer Stacey Alleaume - Australian soprano singer Ivan Astruc - Australian rules footballer Angry Anderson - rock singer-songwriter, television presenter-reporter and actor Ralph Babet - Senator Shalom Brune-Franklin - actress Havana Brown - DJ, singer, recording artist, record producer and dancer.

Denis Constantin - badminton player Edward Duyker - historian, biographer and author Drozena Eden - Australian rules footballer Laurina Fleure - Model and TV Personality Andrew Florent - tennis player Oliver Florent - Australian rules footballer Genevieve Gregson - Athlete Mahesh Jadu - actor Bob Joshua - politician Bert La Bonté - actor John La Nauze - historian Fabrice Lapierre - long jumper Jerome Laxale - politician Frederick Manton - politician Disco Montego - R&B & Dance group Thomas Shadrach Peersahib - herbalist, teacher, activist Lloyd Rees - painter Aaron Rouge-Serret - Athlete Anabelle Smith - Diving Arthur Stace - soldier Starley - singer and songwriter Anne-Marie Schwirtlich - Director-General of the National Library of Australia Julian Barbara Waugh - Mayor and Politician Bernard Zuel - journalist See also [ edit ] Australia portal Africa portal Mauritians References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Home" .

amasydney.net .

^ a b "The Mauritius-born Community: Historical Background" .

Australian Government, Department of Immigration and Border Protection (2011 census) . 19 November 2013. Archived from the original on 13 February 2014 . Retrieved 23 January 2014 .

^ a b "Cultural Atlas — Mauritian Culture - Mauritians in Australia" . Archived from the original on 6 July 2018 . Retrieved 6 July 2018 .

^ "2021 Census Country of birth QuickStats" .

^ Scroope, Chara.

"Mauritians in Australia" .

www.sbs.com.au . Special Broadcasting Service (SBS) . Retrieved 9 August 2017 .

^ "Migration Act 1966 - Parliamentary Education Office" .

peo.gov.au . Retrieved 19 May 2025 .

^ "Community Information Summary: Mauritius-born" (PDF) .

Australian Government Department of Immigration and Citizenship . February 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 October 2016 . Retrieved 23 October 2016 .

^ "Publication: Eric Bahloo, l'affaire Azor Adelaïde" . Le Mauricien . Retrieved 20 November 2011 .

^ Scroope, Chara.

"Mauritians in Australia" .

www.sbs.com.au . Special Broadcasting Service (SBS) . Retrieved 9 August 2017 .

^ "2021 People in Australia who were born in Mauritius, Census Country of birth QuickStats Australian Bureau of Statistics" .

www.abs.gov.au . Retrieved 11 June 2025 .

^ a b "Mauritian - Population Statistics" .

Cultural Atlas . 1 January 2025 . Retrieved 19 May 2025 .

^ Cormack, Bridget (17 September 2011).

"A real actor" . The Australian . Retrieved 23 October 2016 .

^ "Q & A with Christos Tsiolkas about the  "The Slap" television series" .

Meanjin . Archived from the original on 4 October 2013.

^ "Local Language: The Mauritian Creole" .

www.lexpressproperty.com . 20 July 2015 . Retrieved 19 May 2025 .

^ Collectif (22 March 2007).

La francophonie dans le monde 2006-2007 (édition 2006-2007 ed.). Paris: Nathan.

ISBN 9782098821774 .

v t e Mauritian diaspora Australia France United Kingdom United States v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mauritian_Australians&oldid=1298563298 " Categories : Australian people of Mauritian descent African diaspora in Australia Mauritian diaspora Hidden categories: Use Australian English from January 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from January 2018 Articles needing additional references from November 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 This page was last edited on 3 July 2025, at 07:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mauritian Australians 2 languages Add topic

