Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of ACARS 2 System description and functions Toggle System description and functions subsection 2.1 The ground processing system 3 ACARS message types Toggle ACARS message types subsection 3.1 OOOI events 3.2 Flight management system interface 3.3 Equipment health and maintenance data 3.4 Ping messages 3.5 Manually sent messages 4 Communication details 5 Role of ACARS in air accidents and incidents 6 Uses of ACARS outside aviation 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents ACARS 25 languages العربية Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Slovenščina Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System ) Aircraft digital message communication system Example of an ACARS message In aviation , ACARS ( / ˈ eɪ k ɑːr z / ; an acronym for Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System ) is a digital data communication system for transmission of short messages between aircraft and ground stations via airband radio or satellite . The protocol was designed by ARINC and deployed in 1978, [ 1 ] using the Telex format. More ACARS radio stations were added subsequently by SITA .

History of ACARS [ edit ] Prior to the introduction of datalink in aviation, all communication between the aircraft and ground personnel was performed by the flight crew using voice communication, using either VHF or HF voice radios. In many cases, the voice-relayed information involved dedicated radio operators and digital messages sent to an airline teletype system or successor systems.

Further, the hourly rates for flight and cabin crew salaries depended on whether the aircraft was airborne or not, and if on the ground whether it was at the gate or not. The flight crews reported these times by voice to geographically dispersed radio operators. Airlines wanted to eliminate self-reported times to preclude inaccuracies, whether accidental or deliberate. Doing so also reduced the need for human radio operators to receive the reports.

In an effort to reduce crew workload and improve data integrity, the engineering department at ARINC introduced the ACARS system in July 1978, as an automated time clock system.

Teledyne Controls produced the avionics and the launch customer was Piedmont Airlines .

[ 2 ] The original expansion of the abbreviation was "Arinc Communications Addressing and Reporting System".

[ 3 ] Later, it was changed to "Aircraft Communications, Addressing and Reporting System". The original avionics standard was ARINC 597, which defined an ACARS Management Unit consisting of discrete inputs for the doors, parking brake and weight on wheels sensors to automatically determine the flight phase and generate and send as telex messages. It also contained a MSK modem , which was used to transmit the reports over existing VHF voice radios. Global standards for ACARS were prepared by the Airlines Electronic Engineering Committee (AEEC). The first day of ACARS operations saw about 4,000 transactions, but it did not experience widespread use by the major airlines until the 1980s.

Early ACARS systems were extended over the years to support aircraft with digital data bus interfaces, flight management systems , and thermal printers .

System description and functions [ edit ] ACARS as a term refers to the complete air and ground system, consisting of equipment on board, equipment on the ground, and a service provider.

On-board ACARS equipment [ 4 ] consists of end systems with a router , which routes messages through the air-ground subnetwork.

Ground equipment is made up of a network of radio transceivers managed by a central site computer called AFEPS (Arinc Front End Processor System), which handles and routes messages. Generally, ground ACARS units are either government agencies [ clarification needed ] [ dubious – discuss ] such as the Federal Aviation Administration , an airline operations headquarters, or, for small airlines or general aviation, a third-party subscription service.

[ citation needed ] Usually government agencies are responsible for clearances , while airline operations handle gate assignments, maintenance, and passenger needs.

The ground processing system [ edit ] Ground system provision is the responsibility of either a participating air navigation service provider (ANSP) or an aircraft operator. Aircraft operators often contract out the function to either datalink service provider (DSP) or to a separate service provider. Messages from aircraft, especially automatically generated ones, can be pre-configured according to message type so that they are automatically delivered to the appropriate recipient just as ground-originated messages can be configured to reach the correct aircraft.

[ citation needed ] The ACARS equipment on the aircraft is linked to that on the ground by the DSP. Because the ACARS network is modeled after the point-to-point telex network, all messages come to a central processing location to be routed.

ARINC and SITA are the two primary service providers, with smaller operations from others in some areas. Some areas have multiple service providers.

ACARS message types [ edit ] ACARS messages may be of three broad types: Air traffic control messages [ 5 ] are used to request or provide clearances.

Aeronautical operational control Airline administrative control Control messages are used to communicate between the aircraft and its base, with messages either standardized according to ARINC Standard 633, or user-defined in accordance with ARINC Standard 618.

[ 6 ] The contents of such messages can be OOOI events, flight plans, weather information, equipment health, status of connecting flights, etc.

OOOI events [ edit ] A major function of ACARS is to automatically detect and report the start of each major flight phase, called OOOI events in the industry ( o ut of the gate, o ff the ground, o n the ground, and i nto the gate).

[ 7 ] These OOOI events are detected using input from aircraft sensors mounted on doors, parking brakes, and struts. At the start of each flight phase, an ACARS message is transmitted to the ground describing the flight phase, the time at which it occurred, and other related information such as the amount of fuel on board or the flight origin and destination. These messages are used to track the status of aircraft and crews.

Flight management system interface [ edit ] ACARS interfaces with flight management systems (FMS), acting as the communication system for flight plans and weather information to be sent from the ground to the FMS. This enables the airline to update the FMS while in flight, and allows the flight crew to evaluate new weather conditions or alternative flight plans.

Equipment health and maintenance data [ edit ] ACARS is used to send information from the aircraft to ground stations about the conditions of various aircraft systems and sensors in real-time. Maintenance faults and abnormal events are also transmitted to ground stations along with detailed messages, which are used by the airline for monitoring equipment health, and to better plan repair and maintenance activities.

Ping messages [ edit ] Automated ping messages are used to test an aircraft's connection with the communication station.

[ 8 ] In the event that the aircraft ACARS unit has been silent for longer than a preset time interval, the ground station can ping the aircraft (directly or via satellite). A ping response indicates a healthy ACARS communication.

Manually sent messages [ edit ] ACARS interfaces with interactive display units in the cockpit, which flight crews can use to send and receive technical messages and reports to or from ground stations, such as a request for weather information or clearances or the status of connecting flights. The response from the ground station is received on the aircraft via ACARS as well. Each airline customizes ACARS to this role to suit its needs.

Communication details [ edit ] ACARS messages may be sent using a choice of communication methods, such as VHF or HF, either direct to ground or via satellite, using minimum-shift keying (MSK) modulation.

[ 9 ] ACARS can send messages over VHF if a VHF ground station network exists in the current area of the aircraft. VHF communication is line-of-sight propagation and the typical range is up to 200 nautical miles (370 km) at high altitudes. Where VHF is absent, an HF network or satellite communication may be used if available. Satellite coverage may be limited at high latitudes (trans-polar flights).

Sample ACARS VHF transmission The sound of an ACARS VHF transmission made on 130.025 MHz, recorded at Petaluma , California on 15 August 2006. The short "beep" at the beginning of the message is the "alert" preamble in the protocol.

[ 10 ] The remainder of the clip -- which sounds like radio static -- is the actual data stream of the message.

Problems playing this file? See media help .

A typical ACARS VHF transmission.

Mode A Aircraft B-18722 Ack NAK Block id 2 Flight CI5118 Label B9 Msg No.

L05A Message /KLAX.TI2/024KLAXA91A1 Role of ACARS in air accidents and incidents [ edit ] In the wake of the crash of Air France Flight 447 in 2009, there was discussion about making ACARS an "online- black-box " [ 11 ] to reduce the effects of the loss of a flight recorder. However no changes were made to the ACARS system.

In March 2014, ACARS messages and Doppler analysis of ACARS satellite communication data played a very significant role in efforts to trace Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 to an approximate location. While the primary ACARS system on board MH370 had been switched off, a second ACARS system called Classic Aero was active as long as the plane was powered up, and kept trying to establish a connection to an Inmarsat satellite every hour.

[ 12 ] The ACARS unit on the Airbus A320 of EgyptAir Flight 804 sent ACARS messages indicating the presence of smoke in toilets and the avionics bay prior to the aircraft's crash into the Mediterranean Sea on May 19, 2016, which killed all 66 persons on board.

[ 13 ] On 24 February 2021, the ACARS unit of a South African Airways flight from Johannesburg 's OR Tambo International Airport to Brussels sent an ACARS message about an “alpha floor event”, which was activated when the Airbus A340-600's envelope protection system activated to override the pilots to prevent the plane from stalling on take-off.

[ 14 ] On 19 February 2023, there were numerous ACARS reports of a large white balloon near Hawaii in the aircraft lanes.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Uses of ACARS outside aviation [ edit ] In 2002, ACARS was added to the NOAA Observing System Architecture . Thus commercial aircraft can act as weather data providers for weather agencies to use in their forecast models, sending meteorological observations like winds and temperatures over the ACARS network. NOAA provides real-time weather maps.

See also [ edit ] High Frequency Data Link (HFDL) Acronyms and abbreviations in avionics Aeronautical Telecommunication Network (ATN) Future Air Navigation System (FANS) SELCAL References [ edit ] ^ Carlsson, Barbara (October 2002).

"GLOBALink/VHF: The Future Is Now" (PDF) .

The Global Link (Press release). p. 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 February 2006 . Retrieved 24 January 2007 .

^ "ACARS is in and Working" , Piedmonitor , Piedmont Airlines, May–June 1978 , retrieved 7 January 2024 ^ "ARINC Communications Addressing and Reporting System" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2011 . Retrieved 22 September 2011 .

^ "ARINC Characteristic 758-2 Communications Management Unit (CMU) Mark 2" . ARINC. July 2005. Archived from the original on 10 June 2012 . Retrieved 27 March 2014 .

^ "ARINC Specification 623-3Character-Oriented Air Traffic Service (ATS) Applications" . ARINC. April 2005. Archived from the original on 10 May 2012 . Retrieved 28 March 2014 .

^ "ARINC Specification 618-7 Air/Ground Character-Oriented Protocol Specification" . ARINC. June 2013. Archived from the original on 2014-03-28 . Retrieved 28 March 2014 .

^ "OOOI Data" .

FAA .

^ Hoppenbrouwers, Jeroen.

"ACARS documentation" .

ACARS . Retrieved 26 March 2014 .

^ Tooley, Michael H.; Wyatt, David (2007).

Aircraft communications and navigation systems: Principles, operation and maintenance . Amsterdam: Elsevier/Butterworth-Heineman.

ISBN 978-0750681377 .

OCLC 127107537 .

^ Anderson, Lionel K. (2010).

ACARS – A Users Guide . Las Atalayas. p. 5.

ISBN 978-1-4457-8847-0 . Retrieved 24 March 2014 .

^ "Online-Black-Box soll Crashs schneller aufklären" [Online Black Box to solve crashes faster].

Spiegel-Online (in German). 6 June 2009 . Retrieved 6 June 2009 .

^ Rayner, Gordon; Collins, Nick.

"MH370: Britain finds itself at centre of blame game over crucial delays" .

The Telegraph . UK . Retrieved 28 March 2014 .

^ Hradecky, Simon (22 May 2017).

"Crash: Egypt A320 over Mediterranean on May 19th 2016, fire on board, traces of explosives found" .

The Aviation Herald . Salzburg, Austria . Retrieved 22 May 2017 .

^ "SAA probed after 'extraordinarily dangerous' take-off" .

BusinessLIVE .

^ Rogoway, Tyler; Trevithick, Joseph (February 20, 2023).

"Pilots Advised Of Large White High-Altitude Balloon East Of Hawaii (Updated)" .

The Drive .

^ "Pilot reports "large white balloon" floating near Hawaii" .

Newsweek . February 20, 2023.

External links [ edit ] ARINC , inventors of ACARS acarsd , free ACARS decoder software for Linux/Windows ARINC Standards Document List , list and describe the ARINC standards v t e Earth-based meteorological equipment and instrumentation Anemometer Atmometer Barograph Barometer Ceiling balloon Ceiling projector Ceilometer Dark adaptor goggles Dewcell Disdrometer Dropsonde Field mill Heat flux sensor Hygrometer Ice accretion indicator Lidar Lightning detector Nephelometer Nephoscope Pan evaporation Pyranometer Pyrheliometer Present weather sensor Radiosonde Rain gauge Snow gauge Snowboard Snow pillow SODAR Solarimeter Sounding rocket Stevenson screen Sunshine recorder Tethersonde Thermo-hygrograph Thermometer Tide gauge Transmissometer Weather balloon Weather buoy Weather radar Weather vane Whole sky camera Wind profiler Windsock v t e Earth-based meteorological observation systems and weather stations General Aircraft report (AIREP) Automated airport weather station Automatic weather station (AWS) Binary Universal Form for the Representation of meteorological data (BUFR) Dropsonde Hurricane Hunters Mesonet Meteorological Aerodrome Report (METAR) Pilot report (PIREP) Weather ship By region Worldwide Aircraft Communication Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS) Aircraft Meteorological Data Relay (AMDAR) Argo Automated Meteorological Data Acquisition System (AMeDAS) Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis (DART) FluxNet Project (FluxNet) Global Atmosphere Watch (GAW) Global Sea Level Observing System (GLOSS) Prediction and Research Moored Array in the Atlantic (PIRATA) Research Moored Array for African-Asian-Australian Monsoon Analysis and Prediction (RAMA) Tropical Atmosphere Ocean project (TAO/TRITON) Voluntary observing ship program United States Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) NEXRAD radar Snow Telemetry (SNOTEL) Remote Automated Weather Station (RAWS) Road Weather Information System (RWIS) Tropospheric Airborne Meteorological Data Reporting (TAMDAR) v t e Telecommunications History Beacon Broadcasting Cable protection system Cable TV Communications satellite Computer network Data compression audio DCT image video Digital media Internet video online video platform social media streaming Drums Edholm's law Electrical telegraph Fax Heliographs Hydraulic telegraph Information Age Information revolution Internet Mass media Mobile phone Smartphone Optical telecommunication Optical telegraphy Pager Photophone Prepaid mobile phone Radio Radiotelephone Satellite communications Semaphore Phryctoria Semiconductor device MOSFET transistor Smoke signals Telecommunications history Telautograph Telegraphy Teleprinter (teletype) Telephone The Telephone Cases Television digital streaming Undersea telegraph line Videotelephony Whistled language Wireless revolution Pioneers Nasir Ahmed Edwin Howard Armstrong Mohamed M. Atalla John Logie Baird Paul Baran John Bardeen Alexander Graham Bell Emile Berliner Tim Berners-Lee Francis Blake Jagadish Chandra Bose Charles Bourseul Walter Houser Brattain Vint Cerf Claude Chappe Yogen Dalal Donald Davies Daniel Davis Jr.

Amos Dolbear Thomas Edison Philo Farnsworth Reginald Fessenden Lee de Forest Elisha Gray Oliver Heaviside Robert Hooke Erna Schneider Hoover Harold Hopkins Gardiner Greene Hubbard Bob Kahn Dawon Kahng Charles K. Kao Narinder Singh Kapany Hedy Lamarr Roberto Landell Innocenzo Manzetti Guglielmo Marconi Robert Metcalfe Antonio Meucci Samuel Morse Jun-ichi Nishizawa Charles Grafton Page Radia Perlman Alexander Stepanovich Popov Tivadar Puskás Johann Philipp Reis Claude Shannon Almon Brown Strowger Henry Sutton Charles Sumner Tainter Nikola Tesla Camille Tissot Alfred Vail Thomas A. Watson Charles Wheatstone Vladimir K. Zworykin Internet pioneers Transmission media Coaxial cable Fiber-optic communication optical fiber Free-space optical communication Molecular communication Radio waves wireless Transmission line telecommunication circuit Network topology and switching Bandwidth Links Network switching circuit packet Nodes terminal Telephone exchange Multiplexing Space-division Frequency-division Time-division Polarization-division Orbital angular-momentum Code-division Concepts Communication protocol Computer network Data transmission Store and forward Telecommunications equipment Types of network Cellular network Ethernet ISDN LAN Mobile NGN Public Switched Telephone Radio Television Telex UUCP WAN Wireless network Notable networks ARPANET BITNET CYCLADES FidoNet Internet Internet2 JANET NPL network TANet Toasternet Usenet Locations Africa Americas North South Antarctica Asia Europe Oceania Global telecommunications regulation bodies Telecommunication portal Category Outline Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=ACARS&oldid=1302483809 " Categories : Telecommunications-related introductions in 1978 Airbands Aircraft instruments Aviation communications Avionics Meteorological data and networks Computer printers Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2019 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from September 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2016 Articles with hAudio microformats This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 18:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents ACARS 25 languages Add topic

