Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 First philosophy Toggle First philosophy subsection 1.1 Celestial spheres 1.2 Final cause and efficient cause 1.3 Aristotle's theology 1.4 First cause 2 Substance and change 3 Number of movers 4 Influence 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Sources Toggle the table of contents Unmoved mover 23 languages العربية বাংলা Català Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Postulated primary cause of all activity in the universe Not to be confused with Ultimate cause .

Raphael's depiction of the unmoved mover from the Stanza della Segnatura The unmoved mover ( Ancient Greek : ὃ οὐ κινούμενον κινεῖ , romanized : ho ou kinoúmenon kineî , lit.

'that which moves without being moved') [ 1 ] or prime mover ( Latin : primum movens ) is a concept advanced by Aristotle as a primary cause (or first uncaused cause ) [ 2 ] or " mover " of all the motion in the universe .

[ 3 ] As is implicit in the name, the unmoved mover moves other things, but is not itself moved by any prior action. In Book 12 ( Ancient Greek : Λ ) of his Metaphysics , Aristotle describes the unmoved mover as being perfectly beautiful, indivisible, and contemplating only the perfect contemplation : self-contemplation. He also equates this concept with the active intellect . This Aristotelian concept had its roots in cosmological speculations of the earliest Greek pre-Socratic philosophers [ 4 ] and became highly influential and widely drawn upon in medieval philosophy and theology .

St. Thomas Aquinas , for example, elaborated on the unmoved mover in the Five Ways .

First philosophy [ edit ] Aristotle argues, in Book 8 of the Physics and Book 12 of the Metaphysics , "that there must be an immortal, unchanging being, ultimately responsible for all wholeness and orderliness in the sensible world." [ 5 ] In the Physics (VIII 4–6) Aristotle finds "surprising difficulties" explaining even commonplace change, and in support of his approach of explanation by four causes , he required "a fair bit of technical machinery".

[ 6 ] This "machinery" includes potentiality and actuality , hylomorphism , the theory of categories , and "an audacious and intriguing argument, that the bare existence of change requires the postulation of a first cause, an unmoved mover whose necessary existence underpins the ceaseless activity of the world of motion".

[ 7 ] Aristotle's "first philosophy", or Metaphysics (" after the Physics "), develops his peculiar theology of the prime mover, as πρῶτον κινοῦν ἀκίνητον : an independent divine eternal unchanging immaterial substance.

[ 8 ] Celestial spheres [ edit ] Aristotle adopted the geometrical model of Eudoxus of Cnidus to provide a general explanation of the apparent wandering of the classical planets arising from uniform circular motions of celestial spheres .

[ 9 ] While the number of spheres in the model itself was subject to change (47 or 55), Aristotle's account of aether , and of potentiality and actuality , required an individual unmoved mover for each sphere.

[ 10 ] Final cause and efficient cause [ edit ] Simplicius argues that the first unmoved mover is a cause not only in the sense of being a final cause—which everyone in his day, as in ours, would accept—but also in the sense of being an efficient cause (1360. 24ff.), and his master Ammonius wrote a whole book defending the thesis (ibid. 1363. 8–10). Simplicius's arguments include citations of Plato 's views in the Timaeus —evidence not relevant to the debate unless one happens to believe in the essential harmony of Plato and Aristotle—and inferences from approving remarks which Aristotle makes about the role of Nous in Anaxagoras , which require a good deal of reading between the lines. But he does point out rightly that the unmoved mover fits the definition of an efficient cause—"whence the first source of change or rest" ( Phys . II. 3, 194b29–30; Simpl. 1361. 12ff.). The examples which Aristotle adduces do not obviously suggest an application to the first unmoved mover, and it is at least possible that Aristotle originated his fourfold distinction without reference to such an entity. But the real question is whether his definition of the efficient cause includes the unmoved mover willy-nilly. One curious fact remains: that Aristotle never acknowledges the alleged fact that the unmoved mover is an efficient cause (a problem of which Simplicius is well aware: 1363. 12–14)...

[ 11 ] — D. W. Graham, Physics Despite their apparent function in the celestial model, the unmoved movers were a final cause , not an efficient cause for the movement of the spheres; [ 12 ] they were solely a constant inspiration, [ 13 ] and even if taken for an efficient cause precisely due to being a final cause, [ 14 ] the nature of the explanation is purely teleological.

[ 15 ] Aristotle's theology [ edit ] The unmoved mover, if they were anywhere, were said to fill the outer void beyond the sphere of fixed stars: It is clear then that there is neither place, nor void, nor time, outside the heaven. Hence whatever is there, is of such a nature as not to occupy any place, nor does time age it; nor is there any change in any of the things which lie beyond the outermost motion; they continue through their entire duration unalterable and unmodified, living the best and most self sufficient of lives… From [the fulfilment of the whole heaven] derive the being and life which other things, some more or less articulately but other feebly, enjoy.

[ 16 ] — Aristotle, De Caelo , I.9, 279 a17–30 The unmoved mover is an immaterial substance (separate and individual beings), having neither parts nor magnitude. As such, it would be physically impossible for them to move material objects of any size by pushing, pulling, or collision. Because matter is, for Aristotle, a substratum in which a potential to change can be actualized, any potentiality must be actualized in an eternal being, but it must not be still because continuous activity is essential for all forms of life. This immaterial form of activity must be intellectual and cannot be contingent upon sensory perception if it is to remain uniform; therefore, eternal substance must think only of thinking itself and exist outside the starry sphere, where even the notion of place is undefined for Aristotle. Their influence on lesser beings is purely the result of an "aspiration or desire," [ 17 ] and each aetheric celestial sphere emulates one of the unmoved movers, as best it can, by uniform circular motion . The first heaven, the outmost sphere of fixed stars, is moved by a desire to emulate the prime mover (first cause), [ 18 ] [ note 1 ] about whom, the subordinate movers suffer an accidental dependency.

Many of Aristotle's contemporaries complained that oblivious, powerless gods are unsatisfactory.

[ 8 ] Nonetheless, it was a life which Aristotle enthusiastically endorsed as one most enviable and perfect, the unembellished basis of theology. As the whole of nature depends on the inspiration of the eternal unmoved movers, Aristotle was concerned with establishing the metaphysical necessity of the perpetual motions of the heavens. Through the Sun's seasonal action upon the terrestrial spheres, the cycles of generation and corruption give rise to all natural motion as efficient cause.

[ 15 ] The intellect, nous , "or whatever else it be that is thought to rule and lead us by nature, and to have cognizance of what is noble and divine" is the highest activity, according to Aristotle (contemplation or speculative thinking, theōríā ). It is also the most sustainable, pleasant, self-sufficient activity; [ 19 ] something which is aimed at for its own sake. (Unlike politics and warfare, it does not involve doing things we'd rather not do, but rather something we do at our leisure.) This aim is not strictly human: to achieve it means to live following not mortal thoughts but something immortal and divine within humans. According to Aristotle, contemplation is the only type of happy activity that it would not be ridiculous to imagine the gods having. In Aristotle's psychology and biology, the intellect is the soul (see also eudaimonia ).

According to Giovanni Reale , the first Unmoved Mover is a living, thinking, and personal God who "possesses the theoretical knowledge alone or in the highest degree...knows not only Himself, but all things in their causes and first principles." [ 20 ] First cause [ edit ] In Book VIII of his Physics, [ 21 ] Aristotle examines the notions of change or motion, and attempts to show by a challenging argument, that the mere supposition of a 'before' and an 'after', requires a first principle . He argues that in the beginning, if the cosmos had come to be, its first motion would lack an antecedent state; and, as Parmenides said, " nothing comes from nothing ". The cosmological argument , later attributed to Aristotle, thereby concludes that God exists. However, if the cosmos had a beginning, Aristotle argued, it would require an efficient first cause , a notion that Aristotle took to demonstrate a critical flaw.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] But it is a wrong assumption to suppose universally that we have an adequate first principle in virtue of the fact that something always is so ... Thus Democritus reduces the causes that explain nature to the fact that things happened in the past in the same way as they happen now: but he does not think fit to seek for a first principle to explain this 'always' ... Let this conclude what we have to say in support of our contention that there never was a time when there was not motion, and never will be a time when there will not be motion.

— Physics VIII, 2 [ 25 ] The purpose of Aristotle's cosmological argument that at least one eternal unmoved mover must exist is to support everyday change.

[ 26 ] Of things that exist, substances are the first. But if substances can, then all things can perish... and yet, time and change cannot. Now, the only continuous change is that of place, and the only continuous change of place is circular motion. Therefore, there must be an eternal circular motion and this is confirmed by the fixed stars which are moved by the eternal actual substance that's purely actual.

[ 27 ] In Aristotle's estimation, an explanation without the temporal actuality and potentiality of an infinite locomotive chain is required for an eternal cosmos with neither beginning nor end: an unmoved eternal substance for whom the Primum Mobile [ note 2 ] turns diurnally, whereby all terrestrial cycles are driven by day and night, the seasons of the year, the transformation of the elements, and the nature of plants and animals.

[ 10 ] Substance and change [ edit ] Aristotle begins by describing substance, of which he says there are three types: the sensible, subdivided into the perishable, which belongs to physics, and the eternal, which belongs to "another science." He notes that sensible substance is changeable and that there are several types of change, including quality and quantity, generation and destruction, increase and diminution, alteration, and motion. Change occurs when one given state becomes something contrary to it: that is to say, what exists potentially comes to exist actually (see potentiality and actuality ). Therefore, "a thing [can come to be], incidentally, out of that which is not, [and] also all things come to be out of that which is, but is potentially , and is not actually." That by which something is changed is the mover, that which is changed is the matter, and that into which it is changed is the form.

[ citation needed ] Substance is necessarily composed of different elements. The proof for this is that there are things that are different from each other and that all things are composed of elements. Since elements combine to form composite substances, and because these substances differ from each other, there must be different elements: in other words, "b or a cannot be the same as ba." [ citation needed ] Number of movers [ edit ] Near the end of Metaphysics , Book Λ , Aristotle introduces a surprising question, asking "whether we have to suppose one such [mover] or more than one, and if the latter, how many." [ 28 ] Aristotle concludes that the number of all the movers equals the number of separate movements, and we can determine these by considering the mathematical science most akin to philosophy, i.e., astronomy. Although the mathematicians differ on the number of movements, Aristotle considers that the number of celestial spheres would be 47 or 55. Nonetheless, he concludes his Metaphysics , Book Λ , with a quotation from the Iliad : "The rule of many is not good; one ruler let there be." [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Influence [ edit ] See also: Ontological argument , Apophatic theology , and Hellenistic philosophy and Christianity John Burnet (1892) noted [ 31 ] The Neoplatonists were quite justified in regarding themselves as the spiritual heirs of Pythagoras; and, in their hands, philosophy ceased to exist as such, and became theology. And this tendency was at work all along; hardly a single Greek philosopher was wholly uninfluenced by it. Perhaps Aristotle might seem to be an exception; but it is probable that, if we still possessed a few such "exoteric" works as the Protreptikos in their entirety, we should find that the enthusiastic words in which he speaks of the " blessed life " in the Metaphysics and in the Ethics (Nicomachean Ethics) were less isolated outbursts of feeling than they appear now. In later days, Apollonios of Tyana showed in practice what this sort of thing must ultimately lead to. The theurgy and thaumaturgy of the late Greek schools were only the fruit of the seed sown by the generation which immediately preceded the Persian War.

Aristotle's principles of being (see section above) influenced Anselm 's view of God, whom he called "that than which nothing greater can be conceived." Anselm thought God did not feel emotions such as anger or love but appeared to do so through our imperfect understanding. The incongruity of judging "being" against something that might not exist may have led Anselm to his famous ontological argument for God's existence.

Many medieval philosophers used the idea of approaching a knowledge of God through negative attributes. For example, we should not say that God exists in the usual sense of the term; all we can safely say is that God is not nonexistent. We should not say that God is wise, but we can say that God is not ignorant (i.e., in some way, God has some properties of knowledge). We should not say that God is One, but we can state that there is no multiplicity in God's being.

Many later Jewish, Islamic, and Christian philosophers accepted Aristotelian theological concepts. Key Jewish philosophers included ibn Tibbon , Maimonides , and Gersonides , among many others. Their views of God are considered mainstream by many Jews of all denominations, even today. Preeminent among Islamic philosophers who were influenced by Aristotelian theology are Avicenna and Averroes . In Christian theology, the key philosopher influenced by Aristotle was undoubtedly Thomas Aquinas . There had been earlier Aristotelian influences within Christianity (notably Anselm), but Aquinas (who, incidentally, found his Aristotelian influence via Avicenna, Averroes, and Maimonides) incorporated extensive Aristotelian ideas throughout his theology. Through Aquinas and the Scholastic Christian theology of which he was a significant part, Aristotle became "academic theology's great authority in the thirteenth century" [ 32 ] and influenced Christian theology that became widespread and deeply embedded. However, notable Christian theologians rejected [ a ] Aristotelian theological influence, especially the first generation of Christian Reformers, [ b ] most notably Martin Luther .

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] In subsequent Protestant theology, Aristotelian thought quickly reemerged in Protestant scholasticism .

See also [ edit ] Big Bang – Physical theory Book of the 24 Philosophers – Philosophical and theological medieval text of uncertain authorship Brahman – Metaphysical concept, unchanging Ultimate Reality in Hinduism Conceptions of God Dynamics of the celestial spheres – Classical theories concerning movement of spheres Eternal recurrence Existence of God – Philosophical question Henosis – Classical Greek word for mystical oneness Henotheism – Worshipping a god, accepting others may exist Logos – Concept in philosophy, religion, rhetoric, and psychology Monad – Philosophical concept of a most basic substance, or supreme being The One – Philosophical system Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Primum Mobile – Outermost moving sphere in the geocentric model of the universe Causa sui – Term that denotes something that is generated within itself Tao – Philosophical concept native to China Notes [ edit ] ^ Now understood as the Earth's rotation .

^ The outermost celestial sphere, for Aristotle, the sphere of fixed stars .

^ Especially since the 1990s, scholars have argued that the early Reformers have been misunderstood in their stance against Aristotle (and the Scholasticism that he permeated). A distinction must be made between scholastic methodology and its theological content. See the self-avowedly ground-breaking collection, Protestant Scholasticism , eds.

Trueman, Carl , and R. Scott Clark , 1997, page xix. Even within that volume, however, Luther is admitted to have made a complete, sincere, and absolute renunciation of scholasticism (see D.V.N.Bagchi within Trueman and Clark, page 11).

^ Luther is certainly more acerbic and quotable, but both John Calvin , who "denounced scholastic theology as contemptible" (Payton, James R., Jr, Getting the Reformation Wrong , 2010, page 197), and Melanchthon , who found that the church had "embraced Aristotle instead of Christ" (see Melanchthon , Loci Communes , 1521 edition, 23) also rejected Aristotelian elements of scholasticism.

References [ edit ] ^ Aristotle, Metaphysics XII, 1072a.

^ Nielsen, Kai (1971).

Reason and practice; a modern introduction to philosophy . New York: Harper & Row. pp.

170– 2.

ISBN 0060448369 .

LCCN 70137800 .

^ "Aristotle's Natural Philosophy" .

Aristotle's Natural Philosophy: Movers and Unmoved Mover .

stanford.edu . 2018.

^ Lesher, James H. (2001).

Xenophanes of Colophon: Fragments . University of Toronto Press. pp.

106– 110.

^ Sachs, Joe.

"Aristotle: Metaphysics" . Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ Shields, Christopher John (2007).

Aristotle (reprint ed.). Taylor & Francis. p. 187.

ISBN 978-0-415-28331-1 .

^ Shields, Christopher John (2007).

Aristotle . Taylor & Francis. pp. 196, 226.

ISBN 9780203961940 .

^ a b Ross, Sir David; Ackrill, John Lloyd (2004).

Aristotle (6th ed., revised ed.). Psychology Press. pp. 188, 190.

ISBN 978-0-415-32857-9 .

^ Mendell, Henry (16 September 2009).

"Eudoxus of Cnidus: Astronomy and Homocentric Spheres" . Vignettes of Ancient Mathematics. Archived from the original on 16 May 2011.

^ a b Bodnar, Istvan (2010). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

"Aristotle's Natural Philosophy" (Spring 2010 ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

In Metaphysics 12.8, Aristotle opts for both the uniqueness and the plurality of the unmoved celestial movers. Each celestial sphere possesses the unmoved mover of its own—presumably as the object of its striving, see Metaphysics 12.6—whereas the mover of the outermost celestial sphere, which carries with its diurnal rotation the fixed stars, being the first of the series of unmoved movers also guarantees the unity and uniqueness of the universe.

^ Graham, D. W. (1999).

Physics . Clarendon Aristotle Series. Oxford University Press, USA. p. 179.

ISBN 9780198240921 .

LCCN 98049448 .

^ Humphrey, P. (2007).

Metaphysics of Mind: Hylomorphism and Eternality in Aristotle and Hegel . State University of New York at Stony Brook. p. 71.

ISBN 9780549806714 .

The universe has no beginning in time, no temporal first cause, so Aristotle is obviously not seeking an efficient cause in the sense of "what set it all off?" Aristotle's unmoved mover acts as final cause, as the good toward which all things strive. That is, it acts an objects of desire: "The object of desire and the object of thought move without being moved" ( Met.

, 1072a26–27).

^ Hankinson, R. J. (1997).

Cause and Explanation in Ancient Greek Thought (PDF) . Oxford University Press. p. 125 (PDF p. 103). Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 April 2015 . Retrieved 7 September 2011 .

^ Ross, Sir David; Ackrill, John Lloyd (2004).

Aristotle . Taylor & Francis. p. 187.

ISBN 9780203379530 .

^ a b Shields, Christopher John (2007).

Aristotle . Taylor & Francis. p. 121.

ISBN 9780203961940 .

^ Aristotle (7 January 2009).

" De Caelo " [On the Heavens]. Translated by J. L. Stocks. The Internet Classics Archive. I.9, 279 a17–30.

^ "Cosmological Argument for the Existence of God," in Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1967), Vol. 2, p. 233ff.

^ Aristotle, Physics VIII 6, 258 b26-259 a9.

^ Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics X 1177 a20.

^ Giovanni Reale, Il concetto di filosofia prima e l'unità della metafisica in Aristotele , Milan 1965, p. 23. As quoted in Father Battista Mondin , O.P. (2022).

Ontologia e metafisica [ Ontology and metaphysics ]. Filosofia (in Italian) (3rd ed.).

Edizioni Studio Domenicano . pp.

95– 96.

ISBN 978-88-5545-053-9 .

^ Aristotle, Physics VIII, 4–6.

^ Brentano, F.C.; George, R.; Chisholm, R.M. (1978).

Aristotle and His World View . University of California Press. p.

56 .

ISBN 9780520033900 .

LCCN lc76050245 .

^ Aristotle, De Caelo Book I Chapter 10 280a6 ^ Aristotle, Physics Book VIII 251–253.

^ Aristotle; (trans. Hardie, R. P. & Gaye, R. K.) (7 January 2009).

"Physics" . The Internet Classics Archive.

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Shields, Christopher John (2007).

Aristotle (reprint ed.). Taylor & Francis. p. 222.

ISBN 978-0-415-28331-1 .

^ Ross, Sir David; Ackrill, John Lloyd (2004).

Aristotle . p. 186.

ISBN 9780203379530 .

^ Aristotle, Metaphysics, 1073a14–15.

^ Iliad, ii, 204; quoted in Aristotle, Metaphysics, 1076a5.

^ Harry A. Wolfson, "The Plurality of Immovable Movers in Aristotle and Averroës," Harvard Studies in Classical Philology , 63 (1958): 233–253.

^ John Burnet (1892).

Early Greek Philosophy . A. and C. Black. p.

88 .

^ Oberman, Heiko.

Luther: Man Between God and the Devil , 1982, trans. Eileen Walliser-Schwarzbart, 1989. p. 160.

ISBN 9780300103137 ^ Luther's quotes aimed directly against Aristotle are many and sometimes strident. For example, "Virtually the entire Ethics of Aristotle is the worst enemy of grace" (Thesis 41) and "Briefly, the whole of Aristotle is to theology as shadow is to light" (Thesis 50) in Luther's 97 Theses of September 1517 (Luther, Disputation Against Scholastic Theology , 1517).

^ In a personal note, Luther wrote, "Should Aristotle not have been a man of flesh and blood, I would not hesitate to assert that he was the Devil himself." (Luther, 8 Feb 1517; quoted in Oberman, 121).

^ "Thomas [Aquinas] wrote a great deal of heresy, and is responsible for the reign of Aristotle, the destroyer of godly doctrine." (Luther, Against Latomus , 1521; quoted in Payton, 196).

Sources [ edit ] The Theology of Aristotle in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy John W. Watt (2019).

The Aristotelian Tradition in Syriac .

Routledge .

ISBN 9780429817489 .

Gilles Emery; Matthew Levering (2015).

Aristotle in Aquinas's Theology .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780198749639 .

Richard Bodeus (2000).

Aristotle and the Theology of the Living Immortals .

SUNY Press .

ISBN 9780791447284 .

Otfried Hoffe (2003).

Aristotle .

SUNY Press .

ISBN 9780791456347 .

v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐l7jg7
Cached time: 20250818132820
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.873 seconds
Real time usage: 1.111 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5850/1000000
Revision size: 28720/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 275577/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8418/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 126529/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.532/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15173964/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  904.544      1 -total
 25.87%  233.991      2 Template:Reflist
 20.86%  188.643     19 Template:Cite_book
 15.17%  137.244     16 Template:Navbox
 15.12%  136.771      3 Template:Langx
 13.21%  119.508     14 Template:Annotated_link
 10.35%   93.589      1 Template:Aristotelianism
  7.91%   71.576      1 Template:Short_description
  5.67%   51.318      2 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  4.45%   40.255      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3446100:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818132820 and revision id 1305767503. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Unmoved_mover&oldid=1305767503 " Categories : Philosophy of Aristotle Conceptions of God Causality Aristotelianism Concepts in metaphysics Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2022 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 00:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Unmoved mover 23 languages Add topic

