Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 The West of the Mediterranean Region during the Antiquity 2.2 The birth of European West during the Middle Ages 2.2.1 Later Middle Ages (Rome and Reformation) 2.3 Expansion of the West: the Era of Colonialism (15th–20th centuries) 2.3.1 Early modern era 2.3.2 Industrial Revolution 2.4 Post-Industrial era 3 Arts and humanities Toggle Arts and humanities subsection 3.1 Music 3.2 Painting and photography 3.3 Dance and performing arts 3.4 Literature 3.5 Architecture 4 Cuisine 5 Scientific and technological inventions and discoveries 6 Media 7 Religion 8 Sport 9 Themes and traditions 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References Toggle References subsection 12.1 Citations 12.2 Sources 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Western culture 49 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Беларуская भोजपुरी བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Català Čeština Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue עברית Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lingua Franca Nova Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Nederlands Papiamentu پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Norms, values, customs and political systems of the Western world For the 1979 album by Henry Cow, see Western Culture (album) .

Leonardo da Vinci 's Vitruvian Man , based on the correlations of ideal human proportions with geometry described by the ancient Roman architect Vitruvius in Book III of his treatise De architectura Plato , arguably the most influential figure in early Western philosophy .

Western culture , also known as Western civilization , European civilization , Occidental culture , Western society , or simply the West , refers to the internally diverse culture of the Western world . The term "Western" encompasses the social norms , ethical values , traditional customs , belief systems , political systems , artifacts and technologies primarily rooted in European and Mediterranean histories. A broad concept, "Western culture" does not relate to a region with fixed members or geographical confines. It generally refers to the classical era cultures of Ancient Greece , Ancient Rome , and their Christian successors that expanded across the Mediterranean basin and Europe , and later circulated around the world predominantly through colonization and globalization .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Historically, scholars have closely associated the idea of Western culture with the classical era of Greco-Roman antiquity .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] However, scholars also acknowledge that other cultures, like Ancient Egypt , the Phoenician city-states , and several Near-Eastern cultures stimulated and influenced it.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] The Hellenistic period also promoted syncretism , blending Greek, Roman, and Jewish cultures. Major advances in literature, engineering, and science shaped the Hellenistic Jewish culture from which the earliest Christians and the Greek New Testament emerged.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] The eventual Christianization of Europe in late-antiquity would ensure that Christianity , particularly the Catholic Church , remained a dominant force in Western culture for many centuries to follow.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Western culture continued to develop during the Middle Ages as reforms triggered by the medieval renaissances , the influence of the Islamic world via Al-Andalus and Sicily (including the transfer of technology from the East, and Latin translations of Arabic texts on science and philosophy by Greek and Hellenic-influenced Islamic philosophers), [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] and the Italian Renaissance as Greek scholars fleeing the fall of Constantinople brought ancient Greek and Roman texts back to central and western Europe.

[ 17 ] Medieval Christianity is credited with creating the modern university , [ 18 ] [ 19 ] the modern hospital system, [ 20 ] scientific economics, [ 21 ] [ 22 ] and natural law (which would later influence the creation of international law ).

[ 23 ] European culture developed a complex range of philosophy, medieval scholasticism , mysticism and Christian and secular humanism , setting the stage for the Protestant Reformation in the 16th century, which fundamentally altered religious and political life. Led by figures like Martin Luther , Protestantism challenged the authority of the Catholic Church and promoted ideas of individual freedom and religious reform , paving the way for modern notions of personal responsibility and governance.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] The Enlightenment in the 17th and 18th centuries shifted focus to reason , science , and individual rights , influencing revolutions across Europe and the Americas and the development of modern democratic institutions. Enlightenment thinkers advanced ideals of political pluralism and empirical inquiry , which, together with the Industrial Revolution , transformed Western society. In the 19th and 20th centuries, the influence of Enlightenment rationalism continued with the rise of secularism and liberal democracy , while the Industrial Revolution fueled economic and technological growth. The expansion of rights movements and the decline of religious authority marked significant cultural shifts. Tendencies that have come to define modern Western societies include the concept of political pluralism , individualism , prominent subcultures or countercultures , and increasing cultural syncretism resulting from globalization and immigration .

Terminology [ edit ] Further information: Western world The West as a geographical area is unclear and undefined. There is some disagreement about which nations should or should not be included in the category, when, and why. Certainly related conceptual terminology has changed over time in scope, meaning, and use. The term "western" draws on an affiliation with, or a perception of, a shared philosophy , worldview , political, and religious heritage grounded in the Greco-Roman world , the legacy of the Roman Empire , and medieval concepts of Christendom . For example, whether the Eastern Roman Empire (anachronistically/controversially referred to as the Byzantine Empire) , or those countries heavily influenced by its legacy, should be counted as "Western" is an example of the possible ambiguity of the term. These questions [ which?

] can be traced back to the affiliation between the culture of ancient Rome and that of Classical Greece , a persistent Greek East and Latin West language-split within the Roman Empire , and an eventual permanent splitting of the Roman Empire in 395 into Western and Eastern halves. And perhaps, at its worst, [ citation needed ] culminating in Pope Leo III's transfer of the Roman Empire from the Eastern Roman Empire to the Frankish King Charlemagne in the form of the Holy Roman Empire in 800, the Great Schism of 1054, and the devastating Fourth Crusade of 1204.

Conversely, traditions of scholarship around Plato , Aristotle , and Euclid had been forgotten in the Catholic west and were rediscovered by Italians from scholars fleeing the 1453 fall of the Eastern Roman Empire .

[ 17 ] The subsequent Renaissance , a conscious effort by Europeans to revive and surpass the ideas and achievements of the Greco-Roman world, eventually encouraged the Age of Discovery , the Scientific Revolution , Age of Enlightenment , and the subsequent Industrial Revolution . Similarly, complicated relationships between virtually all the countries and regions within a broadly defined "West" can be discussed in the light of a persistently fragmented political landscape resulting in a lack of uniformity and significant diversity between the various cultures affiliating with this shared socio-cultural heritage. Thus, those cultures identifying with the West and with what it means to be "western" change over time as the geopolitical circumstances of a place changes and what is meant by the terminology changes.

It is difficult to determine which individuals or places or trends fit into which category, and the East–West contrast is sometimes criticized as relativistic and arbitrary.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ page needed ] Globalization has spread Western ideas so widely that almost all modern cultures are, to some extent, influenced by aspects of Western culture. Stereotypical views of "the West" have been labeled " Occidentalism ", paralleling " Orientalism "—the term for the 19th-century stereotyped views of "the East".

Some philosophers have questioned whether Western culture can be considered a historically sound, unified body of thought.

[ 31 ] For example, Kwame Anthony Appiah pointed out in 2016 that many of the fundamental influences on Western culture – such as those of Greek philosophy – are also shared by the Islamic world to a certain extent.

[ 31 ] [ need quotation to verify ] Appiah argues that the origin of the Western and European identity can be traced back to the 8th-century Muslim invasion of Europe via Iberia , when Christians would start to form a common Christian or European identity.

[ 31 ] [ need quotation to verify ] Contemporary Latin chronicles from Spain referred to the victors in the Frankish victory over the Umayyads at the 732 Battle of Tours as "Europeans" according to Appiah, denoting a shared sense of identity.

[ 32 ] A former, now less-acceptable synonym for "Western civilisation" was "the white race ".

[ 33 ] As Europeans discovered the extra-European world, old concepts adapted. The area that had formerly been considered the Orient ("the East") became the Near East as the interests of the European powers interfered with Meiji Japan and Qing China for the first time in the 19th century.

[ 34 ] Thus the Sino-Japanese War in 1894–1895 occurred in the " Far East " while troubles surrounding the decline of the Ottoman Empire occurred simultaneously in the Near East.

[ a ] The term "Middle East" in the mid-19th century included the territory east of the Ottoman Empire but west of China— Greater Persia and Greater India —but is now used synonymously with "Near East" in most languages.

History [ edit ] Further information: History of Western civilization Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e The earliest civilizations which influenced the development of Western culture were those of Mesopotamia ; the area of the Tigris–Euphrates river system , largely corresponding to modern-day Iraq , northeastern Syria , southeastern Turkey and southwestern Iran : the cradle of civilization .

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Ancient Egypt similarly had a strong influence on Western culture.

Phoenician mercantilism and the introduction of the Alphabetic script boosted state formation in the Aegean and current-day Italy and current-day Spain, spawning civilizations in the Mediterranean such as Ancient Carthage , Ancient Greece , Etruria , and Ancient Rome .

[ 37 ] The Greeks contrasted themselves with both their Eastern neighbours (such as the Trojans in Iliad ) as well as their Northern neighbours (who they considered barbarians ).

[ citation needed ] Concepts of what is the West arose out of legacies of the Western and the Eastern Roman Empire. Later, ideas of the West were formed by the concepts of Latin Christendom and the Holy Roman Empire . What is thought of as Western thought today originates primarily from Greco-Roman and Christian traditions, with varying degrees of influence from the Germanic , Celtic and Slavic peoples, and includes the ideals of the Middle Ages , the Renaissance , Reformation and the Enlightenment .

[ 38 ] The West of the Mediterranean Region during the Antiquity [ edit ] See also: Hellenization , Romanization (cultural) , and Greco-Roman world During the Greco-Roman world , North Africa and the Western regions of the Middle East were integral parts of the Western civilization, due to Hellenization and the direct cultural impact of the conquests of the Roman Empire. After the Roman conquests, the whole Mediterranean became essentially a Roman inland sea.

[ 39 ] While the concept of a "West" did not exist until the emergence of the Roman Republic , the roots of the concept can be traced back to Ancient Greece . Since Homeric literature (the Trojan Wars ), through the accounts of the Persian Wars of Greeks against Persians by Herodotus , and right up until the time of Alexander the Great , there was a paradigm of a contrast between Greeks and other civilizations.

[ 40 ] Greeks felt they were the most civilized and saw themselves (in the formulation of Aristotle ) as something between the advanced civilizations of the Near East (who they viewed as soft and slavish) and the wild barbarians of most of Europe to the north. During this period writers like Herodotus and Xenophon would highlight the importance of freedom in the Ancient Greek world, as opposed to the perceived slavery of the so-called barbaric world.

[ 40 ] Alexander the Great Alexander's conquests led to the emergence of a Hellenistic civilization , representing a synthesis of Greek and Near-Eastern cultures in the Eastern Mediterranean region.

[ 41 ] The Near-Eastern civilizations of Ancient Egypt and the Levant , which came under Greek rule, became part of the Hellenistic world. The most important Hellenistic centre of learning was Ptolemaic Egypt , which attracted Greek, Egyptian , Jewish, Persian , Phoenician and even Indian scholars.

[ 42 ] Hellenistic science, philosophy, architecture , literature and art later provided a foundation embraced and built upon by the Roman Empire as it swept up Europe and the Mediterranean world , including the Hellenistic world in its conquests in the 1st century BCE.

Following the Roman conquest of the Hellenistic world, the concept of a "West" arose, as there was a cultural divide between the Greek East and Latin West . The Latin-speaking Western Roman Empire consisted of Western Europe and Northwest Africa, while the Greek-speaking Eastern Roman Empire consisted of the Balkans , Asia Minor , Egypt and Levant . The "Greek" East was generally wealthier and more advanced than the "Latin" West.

[ citation needed ] With the exception of Italia , the wealthiest provinces of the Roman Empire were in the East, particularly Roman Egypt which was the wealthiest Roman province outside of Italia.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Nevertheless, the Celts in the West created some significant literature in the ancient world whenever they were given the opportunity (an example being the poet Caecilius Statius ), and they developed a large amount of scientific knowledge themselves (as seen in their Coligny Calendar ).

The Maison Carrée in Nîmes , one of the best-preserved Roman temples The Roman Empire (red) and its client states (pink) at its greatest extent in 117 AD under emperor Trajan For about five hundred years, the Roman Empire maintained the Greek East and consolidated a Latin West, but an east–west division remained, reflected in many cultural norms of the two areas, including language. Eventually, the empire became increasingly split into a Western and Eastern part, reviving old ideas of a contrast between an advanced East, and a rugged West.

From the time of Alexander the Great (the Hellenistic period ), Greek civilization came in contact with Jewish civilization. Christianity would eventually emerge from the syncretism of Hellenic culture , Roman culture , and Second Temple Judaism , gradually spreading across the Roman Empire and eclipsing its antecedents and influences.

[ 45 ] The Roman Empire in 330. The area in red shows the zone of influence of the Latin West, while the area in blue shows the eastern Greek part.

The Greek and Roman paganism was gradually replaced by Christianity, first with its legalisation with the Edict of Milan and then the Edict of Thessalonica which made it the State church of the Roman Empire .

Catholic Christianity, served as a unifying force in Christian parts of Europe, and in some respects replaced or competed with the secular authorities. The Jewish Christian tradition out of which it had emerged was all but extinguished, and antisemitism became increasingly entrenched or even integral to Christendom.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] Much of art and literature, law, education, and politics were preserved in the teachings of the Church.

In a broader sense, the Middle Ages , with its fertile encounter between Greek philosophical reasoning and Levantine monotheism was not confined to the West but also stretched into the old East. The philosophy and science of Classical Greece were largely forgotten in Europe after the collapse of the Western Roman Empire, other than in isolated monastic enclaves (notably in Ireland, which had become Christian but was never conquered by Rome).

[ 48 ] The learning of Classical Antiquity was better preserved in the Eastern Roman Empire. Justinian's Corpus Juris Civilis Roman civil law code was created in the East in his capital of Constantinople, [ 49 ] and that city maintained trade and intermittent political control over outposts such as Venice in the West for centuries. Classical Greek learning was also subsumed, preserved, and elaborated in the rising Eastern world, which gradually supplanted Roman-Byzantine control as a dominant cultural-political force. Thus, much of the learning of classical antiquity was slowly reintroduced to European civilization in the centuries following the collapse of the Western Roman Empire.

The birth of European West during the Middle Ages [ edit ] Mosaic of Justinian I with his court, circa 547–549, Basilica of San Vitale ( Ravenna , Italy) [ 50 ] Two main symbols of the medieval Western civilization on one picture: the gothic St. Martin's cathedral in Spišské Podhradie ( Slovakia ) and the Spiš Castle behind the cathedral Stone bas-relief of Jesus, from the Vézelay Abbey ( Burgundy , France) Notre-Dame , the most iconic Gothic cathedral, [ 51 ] built between 1163 and 1345 After the fall of Rome , much of Greco-Roman art, literature, science and even technology were all but lost in the western part of the old empire. However, this would become the center of a new West. Europe fell into political anarchy, with many warring kingdoms and principalities. Under the Frankish kings, it eventually, and partially, reunified, and the anarchy evolved into feudalism .

The Medieval West referred specifically to the Catholic "Latin" West, also called "Frankish" during Charlemagne 's reign, in contrast to the Orthodox East, where Greek remained the language of the Byzantine Empire. The earliest recorded concept of Europe as a cultural sphere (instead of simply a geographic term) was formed by Alcuin of York in the late 8th century during the Carolingian Renaissance , limited to the territories that practised Western Christianity at the time. "European" as a cultural term did not include much of the territories where the Orthodox Church represented the dominant religion until the 19th century.

[ 52 ] Much of the basis of the post-Roman cultural world had been set before the fall of the Western Roman Empire, mainly through the integration and reshaping of Roman ideas through Christian thought. The Eastern Orthodox Church founded many cathedrals , monasteries and seminaries , some of which continue to exist today.

After the fall of the Roman Empire , many of the classical Greek texts were translated into Arabic and preserved in the medieval Islamic world . The Greek classics along with Arabic science , philosophy and technology were transmitted to Western Europe and translated into Latin , sparking the Renaissance of the 12th century and 13th century.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Thomas Aquinas , a Catholic philosopher of the Middle Ages , revived and developed natural law from ancient Greek philosophy .

Medieval Christianity is credited with creating the first modern universities.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] The Catholic Church established a hospital system in medieval Europe that vastly improved upon the Roman valetudinaria [ 53 ] and Greek healing temples.

[ 54 ] These hospitals were established to cater to "particular social groups marginalized by poverty, sickness, and age," according to the historian of hospitals, Guenter Risse.

[ 20 ] Christianity played a role in ending practices common among pagan societies, such as human sacrifice, slavery, [ 55 ] infanticide and polygamy.

[ 56 ] Francisco de Vitoria , a disciple of Thomas Aquinas and a Catholic thinker who studied the issue regarding the human rights of colonized natives, is recognized by the United Nations as a father of international law, and now also by historians of economics and democracy as a leading light for the West's democracy and rapid economic development.

[ 57 ] Joseph Schumpeter , an economist of the twentieth century, referring to the Scholastics , wrote, "it is they who come nearer than does any other group to having been the 'founders' of scientific economics." [ 21 ] The rediscovery of the Justinian Code in Western Europe early in the 10th century rekindled a passion for the discipline of law, which crossed many of the re-forming boundaries between East and West. In the Catholic or Frankish west, Roman law became the foundation on which all legal concepts and systems were based. Its influence is found in all Western legal systems, although in different manners and to different extents. The study of canon law , the legal system of the Catholic Church, fused with that of Roman law to form the basis of the refounding of Western legal scholarship.

From Late Antiquity , through the Middle Ages, and onwards, while Eastern Europe was shaped by the Eastern Orthodox Church , Southern and Central Europe were increasingly stabilized by the Catholic Church which, as Roman imperial governance faded from view, was the only consistent force in Western Europe.

[ 58 ] In 1054 came the Great Schism that, following the Greek East and Latin West divide, separated Europe into religious and cultural regions present to this day.

Later Middle Ages (Rome and Reformation) [ edit ] In the 14th century, the Renaissance starting from Italy and then spreading throughout Europe, [ 59 ] there was a massive artistic, architectural, scientific and philosophical revival, as a result of the Christian revival of Greek philosophy, and the long Christian medieval tradition that established the use of reason as one of the most important of human activities.

[ 60 ] This period is commonly referred to as the Renaissance . In the following century, this process was further enhanced by an exodus of Greek Christian priests and scholars to Italian cities such as Florence and Venice after the end of the Byzantine Empire with the fall of Constantinople.

Christopher Columbus arrives at the New World .

Until the Age of Enlightenment, [ 61 ] Christian culture took over as the predominant force in Western civilization, guiding the course of philosophy, art, and science for many years.

[ 58 ] [ 62 ] Movements in art and philosophy, such as the Humanist movement of the Renaissance and the Scholastic movement of the High Middle Ages , were motivated by a drive to connect Catholicism with Greek and Arab thought imported by Christian pilgrims.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] However, due to the division in Western Christianity caused by the Protestant Reformation and the Enlightenment, religious influence—especially the temporal power of the Pope—began to wane.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] During the Reformation and Enlightenment, the ideas of civil rights , equality before the law, procedural justice , and democracy as the ideal form of society began to be institutionalized as principles forming the basis of modern Western culture, particularly in Protestant regions.

Expansion of the West: the Era of Colonialism (15th–20th centuries) [ edit ] The United States Constitution Early modern era [ edit ] From the late 15th century to the 17th century, Western culture began to spread to other parts of the world through explorers and missionaries during the Age of Discovery , and by imperialists from the 17th century to the early 20th century. During the Great Divergence , a term coined by Samuel Huntington [ 68 ] the Western world overcame pre-modern growth constraints and emerged during the 19th century as the most powerful and wealthy world civilization of the time, eclipsing Qing China , Mughal India , Tokugawa Japan , and the Ottoman Empire . The process was accompanied and reinforced by the Age of Discovery and continued into the modern period. Scholars have proposed a wide variety of theories to explain why the Great Divergence happened, including lack of government intervention, geography, colonialism, and customary traditions.

The Age of Discovery faded into the Age of Enlightenment of the 18th century, during which cultural and intellectual forces in European society emphasized reason, analysis, and individualism rather than traditional lines of authority. It challenged the authority of institutions that were deeply rooted in society, such as the Catholic Church; there was much talk of ways to reform society with toleration, science and skepticism .

Philosophers of the Enlightenment included Francis Bacon , René Descartes , John Locke , Baruch Spinoza , Voltaire (1694–1778), Jean-Jacques Rousseau , David Hume , and Immanuel Kant , [ 69 ] who influenced society by publishing widely read works. Upon learning about enlightened views, some rulers met with intellectuals and tried to apply their reforms, such as allowing for toleration, or accepting multiple religions, in what became known as enlightened absolutism . New ideas and beliefs spread around Europe and were fostered by an increase in literacy due to a departure from solely religious texts. Publications include Encyclopédie (1751–72) that was edited by Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert . The Dictionnaire philosophique (Philosophical Dictionary, 1764) and Letters on the English (1733) written by Voltaire spread the ideals of the Enlightenment.

Coinciding with the Age of Enlightenment was the Scientific Revolution , spearheaded by Newton. This included the emergence of modern science , during which developments in mathematics , physics , astronomy , biology (including human anatomy ) and chemistry transformed views of society and nature.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] [ excessive citations ] While its dates are disputed, the publication in 1543 of Nicolaus Copernicus 's De revolutionibus orbium coelestium ( On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres ) is often cited as marking the beginning of the scientific revolution, and its completion is attributed to the "grand synthesis" of Newton's 1687 Principia .

Industrial Revolution [ edit ] A Watt steam engine . The steam engine , made of iron and fueled primarily by coal, propelled the Industrial Revolution in Great Britain and the world.

[ 76 ] The Industrial Revolution was the transition to new manufacturing processes in the period from about 1760 to sometime between 1820 and 1840. This included going from hand production methods to machines, new chemical manufacturing and iron production processes, improved efficiency of water power , the increasing use of steam power , and the development of machine tools .

[ 77 ] These transitions began in Great Britain and spread to Western Europe and North America within a few decades.

[ 78 ] The Industrial Revolution marks a major turning point in history; almost every aspect of daily life was influenced in some way. In particular, average income and population began to exhibit unprecedented sustained growth. Some economists say that the major impact of the Industrial Revolution was that the standard of living for the general population began to increase consistently for the first time in history, although others have said that it did not begin to meaningfully improve until the late 19th and 20th centuries.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] [ 81 ] The precise start and end of the Industrial Revolution is still debated among historians, as is the pace of economic and social changes.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] GDP per capita was broadly stable before the Industrial Revolution and the emergence of the modern capitalist economy, [ 86 ] while the Industrial Revolution began an era of per-capita economic growth in capitalist economies.

[ 87 ] Economic historians are in agreement that the onset of the Industrial Revolution is the most important event in the history of humanity since the domestication of animals, plants [ 88 ] and fire.

The First Industrial Revolution evolved into the Second Industrial Revolution in the transition years between 1840 and 1870, when technological and economic progress continued with the increasing adoption of steam transport (steam-powered railways, boats, and ships), the large-scale manufacture of machine tools and the increasing use of machinery in steam-powered factories.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] [ 91 ] Post-Industrial era [ edit ] Tendencies that have come to define modern Western societies include the concept of political pluralism , individualism , prominent subcultures or countercultures (such as New Age movements) and increasing cultural syncretism resulting from globalization and immigration. Western culture has been heavily influenced by the Renaissance, the Ages of Discovery and Enlightenment and the Industrial and Scientific Revolutions .

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] In the 20th century, Christianity declined in influence in many Western countries, mostly in the European Union where some member states have experienced falling church attendance and membership in recent years, [ 94 ] and also elsewhere.

Secularism (separating religion from politics and science) increased. Christianity remains the dominant religion in the Western world, where 70% are Christians.

[ 95 ] The West went through a series of great cultural and social changes between 1945 and 1980. The emergent mass media (film, radio, television and recorded music) created a global culture that could ignore national frontiers. Literacy became almost universal, encouraging the growth of books, magazines and newspapers. The influence of cinema and radio remained, while televisions became near essentials in every home.

By the mid-20th century, Western culture was exported worldwide, and the development and growth of international transport and telecommunication (such as transatlantic cable and the radiotelephone ) played a decisive role in modern globalization. The West has contributed a great many technological, political, philosophical, artistic and religious aspects to modern international culture: having been a crucible of Catholicism , Protestantism , democracy, industrialisation; the first major civilisation to seek to abolish slavery during the 19th century, the first to enfranchise women (beginning in Australasia at the end of the 19th century) and the first to put to use such technologies as steam , electric and nuclear power . The West invented cinema, television, the personal computer, the Internet and video games; developed sports such as soccer, cricket , golf , tennis , rugby , basketball , and volleyball ; and transported humans to an astronomical object for the first time with the 1969 Apollo 11 Moon Landing .

Arts and humanities [ edit ] See also: Western canon Detail of the Bayeux Tapestry showing William the Conqueror (centre), his half-brothers Robert, Count of Mortain (right) and Odo , Bishop of Bayeux in the Duchy of Normandy (left). The Bayeux tapestry is one of the supreme achievements of the Norman Romanesque .

Music [ edit ] In music, Catholic monks developed the first forms of modern Western musical notation to standardize liturgy throughout the worldwide Church, [ 96 ] and an enormous body of religious music has been composed for it through the ages. This led directly to the emergence and development of European classical music and its many derivatives. The Baroque style, which encompassed music, art, and architecture, was particularly encouraged by the post-Reformation Catholic Church as such forms offered a means of religious expression that was stirring and emotional, intended to stimulate religious fervor.

[ 97 ] The symphony , concerto, sonata , opera, and oratorio have their origins in Italy. Many musical instruments developed in the West have come to see widespread use all over the world; among them are the guitar, violin, piano, pipe organ , saxophone, trombone, clarinet, accordion , and the theremin . In turn, it has been claimed that some European instruments have roots in earlier Eastern instruments that were adopted from the medieval Islamic world .

[ 98 ] The solo piano, symphony orchestra , and the string quartet are also significant musical innovations of the West.

Claudio Monteverdi , 1567–1643 Antonio Lucio Vivaldi , 1678–1741 George Frideric Handel , 1685–1759 Johann Sebastian Bach , 1685–1750 Franz Joseph Haydn , 1732–1809 Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart , 1756–1791 Ludwig van Beethoven , 1770–1827 Frédéric François Chopin , 1810–1849 Franz Liszt , 1811–1886 Painting and photography [ edit ] Jan van Eyck , among other renaissance painters, made great advances in oil painting , and perspective drawings and paintings had their earliest practitioners in Florence .

[ 99 ] In art, the Celtic knot is a very distinctive Western repeated motif. Depictions of the nude human male and female in photography, painting, and sculpture are frequently considered to have special artistic merit. Realistic portraiture is especially valued.

Photography and the motion picture as both a technology and basis for entirely new art forms were also developed in the West.

Restoration of a fresco from an Ancient Roman villa bedroom, circa 50–40 BC, dimensions of the room: 265.4 × 334 × 583.9 cm, in the Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York City) Mona Lisa , by Leonardo da Vinci , c. 1503 – 1506, perhaps continuing until circa 1517, oil on poplar panel, 77 cm × 53 cm, Louvre (Paris) Las Meninas , by Diego Velázquez , 1656, oil on canvas, 318 cm × 276 cm, El Prado (Madrid) Dance at Le moulin de la Galette , by Pierre-Auguste Renoir , 1876, oil on canvas, height: 131 cm, Musée d'Orsay (Paris) Photo of the interior of the apartment of Eugène Atget , taken in 1910 in Paris Rêverie , by Alphonse Mucha , poster for the publishing house Champenois (1897) Dance and performing arts [ edit ] Classical music, opera and ballet: Swan Lake pictured The ballet is a distinctively Western form of performance dance.

[ 100 ] The ballroom dance is an important Western variety of dance for the elite. The polka , the square dance , the flamenco , and the Irish step dance are very well known Western forms of folk dance .

Greek and Roman theatre are considered the antecedents of modern theatre, and forms such as medieval theatre , Passion Plays , morality plays , and commedia dell'arte are considered highly influential.

Elizabethan theatre , with playwrights including William Shakespeare , Christopher Marlowe , and Ben Jonson , is considered one of the most formative and important eras for modern drama.

The soap opera, a popular culture dramatic form, originated in the United States first on radio in the 1930s, then a couple of decades later on television. The music video was also developed in the West in the middle of the 20th century. Musical theatre was developed in the West in the 19th and 20th Centuries, from music hall , comic opera , and Vaudeville ; with significant contributions from the Jewish diaspora , African-Americans , and other marginalized peoples.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] [ 103 ] Literature [ edit ] The Divine Comedy is an epic poem by Dante Alighieri . Engraving by Gustave Doré .

Western literature encompasses the literary traditions of Europe, as well as North America, Oceania and Latin America.

[ 104 ] While epic literary works in verse such as the Mahabharata and Homer's Iliad are ancient and occurred worldwide, the prose novel as a distinct form of storytelling, with developed, consistent human characters and, typically, some connected overall plot (although both of these characteristics have sometimes been modified and played with in later times), was popularized by the West [ 105 ] in the 17th and 18th centuries. Of course, extended prose fiction had existed much earlier; both novels of adventure and romance in the Hellenistic world and in Heian Japan. Both Petronius ' Satyricon (c. 60 CE) and the Tale of Genji by Murasaki Shikibu (c. 1000 CE) have been cited as the world's first major novel but they had a very limited long-term impact on literary writing beyond their own day until much more recent times.

Tragedy , from its ritually and mythologically inspired Greek origins to modern forms where struggle and downfall are often rooted in psychological or social, rather than mythical, motives, is also widely considered a specifically European creation and can be seen as a forerunner of some aspects of both the novel and of classical opera.

Architecture [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( June 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Important Western architectural motifs include the Doric , Corinthian , and Ionic orders of Greek architecture , [ 106 ] and the Romanesque , Gothic , Renaissance , Baroque , and Victorian styles, which are still widely recognized and used in contemporary Western architecture. Much of Western architecture emphasizes repetition of simple motifs, straight lines and expansive, undecorated planes. A modern ubiquitous architectural form that emphasizes this characteristic is the skyscraper , their modern equivalent first developed in New York and Chicago. The predecessor of the skyscraper can be found in the medieval towers erected in Bologna .

The Parthenon under restoration in 2008, the most iconic Classical building, built from 447 BC to 432 BC, located in Athens The facade of Angoulême Cathedral was built between 1110 and 1128 in the Romanesque style.

Stained glass windows of the Sainte-Chapelle in Paris, completed in 1248, mostly constructed between 1194 and 1220 in the Gothic style The Palazzo Farnese , in Rome , built from 1534 to 1545, was designed by Sangallo and Michelangelo and is an important example of renaissance architecture .

The Palais Garnier in Paris, built between 1861 and 1875, a Beaux-Arts masterpiece Cuisine [ edit ] See also: Western cuisine and Western food Western foodways were, until recently, considered to have their roots in the cuisines of Classical Rome and Greece, but the influence of Arab and Near Eastern cuisine on the West has become a topic of research in recent decades. The Crusaders , known mostly for fighting over holy land, settled in the Levant and acclimated to the local culture and cuisine.

Fulcher of Chartres said "For we who were occidentals have now become orientals." These cultural experiences, carried back to France by notables like Eleanor of Aquitaine influenced Western European foodways. Many Oriental ingredients were relatively new to the Western lands. Sugar, almonds, pistachios, rosewater, and dried citrus fruits were all novelties to the Crusaders who encountered them in Saracen lands. Pepper, ginger and cinnamon were the most widely used spices of the European courts and noble households. By the end of the Middle Ages, cloves , nutmeg , mastic , galingale , and other imported spices had become part of the Western cuisine.

[ 107 ] Saracen influence can be seen in medieval cookbooks. Some recipes retain their Arabic names in Italian translations of the Liber de Coquina . Known as bruet Sarassinois in the cuisine of North France, the concept of sweet and sour sauce is attested to in Greek tradition when Anthimus finishes his stew with vinegar and honey. Saracens combined sweet ingredients like date-juice and honey with pomegranate, lemons and citrus juices, or other sour ingredients. The technique of browning pieces of meat and simmering in liquid with vegetables is used in many recipes from the Baghdad cookery book . The same technique appears in the late-13th century Viandier . Fried pieces of beef simmered in wine with sugar and cloves was called bruet of Sarcynesse in English.

[ 107 ] Scientific and technological inventions and discoveries [ edit ] Medieval Christians believed that to seek the geometric, physical and mathematical principles that govern the world was to seek and worship God. Detail of a scene in the bowl of the letter 'P' with a woman with a set-square and dividers; using a compass to measure distances on a diagram. In her left hand she holds a square, an implement for testing or drawing right angles. She is watched by a group of students. In the Middle Ages, it is unusual to see women represented as teachers, in particular when the students appear to be monks. She is most likely the personification of Geometry, based on Martianus Capella's famous book De Nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii [5th c.], a standard source for allegorical imagery of the seven liberal arts. Illustration at the beginning of Euclid's Elementa, in the translation attributed to Adelard of Bath.

A doctor of philosophy of the University of Oxford , in full academic dress. The typical dress for graduation are gowns and hoods or hats adapted from the daily dress of university staff in the Middle Ages, which was in turn based on the attire worn by medieval clergy.

[ 108 ] The Greek Antikythera mechanism is generally referred to as the first known analogue computer .

Apollo 11 astronaut Buzz Aldrin , Apollo Lunar Module pilot of the first crewed mission to land on the Moon, poses for a photograph beside the deployed United States flag during his Extravehicular Activity (EVA) on the lunar surface.

A notable feature of Western culture is its strong emphasis and focus on innovation and invention through science and technology, and its ability to generate new processes, materials and material artifacts with its roots dating back to the Ancient Greeks. The scientific method as "a method or procedure that has characterized natural science since the 17th century, consisting in systematic observation, measurement, and experiment, and the formulation, testing, and modification of hypotheses" was fashioned by the 17th-century Italian Galileo Galilei , [ 109 ] [ 110 ] with roots in the work of medieval scholars such as the 11th-century Iraqi physicist Ibn al-Haytham [ 111 ] [ 112 ] and the 13th-century English friar Roger Bacon .

[ 113 ] By the will of the Swedish inventor Alfred Nobel the Nobel Prizes were established in 1895. The prizes in Chemistry , Literature , Peace , Physics , and Physiology or Medicine were first awarded in 1901.

[ 114 ] The percentage of ethnically European Nobel prize winners during the first and second halves of the 20th century were respectively 98 and 94 percent.

[ 115 ] The West is credited with the development of the steam engine and adapting its use into factories, and for the generation of electric power .

[ 116 ] The electrical motor , dynamo , transformer , electric light , and most of the familiar electrical appliances, were inventions of the West.

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] [ 119 ] [ 120 ] The Otto and the Diesel internal combustion engines are products whose genesis and early development were in the West.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] Nuclear power stations are derived from the first atomic pile constructed in Chicago in 1942.

[ 123 ] Communication devices and systems including the telegraph , the telephone, radio, television, communications and navigation satellites , mobile phone, and the Internet were all invented by Westerners.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] [ 126 ] [ 127 ] [ 128 ] [ 129 ] [ 130 ] [ 131 ] The pencil , ballpoint pen , Cathode ray tube , liquid-crystal display , light-emitting diode , camera, photocopier , laser printer , ink jet printer , plasma display screen and World Wide Web were also invented in the West.

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] [ 134 ] [ 135 ] [ 136 ] Ubiquitous materials including aluminum, clear glass, synthetic rubber , synthetic diamond and the plastics polyethylene , polypropylene , polyvinyl chloride and polystyrene were discovered and developed or invented in the West. Iron and steel ships, bridges and skyscrapers first appeared in the West.

Nitrogen fixation and petrochemicals were invented by Westerners. Most of the elements were discovered and named in the West, as well as the contemporary atomic theories to explain them.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] [ 139 ] [ 140 ] [ 141 ] [ 142 ] [ 143 ] [ 144 ] The transistor , integrated circuit , memory chip, first programming language and computer were all first seen in the West. The ship's chronometer , the screw propeller , the locomotive , bicycle, automobile , and airplane were all invented in the West.

Eyeglasses , the telescope , the microscope and electron microscope , all the varieties of chromatography , protein and DNA sequencing , computerised tomography , nuclear magnetic resonance , x-rays , and light, ultraviolet and infrared spectroscopy , were all first developed and applied in Western laboratories, hospitals and factories.

[ citation needed ] In medicine, the pure antibiotics were created in the West. The method of preventing Rh disease , the treatment of diabetes , and the germ theory of disease were discovered by Westerners. The eradication of smallpox , was led by a Westerner, Donald Henderson .

Radiography , computed tomography , positron emission tomography and medical ultrasonography are important diagnostic tools developed in the West. Other important diagnostic tools of clinical chemistry , including the methods of spectrophotometry , electrophoresis and immunoassay , were first devised by Westerners. So were the stethoscope , the electrocardiograph , and the endoscope .

Vitamins , hormonal contraception , hormones , insulin , beta blockers and ACE inhibitors , along with a host of other medically proven drugs, were first used to treat disease in the West. The double-blind study and evidence-based medicine are critical scientific techniques widely used in the West for medical purposes.

[ citation needed ] Euler is widely regarded to be one of the greatest mathematicians in history.

In mathematics, calculus , statistics, logic , vectors , tensors and complex analysis , group theory , abstract algebra and topology were developed by Westerners.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] [ 147 ] [ 148 ] [ 149 ] [ 150 ] [ 151 ] In biology, evolution , chromosomes , DNA , genetics and the methods of molecular biology are creations of the West. In physics, the science of mechanics and quantum mechanics , relativity , thermodynamics , and statistical mechanics were all developed by Westerners. The discoveries and inventions by Westerners in electromagnetism include Coulomb's law (1785), the first battery (1800), the unity of electricity and magnetism (1820), Biot–Savart law (1820), Ohm's law (1827), and Maxwell's equations (1871). The atom , nucleus , electron , neutron and proton were all unveiled by Westerners.

[ citation needed ] The world's most widely adopted system of measurement, the International System of Units , derived from the metric system , was first developed in France and evolved through contributions from various Westerners.

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] In business, economics, and finance, double entry bookkeeping , credit cards, and the charge card were all first used in the West.

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] Westerners are also known for their explorations of the globe and outer space . The first expedition to circumnavigate the Earth (1522) was by Westerners, as well as the first journey to the South Pole (1911), and the first Moon landing (1969).

[ 156 ] [ 157 ] The landing of robots on Mars (2004 and 2012) and on an asteroid (2001), the Voyager 2 explorations of the outer planets ( Uranus in 1986 and Neptune in 1989), Voyager 1 ' s passage into interstellar space (2013), and New Horizons ' flyby of Pluto (2015) were significant recent Western achievements.

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] [ 160 ] [ 161 ] [ 162 ] Media [ edit ] Main article: Western media The roots of modern-day Western mass media can be traced back to the late 15th century, when printing presses began to operate throughout wealthy European cities. The emergence of news media in the 17th century has to be seen in close connection with the spread of the printing press , from which the publishing press derives its name.

[ 163 ] In the 16th century, a decrease in the preeminence of Latin in its literary use, along with the impact of economic change, the discoveries arising from trade and travel, navigation to the New World , science and arts and the development of increasingly rapid communications through print led to a rising corpus of vernacular media content in European society.

[ 164 ] After the launch of the satellite Sputnik 1 by the Soviet Union in 1957, satellite transmission technology was dramatically realised, with the United States launching Telstar in 1962 linking live media broadcasts from the UK to the US. The first digital broadcast satellite (DBS) system began transmitting in US in 1975.

[ 165 ] Beginning in the 1990s, the Internet has contributed to a tremendous increase in the accessibility of Western media content. Departing from media offered in bundled content packages (magazines, CDs, television and radio slots ), the Internet has primarily offered unbundled content items ( articles , audio and video files).

[ 166 ] Religion [ edit ] Main article: Western religions The native religions of Europe were polytheistic but not homogenous – however, they were similar insofar as they were predominantly Indo-European in origin.

Roman religion was similar to but not the same as Hellenic religion – likewise for indigenous Germanic polytheism , Celtic polytheism and Slavic polytheism . Before this time many Europeans from the north, especially Scandinavians, remained polytheistic, though southern Europe was predominantly Christian from the 5th century onwards.

Western culture at a fundamental level is influenced by the Judeo-Christian and Greco-Roman traditions.

[ 167 ] These cultures had a number of similarities, such as a common emphasis on the individual, but they also embody fundamentally conflicting worldviews. For example, in Judaism and Christianity, God is the ultimate authority, while Greco-Roman tradition considers the ultimate authority to be reason . Christian attempts to reconcile these frameworks were responsible for the preservation of Greek philosophy .

[ 167 ] Historically, Europe has been the center and cradle of Christian civilization .

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] [ 170 ] [ 171 ] St. Peter's Basilica in the Vatican , the epicenter of the Catholic Church .

According to a survey by Pew Research Center from 2011, Christianity remains the dominant religion in the Western world where 70–84% are Christians, [ 95 ] According to this survey, 76% of Europeans described themselves as Christians, [ 95 ] [ 172 ] [ 173 ] and about 86% of the Americas ' population identified themselves as Christians, [ 174 ] (90% in Latin America and 77% in North America).

[ 173 ] 73% in Oceania self-identify as Christian, and 76% in South Africa are Christian.

[ 95 ] Eurobarometer polls about religiosity in the European Union in 2012 found that Christianity was the largest religion in the European Union , accounting for 72% of the population.

[ 175 ] Catholics are the largest Christian group, accounting for 48%, while Protestants make up 12%, Eastern Orthodox make up 8% and other Christians make up 4% of the population respectively.

[ 176 ] In addition, Non-believers/Agnostics account for 16%, [ 175 ] atheists account for 7%, [ 175 ] and Muslims account for 2% of the population respectively.

[ 175 ] According to Scholars, in 2017, Europe's population was 77.8% Christian (up from 74.9% 1970), [ 177 ] [ 178 ] these changes were largely largely ascribed to the collapse of Communism and switching to Christianity in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc countries.

[ 177 ] At the same time, there has been an increase in the share of agnostic or atheist residents in Europe that accounted for 18% of the European population in 2012.

[ 179 ] In particular, over half of the population of the Czech Republic ( 79% ) was agnostic, atheist or irreligious, compared to the United Kingdom ( 52% ), Germany ( 25–33% ), [ 180 ] France (30–35%) [ 181 ] [ 182 ] [ 183 ] and the Netherlands (39–44%).

As in other areas, the Jewish diaspora and Judaism exist in the Western world.

There are also small but increasing numbers of people across the Western world who seek to revive the indigenous religions of their European ancestors; such groups include Germanic , Roman , Hellenic , Celtic , Slavic , and polytheistic reconstructionist movements. Likewise, Wicca , New Age spirituality and other neo-pagan belief systems enjoy notable minority support in Western states.

Sport [ edit ] Main article: Western sports The Bull-Leaping Fresco from the Great Palace at Knossos , Crete . Sport has been an important part of Western culture since Classical Antiquity .

Baron Pierre de Coubertin , founder of the International Olympic Committee , and considered father of the modern Olympic Games Since classical antiquity , sport has been an important facet of Western cultural expression.

[ 184 ] [ 185 ] A wide range of sports was already established by the time of Ancient Greece and the military culture and the development of sports in Greece influenced one another considerably. Sports became such a prominent part of their culture that the Greeks created the Olympic Games , which in ancient times were held every four years in a small village in the Peloponnesus called Olympia . Baron Pierre de Coubertin , a Frenchman, instigated the modern revival of the Olympic movement. The first modern Olympic games were held at Athens in 1896 .

The Romans built immense structures such as the amphitheatres to house their festivals of sport. The Romans exhibited a passion for blood sports , such as the infamous Gladiatorial battles that pitted contestants against one another in a fight to the death. The Olympic Games revived many of the sports of classical antiquity —such as Greco-Roman wrestling , discus and javelin .
The sport of bullfighting is a traditional spectacle of Spain, Portugal, southern France, and some Latin American countries. It traces its roots to prehistoric bull worship and sacrifice and is often linked to Rome, where many human-versus-animal events were held. Bullfighting spread from Spain to its American colonies, and in the 19th century to France, where it developed into a distinctive form in its own right.

[ 186 ] Jousting and hunting were popular sports in the European Middle Ages, and the aristocratic classes developed passions for leisure activities. A great number of popular global sports were first developed or codified in Europe. The modern game of golf originated in Scotland, where the first written record of golf is James II 's banning of the game in 1457, as an unwelcome distraction to learning archery .

[ 187 ] The Industrial Revolution that began in Great Britain in the 18th century brought increased leisure time, leading to more opportunities for citizens to participate in athletic activities and also follow spectator sports. These trends continued with the advent of mass media and global communication. The bat and ball sport of cricket was first played in England during the 16th century and was exported around the globe via the British Empire . A number of popular modern sports were devised or codified in the United Kingdom during the 19th century and obtained global prominence; these include ping pong , modern tennis , association football, netball and rugby .

[ 188 ] Football (or soccer) remains hugely popular in Europe, but has grown from its origins to be known as the world game . Similarly, sports such as cricket, rugby, and netball were exported around the world, particularly among countries in the Commonwealth of Nations , thus India and Australia are among the strongest cricketing states, while victory in the Rugby World Cup has been shared among New Zealand, Australia, England, and South Africa.

Australian Rules Football , an Australian variation of football with similarities to Gaelic football and rugby , evolved in the British colony of Victoria in the mid-19th century. The United States also developed unique variations of English sports. English migrants took antecedents of baseball to America during the colonial period. The history of American football can be traced to early versions of rugby football and association football. Many games are known as "football" were being played at colleges and universities in the United States in the first half of the 19th century. American football resulted from several major divergences from rugby, most notably the rule changes instituted by Walter Camp , the "Father of American football".

Basketball was invented in 1891 by James Naismith , a Canadian physical education instructor working in Springfield, Massachusetts , in the United States.

Volleyball was created in Holyoke, Massachusetts , a city directly north of Springfield, in 1895.

Themes and traditions [ edit ] A Madonna and Child painting by an anonymous Italian from the first half of the 19th century, oil on canvas Western culture has developed many themes and traditions, the most significant of which are: [ citation needed ] Greco-Roman classic letters, arts, architecture, philosophical and cultural tradition, which include the influence of preeminent authors and philosophers such as Socrates , Plato , Aristotle , Homer , Virgil , and Cicero , as well as a long mythologic tradition .

Christian ethical, philosophical, and mythological tradition, stemming largely from the Christian Bible , particularly the New Testament Gospels.

[ 189 ] [ 190 ] [ 191 ] Monasteries, schools, libraries, books, book making, universities, teaching, education, and lecture halls.

A tradition of the importance of the rule of law .

Secular humanism , rationalism and Enlightenment thought. This set the basis for a new critical attitude and open questioning of religion, favouring freethinking and questioning of the church as an authority, which resulted in open-minded and reformist ideals inside, such as liberation theology , which partly adopted these currents, and secular and political tendencies such as separation of church and state (sometimes termed laicism ), agnosticism and atheism .

Generalized usage of some form of the Latin alphabet , used by the majority of Europe, Greek alphabet , used in Greece or Cyrillic script , used by southern and eastern Slavic states of Eastern Orthodox tradition, historically influenced by the Byzantine Empire or the Bulgarian Empire, and later within the Russian czarist or the Soviet area of influence. Other variants of the Latin or Greek alphabets are found in the Gothic and Coptic alphabets , which historically superseded older scripts, such as runes , and the Egyptian Demotic and Hieroglyphic systems.

Natural law , human rights, constitutionalism , parliamentarism (or presidentialism ) and formal liberal democracy in recent times—prior to the 19th century, most Western governments were still monarchies.

A large influence, in modern times , of many of the ideals and values developed and inherited from Romanticism .

An emphasis on, and use of, science as a means of understanding the natural world and humanity's place in it.

More pronounced use and application of innovation and scientific developments, as well as a more rational approach to scientific progress (what has been known as the scientific method ).

See also [ edit ] Society portal Europe portal Atlanticism Christendom Classical tradition Culture during the Cold War Eastern world Eastern culture European diaspora Greco-Roman world Western education Western religion Westernization Western values Notes [ edit ] ^ British archaeologist D. G. Hogarth published The Nearer East in 1902, which helped to define the term and its extent, including Albania , Montenegro , southern Serbia and Bulgaria , Greece , Egypt , all Ottoman lands, the entire Arabian Peninsula , and Western parts of Iran .

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Lewis, Martin W.; Wigen, Kären (1997).

The Myth of Continents: A Critique of Metageography . University of California Press. p. 226.

ISBN 978-0-520-20743-1 .

^ Hanson, Victor Davis (2007).

Carnage and Culture: Landmark Battles in the Rise to Western Power . Knopf Doubleday.

ISBN 978-0-307-42518-8 .

the term "Western" — refer to the culture of classical antiquity that arose in Greece and Rome; survived the collapse of the Roman Empire; spread to western and northern Europe; then during the great periods of exploration and colonization of the fifteenth through nineteenth centuries expanded to the Americas, Australia and areas of Asia and Africa; and now exercises global political, economic, cultural, and military power far greater than the size of its territory or population might otherwise suggest.

^ Freeman, Charles (September 2000).

The Greek Achievement: The Foundation of the Western World . Penguin.

ISBN 978-0-14-029323-4 .

The Greeks provided the chromosomes of Western civilization. One does not have to idealize the Greeks to sustain that point. Greek ways of exploring the cosmos, defining the problems of knowledge (and what is meant by knowledge itself), creating the language in which such problems are explored, representing the physical world and human society in the arts, defining the nature of value, describing the past, still underlie the Western cultural tradition Cartledge, Paul (2002).

The Greeks: A Portrait of Self and Others . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-157783-3 .

Greekness was identified with freedom-spiritual and social as well as political-and slavery was equated with being barbarian, [...] 'democracy' was a Greek invention (celebrating its 2,500th anniversary in 1993/4) [...] an ancient culture, that of the Greeks — is both a foundation stone of our own (Western) civilization and at the same time in key respects a deeply alien phenomenon.

Pagden, Anthony (2008).

Worlds at War: The 2,500 - Year Struggle Between East and West . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-923743-2 .

Had the Persians overrun all of mainland Greece, had they then transformed the Greek city-states into satrapies of the Persian Empire, had Greek democracy been snuffed out, there would have been no Greek theater, no Greek science, no Plato, no Aristotle, no Sophocles, no Aeschylus. The incredible burst of creative energy that took place during the fifth and fourth centuries B.C.E. and that laid the foundation for all of later Western civilization would never have happened. [...] in the years between 490 and 479 B.C.E., the entire future of the Western world hung precariously in the balance ^ Richard, Carl J. (16 April 2010).

Why We're All Romans: The Roman Contribution to the Western World . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-7425-6780-1 .

In 1,200 years the tiny village of Rome established a republic, conquered all of the Mediterranean basin and western Europe, lost its republic, and finally, surrendered its empire. In the process the Romans laid the foundation of Western civilization. [...] The pragmatic Romans brought Greek and Hebrew ideas down to earth, modified them, and transmitted them throughout western Europe. [...] Roman law remains the basis for the legal codes of most western European and Latin American countries — Even in English-speaking countries, where common law prevails, Roman law has exerted substantial influence Sharon, Moshe (2004).

Studies in Modern Religions, Religious Movements and the Båabåi-Bahåa'åi Faiths . Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-13904-6 .

Side by side with Christianity, the classical Greco-Roman world forms the sound foundation of Western civilization. Greek philosophy is also the origin for the methods and contents of the philosophical thought and theological investigation in Islam and Judaism Grant, Michael (1991).

The Founders of the Western World: A History of Greece and Rome . Scribner.

ISBN 978-0-684-19303-8 – via Internet Archive.

Perry, Marvin; Chase, Myrna; Jacob, James; Jacob, Margaret; Laue, Theodore H. Von (2012).

Western Civilization: Since 1400 . Cengage.

ISBN 978-1-111-83169-1 .

^ Nightingale, Andrea (2007). "The Philosophers in Archaic Greek Culture". In Shapiro, H. A.; Antonaccio, Carla M. (eds.).

The Cambridge Companion to Archaic Greece . Cambridge companions to the ancient world. Cambridge University Press. p. 171.

ISBN 978-0-521-52929-7 .

We have ample evidence that the Greek thinkers encountered and responded to many different cultures and ideologies. Consider, for example, the city of Miletus, which was the center of intellectual activity in sixth-century Ionia. Miletus bordered on the Lydian and, later, the Persian empires and had extensive dealings with these cultures.In addition, it had trading relations all over the Mediterranean and sent out numerous colonies to Egypt and Thrace. The Milesian thinkers thus encountered ideas and practices from all over the "known" world. In the Archaic period, the interaction of different peoples from Greece, Italy, Egypt, and the Near East created a cultural ferment that had a profound impact on Greek life and thought.

^ Boardman, John (1982), "The material culture of Archaic Greece" , in Boardman, John; Hammond, N. G. L. (eds.), The Cambridge Ancient History , vol. 3 (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press, p. 450, doi : 10.1017/chol9780521234474.018 , ISBN 978-0-521-23447-4 , retrieved 20 October 2024 , Knowledge of Egyptian art after the mid century led to Greek exploitation of the harder stone, their white island marble, for the first time, and the creation of figures at life size or more. We know these best—the kouroi and korai—as dedications and grave markers, but a prime use for monumental statuary must have been as cult images and it is at about this time that the temple-houses, oikoi, for these images begin to receive a monumental form and, again probably through inspiration from Egypt are decorated with architectural orders: first the Doric in homeland Greece, then the orientalizing Ionic in the East Greek world.

^ Scott, John C (2018).

"The Phoenicians and the Formation of the Western World" .

Comparative Civilizations Review .

78 (78).

Brigham Young University .

ISSN 0733-4540 .

^ Green, P. (2008).

Alexander The Great and the Hellenistic Age . Phoenix. p. xiii.

ISBN 978-0-7538-2413-9 .

^ Porter, Stanley E. (2013).

Early Christianity in its Hellenistic context. Volume 2, Christian origins and Hellenistic Judaism: social and literary contexts for the New Testament . Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 978-9004234765 .

^ Hengel, Martin (2003).

Judaism and Hellenism: studies in their encounter in Palestine during the early Hellenistic period . Eugene, OR: Wipf & Stock.

ISBN 978-1-59244-186-0 .

^ Spielvogel, Jackson J. (2016).

Western Civilization: A Brief History, Volume I: To 1715 (Cengage Learning ed.). Cengage Learning. p. 156.

ISBN 978-1-305-63347-6 .

^ Neill, Thomas Patrick (1957).

Readings in the History of Western Civilization, Volume 2 (Newman Press ed.). p. 224.

^ O'Collins, Gerald ; Farrugia, Maria (2003).

Catholicism: The Story of Catholic Christianity . Oxford University Press. p. v.

ISBN 978-0-19-925995-3 .

^ a b Haskins, Charles Homer (1927), The Renaissance of the Twelfth Century , Cambridge: Harvard University Press, ISBN 978-0-6747-6075-2 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b George Sarton: A Guide to the History of Science Waltham Mass. U.S.A. 1952 ^ a b Burnett, Charles.  "The Coherence of the Arabic-Latin Translation Program in Toledo in the Twelfth Century", Science in Context , 14 (2001): 249–288.

^ a b Geanakoplos, Deno John (1989).

Constantinople and the West : essays on the late Byzantine (Palaeologan) and Italian Renaissances and the Byzantine and Roman churches . Madison, Wis.: University of Wisconsin Press.

ISBN 0-299-11880-0 .

OCLC 19353503 .

^ a b Rüegg, Walter: "Foreword. The University as a European Institution", in: A History of the University in Europe. Vol. 1: Universities in the Middle Ages , Cambridge University Press, 1992, ISBN 0-521-36105-2 , pp. xix–xx ^ a b Verger 1999 ^ a b Risse, Guenter B. (April 1999).

Mending Bodies, Saving Souls: A History of Hospitals . Oxford University Press. p.

59 .

ISBN 978-0-19-505523-8 .

^ a b Schumpeter, Joseph (1954).

History of Economic Analysis . London: Allen & Unwin.

^ "Review of How the Catholic Church Built Western Civilization by Thomas Woods, Jr" .

National Review Book Service . Archived from the original on 22 August 2006 . Retrieved 16 September 2006 .

^ Cf.

Jeremy Waldron (2002), God, Locke, and Equality: Christian Foundations in Locke's Political Thought , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (UK), ISBN 978-0-521-89057-1 , pp. 189, 208 ^ The Protestant Heritage Archived 23 February 2018 at the Wayback Machine , Britannica ^ McNeill, William H. (2010).

History of Western Civilization: A Handbook (University of Chicago Press ed.). University of Chicago Press. p. 204.

ISBN 978-0-226-56162-2 .

^ Faltin, Lucia; Melanie J. Wright (2007).

The Religious Roots of Contemporary European Identity (A&C Black ed.). A&C Black. p.

83 .

ISBN 978-0-8264-9482-5 .

^ Karl Heussi, Kompendium der Kirchengeschichte , 11. Auflage (1956), Tübingen (Germany), pp. 317–319, 325–326 ^ Yin Cheong Cheng, New Paradigm for Re-engineering Education . p. 369 ^ Ainslie Thomas Embree , Carol Gluck , Asia in Western and World History: A Guide for Teaching . p. xvi ^ Kwang-Sae Lee, East and West: Fusion of Horizons [ page needed ] ^ a b c Kwame Anthony Appiah (9 November 2016).

"There Is No Such Thing As Western Civilization" .

^ Kwame Anthony Appiah (9 November 2016).

"There Is No Such Thing As Western Civilization" .

[...] the first recorded use of a word for Europeans as a kind of person, so far as I know, comes out of this history of conflict. In a Latin chronicle, written in 754 in Spain, the author refers to the victors of the Battle of Tours as Europenses , Europeans. So, simply put, the very idea of a 'European' was first used to contrast Christians and Muslims.

^ Graeber, David ; Wengrow, David (9 November 2021). "Farewell to Humanity's Childhood".

The Dawn of Everything: A New History of Humanity . Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

ISBN 9780374721107 . Retrieved 28 February 2023 .

[...] that one group of humans who used to refer to themselves as 'the white race' (and now, generally, call themselves by its more accepted synonym, 'Western civilization') [...].

^ Davidson, Roderic H. (1960). "Where is the Middle East?".

Foreign Affairs .

38 (4): 665– 75.

doi : 10.2307/20029452 .

JSTOR 20029452 .

S2CID 157454140 .

^ Jacobus Bronowski; The Ascent of Man ; Angus & Robertson, 1973 ISBN 0-563-17064-6 ^ Geoffrey Blainey; A Very Short History of the World ; Penguin Books, 2004 ^ Scott 2018 , pp. 38–39.

^ Stearns, Peter N. (2003).

Western civilization in world history . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9781134374755 .

^ Polybius (1980).

The Rise of the Roman Empire .

Oxford University Press . p. 177.

ISBN 9780140443622 .

^ a b Hanson, Victor Davis (18 December 2007).

Carnage and Culture: Landmark Battles in the Rise to Western Power . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0-307-42518-8 .

^ Green, Peter.

Alexander to Actium: The Historical Evolution of the Hellenistic Age . Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990.

^ George G. Joseph (2000).

The Crest of the Peacock , pp. 7–8.

Princeton University Press .

ISBN 0-691-00659-8 ^ Maddison, Angus (2007), Contours of the World Economy, 1–2030 AD: Essays in Macro-Economic History , p. 55, table 1.14, Oxford University Press , ISBN 978-0-19-922721-1 ^ Hero (1899).

"Pneumatika, Book ΙΙ, Chapter XI" .

Herons von Alexandria Druckwerke und Automatentheater (in Greek and German). Translated by Wilhelm Schmidt. Leipzig: B.G. Teubner. pp.

228– 232.

^ Gordon, Cyrus H., The Common Background of the Greek and Hebrew Civilizations, W. W. Norton and Company, New York 1965 ^ Nicholls, William (1995).

Christian Antisemitism: A History of Hate (1st Jason Aronson softcover ed.). Northvale, New Jersey: Jason Aronson.

ISBN 978-1-56821-519-8 .

OCLC 34892303 .

^ Gager, John G. (1983).

The origins of anti-semitism : attitudes toward Judaism in Pagan and Christian antiquity . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-503607-7 .

OCLC 9112202 .

^ "How The Irish Saved Civilisation", by Thomas Cahill, 1995 [ page needed ] ^ Kaiser, Wolfgang (2015).

The Cambridge Companion to Roman Law . pp.

119– 148.

^ Fortenberry, Diane (2017).

THE ART MUSEUM . Phaidon. p. 108.

ISBN 978-0-7148-7502-6 .

^ Elisheva Carlebach; Jacob J. Schacter (25 November 2011).

New Perspectives on Jewish-Christian Relations . BRILL. p. 38.

ISBN 978-90-04-22117-8 .

^ Sanjay Kumar (2021).

A Handbook of Political Geography . K.K. Publications. pp.

125– 127.

^ "Valetudinaria" .

broughttolife.sciencemuseum.org.uk . Archived from the original on 5 October 2018 . Retrieved 22 February 2018 .

^ Risse, Guenter B. (15 April 1999).

Mending Bodies, Saving Souls: A History of Hospitals . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-974869-3 .

^ Chadwick, Owen p. 242.

^ Hastings, p. 309.

^ de Torre, Fr. Joseph M. (1997).

"A Philosophical and Historical Analysis of Modern Democracy, Equality, and Freedom Under the Influence of Christianity" . Catholic Education Resource Center.

^ a b Koch, Carl (1994).

The Catholic Church: Journey, Wisdom, and Mission . Early Middle Ages: St. Mary's Press.

ISBN 978-0-88489-298-4 .

^ Burke, P., The European Renaissance: Centre and Peripheries (1998) ^ Grant God and Reason p. 9 ^ Koch, Carl (1994).

"The Age of Enlightenment" .

The Catholic Church: Journey, Wisdom, and Mission . St. Mary's Press.

ISBN 978-0-88489-298-4 .

^ Dawson, Christopher; Glenn Olsen (1961).

Crisis in Western Education (reprint ed.). CUA Press.

ISBN 978-0-8132-1683-6 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Koch, Carl (1994).

"High Middle Ages" .

The Catholic Church: Journey, Wisdom, and Mission . St. Mary's Press.

ISBN 978-0-88489-298-4 .

^ Koch, Carl (1994).

"Renaissance" .

The Catholic Church: Journey, Wisdom, and Mission . St. Mary's Press.

ISBN 978-0-88489-298-4 .

^ Dawson, Christopher; Glenn Olsen (1961).

Crisis in Western Education (reprint ed.). CUA Press. p. 25.

ISBN 978-0-8132-1683-6 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Koch, Carl (1994).

"Reformation" .

The Catholic Church: Journey, Wisdom, and Mission . St. Mary's Press.

ISBN 978-0-88489-298-4 .

^ Koch, Carl (1994).

"Enlightenment" .

The Catholic Church: Journey, Wisdom, and Mission . St. Mary's Press.

ISBN 978-0-88489-298-4 .

^ Frank 2001 , p. 180.

^ Sootin, Harry. "Isaac Newton." New York, Messner (1955) ^ Galileo Galilei, Two New Sciences , trans.

Stillman Drake , (Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin Pr., 1974), pp. 217, 225, 296–97.

^ Ernest A. Moody (1951). "Galileo and Avempace: The Dynamics of the Leaning Tower Experiment (I)".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

12 (2): 163– 93.

doi : 10.2307/2707514 .

JSTOR 2707514 .

^ Marshall Clagett, The Science of Mechanics in the Middle Ages , (Madison, Univ. of Wisconsin Pr., 1961), pp. 218–19, 252–55, 346, 409–16, 547, 576–78, 673–82; Anneliese Maier , "Galileo and the Scholastic Theory of Impetus", pp. 103–23 in On the Threshold of Exact Science: Selected Writings of Anneliese Maier on Late Medieval Natural Philosophy , (Philadelphia: Univ. of Pennsylvania Pr., 1982).

^ Hannam, p. 342 ^ E. Grant, The Foundations of Modern Science in the Middle Ages: Their Religious, Institutional, and Intellectual Contexts , (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1996), pp. 29–30, 42–47.

^ "Scientific Revolution" .

Encarta . 2007. Archived from the original on 28 October 2009.

^ Watt steam engine File: located in the lobby of into the Superior Technical School of Industrial Engineers of the UPM (Madrid) ^ Landes 1969 , p. 40 ^ Landes 1969 ^ Lucas, Robert E. Jr. (2002).

Lectures on Economic Growth . Cambridge: Harvard University Press. pp.

109–10 .

ISBN 978-0-674-01601-9 .

^ Feinstein, Charles (September 1998). "Pessimism Perpetuated: Real Wages and the Standard of Living in Britain during and after the Industrial Revolution".

Journal of Economic History .

58 (3): 625– 58.

doi : 10.1017/s0022050700021100 .

S2CID 54816980 .

^ Szreter, Simon; Mooney, Graham (February 1998). "Urbanization, Mortality, and the Standard of Living Debate: New Estimates of the Expectation of Life at Birth in Nineteenth-Century British Cities".

The Economic History Review .

51 (1): 104.

doi : 10.1111/1468-0289.00084 .

hdl : 10.1111/1468-0289.00084 .

^ Eric Hobsbawm, The Age of Revolution: Europe 1789–1848 , Weidenfeld & Nicolson Ltd., p. 27 ISBN 0-349-10484-0 ^ Joseph E Inikori.

Africans and the Industrial Revolution in England . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-01079-9 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Berg, Maxine; Hudson, Pat (1992).

"Rehabilitating the Industrial Revolution" (PDF) .

The Economic History Review .

45 (1): 24– 50.

doi : 10.2307/2598327 .

JSTOR 2598327 .

^ Julie Lorenzen.

"Rehabilitating the Industrial Revolution" .

Julie Lorenzen Blog .

Archived from the original on 9 November 2006 . Retrieved 9 November 2006 .

^ Robert Lucas Jr.

(2003).

"The Industrial Revolution" . Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Archived from the original on 27 November 2007 . Retrieved 14 November 2007 .

it is fairly clear that up to 1800 or maybe 1750, no society had experienced sustained growth in per capita income. (Eighteenth century population growth also averaged one-third of 1 percent, the same as production growth.) That is, up to about two centuries ago, per capita incomes in all societies were stagnated at around $400 to $800 per year.

^ Lucas, Robert (2003).

"The Industrial Revolution Past and Future " . Archived from the original on 27 November 2007 . Retrieved 10 July 2016 .

[consider] annual growth rates of 2.4 percent for the first 60 years of the 20th century, of 1 percent for the entire 19th century, of one-third of 1 percent for the 18th century ^ McCloskey, Deidre (2004).

"Review of The Cambridge Economic History of Modern Britain (edited by Roderick Floud and Paul Johnson), Times Higher Education Supplement, 15 January 2004" .

^ Taylor, George Rogers (1951).

The Transportation Revolution, 1815–1860 . M.E. Sharpe.

ISBN 978-0-87332-101-3 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) No name is given to the transition years. The " Transportation Revolution " began with improved roads in the late 18th century.

^ Roe, Joseph Wickham (1916), English and American Tool Builders , New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, LCCN 16011753 . Reprinted by McGraw-Hill, New York and London, 1926 ( LCCN 27-24075 ); and by Lindsay Publications, Inc., Bradley, Illinois, ( ISBN 978-0-917914-73-7 ).

^ Hunter 1985 ^ "Western culture" .

Science Daily .

^ "A brief history of Western culture" .

Khan Academy .

^ Ford, Peter (22 February 2005).

"What place for God in Europe" .

USA Today . Retrieved 24 July 2009 .

^ a b c d ANALYSIS (19 December 2011).

"Global Christianity" . Pewforum.org . Retrieved 17 August 2012 .

^ Hall, p. 100.

^ Murray, p. 45.

^ Sachs, Curt (1940), The History of Musical Instruments , Dover Publications, p. 260, ISBN 978-0-486-45265-4 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Barzun, p. 73 ^ Barzun, p. 329 ^ Lane, Stewart F. (2011).

Jews on Broadway : an historical survey of performers, playwrights, composers, lyricists and producers . Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland.

ISBN 978-0-7864-5917-9 .

OCLC 668182929 .

^ Most, Andrea (2004).

Making Americans : Jews and the Broadway musical . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-01165-6 .

OCLC 52520631 .

^ Jones, John Bush (2003).

Our musicals, ourselves : a social history of the American musical theater . Hanover: Brandeis University Press, published by University Press of New England.

ISBN 978-1-61168-223-6 .

OCLC 654535012 .

^ "Western literature" . 9 May 2023.

^ Barzun, p. 380 ^ "Western architecture" .

britannica.com . Britannica. 22 March 2022. Archived from the original on 1 May 2022 . Retrieved 30 April 2022 .

^ a b Wilson, Anne (2002).

The Saracen Connection: Arab Cuisine and the Medieval West .

^ Graduation through the ages http://www.canterbury.ac.nz/graduation/grad-history.shtml Archived 25 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine ^ "scientific method" , Oxford Dictionaries: British and World English , 2016, archived from the original on 20 June 2016 , retrieved 28 May 2016 ^ Morris Kline (1985) Mathematics for the nonmathematician .

Courier Dover Publications . p. 284.

ISBN 0-486-24823-2 ^ Jim Al-Khalili (4 January 2009).

"The 'first true scientist' " .

BBC News .

^ Tracey Tokuhama-Espinosa (2010).

Mind, Brain, and Education Science: A Comprehensive Guide to the New Brain-Based Teaching . W.W. Norton & Company. p. 39.

ISBN 978-0-393-70607-9 .

Alhazen (or Al-Haytham; 965–1039 CE) was perhaps one of the greatest physicists of all times and a product of the Islamic Golden Age or Islamic Renaissance (7th–13th centuries). He made significant contributions to anatomy, astronomy, engineering, mathematics, medicine, ophthalmology, philosophy, physics, psychology, and visual perception and is primarily attributed as the inventor of the scientific method, for which author Bradley Steffens (2006) describes him as the "first scientist".

^ Ackerman, James S. (1978). "Leonardo's Eye".

Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes .

41 : 119.

doi : 10.2307/750865 .

JSTOR 750865 .

S2CID 195048595 .

^ "Which country has the best brains?" .

BBC News . 8 October 2010 . Retrieved 6 December 2011 .

^ Charles Murray, Human Accomplishment: The Pursuit of Excellence in the Arts and Sciences, 800 B.C. to 1950, Paperback – 9 November 2004, p. 284 ^ Wiser, Wendell H. (2000).

Energy resources: occurrence, production, conversion, use . Birkhäuser. p. 190.

ISBN 978-0-387-98744-6 .

^ Augustus Heller (2 April 1896).

"Anianus Jedlik" .

Nature .

53 (1379): 516.

Bibcode : 1896Natur..53..516H .

doi : 10.1038/053516a0 .

^ Tom McInally, The Sixth Scottish University. The Scots Colleges Abroad: 1575 to 1799 (Brill, Leiden, 2012) p. 115 ^ Bedell, Frederick (1942). "History of A-C Wave Form, Its Determination and Standardization".

Transactions of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers .

61 (12): 864.

doi : 10.1109/T-AIEE.1942.5058456 .

S2CID 51658522 .

^ Freebert, Ernest (2014).

The age of Edison : electric light and the invention of modern America . Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-0-14-312444-3 .

^ Ralph Stein (1967). The Automobile Book. Paul Hamlyn Ltd ^ Diesel's Rational Heat Motor by Rudolph Diesel ^ Fermi, Enrico (December 1982).

The First Reactor . Oak Ridge, Tennessee: United States Atomic Energy Commission, Division of Technical Information. pp.

22– 26.

^ Coe, Lewis (1995).

The Telephone and Its Several Inventors: A History . Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company, Inc. p.

5 .

ISBN 978-0-7864-2609-6 .

^ "U.S. Supreme Court" . Retrieved 23 April 2012 .

^ "Contents" .

brophy.net . Retrieved 15 November 2022 .

^ "Who invented the cell phone?" .

brophy.net . Retrieved 15 November 2022 .

^ "IPTO – Information Processing Techniques Office" Archived 2 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine , The Living Internet , Bill Stewart (ed), January 2000.

^ National Research Council (U.S.). Committee on the Future of the Global Positioning System; National Academy of Public Administration (1995).

The global positioning system: a shared national asset: recommendations for technical improvements and enhancements . National Academies Press. p. 16.

ISBN 978-0-309-05283-2 . Retrieved 16 August 2013 .

, https://books.google.com/books?id=FAHk65slfY4C&pg=PA16 ^ "Arthur C. Clarke Extra Terrestrial Relays" . Archived from the original on 25 December 2007 . Retrieved 15 November 2022 .

^ "Philo Taylor Farnsworth (1906–1971)" Archived 22 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine , The Virtual Museum of the City of San Francisco , retrieved 15 July 2009.

^ Collingridge, M. R.

et al.

. (2007) "Ink Reservoir Writing Instruments 1905–20" Transactions of the Newcomen Society 77(1): pp. 69–100, p. 69 ^ Jonathan W. Steed & Jerry L. Atwood (2009).

Supramolecular Chemistry (2nd ed.). John Wiley and Sons. p. 844.

ISBN 978-0-470-51234-0 .

^ Losev, O.V. (1928). "CII. Luminous carborundum detector and detection effect and oscillations with crystals".

The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science .

6 (39): 1024– 1044.

doi : 10.1080/14786441108564683 .

^ Gernsheim, Helmut (1986).

A Concise History of Photography (3rd ed.). Dover Publications, Inc. pp.

9– 11.

ISBN 978-0-486-25128-8 .

^ Schiffer, Michael B.; Hollenback, Kacy L.; Bell, Carrie L. (2003).

Draw the Lightning Down: Benjamin Franklin and Electrical Technology in the Age of Enlightenment . Berkeley: University of California Press. pp.

242 –44.

ISBN 978-0-520-23802-2 .

electrophorus volta.

^ Bohr, Niels (1 January 1913).

"On the Constitution of Atoms and Molecules, Part I" .

Philosophical Magazine .

26 : 1.

Bibcode : 1913PMag...26....1B .

doi : 10.1080/14786441308634955 .

^ "A Poor Substitute" .

www.pslc.ws . Retrieved 20 June 2022 .

^ Hazen, Robert M. (1999).

The diamond makers . Library Genesis. New York : Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-65474-6 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ "This Is Cheshire - Winnington history in the making" . 21 January 2010. Archived from the original on 21 January 2010 . Retrieved 20 June 2022 .

^ Morris, Peter J. (1989).

Polymer Pioneers: A Popular History of the Science and Technology of Large Molecules . Chemical Heritage Foundation.

ISBN 978-0-941901-03-1 .

^ Liebig, Justus Freiherr von (1872).

Annalen der Chemie und Pharmacie (in German). C.F. Winter'sche.

^ Liebig, Justus.

"Justus Liebig's Annalen der Chemie. v.31-32 1839" .

Annalen der Chemie . Retrieved 20 June 2022 .

^ "Annales de chimie et de physique. Ser.2 v.67 1838" .

HathiTrust . Retrieved 20 June 2022 .

^ *Elwes, Richard, " An enormous theorem: the classification of finite simple groups ", Plus Magazine , Issue 41, December 2006.

Archived 2 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Richard Swineshead (1498), Calculationes Suiseth Anglici , Papie: Per Franciscum Gyrardengum.

^ Dodge, Y. (2006) The Oxford Dictionary of Statistical Terms , OUP.

ISBN 0-19-920613-9 ^ Archimedes, Method , in The Works of Archimedes ISBN 978-0-521-66160-7 ^ The Oxford English Dictionary (2nd. ed.). London: Clarendon Press. 2001.

ISBN 978-0-19-521942-5 .

^ Kline, Morris (1972).

Mathematical thought from ancient to modern times, Vol. 3 . Oxford University Press. pp.

1122–1127 .

ISBN 978-0-19-506137-6 .

^ Croom, Fred H (1989).

Principles of Topology . Saunders College Publishings. pp.

1122– 27.

ISBN 978-0-03-029804-2 .

^ "Metrication in other countries" .

USMA . US Metric Association . Retrieved 24 June 2020 .

^ The International System of Units (PDF) (9 ed.). BIPM. 2019.

ISBN 978-92-822-2272-0 . Retrieved 24 June 2020 .

^ Lauwers, Luc; Willekens, Marleen (1994).

"Five Hundred Years of Bookkeeping: A Portrait of Luca Pacioli" (PDF) .

Tijdschrift voor Economie en Management .

39 (3): 289–304 [p. 300].

ISSN 0772-7674 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 August 2011 . Retrieved 27 April 2017 .

^ (Chapters 9, 10, 11, 13, 25 and 26) and three times (Chapters 4, 8 and 19) in its sequel, Equality ^ Humble, Richard (1978).

The Seafarers – The Explorers . Alexandria, Virginia: Time-Life Books.

^ Orloff, Richard W. (September 2004) [First published 2000].

"Table of Contents" .

Apollo by the Numbers: A Statistical Reference . NASA History Series. Washington, D.C.

ISBN 978-0-16-050631-4 .

LCCN 00061677 . NASA SP-2000-4029 . Retrieved 12 June 2013 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Nelson, Jon.

"Mars Exploration Rover – Spirit" .

NASA . Archived from the original on 28 January 2018 . Retrieved 2 February 2014 .

^ Nelson, Jon.

"Mars Exploration Rover -Opportunity" .

NASA . Retrieved 2 February 2014 .

^ Worth, Helen (28 February 2001).

"The End of an Asteroidal Adventure: NEAR Shoemaker Phones Home for the Last Time" .

Applied Physics Lab .

^ Brown, Dwayne; Cantillo, Laurie; Buckley, Mike; Stotoff, Maria (14 July 2015).

"15-149 NASA's Three-Billion-Mile Journey to Pluto Reaches Historic Encounter" .

NASA . Retrieved 14 July 2015 .

^ Butrica, Andrew.

From Engineering Science to Big Science . p. 267 . Retrieved 4 September 2015 .

^ Weber, Johannes (2006). "Strassburg, 1605: The Origins of the Newspaper in Europe".

German History .

24 (3): 387–412 (387).

doi : 10.1191/0266355406gh380oa .

: At the same time, then as the printing press in the physical technological sense was invented, 'the press' in the extended sense of the word also entered the historical stage. The phenomenon of publishing was now born.

^ Hardy, Jonathan (25 February 2010).

Western Media Systems . Routledge. p. 25.

ISBN 978-1-135-25370-7 .

^ Hardy, Jonathan (25 February 2010).

Western Media Systems . Routledge. p. 59.

ISBN 978-1-135-25370-7 .

^ Küng, Lucy; Picard, Robert G.; Towse, Ruth (14 May 2008).

The Internet and the Mass Media . SAGE. p. 65.

ISBN 978-1-4462-4566-8 .

^ a b Perry, Marvin; Chase, Myrna; Jacob, James; Jacob, Margaret; Von Laue, Theodore H. (1 January 2012).

Western Civilization: Since 1400 . Cengage Learning. p. XXIX.

ISBN 978-1-111-83169-1 .

^ A. J. Richards, David (2010).

Fundamentalism in American Religion and Law: Obama's Challenge to Patriarchy's Threat to Democracy . University of Philadelphia Press. p. 177.

ISBN 9781139484138 .

..for the Jews in twentieth-century Europe, the cradle of Christian civilization.

^ D'Anieri, Paul (2019).

Ukraine and Russia: From Civilied Divorce to Uncivil War . Cambridge University Press. p. 94.

ISBN 9781108486095 .

..for the Jews in twentieth-century Europe, the cradle of Christian civilization.

^ L. Allen, John (2005).

The Rise of Benedict XVI: The Inside story of How the Pope Was Elected and What it Means for the World . Penguin UK.

ISBN 9780141954714 .

Europe is historically the cradle of Christian culture, it is still the primary center of institutional and pastoral energy in the Catholic Church...

^ Rietbergen, Peter (2014).

Europe: A Cultural History . Routledge. p. 170.

ISBN 9781317606307 .

Europe is historically the cradle of Christian culture, it is still the primary center of institutional and pastoral energy in the Catholic Church...

^ "Europe" . Pewforum.org. 19 December 2011 . Retrieved 31 January 2014 .

^ a b "The Global Religious Landscape - Christians" . Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life. 18 December 2012. Archived from the original on 21 December 2012 . Retrieved 31 January 2014 .

^ "Global Christianity - A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World' s Christian Population - Americas" . Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life. 19 December 2011. Archived from the original on 10 September 2012 . Retrieved 17 August 2012 .

^ a b c d "Discrimination in the EU in 2012" (PDF) , Special Eurobarometer , 393, European Union : European Commission , p. 233, 2012 , retrieved 14 August 2013 The question asked was "Do you consider yourself to be...?" With a card showing: Catholic, Orthodox, Protestant, Other Christian, Jewish, Muslim, Sikh, Buddhist, Hindu, Atheist, and Non-believer/Agnostic. Space was given for Other (SPONTANEOUS) and DK.  Jewish, Sikh, Buddhist, Hindu did not reach the 1% threshold.

^ "Discrimination in the EU in 2012" (PDF) .

Special Eurobarometer . 383: 233. 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 December 2012 . Retrieved 14 August 2013 .

^ a b Zurlo, Gina; Skirbekk, Vegard; Grim, Brian (2019).

Yearbook of International Religious Demography 2017 . BRILL. p. 85.

ISBN 9789004346307 .

^ Ogbonnaya, Joseph (2017).

African Perspectives on Culture and World Christianity . Cambridge Scholars Publishing. pp.

2– 4.

ISBN 9781443891592 .

^ "Religiously Unaffiliated" . Pewforum.org. 18 December 2012 . Retrieved 31 January 2014 .

^ "Germany" . State.gov. 14 September 2007 . Retrieved 31 January 2014 .

^ Views on globalisation and faith Archived 17 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine .

Ipsos MORI , 5 July 2011.

^ (in French) Catholicisme et protestantisme en France: Analyses sociologiques et données de l'Institut CSA pour La Croix Archived 11 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine – Groupe CSA TMO for La Croix , 2001 ^ "International Religious Freedom Report 2007" . 14 September 2007 . Retrieved 8 February 2011 .

^ William Joseph Baker, Sports in the western world (University of Illinois Press, 1988).

^ David G. McComb, Sports in world history (Routledge, 2004).

^ Barbara Schrodt, "Sports of the Byzantine empire." Journal of Sport History 8.3 (1981): 40-59.

^ Sall E. D. Wilkins, Sports and games of medieval cultures (Greenwood, 2002).

^ Tranter, N. L. "Popular sports and the industrial revolution in Scotland: the evidence of the statistical accounts." International Journal of the History of Sport 4.1 (1987): 21-38.

^ G. Koenig, Harold (2009).

Religion and Spirituality in Psychiatry . Cambridge University Press. p. 31.

ISBN 9780521889520 .

The Bible is the most globally influential and widely read book ever written. ... it has been a major influence on the behavior, laws, customs, education, art, literature, and morality of Western civilization.

^ Burnside, Jonathan (2011).

God, Justice, and Society: Aspects of Law and Legality in the Bible . Oxford University Press. p. XXVI.

ISBN 9780199759217 .

^ V. Reid, Patrick (1987).

Readings in Western Religious Thought: The ancient world . Paulist Press. p. 43.

ISBN 9780809128501 .

Sources [ edit ] Ankerl, Guy (2000).

Global communication without universal civilization . INU societal research. Vol. 1: Coexisting contemporary civilizations: Arabo-Muslim, Bharati, Chinese, and Western. Geneva: INU Press.

ISBN 978-2-88155-004-1 .

Ankerl, Guy (2000).

Coexisting Civilizations: Arabo-Muslim, Bharati, Chinese, and Western . INUPRESS, Geneva, 119–244.

ISBN 2-88155-004-5 .

Atle Hesmyr (2013).

Civilization, Oikos, and Progress ISBN 978-1468924190 Barzun, Jacques From Dawn to Decadence : 500 Years of Western Cultural Life 1500 to the Present HarperCollins (2000) ISBN 0-06-017586-9 .

Daly, Jonathan. " The Rise of Western Power: A Comparative History of Western Civilization Archived 30 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine " (London and New York: Bloomsbury, 2014).

ISBN 978-1441161314 .

Daly, Jonathan. " Historians Debate the Rise of the West " (London and New York: Routledge, 2015).

ISBN 978-1138774810 .

Derry, T. K. and Williams, Trevor I.

A Short History of Technology: From the Earliest Times to A.D. 1900 Dover (1960) ISBN 0-486-27472-1 .

Duran, Eduardo, Bonnie Dyran Native American Postcolonial Psychology 1995 Albany: State University of New York Press ISBN 0-7914-2353-0 Frank, Andre (2001), "Review of The Great Divergence " , Journal of Asian Studies , 60 (1): 180– 182, doi : 10.2307/2659525 , JSTOR 2659525 Hanson, Victor Davis ; Heath, John (2001).

Who Killed Homer: The Demise of Classical Education and the Recovery of Greek Wisdom , Encounter Books.

Hunter, Louis C. (1985).

A History of Industrial Power in the United States, 1730–1930 . Vol. 2: Steam Power. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.

Jones, Prudence and Pennick, Nigel A History of Pagan Europe Barnes & Noble (1995) ISBN 0-7607-1210-7 .

Landes, David. S.

(1969).

The Unbound Prometheus: Technological Change and Industrial Development in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present . Cambridge, New York: Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge. p. 92.

ISBN 0-521-09418-6 .

Meaney, Thomas "The Return of 'The West'" New York Times March 11, 2022.

Merriman, John Modern Europe: From the Renaissance to the Present W. W. Norton (1996) ISBN 0-393-96885-5 .

McClellan, James E. III and Dorn, Harold Science and Technology in World History Johns Hopkins University Press (1999) ISBN 0-8018-5869-0 .

Stein, Ralph The Great Inventions Playboy Press (1976) ISBN 0-87223-444-4 .

Asimov, Isaac Asimov's Biographical Encyclopedia of Science and Technology: The Lives & Achievements of 1510 Great Scientists from Ancient Times to the Present Revised second edition, Doubleday (1982) ISBN 0-385-17771-2 .

Pastor, Ludwig von , History of the Popes from the Close of the Middle Ages; Drawn from the Secret Archives of the Vatican and other original sources , 40 vols. St. Louis, B. Herder (1898ff.) Walsh, James Joseph , The Popes and Science; the History of the Papal Relations to Science During the Middle Ages and Down to Our Own Time , Fordham University Press, 1908, reprinted 2003, Kessinger Publishing.

ISBN 0-7661-3646-9 Reviews: p. 462 .

[1] Stearns, P.N. (2003).

Western Civilization in World History , Routledge, New York.

Thornton, Bruce (2002).

Greek Ways: How the Greeks Created Western Civilization , Encounter Books.

Ferguson, Niall , Civilization. The West and the rest , Penguin Press, 2011.

ISBN 978-1-101-54802-8 Pinker, Steven , Enlightenment Now: The Case for Reason, Science, Humanism, and Progress , Penguin Books, 2018.

ISBN 978-0-525-42757-5 Henrich, Joseph , The WEIRDest People in the World : How the West Became Psychologically Peculiar and Particularly Prosperous , Farrar, Straus and Giroux , 2020.

ISBN 978-0374173227 Stark, Rodney , The Victory of Reason: How Christianity Led to Freedom, Capitalism, and Western Success , Random House , 2006.

ISBN 978-0812972337 Stark, Rodney , How the West Won: The Neglected Story of the Triumph of Modernity , Intercollegiate Studies Institute , 2014.

ISBN 978-1497603257 Headley, John M.

The Europeanization of the World: On the Origins of Human Rights and Democracy , Princeton University Press , 2007.

ISBN 9780691171487 Verger, Jacques [in French] (1999).

Culture, enseignement et société en Occident aux XIIe et XIIIe siècles (in French) (1st ed.). Presses universitaires de Rennes in Rennes.

ISBN 286847344X .

Further reading [ edit ] Barzun, Jacques.

From Dawn to Decadence: 500 Years of Western Cultural Life : 1500 to the Present . New York: HarperCollins, 2001.

Hesmyr, Atle Kultorp: Civilization; Its Economic Basis, Historical Lessons and Future Prospects (Telemark: Nisus Publications, 2020).

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Western culture .

An overview of the Western Civilization Archived 24 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine v t e Generations In the Western world Lost Generation Greatest Generation Silent Generation Baby boomers Generation X Millennials Generation Z Generation Alpha Generation Beta (proposed name) Cuspers Interbellum Generation Generation Jones Xennials Zillennials Related Boomerang Generation Coronials Me generation MTV Generation Country-specific China Post-70s Post-80s Post-90s Czechoslovakia Husák's Children Iran Burnt Generation Japan Satori generation Poland Generation of Columbuses Romania Decreței Singapore Pioneer Generation Merdeka Generation South Korea 386 Generation Sampo generation Taiwan Strawberry generation United States Millennials Generation Z Vietnam 9X Generation Types Future generations Immigrant generations Revolutionary generation Concepts Child tax credit Filial responsibility laws Generation gap Generational accounting Generationism Intergenerationality Equity Policy Shared site Struggle Parent–offspring conflict Parental dividend Parental investment Cost of raising a child Old-age-security hypothesis Sandwich generation Strauss–Howe generational theory Tax on childlessness Theory of generations Transgenerational design Voluntary childlessness Related Beat Generation Digital divide Digital native OK boomer The Greatest Generation v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization v t e Culture Outline Sciences Cultural anthropology Cultural astronomy Cultural ecology Cultural geography Cultural neuroscience Cultural studies Culturology Culture theory Subfields Bioculture Cross-cultural studies Cross-cultural communication Cross-cultural leadership Cross-cultural psychiatry Cross-cultural psychology Cultural analytics Cultural economics Cultural entomology Cultural history Cultural mapping Cultural mediation Cultural psychology Cultural values Culturomics Intercultural learning Intercultural relations Philosophy of culture Popular culture studies Postcritique Semiotics of culture Sociology of culture Sound culture Theology of culture Transcultural nursing Types Constructed culture Dominant culture Folk culture High culture Individualistic culture Legal culture Microculture Official culture Political culture Civic Popular culture Low culture Media culture Recombinant culture Remix culture Trash culture Urban Primitive culture Resistance through culture Subculture Alternative culture Counterculture Fandom Far-right subcultures Underground culture Youth subculture list Super culture Vernacular culture Culture by location Aspects Acculturation Cultural appreciation Cultural appropriation Cultural area Cultural artifact Cultural baggage Cultural bias Cultural capital Cross-cultural Cultural communication Cultural conflict Cultural cringe Cultural dissonance Cultural emphasis Cultural framework Cultural heritage Destroyed Cultural icon Cultural identity Cultural industry Cultural invention Cultural landscape Cultural learning Cultural leveling Cultural memory Cultural pluralism Cultural practice Cultural property Cultural reproduction Cultural system Cultural technology Cultural universal Cultureme Enculturation High- and low-context cultures Interculturality Internet culture Manuscript culture Material culture Non-material culture Organizational culture Assessment culture Design culture Journalism culture Print culture Protoculture Relational mobility Safety culture Symbolic culture Technoculture Trans-cultural diffusion Transculturation Visual culture Politics Colonial mentality Consumer capitalism Cross cultural sensitivity Cultural assimilation Cultural attaché Cultural backwardness Cultural Bolshevism Cultural conservatism Cultural contracts Cultural deprivation Cultural diplomacy Cultural environmentalism Cultural exception Cultural feminism Cultural genocide Cultural globalization Cultural hegemony Cultural imperialism Cultural intelligence Cultural liberalism Cultural nationalism Cultural pessimism Cultural policy Cultural racism Cultural radicalism Cultural retention Cultural Revolution Cultural rights Cultural safety Cultural silence Cultural subsidy Cultural Zionism Culture change Culture minister Culture of fear Culture war Deculturalization Dominator culture Interculturalism Monoculturalism Multiculturalism Biculturalism Multiracial democracy Pluriculturalism Polyculturalism Transculturism Religions Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Cultural Christians Protestantism Role of Christianity in civilization Eastern Orthodoxy Mormonism Cultural Hindus Islam Cultural Muslims Judaism Sikhism Related Algorithmic culture Animal culture Archaeological culture Bennett scale Cannabis culture Circuit of culture Civilization Coffee culture Cringe culture Cross-cultural Cultural center Cultural competence Cultural critic Cultural determinism Cultural diversity Cultural evolutionism Cultural homogenization Cultural institution Cultural jet lag Cultural lag Cultural literacy Cultural mosaic Cultural movement Cultural mulatto Cultural probe Cultural relativism Cultural tourism Pop-culture Cultural translation Cultural turn Cultural sensibility Culture and menstruation Culture and positive psychology Culture and social cognition Culture gap Culture hero Culture industry Culture shock Culturgen Children's culture Culturalism Cyberculture Death and culture Disability culture Deaf culture Drinking culture Drug culture Eastern culture Emotions and culture Historical culture Intercultural communication Intercultural competence Languaculture Living things in culture Media culture Oppositional culture Participatory culture Permission culture Rape culture Remix culture Tea culture Transformation of culture Urban culture Welfare culture Western culture Youth culture Category Authority control databases International FAST National United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐v5bq9
Cached time: 20250814215513
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.830 seconds
Real time usage: 2.087 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12672/1000000
Revision size: 129505/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 422315/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12949/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 29/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 671648/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.116/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18963517/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1683.653      1 -total
 54.34%  914.885      2 Template:Reflist
 27.85%  468.892     84 Template:Cite_book
  8.64%  145.433     30 Template:Cite_web
  6.09%  102.508     15 Template:Fix
  5.08%   85.543      1 Template:History_of_Western_philosophy
  4.56%   76.771     15 Template:Cite_journal
  4.52%   76.151      1 Template:Lang
  4.37%   73.547      2 Template:Sfn
  3.69%   62.149      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:21208262:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215513 and revision id 1303358205. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Western_culture&oldid=1303358205 " Categories : Western culture Cultural anthropology Sociological terminology Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2015 CS1 Greek-language sources (el) CS1 German-language sources (de) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 maint: publisher location CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from July 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from August 2021 Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from February 2023 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with unsourced statements from May 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2019 Citation overkill Articles tagged with the inline citation overkill template from December 2021 Articles needing additional references from June 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2017 CS1: long volume value CS1 interwiki-linked names CS1 French-language sources (fr) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 14:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Western culture 49 languages Add topic

